llSill

it!i  »^

llilililiiillbliiillii^rajHiililiijl:;;

liiiiiiiiiiiisitiisiii:!     :,

lliuillllr    ■•      ■  ■      rH  r


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


^^


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105074


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EMTED   BY  THE

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN.  OF  GLOUCESTER ;
AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY  THE


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F,R.S,E.

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A.

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY  REY.  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,

DEAN   OF   GLOUCESTER  ;
AND  BY  THE

REY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A.


THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHIST.

Introbncticrn  arib  (Ejeposition :
By  EEV.   H.   R.   REYNOLDS,  D.D.,

PmESIDENT  AND  PROFESSOR  OP  THEOLOGY,  CHESHUNT  COLLEGE ;  FELLOW  OF  DNIVERSIT1

COLLEGE,   LONDON.

i^omiletics :
By  REY.    PROF.   T.    CROSKERT,  D.D.,

LATE  PROFESSOR  OF  SYSTEMATIC  THEOLOGY,  MAGEE  COLLEGE,   LONDONDERRY.

^omiiits  bg  tJorious  <a,utI)ors :

REV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  B.  THOMAS.

REV.  D.  YOUNG,  B.A.  REV.  GEORGE  BROWN    B.A.


roz.  I.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
Nb"W  Yobk  and  Toronto.


CONTENTS  OF  THE  INTEODULTiON.


I.  PbeumthLiBT  Statement  or  thb  Diitioultie8  of  the  Problem,    pp.  Ui. — ziL

II.  The   DETAiLa   or   the   Dispittb   ooNCEBNiKa   the    Authobship   of   tbe    Fourth

Gospel,    pp.  xii. — xviii.

IIL  The  External  Etidenoeb  of  the  Early  Existenoe  of  the  Four  Gospels.

pp.  xviii. — XXV.

1.  General  obaervationa  on  the  nature  of  the  evidence,     pp.  xviii.,  xix.

2.  Proof  that  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  flie  second  century  the  four  Gospels,  as  we
now  possess  them,  were  held  in  universal  respect  throughout  the  Cliristian  Church.
(1)  Irenaeus.  (2)  I'heophilus.  (3)  Clemens  Alexandrians.  (4)  Tertullian.  (5)  Marcion.
pp.  xix. — xxiL

3.  Proof  that  Justin  Martyr,  before  the  close  of  the  second  quarter  of  the  century,  utilized
the /our  Gospels,    pp.  xxii — ^xxv.

IV.  The  Speoifio  External  Evidence  for  the  Early  Existence  of  the  Fourth

Gospel,    pp.  xxv. — xxxvii.

1.  Justin  Martyr.    Answer  to  objections,    pp.  xxv. — xxix.

2.  Confirmatory  evidence  linking  the  documents  known  to  Justin  with  those  shown  to  be
in  the  hands  of  Irenseus.  (1)  Heraoleon.  (2)  Tatian's  '  Diatessaion.'  (3)  Tlie  Muratorian
Fragment  on  the  Canon.    (4)  Papias.    pp.  xxix. — xxxiv.

3.  The  testimony  of  the  apostolic  Fatliers.  (1)  Polycarp.  (2)  Clemens  Eomanus  and
Barnabas.  (3)  Shepherd  of  Hermas.  (4)  The  so-called  Second  Epistle  of  Clemens.
(5)  The  Ignatian  letters.  (6)  The  letter  to  Diognetus.  (7)  The  Didache.  pp.  xxxiv. —
xxxvii.

V.  Further  Testimonies  from  outside  the  Chuboh  and  from  Apocryphal  ahd

PSBUDEPIQBAPHIO  LiTERiTUBB.      pp.  XXXVii. — xlii.

1.  Celsns.  2.  Testament  of  the  XII.  Patriarchs.  3.  Clementine  Homilies.  4.  Mon-
tanus  and  Montanism.  5.  Marcion.  6.  Valentinus.  7.  Basilides  and  Ma  followers.
8.  The  Ophites.    9.  General  conclusion  from  the  evidence  as  a  whole,

YL  The  Oanonioity  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,    p.  xliii.

Vn.  The  Internal  Evidence  or  the  Authorship  of  the  Fourth  Gospeu
pp.  xliii. — Ixxxvii.

1.  The  author  must  have  been  a  Jew.    Answer  to  objections,    pp.  xliii. — xlvi.

2.  The  author  must  have  been  a  Palestinian  Jew.  Discussion  of  the  relation  of  the
Fourth  Gospel  to  the  philosophy  of  Philo.    pp.  xlvi. — lii.

3.  The  author  was  an  eye-witness  of  much  that  he  describes,  and  an  intimate  acqnaintance
of  the  disciples  of  Jesus,    pp.  lii.,  liii.

4.  The  author  represents  himself  as  one  of  the  disciples  whom  Jesus  loves.  Thu  disciple,
by  constructive  evidence,  shown  to  be  John  the  son  of  Zebedee.    pp.  liii. — Iv.

5.  A  comparison  of  the  character  of  the  author  derived  from  the  Gospel  itself,  with  th«
hints  of  the  character  of  the  son  of  Zebedee  given  in  other  literature.  (1)  The  "  John  "  of
the  synoptists  (2)  The  "John"  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  of  the  Epistle  to  the
Galatians.  (3)  The  author  of  the  three  Epistles  which  bear  traditionally  the  name  of  John
compared  with  tha  author  of  the  Gospel.    (4)  A  comparison  between  tite  author  of  the

tOBM.  I


CONTENTS  OP  THE  INTRODUCTION.


Foorth  Gospel  and  the  anthor  of  the  Apocalypse,  pp.  Ixvi — ^Ixxxvii.  (a)  The  JohAnniiu
authorship  of  the  Apocalypse,  (o)  Internal  evidence.  (i8)  External  evidence.  (6)  The
phenomena  of  divergence  and  resemblance  between  the  Apocalypse  and  the  Fourth  GospeL
(o)  The  grammatical  and  lexical  differences.  (j3)  The  grammatical  and  lexical  resemblances.
(y)  The  structure  of  the  two  books.  (S)  The  theological  divergences  and  resemblance*,
pp.  Iv. — Izsxvii

VIII.   Thb   General  BeIiAtion  between   the   Synoptio   Gospels  and   the   Foubth
Gospel,     pp.  Ixxxviii — czxviii.

A.  General  statement  of  the  discrepancies.  Examination  in  detail,  of:  1.  The  scene  of
our  Lord's  ministry.  2.  The  length  of  our  Lord's  ministry.  3>.  The  day  of  our  Lord's
death.    4.  The  omissions  of  the  synoptists.    pp.  Ixxxviii. — xovii.

B.  The  coincidences  with  the  Fourth  Gospel,  pp.  icvii.— cxix.  1.  With  reference  to  main
facts.  2.  Coincidental  reference  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  matters  related  in  detail  in  synoptic
Gospels.  (1)  Facts.  (2)  Coincidental  reference  to  matters  differently  specified,  in  the
Fourth  Gospel,  including  omissions  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  of  memorable  events.  Omission
of:  (a)  The  temptation  of  our  Lord.  pp.  o. — ciii.  (6)  The  Transfiguration,  pp.  oiii.,  civ.
(o)  The  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  pp.  ov.,  ovi  (d)  The  agony  in  the  garden,
pp.  cvi.,  cvii.  (e)  The  Ascension,  pp.  ovii.,  oviii.  (3)  Allusions  to  features  of  teaching
and  imagery  already  familiar,  p.  cviii.  (4)  Subtle  indications  of  identity  of  character,
ip.  cix. — oxii.  (5)  The  portraitures  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  (a)  The  mother  of  Jesus.
(6)  John  the  Baptist,    (c)  Simon  Peter,    (d)  Caiaphas  and  PUate.    pp.  cxii. — cxix.

0.  Answer  to  objections  based  on  special  discrepancies  and  characteristics.  1.  The
supposed  exaggeration  of  the  supernatural.  2.  The  non-development  of  the  character  of
Jesus.  3.  The  supposed  presence  of  Gnostic  elements  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  4.  The  style
and  diction  of  the  Fourth  GospeL  5.  The  discourses  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  pp.  cxix. —
oxxviii.

IX.  The  Teaching  of  the  Fototh  Gospel,    pp.  cxxviii. — cL

1.  Johannine  teaching  with  reference  to  the  Godhead.  (1)  A  Spirit.  (2)  The  Father.
(3)  The  Father  and  the  Son.  (4)  God  and  the  Logos.  (5)  The  Logos  made  flesh — the
humanity  of  Jesus.  (6)  The  Son  of  God,  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  man.  (7)  The  Spirit,  the
Paraclete;  the  Triunity.    pp.  oxxviii.— cxxxvi

2.  27ie  world.  (1)  The  world  as  the  creature  of  God.  (2)  The  world  of  men  considered
apart  from  God  and  hostile  to  God.    (3)  The  prince  of  this  world,    pp.  cxxxvi. — cxxxix.

3.  The  aahation  of  the  world.  (1)  The  Saviour  himself  and  the  world's  need.  (2)  The
nature  of  salvation,  (a)  Life  to  the  non-living  and  dead.  (6)  Light  to  the  darkened — a  Sun
and  eyesight,  (e)  Love  to  the  lost,  to  condemned,  and  to  the  whole  world.  (3)  The  means
taken  by  the  Light,  Life,  and  Love  to  effect  the  illumination,  resurrection,  and  salvation  of
the  world  of  men.  (a)  The  shining  of  the  Light.  (6)  The  sacrificial  death,  (o)  The  rising
again,  (d)  The  Paraclete.  (4)  The  method  of  appropriating  the  Life,  Light,  Love,  (a)
Faith  in  his  Name.  (6)  Faith  in  and  following  of  Jesus,  with  all  its  consequences,  (o)  Eman-
cipation. O)  Lovo  to  Christ  and  one  another.  (7)  Worship.  (5)  Assurance,  (e)  Vision
of  the  Father.  (O  Union  with  the  Divine  humanity,  (ig)  Eternal  glory,  pp.  oxzxix. —
oxlix.

4.  The  future  life  and  judgment  of  the  world,    pp.  oxlix.,  cl.

5.  The  founding  and  training  of  the  Church,    p.  cl.

X.  The  Abbanoehent  ov  the  Contents  of  the  Foubth  Gospel,     pp.  ol. — olx.
History  of  the  classification  of  subject-matter.     The   arrangement  followed  in  tk»
Exposition.

XL  Bevebenob  to  IjItesatube  and  Text.    pp.  olx.,  clxL


INTEODUCTION

TO  THE  BTODT  OV  TBB

GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


I.  Fbeliuinabt  Statement  of  the  Pbobleu.

1.  EvoLTTTiON  throws  light  on  a  myriad  phenomena,  but  around  each  of  them  thera
stretches  a  measureless  circumference  of  impenetrable  darkness.  Science,  with  all  its
methods,  is  perfectly  powerless  to  bridge  the  abyss  between  "  nothing"  and  "  something ; "
between  eternal  "  stillness  "  and  "  motion ; "  between  non-living  "  things  "  and  "  life ; "
between  "  physical  phenomena ''  and  "  mental  impressions  ; "  between  "  logical  pro-
cesses" and  "real  inspirations."

We  are  face  to  face  with  mysteries  everywhere,  but  our  great  men  furnish  our
profoundest  problems.  The  science  of  their  antecedents  and  their  environment  does
not  solve  these  problems.  Criticism  may  show  that  some  peculiarities  which  we
thought  unique  have  been  noticed  elsewhere;  but  the  greatest  men  issue  from  the
furnace  of  historical  inquiry  unsinged  and  inexplicable.

We  are  quite  ready  to  concede  that  some  of  the  great  "figures'"  of  history,  who  to
our  unassisted  gaze  have  seemed  like  stars  apart,  when  covered  by  the  object-glass  of
the  modem  telescopic  inquirer  are  resolved  into  clusters  of  stars.  The  Greek  Sesostris
thus  becomes,  on  close  inquiry,  several  Pharaohs  rolled  into  one.  The  doubtful  dignity
assigned  to  Aristotle  in  mediaeval  legend,  and  the  incongruous  functions  attributed  to
Virgil,  have  been  discredited  by  criticism.  Mists  have  gathered  round  the  personality
of  Buddha,  of  Zerdusht,  and  Mohammed,  which  the  higher  criticism  has  done  much  to
pierce.  We  do  not  deny  that  there  are  composite  characters  even  in  tbe  sacred  history,
who,  when  closely  examined,  lose  some  of  the  mythical  adornment  with  which  they
have  been  invested  by  the  piety  of  three  thousand  years.

2.  What  is  true  of  men  is  also  true  of  their  work.  The  '  Analects'  of  Confucius  are
now  known  not  to  have  been  the  sole  product  of  his  brain.  Ko  one  dares  attribute  all
the  discourses  of  Buddha  to  his  own  lips.  We  cannot  regard  all  the  Hebrew  Psalter
as  the  work  of  David,  and  many  cautious  scholars  treat  the  visions  of  Isaiah  as  a
collection  of  oracles  issuing  at  different  periods  from  the  prophetic  heart  of  Israel.

Notwithstanding  these  concessions,  we  know  that  some  men  and  some  work  defy
the  critical  analysis.  The  more  we  know  of  some  men  so  much  tbe  greater  becomes
their  wondrous  personality.  The  blending  of  apparently  contradictory  elements  is  so
complete  that  they  cannot  be  analyzed  or  torn  asunder ;  eg.  our  own  Alfred  comes  out
at  last  from  the  crucible,  minstrel  and  king,  theologian  and  lawgiver,  warrior  and
■aint.

There  are,  moreover,  certain  works  which,  though  they  represent  the  age  in  whii,^
they  were  produced,  and  many  lineg  of  anteceident  thought,  yet  are  so  dominated  by  the
creative  energies  of  master  minds  that  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  patchwork  of
many  brains  and  remote  ages.  This  conclusion  may  present  Its  own  peculiar  difficulty,
but,  insteatd  of  sacrifidng  a  great  man  oi  a  unique  word  at  th«  shnne  of  psydiologio


INTBODUCTION  TO


law,  we  have  either  to  modify  our  notion  of  the  law  in  order  to  take  in  this  new  case,
or  else  to  allow  that  it  passes  heyond  our  law  altogether.

8.  Now  wiB  have  hefore  us  here  a  unique  work  and  a  presumed  author.  The  more
the  Fourth  Gospel  has  been  focussed  in  the  light  of  criticism,  the  more  convinced  do
we  become  that  it  is  the  work  of  (me  extraordinary  mind.  We  cannot  tear  it  to
pieces  and  say,  "  This  paragraph  belongs  to  one  decade,  and  that  to  another ;  thia  to
Jerusalem,  and  that  to  Alexandria ;  this  to  Galilee,  and  that  to  Bphesus."  Whenever
or  by  whomsoever  this  Gospel  was  produced,  it  was  fashioned  by  one  strangely  gifted
man.     On  this  the  bulk  of  critics  are  agreed.

The  question,  then,  arises — Is  it  a  record,  or  is  it  a  dream  ?  Is  it  the  testimony  of
an  eye-witness  and  ear-witness  to  certain  events,  or  is  it  the  speculation  of  a  philosopher
concerning  some  analogous  events  ?  Is  it  a  page  of  biography,  or  is  it  the  artistic
clothing  of  an  idea?  Is  it  of  priceless  value  as  the  outpouring  on  the  ear  of  an  intimate
friend  of  the  inner  life  and  consciousness  of  One  whom  the  writer  did  not  hesitate  to
call  the  incarnate  Word  of  God,  or  is  it  the  poetic  and  artistic  exposition  of  a  reverence
which  knew  no  bounds,  but  did  not  hesitate  to  create  facts  and  imagine  teachings  in
harmony  with  such  a  subtle  and  stupendous  idea  as  that  of  the  Son  of  Qod  who  had
taken  a  perfect  humanity  up  into  his  own  consciousness  1

Answers  have  been  given  in  the  afiSrmative  to  each  of  these  alternatives.  The  pro°
blem,  however,  is  further  complicated  because  the  presumed  author  is  almost  certainly
proven  to  be  the  author  of  another  work  of  strangely  different  character.  The  style,
motive,  mental  position,  and  attitude  of  the  Apocalyptic  seer  of  Fatmos  seem  widely
diverse  from  those  of  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.  If  be  who  saw  the  Lord  on
the  Lake  of  Galilee,  and  heard  his  dying  cry  upon  the  cross,  beheld  him  afterwards  in
the  midst  of  the  throne  of  God,  his  experience  was  momentous  and  unique ;  and  if  the
game  eyes  that  looked  into  the  soul  of  Jesus  till  they  saw  the  heavenly  Father  there,
.  also  saw  in  vision  the  small  and  great,  the  quick  and  dead,  come  to  his  eternal  jud  gment ;
if  he  who  described  the  washing  of  the  disciples'  feet  actually  penned  the  fall  of
"  Babylon  the  Great ; " — then  in  this  "  author  "  we  have  one  of  the  most  astounding
phenomena  in  the  history  of  humanity.  His  character,  fimctions,  and  powers,  by  their
spread,  their  compass,  and  their  intensity,  become  almost  as  wonderful  a  presentment
to  OUT  thought  as  that  of  the  great  theme  of  all  his  meditations.  The  personality  of
John  become  almost  as  great  a  puzzle  to  scientific  history  as  the  personality  of  Jesus.

Modern  methods  of  determining  authorship  or  of  repudiating  authorship  had  not
been  completed  when  the  sublime  personality  of  "  John  the  divine  "  took  possession  of
the  Christian  consciousness.  The  early  ages  were  uncritical ;  yet  they  were  not  blind
to  the  difficulties  involved  in  recognizing  the  unity  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel
and  of  the  Apocalypse.  Some  of  these  lie  upon  the  surface,  and  we  find  that  Dionysius
of  Alexandria,  in  a  passage  preserved  by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Bed.,' vii.  10,  24,  25),  felt  as
keenly  as  any  modern  critic  does  the  contrasts  of  method,  style,  theme,  that  the  two
documents  offer  to  a  cursory  gaze  (see  section  VII.  5.  (4)  of  these  prolegomena).  Yet
these  scepticisms  took  no  serious  hold  upon  the  mind  of  Christendom.  Where  they
were  most  acutely  realized  the  shadow  of  doubt  fell  rather  upon  the  Apocalypse  than
upon  the  GospeL

4.  The  striking  difference, however,  between  the  Divine  themeof  the  Gospel  and  Epistles
on  the  one  side,  and  that  of  the  world-conquering  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  on
the  other,  is  mysteriously  confirmed  by  the  traditions  which  have  gathered  round  the
venerable  name  of  John.  Thus  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  28)  tells  us  that  John  was
to  the  close  of  his  life  a  man  of  fiery  enthusiasm  and  severe  judgment  on  ij;3se  that
blasphemed  and  resisted  the  authority  of  the  Lord ;  for  once,  "  having  entered  a  bath  to
wash,  but  ascertaining  that  Cerinthus  was  within,  he  leaped  out  of  the  place  and  fled
from  the  door,  not  enduring  to  enter  under  the  same  roof  with  him,  and  exhorted  those
with  him  to  do  the  same,  saying, '  Let  us  flee,  lest  the  bath  fall  in,  as  long  as  Cerinthuj,
that  enemy  of  the  truth,  is  within ' "  (cf.  here  1  and  2  Epistles  of  John).  Here  is  the
Boanerges  who  would  call  down  fire  from  heaven  upon  those  Samaritans  who  were
unmindful  of  their  obligations  to  the  Saviour  of  the  world  ;  and  here  also  is  the  author
of  the  visions  of  the  Apocalypse.  But  tradition  also  preserved  the  exquisite  feature  of
character  which  induced  him  to  say  on  all  occasions  to  those  who  gathered  round  him^
•  Little  children,  love  one  another ;  if  you  do  this,  all  is  done."


THE  GOSPEL  ACCK)BDma  TO  ST.  JOHN.


CSlemens  Alexandrinus  preserved  a  story  which  he  declares  ia  no  fiction,  but  a  veritable
fiMSt  (Eusebius, '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  23),  which  blends  the  apostle  of  love  with  the  enthusiasm
against  wTong,  and  helps  one  to  feel  the  reality  of  the  nature,  composite  though  it
might  be,  which  could  have  produced  the  two  most  wonderful  books  in  the  world.

6.  For  sixteen  hundred  years  every  sentence  attributed  to  him  was  searched  and
compared  with  every  other  sentence  or  trait  which  had  floated  down  the  ages,  and  these
had  fitted  themselves  each  to  each,  so  that  one  of  the  sublimest  ideals  of  human  life  sat
upon  the  verge  of  time,  and  held  in  hand  the  veil  which  hides  the  deepest  things  of
Grod  and  of  eternity  from  mortal  gaze.  Devotion  and  insight  felt  that  hecause  John
had  seen  the  family  at  Bethany,  and  had  witnessed  the  beginnings  of  faith  in  Samaria,
he  was  not  unlikely  to  wish- to  call  down  fire  from  heaven  upon  those  Samaritans  who
would  not  receive  the  Christ — ^whom  himself  loved  with  silent  passion — when  he  came
on  earth  to  claim  his  own.  Historic  imagination  realized  that  he  who  had  seen  the
Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  was  not  unlikely  to  have  recorded  among  his  earliest
memories  the  trumpet-cry  of  the  Baptist,  or  the  adoring  exclamations  of  Nathanael,
of  Peter,  and  of  Thomas.  The  synoptic  Grospeils  as  well  as  the  Fourth  Gospel  are  all
alike  pervaded  by  the  august  but  silent  presence  of  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.

During  sixteen  hundred  years  the  Apocalyptist  and  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel
were  believed  mutually  to  explain  and  complement  one  another.  The  eagle  flew  through
the  expanse  of  heaven  on  double  pinion  borne.

"  Bed  Joannes,  alft  binft
Caritatis,  aqulUn&
Form&  fertur  in  diviiM
Puriori  lumiue,"

said  Adam  of  St.  Victor;  and  in  still  more  striking  words,  blending  the  two  lines  of
John's  experience  and  character,  he  sang  in  memorable  words—

"  Volat  avis  sine  metft
Quo  neo  rates  nee  propheta

Evolavit  altius ;
Tarn  implenda.  quam  impleta,
Nunquara  vidit  tot  seoreta
Purus  homo  purius."

6.  The  incompatibilities  of  tradition  and  of  authorship  were  easily  solved  by  the  unique,
experiences  of  this  mioihty  spirit.  If  it  were  true  that  John  listened  to  the  heart  of
Jesus  and  heard  the  pulsations  of  eternal  love,  looked  also  into  the  unseen  and  saw  the
visions  of  God,  theoretical  difiRculties  vanish.  Concede  the  facts  as  they  stand,  and
there  is  no  psychological  or  historical  problem  awaiting  our  anxious  solution.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  if,  as  many  modem  critics  tell  us,  the  supernatural  be  incredible ;  if
the  Incarnation  be  a  delusion ;  if  inspiration  and  the  vision  of  unseen  things  be  unthink-
able ;  if  Christ  did  not  raise  Lazarus  from  the  dead,  nor  offer  the  intercessory  prayer,
but  was  only  supposed  to  have  done  so;  if  the  Transfiguration  were  a  dream,  and  the
agony  in  the  garden  a  nightmare ;  if  the  Syrian  sun  still  looks  on  the  unknown  grave
of  the  Crucified ;  if  no  new  commencement  of  our  humanity  began  on  that  Easter
morning;  if  the  entire  story  of  the  Eesurrection,  of  Pentecost,  and  Patmos  be  pure
fiction  of  even  pious  minds ;  then  I  am  free  to  confess  the  literary  problem  is  most  per-
plexing. If  the  Fourth  Gospel  be  a  theological  romance,  or  a  poetical  prose  drarna
of  a  philosophical  mind  intent  on  pressing  certain  conclusions  on  a  hostile  school  of
thought ;  if  the  Epistles  are  ecclesiastical  treatises,  and  are  arranged  to  produce  some
carefully  calculated  results  entirely  different  from  their pritnd facie  significance;  and  if
the  Apocalypse  be  a  rhetorical  manifesto,  a  political  cryptogram,  a  poem  of  one  who
deliberately  chose  this  apocalyptic  method  of  presenting  his  ideas ; — then  the  critics  may
be  right.  The  same  mind,  out  of  the  depths  of  its  own  moral  self-consciousness,  with-
out any  facts  to  rest  upon  or  any  visions  to  help  it,  never  did  produce  the  two  documents.
Then  the  few  references  in  the  synoptic  Gospels  to  the  supposed  writer  need  not  refer
either  to  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  or  to  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse.  The
problem  is  then  insoluble.  We  stxould  have  nothing  wherewith  to  account  for  the
obvious  literary  phenomena  except  the  unfathomable  consciousness  of  an  unknown


INTRODUOTION  TO


indivklual.  If  the  Fourth  Gospel  be  nothing  but  »n  invention,  a  subjective  creation,
without  historic  basis  or  conviction ;  and  if  the  Apocalypse  be  a  political  manifesto,
and  answers  to  do  objective  revelation ; — then  the  authorship  of  the  two  documents,
notwithstanding  remarkable  coincidences  between  them,  cannot  be  referred  to  one  and
the  same  individual

7.  Let  us,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  suppose,  however,  that  the  Ohrist  of  the  tynoptio
Gospels  is  an  objective  reality,  and  that  the  fisherman  John  (a  near  relative  of  Jesus)
was  one  of  hb  earliest  disciples;  that  he  did  come  into  the  closest  intimacy  with  his
Master,  saw  his  greatest  signs  of  power,  his  deepest  humiliation,  his  tragic  death  |
that  John  was  one  of  the  witnesses  of  his  resurrection;  that  he  saw  his  Master
assume  a  new  humanity,  the  same,  yet  not  the  same,  and  in  that  supernal  vesture  of
his  Divine  majesty  ascend  into  the  heavens  and  vanish  in  the  light.  Let  vs  suppose
that  this  reticent  but  yet  passionately  loving  man  became  from  that  moment  pro-
foundly impressed  with  the  belief  that  the  Divine  Spirit  which  was  in  his  Lord  came
forth  from  heaven,  and,  by  its  mighty  workiug,  did  produce  a  new  and  sacred  fellow-
ship which,  as  the  months  and  years  rolled  on,  became  the  most  notable  fact  to  him,
and  was  obviously  bidding  fair  to  move,  to  change,  to  revolutionize,  the  whole  world.  If
this  were  so,  there  is  no  difBculty  in  the  supposition  that  ee  who  had  shone  upon  the
dazzled  eyes  of  the  disciples  with  a  glory  surpassing  that  of  the  sun  should,  at  some
subsequent  epoch  in  the  apostle's  life,  when  the  new  society  bad  been  suffering  from
grievous  failures  and  cruel  persecution,  have  favoured  him  with  veritable  assurances
that  his  Master  was  indeed  the  "  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  the  "  Lamb  in  the
,  midst  of  the  throne,"  the  human  but  Divine  Lord  of  all  men,  and  the  Consummator
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  On  that  supposition  it  is  clear  that  a  series  of  Divine  and
awful  communications  might  be  made  to  him,  that  these  would  be  the  symbolic  clothing
of  great  principles  of  providential  rule,  by  which  the  old  theocracy  would  merge  even-
tually  into  a  heavenly  and  eternal  rule  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  men,  over  all  forces
visible  and  invisible ;  and  definitely  reveal,  to  him  at  least,  the  Eternal  Now  into  which
he  calls  all  souls  that  believe  his  Word  and  have  life  through  his  Name.

Let  us  suppose  that  John  described  what  it  was  given  him  to  see,  and  uttered  and
wrote  what  had  been  spoken  to  him  with  a  voice  loud  as  the  sound  of  many  waters ;
that  the  heavens  were  veritably  opened  to  him ;  that  he  saw  the  glory  of  God  and  the
city  of  God ;  that  he  beheld  in  vision  the  judgments  and  the  battle,  the  victory  and
the  abiding  blessedness,  of  the  saints  of  God.  The  experiences  through  which  he
.  passed  before  these  visions  dazzled  him  had  been  unique  and  wonderful.  He  must
have  witnessed  the  marvellous  rise  of  the  Christian  Church  irresistibly  forming  itself
into  a  visible  and  spiritual  power,  not  only  in  Judaism,  but  embracing  a  multitude  that
no  man  could  number,  of  every  country,  kindred,  and  tribe.  The  troubles  of  Jerusalem
and  Antioch  and  Bphesus  must  have  entered  into  his  soul.  He  must,  on  any  hypo-
thesis, have  lived  through  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and  suffered  persecution  of  a  bitter  kind,
a  lifelong  martyrdom ;  but  he  cherished  an  invincible  faith  in  the  ultimate  triumph
of  the  Christ.  Apart  from  the  great  place  which  he  himself  took  in  the  order  of  the
Chiu:ch  and  the  creation  of  Christian  ideas,  we  know  that  there  were  hundreds  of
thousands  of  men  and  women  who  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  were  ready  to  die
rather  than  forego  their  loyal  trust,  not  in  a  new  method  of  life,  but  in  the  living,
reigning  Christ — the  Man  who  was  appointed  to  judge  the  world.  Untold  multitudes
praised  him,  and  were  ready  to  confide  in  him  as  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  to  imitate
what  they  knew  of  the  manner  «f  his  life,  to  e»t  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood,  to  take
up  his  cross  and  follow  him.

Through  him  Jews  and  Gentiles  had  access  to  the  Father  by  the  one  Spirit  which  he,
their  Lord,  had  given  (Eph.  ii.  18).  Christ  was  the  Power  of  God  to  the  Jew,  and  the
Wisdom  of  God  to  the  Greek  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  From  Jerusalem  to  Borne  men  were  pray-
ing in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  saying,  "  Our  Father  .  .  .  thy  will  be  done,  thy
kingdom  come,  as  in  heaven  so  on  earth "  (Luke  xi.  2).  The  Beatitudes  and  the
parables  and  the  deeds  of  mercy  wrought  by  Jesus  were  passing  like  watchwords  from
lip  to  lip.  Such  words  as  the  following  were  among  the  divinest  and  the  most  sacred :
"  No  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father ;  and  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,
but  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  him ; "  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye
that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest "  (llatt.  xL  27,  28).   The  word


THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDma  TO  ST.  JOHN.  ^

of  Christ  dwelt  in  men  richly  in  all  spiritual  understanding  (Col.  iii.  16).  They
remembered  his  word  that  it  was  "  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  (Acts  xx.  35),
Ritualism  and  externality  in  religion  were  vanishing  before  the  remembrance  that  he
was  "  Lord  of  the  sabbath"  and  "greater  than  the  temple,"  that  his  interpretation  of
th«  sabbath  bad  emancipated  men  from  the  letter.  The  ministration  of  the  Spirit,  of
righteousness,  and  of  life  was  more  glorious  to  men  in  Corinth  and  Philippi  than  the
ministration  of  death  (2  Cor.  iii.  7,  etc.).  The  Christ's  death  was  the  offering  of  the  true
Paschal  Lamb  (1  Cor.  v.  7) ;  and  circumcision  was  regarded  as  the  symbol  only,  not  the
reality,  of  religious  life  (Bom.  ii.  25).  Faith  in  Christ  made  men  of  different  nation-
alities fellow-heirs  of  a  groat  inheritance.  Because  Christ  had  been  raised  from  the
dead,  them  also  who  sleep  in  Jesus  would  God  bring  in  triumph.  'I'hose  who  believed
would  not  be  baffled  by  death ;  they  would  be  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  14).
The  intimate  mystic  fellowship  between  the  glorified  Lord  and  those  who  were  united
ti)  him  by  "like  precious  faith"  was  set  forth  in  wonderful  imagery,  and  was  read  of
eagerly  by  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  and  Romans.  Christ  was  the  Head,  they  were  the
members  of  his  body  (1  Cor.  xii.  12,  27).  Christ  was  the  Husband,  and  the  Church
was  his  bride  (Eph.  v.  23).  Christ  was  the  Tree  of  life,  into  which  the  branches  broken
off  might  be  engrafted  (Rom.  xi.  24).  All  kinds  of  metaphors  were  used  to  indicate
what  he  had  done  for  humanity.  Christ  was  currently  believed  to  be  the  Foundation  of
the  true  temple  of  God  (1  Cor.  iii.  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  20);  the  Substance  (body),  of  which  the
Jewish  sabbath  and  ritual  were  the  shadows  (Col.  ii.  17).  He  was  "  the  End  of  the  Law
for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth  (Rom.  x.  4).  "  He  died,  rose,  and  lived
again,  that  he  might  be  Lord  both  of  dead  and  living  "(Rom.  xiv.  9).  He  was  set
forth  as  a  Propitiation  (Rom.  iii.  25).  God's  righteousness  by  faith  was  declared  in  the
blood  of  Christ.  He  was  a  great  Intercessor,  realizing  the  very  ideal  of  prayer  (Rom.  viii.
34).  He  had  appeared  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  He  would  judge  the  world.  There
was  no  conciemnation  for  those  who  were  in  Christ  Jesus  (Rom.  viii.  1).  He  would  over-
come death  and  hell.  He  would  save  all  men.  He  would  consummate  the  kingdom.
All  things  should  be  subjected  to  him.  He  would  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even
the  Father,  that  God  might  be  all  in  all  (1  Cor.  xv.  22—28,  57).

In  this  brief  outline  of  dominant  and  widely  circulated  ideas  about  Jesus,  the  main
substance  of  which  is  drawn  from  uncontested  authorities,  we  are  often  led,  irrespective
of  the  documents  attributed  to  John,  to  ask  in  wonder  and  with  trembling — Where  and
whence  did  these  ideas  arise  f  Notwithstanding  all  the  search  that  has  been  made  in
Jewish  literature,  either  in  the  sacred  or  apocryphal  books,  or  in  the  Targums  or
JVIishna  or  Gemaras,  in  classical  or  Oriental  sources,  or  in  Alexandrine  theosophy  or
logosophy,  we  can  find  nothing  sufficient  to  account  for  the  profoundly  rooted  senti-
metjts,  the  mutually  understood  commonplaces  of  the  Christian  faith,  which  appear  t)
lie  between  the  lines  of  almost  every  verse  of  the  four  undisputed  Epistles,  to  say
nothing  of  the  rest  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  and  of  Peter,  James,  and  Jude,  and  the
writer  to  the  Hebrews.

The  profundity  and  compass  of  these  ideas  contrast  very  forcibly  with  the  prevailing
sentiment  in  the  end  of  the  first  century  or  throughout  the  second  century.  We  find,
in  the  writings  of  the  apostolic  Fathers  and  apologists,  much  practical  teaching,  crude
allegory,  underlying  suggestions  of  ecclesiastical  platform,  or  of  passionate  desire  for
martyrdom,  and  the  hint  of  much  dreary  controversy  with  active  or  incipient  Gnosti-
cism. A  stream  of  gracious  and  ethical  teaching  flows  apparently  at  the  side  of  these
writers.  They  made  abundant  use  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  they  also  quote  from
nearly  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testament ;  but  they  differ  from  both  in  a  manner
truly  surprising.  There  are  no  springs  of  living  water  bursting  and  bubbling  through
their  words.  Often  when  we  sink  a  shaft  into  their  verbose  and  wearisome  iterations,
the  indications  of  some  life-spring  that  we  trusted  might  gush  forth  runs  off  and
escapes  us.

8.  Some  potent  cause  must  account  for  the  strength  of  spiritual  life,  the  novelty  and
abundance  of  religious  ideas  and  hopes,  which  confront  us  in  the  pages  of  the  New
Testament  itself.  The  air  we  breathe  braces  our  moral  nature,  and  is  intensely  prac-
tical; but  we  cannot  but  feel  the  close  nearness  of  the  eternal  world,  a  constant
occupation  of  men's  minds  with  the  idea  of  salvation  from  sin  and  of  reconciliation
with  God,  the  sense  of  imion  through  Christ  with  the  Father^  large  con<!eptions  of


TlB  INTRODUOTION  TO


humanity  and  of  the  Church,  the  realized  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  continual
reference  to  Christ — to  his  character,  to  his  death,  and  his  blood,  his  resurrection,  and
ascension,  his  second  advent,  and  the  judgment  of  quick  and  dead.  Now,  if  GhrUt  he
a  reality,  if  the  story  of  the  synoptic  Gospels  can  be  tmsted,  very  much  is  explained.
The  generation  was  living  which  had  received  from  the  lips  pf  Jesus  his  own  idea_  of
himself,  and  bad  been  face  to  face  with  God  manifest  in  flesh.  The  sifting,  burning
words  of  the  Master  himself,  circulating  from  home  to  home,  from  Church  to  Church
-^the  living  word  of  the  Christ,  the  revelations  made  by  him — were  the  life  of  the
apostolic  community.  Men  were  eating  this  manna  which  came  down  from  heaven.
St.  Paul's  Epistles  are  admitted  to  be  the  earliest  fragments  of  what  we  call  the  Kew
Testament;  but  they  most  obviously  are  built  up  on  mutually  accredited  ideas — on  the
"  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,"  which  had  spread  with  the  rapidity  of  a  prairie  fire
from  Galilee  to  Antiooh,  from  Galatia  to  Ephesus,  from  Babylon  to  Corinth,  from  Alex-
andria and  Athens  to  Borne.  Men,  not  "  filled  with  new  wine,"  but  saturated  with
the  Spirit,  were  then  moving  from  land  to  land ;  wheresoever  they  went  they  proclaimed
the  word,  the  royal  majesty,  the  saving  might,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  According
to  our  narratives,  "  John  "  was  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Church  (Gal.  ii.  9),  and  was
closely  identified  with  Peter  in  the  earliest  victories  of  Christianity.  He  was  one  of  the
first  preachers  of  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  and  his  memories  of  the  Master  contributed  at
least  to  the  views  which  St.  Paul  entertained  of  the  Person  and  ministry,  the  death  and
resurrection,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  powers  of  faith,  the  functions  of  love,  and  the
relation  between  the  body  of  Christ  and  its  spiritual  and  exalted  Head.

May  we  not  make  the  supposition  that  Jesus  did  speak  to  Nicodemus,  to  the
Samaritaness,  to  the  Jews,  to  the  Qalilseans,  to  the  chief  rulers,  to  the  Greeks,  to  the
company  of  the  eleven,  as  the  Fourth  Ck>spel  reports  of  him?    Is  it  inconceivable  and
incredible  that  he  who  did,  according  to  synoptic  tradition,  speak  of  himself  as  having
the  destiny  of  all  men  and  nations  in  his  hands,  should  also  have  said  on  another
occasion  that  "  the  Father  hath  given  all  judgment  into  his  hands ; "  that  he  who  called
upon  all  men  to  "  repent,"  should  have  described  the  Divine  side  of  this  great  human
experience  as  a  regeneration  by  the  Spirit ;  that  he  who  raised  other  dead  may  have
raised  Lazarus  from  the  grave ;  that  he  who  said,  "  Come  \mto  me,"  should  also  have
said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out "  ?  Is  not  the  astounding  group
and  body  of  convictions  concerning  the  place  and  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  best  explained
by  the  fact  (not  the  mere  supposition)  that  Jesus  claimed  a  pre-existent  glory  with
the  Father,  that  he  was  one  with  the  Father,  and  would  be  lifted  up  that  he  might
draw  all  men  to  himself?    Are  not  many  events  in  the  final  week  of  the  Lord's  life  best
explained  by  the  additional  facts  referred  to  by  the  fourth  evangelist  ?  Is  it  not  rational
to  suppose  that  some  at  least  of  the  d'sciples  perceived  the  blending  of  the  Divine  and
human  in  the  perfect  life  of  their  Lord,  and  felt  overpowered  by  the  greatness  of  his  con-
descension and  the  unutterable  sweetness  of  his  sympathy  ?    Without  going  into  further
det^ls,  let  us  for  the  sake  of  argument  make  the  supposition  that  the  eternal  Son  of  God,
who  had  been  always  the  Life  and  Light  of  the  world,  did  actually  become  man  upon
earth,  and,  by  reason  of  his  resurrection  from  the  dead,  became,  as  Paul  said,  "  the  first-
fruits  of  them  that  sleep,"  and  "  was  declared  with  power  to  be  the  Son  of  God ; "  that  this
was  not  a  mere  after-thought,  a  dream  of  St.  Paul,  or  a  dogma  of  an  Alexandrine  sophist
in  the  second  century,  but  a  positive  event,  which  enacted  itself  in  the  life  of  Jesus ;
— then  what  more  likely  than  that  a  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  should  have  retained
memories  of  his  words  and  deeds  which,  when  brought  together  in  later  years  should
have  justified  him  in  producing  the  proem  of  the  Gospel?    The  supposition  is  that  this
same  disciple  should  also  have  seen  visions  and  dreamed  dreams  of  Christ's  supernal
splendour  of  power  and  rule,  which  justified  and  deepened  his  own  older  memories.
These  memories  prepared  him  for  the  final  conception  of  the  place  filled  in  the  universe
by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  conception  enabled  him  to  fall  back  upon  the
earthly  manifestations  of  love  and  of  power  by  which  he  had  been  brought  into  the
fellowship  of  the  Father,  and  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

The  atiumption  of  the  occurrence  of  the  facts  dissipates  all  difficulty  about  the  unity
of  the  man  John.  The  fact  that  he  had  insight  enough  to  receive  and  retain  the
discourses  of  Jesus,  and  t>«  fact  that  he  saw  the  fulness  of  grace  and  truth,  the  glory
ot  the  only  begotten  Son,  in  the  humanity  of  Jesus,  are  consonant  with  another  fact  in


THK  GOSPEL  AOOOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


his  experience,  that  he  should  see  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  and  the  slain  Lamb,  and  the
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  open  the  book  and  loose  its  seals,  and  declare  that,  as  "  the
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,"  hearing  the  name  of  "  The  Word  of  God,"  he  should
cast  down  ul  that  resists  his  supreme  power,  and  fulfil  all  the  sublime  hopes  which
were  breathed  in  the  solemn  hush  of  the  upper  chamber.

9.  Critical  difficulties  of  a  literary  kind^  arising  from  some  of  the  peculiarities  of  the
several  documents,  do  in  our  opinion  largely  depend  on  the  d  priori  supposition  that
such  facts  as  these  are  incredible  and  unthinkable.  The  supposed  impossibility  of  the
Incarnation,  the  fancied  Lacredibility  of  the  Resurrection,  and  the  consequent  rejection
of  all  events  which  are  not  in  harmony  with  physical  and  psychologic  laws  of  nature
and  man,  compel  the  critics  to  find  some  explanation  of  the  mysterious  and  puzzling
phenomena  which  these  docimients  reveal.  If  the  unreality  of  both  groups  of  facts  be
a  foregone  conclusion,  the  Gospel  it  a  romance  and  the  Apocalypse  a  dream ;  and  such
a  romance  and  such  a  dream  could  scarcely  have  been  fashioned  in  the  same  brain.

On  the  other  hand,  the  admission  of  such  facta,  or  the  absence  even  of  any  prejudice
against  their  possibility,  reduces  this  discrepancy  to  very  small  limits.

If  it  was  the  beloved  disciple  who  has  given  us  this  r^sumi  of  his  deepest  religious
experience,  then  the  evidence  becomes  almost  irresistible  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God.
If  Jesus  did  say  and  do  the  things  herein  recorded,  then  everything  in  the  universe,
every  event  in  time,  every  fact  in  the  history  of  the  world,  is  affected  by  it.

10.  The  Christian  faith  i$  not  dtpendent  upon  the  Gospel  of  John.  All  the  strenuous,
wonderful  ministry  and  correspondence  of  St.  Fttul  were  completed  thirty  (perhaps
forty)  years  before  this  Gespel  saw  the  light.  The  Churches  of  Antioch,  Ephesus,
Corinth,  and  Rome  were  founded  and  grew  to  great  importance  without  having
read  the  conversation  with  Nicodemus  or  the  valedictory  discourse.  "The  faith  of
Christ  the  Lord  of  glory"  prevailed  in  the  synagogues  of  Judraa,  as  we  may  reasonably
argue  from  the  encyclical  letter  of  James  the  Just,  the  servant  and  brother  of  Jesus.
Judas  also,  the  brother  of  James, 'taught  his  fellow-disciples  to  "keep  themselves  in
the  love  of  God,  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life."
The  Christian  Church  existed,  and  was  the  scene  of  anxious  controversy,  developing  a
new  form  of  human  society  and  a  new  code  of  ethics.  This  society  was  linked  by
subtle  bands  of  common  faith  and  hope ;  it  was  troubled  by  unauthorized  intruders ;  it
was  consecrated  by  the  blood  of  many  martyrs;  it  possessed  a  "faith  once  for  all
delivered  to  the  saints,"  hefore  the  Fourth  Oospel  was  indited,  Christianity  is  not
dependent  upon  it.  The  existence  of  this  faith  in  a  potent  form,  so  subtle  that  it
abashed  philosophy  and  sapped  the  foundations  of  idolatry  and  honeycombed  the
Graeco-Roman  world,  and  did  so  'before  this  docwnent  saw  the  light,  is  one  of  the  best-
attested  facts  of  past  history.  The  spread,  the  force,  the  vitality,  of  the  Christian  com-
munity, even  in  the  days  when  the  Epistle  to  Romans  was  written  (say  a.d.  68),  is  forced
upon  our  minds  by  a  perusal  of  any  half-dozen  verses  of  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans,
Galstians,  or  Corinthians.  The  bare  lines  themselves  bring  a  supernatural  fact  under
our  very  eyes.  That  a  born  Jew  should  have  preached  in  Corinth  and  Thessalonica  the
supreme  majesty  of  a  crucified  Man — and  this  within  twenty  years  of  the  death  of  Jesus
— and  that  he  should  have  been  believed ;  and  that  ideas  arising  out  of  this  stupendous
claim  should  have  created  a  new  philosophy  of  heaven  and  earth,  of  morals  and  history ;
is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  astonishing  facts  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Modern
criticism  does  not  dispute  the  facts,  and  modem  methods  of  research  have  not  reducer)
them  to  the  "  natural  order."  We  are  face  to  face  with  these  facts  now.  They  can
never  be  abolished.  They  emit  a  lustre  and  exert  a  spiritual  force  wherever  they  are
pondered.  The  simple  facts  themselves  are,  in  the  judgment  of  the  most  widely  read
students  of  ancient  history,  absolutely  unique,  and  they  have  about  them  the  same
kind  of  almost  weird  wonderfulness  which  we  should  have  experienced  if  we  had  seen
and  handled  the  Lord  Jesus  after  he  rose  from  the  dead.  We  are  compelled  to  believe,
or  at  least  to  admit,  this  insoluble  puzzle.  History  dates  from  this  great  crisis,  from  this
commencement  of  a  new  world,  this  enthronement  of  a  new  Adam,  this  conscious
victory  of  man  over  sin  and  death,  this  uplifting  of  the  veil,  this  dawning  of  an
eternu  day.  Christendom  is  practically  independent  of  the  Fourth  Gtespel  and  of  the
Apocalypse,  so  that  if  we  were  deprived  of  both,  or  if,  what  would  be  equally  deplor-
able, we  were  robbed  of  all  confidence  in  either,  we  should  still  have  an  indefeasible


DrrBODUcnoN  to


inheritance,  s  &ith  that  has  made  heroes  and  martyn,  a  fidth  that  worka  fagr  kiw%  a
hope  that  will  not  make  us  ashamed.

It  is  a  mistake  to  regard  the  Gospel  of  John  as  the  acropolis  or  citadel  of  the
Christian  faith.  The  Christian  Church  was  established ;  the  new  Jerusalem  came  down
out  of  heaven ;  the  great  High  Priest  was  seen  to  pass,  with  the  blood  of  his  own
sacrifice,  or  in  the  merit  of  his  vicarious  death  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  within
the  veil  of  the  celestial  temple ;  a  new  creation  had  begun ;  a  new  life  was  being  lived ;
the  Godhead  was  known  to  be  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  by  reason  of  the  lessons
involved  in  the  Divinity  and  humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  before  that  Gospel  opened
the  heart  of  Jesus,  revealed  the  depths  of  the  Father's  love,  or  made  it  obvious  to
babes  in  Christ,  as  well  as  to  strong  men,  that  be  had  been,  was,  and  would  for  ever  be,
"  the  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life."

11.  But,  though  the  Gospel  be  not  the  acropolis  of  the  faith  or  the  key  to  the  whole
position  occupied  by  Christianity,  it  is  of  incalculable  preciousness.  Some  who  have
prsuaded  themselves  that  it  could  not  have  been  produced  by  its  presumed  author,
have  been  free  to  admit  this  much.  On  the  supposition  that  it  was  produced  at  the
close  of  the  second  century  by  a  pious  falsarius,  as  a  dramatic  theologic  romance,  with
special  reference  to  the  controversies  then  prevailing,  some  advocates  of  this  imtenable
hypothesis  have  been  ready  to  admit  that  it  reveaU  the  deepest  insight  into  the  mind
and  heart  of  Jesus.

Thus  F.  C.  Baur  ('  Church  History  of  First  Three  Centuries,'  L  154,  Eng.  trans.)
"  cannot  but  admire  the  breadth  of  true  feeling  and  the  delicate  art  with  which  the
evangelist  has  seized  those  elements  which  led  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Apocalypse
to  the  freer  and  higher  standpoint  of  the  Gospel,  so  as  to  spiritualize  the  Apocalypse
into  the  Gt>speL"

Schenkel  ('  A  Sketch  of  the  Character  of  Jesus :  a  Biblical  Essay,'  p.  34,  Eng.  trans.)
says  that  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  "  has  taken  out  of  their  historical  framework,
elevated  into  the  region  of  eternal  thought,  and  invested  with  transfiguring  glory,  a
selection  of  reminiscences  from  the  evangelical  tradition  of  the  public  life  of  Jesus.  .  .  .
Without  this  Gospel  the  unfathomable  depth,  the  inaccessible  height,  of  the  character  of
the  Saviour  of  the  world  would  be  wanting  to  us,  and  his  boundless  influence,  renewing
all  humanity,  would  for  ever  remain  a  mystery.  He  was  not  what  that  Gospel  paints
him  actually,  but  he  was  that  essentially.  .  .  .  The  representation  of  the  character  of
Jesus  becomes  eternally  true  only  in  the  heavenly  splendour  of  that  light  which  streams
forth  from  the  Fourth  Gospel."

So  Albrecht  Thoma  ('  Die  Genesis  des  Johannes-Evangeliums  ein  Beitrag  zu  Seiner
Aaslegung  Geschichts  und  Kritik '  (1882),  p.  879) :  "  Nothing  earlier  than  itself,  nothing
later,  not  the  synoptic  history,  nor  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  is  necesbary  to  give  the
worth  to  this  Gospel  which  corresponds  to  its  place  in  the  canon.  From  its  rich
treasury  the  scribe  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  God  can  ever  take  things  both  new
and  old.  The  Spirit  which  works  within  the  book — the  Spirit  of  Christ — evermore  will
speak  what  he  himself  hears,  and  will  make  known  things  to  come,  and  will  glorify
him  for  whose  glorification  this  Gospel  has  been  written."

Holtzmann  said  (in  Schenkel's  'Lexicon'  (1869),  vol.  ii.) — what  he  does  not  exactly
repeat  in  his  recent  ' Einleitung,'  though  he  would  not  deny  it  (1885) — "The  most
fundamental  and  far-reaching  thoughts  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  lie  far  beyond  the  second
century  and  beyond  the  entire  outlook  of  the  Christian  Church  even  to  the  present  day."

Testimonies  like  these  might  be  indelinitely  multiplied,  and  they  call  attention  to
the  fact  that  very  much  of  the  most  fundamental  thought  of  the  Gospel  is  absolutely
verified  by  the  Christian  consciousness,  by  whomsoever  it  was  first  formulated,  and
at  whot  time  soever  it  was  first  recorded.  E.g.  we  know,  as  absolutely  true,  that
"  whosoever  willeth  to  do  the  will  of  the  heavenly  Father  knows  of  the  doctrine
whether  it  be  of  God  "  or  whether  it  merely  issue  from  human  lips  ;  the  true  condem-
nation of  sinners,  viz.  that  "  they  love  darkness  rather  than  light,"  is  affirmed  by
every  conscience.  The  need  of  heavenly  birth  is  corroborated  by  every  reason  that
is  sufficiently  introspective.  The  spirituality  of  God  and  of  worship  is  as  far  ahead
of  the  second  century  as  of  the  first,  and  even  of  the  nineteenth  as  of  the  second.  The
drawing  of  the  Father  to  the  Son,  by  the  Son,  so  that  none  cometh  to  the  Father  except
by  this  great  revelation,  is  so  profound  a  thought  that  it  establishes  itself  in  the


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


■piritual  life  of  advanced  thinkers.  The  power  of  faith  to  heal,  to  invigorate,  and
cleanse ;  the  mighty  energies  of  holy  love  and  self-sacrifice ;  the  fact  that  the  strongest,
most  energetic,  love  of  man  to  roan  springs  from  common  love  to  the  Holiest  and  the
Best ;  the  victory  of  love  over  death ;  and  the  revelation  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal
to  love ;  are  among  the  highest  of  all  truths.  That  all  truth  emancipates  bom.  bondage ;
that  all  believing  souls  will  at  length  be  one ;  and  that  the  Spirit  which  was  in  Christ
may  and  does  become  in  the  heart  of  the  believer  a  well  of  living  water,  a  source  of  life
to  others ;  are  positions  to  lose  which  would  impoverish  human  thought  beyond  remedy.
Having  been  once  set  forth,  these  "  open  secrets  "  belong  to  humanity,  and  cannot  be
withdrawn.    And  so  with  very  many  other  mighty  utterances  of  this  spiritual  Gospel.

These  concessions  may,  therefore,  be  fairly  made  without  detracting  from  the  flood
of  glory  which  is  poured  upon  them  when  we  find  that  the  ideas  themselves  are  referred
by  the  evangelist  to  the  Jesus  whom  he  knew  and  loved,  to  whose  heart  he  drew  nearer
than  any  other  had  done.

To  return  to  the  suggestions  with  which  this  section  commenced.  We  may  find  it
impossible  to  state  all  the  reasons  which  intersect  and  blend  in  order  to  convince  us
that  we  have  in  this  wonderful  Gospel  a  veritable  revelation  of  the  Son  of  God.
Psychological  law  will  never  reduce  the  conception  to  a  merely  ordinary  humanity.
We  need  the  sense  of  the  Divine  as  well  as  the  human  to  prevent  the  portraiture  here
given  of  the  Christ  from  shading  or  sheering  off  into  the  impossible  and  abnormal.
We  need  our  deepest  persuasion  that  the  Divine  and  human  are  not  separated  by  an
impassable  chasm,  but  in  their  innermost  essence  are  one ;  to  recognize  the  portraiture
of  the  Logos  made  man,  in  whom  all  the  humanity  at  its  higlfllst  ii  Divine,  and  all
the  Divinity  at  its  greatest  is  manifested  through  the  human.

A  philosophy  based  on  the  necessary  unknowablenes.s  of  Gkid,  on  the  eternal  unlike-
ness  of  God  to  man,  on  the  impossibility  of  communication  or  conversableness  between
man  and  his  Maker,  must  find  an  insoluble  puzzle,  an  impossibility,  in  the  genuineness
of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  endeavours  to  relegate  it  to  a  date  when  it  supposes  that  the
antecedents  are  all  ready  for  its  origination.  "  The  life  of  Christ "  is  not  itself  enough
for  this  philosophy,  seeing  that  all  the  main  ideas  to  which  this  Gospel  calls  special
attention  are  regarded  as  later  accretions  on  a  simpler  and  less  mysterious  original.
Everything  essentially  Johannine  in  the  Christ  must  be  excluded  from  the  historical
antecedents.

The  entire  synoptic  narrative,  notwithstanding  its  striking  points  of  resemblance
to  the  Johannine  teaching  in  some  of  its  most  fundamental  elements,  is  insufficient,
in  the  view  of  many  writers,  to  propound  the  antecedent  or  prepare  the  platform  of  the
Fourth  Gospel.  The  later  Tiibingen  critics,  like  Holtzmann  and  Thoma,  go  very  far
in  admitting  the  presence  of  FauLinism  in  the  Gospel,  and,  instead  of  the  rational
hjrpothesis  that  the  Johannine  elements  were  widely  known  and  deeply  grasped  by
St.  Paul,  they  suppose  that  Paul's  Epistles,  in  all  the  affluence  of  honour  rendered  by
him  to  the  rank  and  work  of  Christ  Jesus,  are  among  the  intellectual  antecedents  of
what  to  such  writers  is  a  masterpiece  of  pious  fraud.

But  neither  the  synoptists,  nor  Paul,  nor  the  Acts  of  the  Apostlei,  nor  the  Apocalypse
itself,  all  of  which  furnished  materials  to  the  great /a/sartus,  are,  in  the  opinion  of  many,
sufficient  antecedents  for  this  work.

Many  have  attempted  to  show  the  amount  of  Alexandrine  influence  with  which  the
author  must  have  been  saturated  before  he  could  have  proposed  the  thesis  of  the  pro-
logue, and  wrought  into  the  texture  of  his  argument  what  are  supposed  to  be  the  ideas
ofPhilo.  '  ,

But  the  pre-existence  of  the  philosophy  of  Philo,  and  the  wide  circulation  of  the
entire  New  Testament  (minus  the  Fourth  Gospel),  are  not  enough  to  satisfy  those  who
cannot  accept  the  historic  verity  of  the  idea  of  the  Christ.  The  antecedents  here  cited
would  not  force  the  Fourth  Gospel  out  of  the  first  century.  The  production  of  this
Gh)spel  in  the  first  century  would  mean  such  an  accession  of  evidence  for  its  practical
historicity  that  diligent  search  has  to  be  made  for  other  indications,  literary  and
polemical,  which  must  have  preceded  the  composition  of  the  GospeL

Consequently,  effort  has  been  made  to  find  in  Cerinthus,  Basileides,  and  Yalentinus
such  elaborations  of  the  idea  of  the  relation  of  God  to  man  as  to  constitute  them  into
veritable  antecedents  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.    Even  the  indications  which  the  martyi


xit  nrrEODUcnoif  to


Justin  ^ves  of  the  previous  existence  of  the  Gospel  have  been  inverted,  and  great  pain*
taken  to  show  that  it.  is  not  probable  that  Justin  had  read  the  work  of  John,  but  that
"  John "  may  have  made  use  of  Justin ;  and  bo,  having  cleared,  not  only  the  first
century,  but  a  large  portion  of  the  second  century,  from  the  presence  of  the  Fourth
Gospel,  a  date  has  been  assigned  to  it  just  anterior  to  the  time  when,  by  universal
confession,  the  Gospel  is  known  to  have  been  regarded  in  Antioch  and  Lyons,  in  Alex-
andria, Ephesus,  and  Borne,  as  one  of  the  four  indisputable  authorities  for  the  biography
of  the  Lord  Jesuo.

n.  The  Dbtaiu  of  the  AssAniff.

The  history  of  the  assault  upon  the  Fourth  Gospel  reveals  an  extended  campaign  and
many  hostile  forces,  and  is  instructive  from  the  fact  that  many  of  the  hypotheses
(inconsistent  with  its  genuineness)  have  been  relinquished  by  the  successive  assailants
as  incompatible  with  known  &ct8  of  literature,  or  ecclesiastical  order,  or  theological
conitruction.

The  assault  has  been  conducted  along  two  main  lines.  One  has  been  directed  towards
the  establishment  of  a  late  date  for  its  composition.  This  has  been  effected  by  a
destructive  and  a  constructive  process:  (1)  by  disputing  the  external  testimonies  to
its  existence  before  the  close  of  the  second  century ;  (2)  by  endeavouring  to  imagine
the  circumstances  and  condition  of  the  Church  out  of  which  it  sprang,  the  errors  it
was  supposed  to  counteract,  and  the  necessary  literary  antecedents  of  the  authorship.
The  second  line  of  assault  has  been  directed  towards  the  internal  incompatibilities
of  the  narrative ;  the  incredibility  of  its  main  teaching  as  the  direct  word  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ ;  the  contrast  between  the  teaching  of  this  "  evangelist "  and  that  of  the
synoptic  Gospels ;  the  improbability  that  the  author  of  the  document  was  either  the
"  John  "  of  the  synoptic  Gospels  or  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse.

We  propose  to  treat  these  matters  in  detail ;  but,  before  doing  so,  we  would  call  atten-
tion to  the  manner  in  which  the  assailants  have  conducted  the  campaign,  and  have
receded  from  positions  they  had  once  taken  up  with  extreme  confidence.

Although  the  English  deists  occasionally  hinted  doubts  of  the  genuineness  of  the
four  Gospels,  yet  the  first  most  deliberate  assault  was  delivered  by  Edward  Evanson,
an  Anglican  clergyman  in  Gloucester,  who  in  1792  published  his  '  Dissonance  of  the
Four  generally  received  Evangelists,  and  the  Evidence  of  their  Respective  Authenticity,
examined  with  that  of  other  Scriptures  deemed  Canonical.'  He  regarded  the  greater
part  of  the  New  Testament  as  a  forgery,  and  accepted  as  true  the  Gospel  of  Luke  alone.
He  opposed  John's  Gospel  from  its  dissimilarity  with  the  Apocalypse,  and  attributed  it
to  a  Platonizing  philosopher  of  the  second  century.

These  positions  were  taken  up  by  Eckermann,  by  Horst  (in  '  Henke's  Museum  fiir
Eeligionswissenschaft ')  in  1803,  by  Cludius,  by  Ballenstedt  ('  Philo  und  Johannes ')  in
1812,  and  by  Vogel,  who  in  1801  sought  to  bring  the  Evangelist  John  and  his  inter-
preters to  the  judgment  of  the  great  day ;  but  not  until  1820  did  the  controversy
assume  a  pungent  phase  by  the  publication  of  Bretschneider's  '  Probabilia  de  Evangelii
et  Epistolarum  Johannis  Apostoli  indole  et  engine.'  This  distinguished  theologian
accumulated  all  the  difficulties  besetting  the  problem  into  one  vivid,  powerful  state-
ment, and  appeared  to  conclude  that  the  Gospel  was  written  by  an  Alexandrine
philosopher  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century.

The  English  deists  were  replied  to  by  Le  Clerc  and  Lampe.  Evanson  was  met  by
Priestley  and  Simpson.  Storr  replied  to  Eckermann  with  such  force  that  the  latter
retracted  his  doubts ;  Vnd  the  whole  position  of  Bretschneider  was  bandied  with  such
dexterity  by  Olshausen,  by  Liicke  in  his  celebrated  '  Kommentar,'  and  by  others,  that
Bretschneider  confessed  that  his  doubts  were  resolved,  and  that  the  object  he  had  in
view  was  accomplished  in  having  provoked  a  more  thorough  vindication  of  the
authenticity  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  This  left  the  atmosphere  clearer,  and  the  ground
secure  for  Schleiermacher  to  regard  the  Christ  of  John  as  the  true  Christ,  and  to  base
his  theology  and  his  view  of  the  historical  Christ  upon  the  Fourth  Gospel  rather  than
upon  any  other  portion  of  the  New  Testament.  De  Wette,  in  his  '  Einleitung '  to  his
first  edition  of  his  'Handbuch'  (1825),  expressed  seiious  doubts  of  the  proof  of  the
genuineness  of  the  Gospel  now  possible  to  us ;  and  in  1837  he  confesses  to  his  "  dearest


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xiU

friend"  Liicke  that  he  fears  his  scepticism  may  be  grievous  to  him,  touching  the
literary  vindication  of  the  authenticity  of  this  "  tender,  unique,  veritably  supreme
Gospel."  Yet  before  this  preface  was  written,  an  event  of  consummate  influence  had
occiured,  viz.  the  publication,  in  1835,  of  Strauss's  '  Leben  Jesu,'  which  endeavoured  to
account  for  the  synoptic  Gospels  by  an  oral  tradition,  which,  with  the  aid  of  popular
expectations  of  the  Messiah,  gradually  accumulated  around  it  a  mythical  enlargement
and  lustre.  He  proceeded,  mainly  by  a  drastic  criticism  of  the  Gospels,  to  reveal  their
discrepancies,  and  to  account  for  them  by  the  growth  of  legend  and  the  accretion  of  non-
historical  elements.  For  a  time  he  seemed  to  waver  as  to  the  possible  authenticity  of
the  Fourth  Gospel,  but  relinquished  it  in  subsequent  editions  of  his  notorious  work,
seeing  that  the  whole  of  his  mythical  theory  would  have  been  broken  to  pieces  if  he
allowed  that  a  disciple  of  Jesus  had  produced  a  chronicle  of  his  deeds  and  words  which
violated  the  physical  and  psychological  laws  which  he  regarded  as  irreversible.  Strauss's
temporary  vacillation  was  intensified  by  the  powerful  effect  produced  upon  him  by  the
appearance  of  Neander's  '  Life  of  Christ,'  which  was  an  attempt  to  show  that  unques-
tionable facts  existed  and  could  not  be  disproved,  out  of  which  the  entire  evangelic
narrative  might  have  arisen.

C.  H.  Weisse  ('Die  Evangelisohe  Geschichte  kiitisch  und  philosophisch  bearbeitet:'
1838)  propounded  a  specious  theory,  which  has  been  not  unfrequently  adopted  by  some
later  critics,  that  there  is  an  apostolic  foundation  for  the  fourth  evangelist,  which  con-
sisted of  "  studies "  of  the  mind  of  Christ  expanded  in  the  old  age  of  the  evangelist,
— when  his  memory  grew  dim — into  the  discourses  of  the  Gospel,  and  that,  at  a  later
date,  these  were  woven  into  a  fictitious  narrative.  Fromman  refuted  the  hypothesis
with  ability  in  1849.

Bruno  Bauer  (1840)  pursued  an  attack  on  different  lines.  He  recognized,  what  has
ever  since  been  felt  more  and  more,  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  not  a  spontaneous  evolution
of  mythical  tendency,  but  the  work  of  "  a  poet  conscious  of  his  procedure,"  and  capable
of  initiating  a  philosophical  romance.  Doubtless  the  plan,  the  growth,  the  gathering
solemnity,  the  climax  of  the  Gospel,  with  its  prologue  and  epilogue,  show  that  it  is  the
work  of  one  mind,  not  the  elaboration  or  crystallization  of  many  minds.  It  bears  from
end  to  end  the  impress  of  a  most  original  and  masterly  thinker,  and,  if  it  were  not  the
work  of  the  apostle,  it  must  have  been  the  creation  of  a  deliberate  forger.  The  moral
revulsion  which  such  a  theory  excites  has  led  to  many  and  varied  replies.  Notably
Ebrard  distinguished  himself  in  1843  ('  Wissenschaftliohe  Kritik  der  Evangel.  Gesch.'),
by  demolishing  the  rival  theories  of  Strauss  and  Bruno  Bauer.  An  English  translation
of  the  second  edition  was  published  in  1863.

But  all  previous  assailants  do,  in  one  sense,  fall  back  into  insignificance  by  the
side  of  the  epoch-making  arguments  of  Ferdinand  Christian  Baur,  of  Tiibingen,
who,  by  articles  first  published  in  Zeller's  Theolog.  JahriiXcher,  and  afterwards
brought  together  in  his  'Kritisohe  Untersuchungen  tiber  die  cauonischen  Evano;elion'
(1847),  and  '  Das  Christenthum  und  die  Christliche  Kirohe  der  drei  ersten  Jahrhun-
derte '  (1853)  [the  latter  translated  into  English  in  two  vols.,  London]  endeavoured  to
establish  such  a  view  of  the  Christian  Churches  and  of  the  creation  of  the  '  Catholic
Church*  in  the  second  century  as  would  provide  at  that  period  a  platform  and
"historical  situation"  on  which  the  grand  edifice  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  could  have
been  erected.  He  supposed  that  it  reveals  traces  throughout  of  the  activity  and  vaiious
speculations  of  the  Gnostic  schools,  which  characterized  the  second  half  of  the  century.
He  held  that  the  Churches  were  split  into  two  hostile  camps:  (1)  those  which  clung
to  the  ancient  Jewish  observances,  the  vitality  of  the  Law,  the  restriction  of  the  highest
Messianic  privileges  to  the  house  of  Israel,  headed  and  guided  by  the  representatives
of  the  Jerusalem  apostles — Peter,  James  the  Just,  and  John  the  son  of  Zebedee ;  and
(2)  those  which  were  largely  composed  of  Gentiles  who  reverted  to  the  authority  of
Paul.  The  four  uncontested  Epistles  are  so  expounded  as  to  reveal  a  permanent  breach
between  Paul  and  the  original  apostles.  These  two  tendencies  in  the  Church  were
aggravated  by  Marcionite  antagonism  to  Judaism  on  the  one  side,  and  by  Montanistic
extravagances  and  reaction  against  the  episcopate  on  the  other.  Baur  further  held
that,  towards  the  second  half  of  the  century,  these  two  parties  in  the  Church  were  dis-
posed to  come  into  closer  relationship  with  each  other.  At  or  before  this  time  he  sup-
poses numerous  forgeries  to  have  occurred.     For  instance,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  had


xIt  intboduction  to


been  written  as  an  eirenicon,  with  the  endeavour  to  prove,  by  forged  facts,  that  Peter  and
Paul  were  not  really  estranged  from  one  another ;  that  the  substance  of  their  preaching
was  practically  identical,  and  that  their  relation  to  the  heathen  world  and  to  the  legal
observance  by  Jews  of  circumcision  had  miich  in  common.  Pseudo-Pauline  Epistles  to  the
Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Philippians,  and  the  pastoral  Epistles,  he  held  recently  to  have
helped  to  bridge  the  chasm  between  the  opposing  parties.  At  length  some  manifesto  was
urgently  needed  which  should  show  that  there  was  truth  on  both  sides,  that  Paulinism
and  Petrinism  were  really  one  in  their  dogmatic  root,  that  while  "  salvation  was  of  the
Jews,"  yet  "  God  is  a  Spirit,"  and  his  wor^ip  independent  of  Jerusalem  and  Gerizim.
This  position  he  thought  not  likely  to  be  taken  till  after  the  second  humiliation  of
Jerusalem  under  Hadrian.  This  manifesto  might  involve  all  that  was  essential  or  good
in  Montanism  or  Marcionitism,  and  should  endeavour  to  root  all  in  a  popular  theory
of  the  Logos.  The  eternal  Logos  was  no  sooner  believed  to  have  become  incarnate  in
Jesus,  than  from  him  all  the  unifying  truths  might  be  presumed  to  have  proceeded.
Baur  supposed  that  some  "  great  unknown  "  attempted  this  colossal  task,  and  produced
the  Fourth  Gospel,  which  exactly  met  the  case.  By  subtle  suggestions  its  author  meant
to  convey  the  idea  that  it  was  written  by  the  son  of  Zebedee,  who  is  represented  ai
specially  dear  to  Jesus,  and  therefore  competent  to  reveal  his  thought.  An  additional
argument  of  great  ingenuity  was  advanced.  At  this  particular  juncture,  said  Baur,  the
difference  between  the  Eastern  and  Western  Churches  as  to  the  celebration  of  Easter
and  the  Paschal  rite  had  once  more  come  forward.  It  was  supposed  that  the  synoptic
Gospels  had  demonstrated  the  fact  that  the  Lord  ate  the  Passover  with  his  disciples  on
the  night  before  his  crucifixion.  It  was  said  that  John  favoured  this  view,  his  example
being  quoted  against  the  Boman  ctistom  of  continuing  the  fast  until  the  eve  of  the
Easter  morning.  What  could  be  more  advantageous,  in  the  growing  interest  of  the
"  Catholic  Church,"  than  that  it  should  appear  that  the  Lord  was  crucified  on  the  14th
Nisan,  and  then  to  have  John's  authority  for  regarding  Christ's  death  as  the  veritable
Passover  ?    This  he  suggested  as  one  of  the  motives  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.

Baur  thus  considered  every  word  of  this  Catholic  manifesto  as  dexterously  chosen
to  accomplish  one  or  more  (rf  these  results.  Thus  the  mythical  hypothesis  vanishes,
and  the  hints  of  Bruno  Bauer  are  made  to  take  the  place  of  the  Straussian  construction
of  the  life  of  Jesus.  Baur  fixed  the  date  of  the  composition  about  the  year  a.d.  170,
when  all  these  conditions  combined,  as  he  imagined,  to  provide  its  "  historical  situation."

The  date  is  a  matter  of  prime  importance  in  this  speculation,  and  the  defenders  of  the
authenticity  were  not  slow  to  appeal  to  the  historical  proof  of  the  existence  of  this
Gospel  before  the  year  A.D.  170.  Bbrard,  in  his  introduction  to  the  Commentary  on
the  Gospel  (Bng.  trans.),  Thiersch  ('  Versuch  zur  Herstellung  des  historischen  Stand-
punkts  fiir  die  Kritik  der  Neutestamentlichen  Schriften'),  and  Bleek  ('Beitrage  zur
Evangelien-Kritik ')  discussed  the  positions  of  Baur  with  great  acumen  and  force.  Later
on  we  give  the  proof  that  Irenseus,  between  a.d.  180  and  185,  quoted  the  Gospel  as
canonical  and  inspired  Scripture;  that  Theophilus  of  Antioch  (a.d.  170)  quoted  the
Gospel  as  that  of  John ;  that  Celsus,  whose  work  Origen  commented  on  and  refuted,  must
have  been  familiar  with  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  that  the  Muratorian  Fragment  shows,  about
A.D.  170,  that  it  was  regarded  as  of  equal  importance  with  the  other  Gospels ;  that
Tatian,  before  a.d.  170,  composed  his  '  Harmony  of  the  Four  Gospels ; '  and  that  the
pseudo-Clementine  literature  (as  is  now  admitted  by  Hilgenfeld)  quoted  the  Fourth
Gospel ;  that  the  disciples  of  Valentinug,  viz.  Heracleon  and  Ptolemseus,  were  acquainted
with  the  Gospel,  the  former  writing  a  commentary  on  it  between  a.d.  125  and  155 !
Thus  it  appeared  that  the  date  on  which  Baur  laid  stress,  and  in  the  midst  of  which
lie  found  the  historical  locus  for  its  composition,  absolutely  vanishes.  Godet  shows,
with  conspicuous  ability,  that  the  supposed  purpose  of  the  author  to  reconcile  Christ's
death-day  with  the  Paschal  feast  would  not  have  accomplished  the  purpose  of  defend-
ing the  Boman  celebration  of  the  Communion  on  Easter  morning ;  and  that  there  is  no
probability  that  the  sacramental  commemoration  of  the  night  of  the  Passion  by  the
Eastern  Church  was  any  commemoration  of  the  moment  when  the  Eucharist  wai
instituted,  but  rather  a  prolongation  of  theocratic  memories  coupled  with  a  reverent
celebration  of  the  death  itself.

Baur's  date  could  not  be  sustained,  and  hii  followers  and  disciples  hav«  been  eom
pelled  to  take  firesh  ground  while  endorsing  his  main  principle!.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  it

We  ehall  see  the  further  proof  that  Justin  Martyr,  about  a.d.  150,  was  acquainted  with
the  Gospel.  The  evidence  has  been  sufficient  to  convince  Hilgenfeld  ('  Das  Evangelium
und  die  Briefe  Johannis  nach  ihrem  Lelirbegiiffo  dargestellt:'  1849;  'Die  Evangelien,'
1854 ;  see  also  his  recently  published  '  Historisch-Kritische  Eiuleitung  in  das  Neue
Test. : '  1875)  that  Baui''3  date  must  be  abandoned ;  but  this  great  scholar  labours  with
vast  learning  to  show  that  the  _Gospel  reveals  traces  of  Valentinian  Gnosticism,  which
might  have  been  available  to  the  author  between  a.d.  136  and  140.  In  such  a  controversy
ai  this,  forty  years  nearer  to  apostolic  times  is  a  concession  of  considerable  importance.
The  connection  between  Valentinian  gnosis  and  the  Gospel  cannot  be,  need  not  be,
ignored ;  but  a  reasonable  conclusion  is  that  Yalentinus  made  use  of  terms  found  in  a
revered  Christian  document,  not  that  the  unknown  author  of  such  document  borrowed
the  terms  "  Logos,"  "  Life,"  "  Light,"  "  Truth,"  which  he  uses  with  didactic  simplicity,
irom  the  «ons  and  syzygies  of  the  Gnostic.  Volkmar  and  Soholten  also  abandoned
their  master's  date,  fixing  it  nevertheless  at  a.d.  150  or  155,  one  which  we  believe  to  be
invalidated  by  the  evidence  derived  from  the  quotations  of  Justin,  as  well  as  from  the
use  made  by  Valentinus  of  the  Gospel  itself.

Volkmar,  and  after  him  both  Beville  and  Benan,  have  expressed  their  wonder  that
(if  the  Fourth  Gospel  had  been  in  existence  in  a.d.  150),  Marcion  did  not  make  use  of
it  instead  of  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  The  true  reply  is  that  John's 'Gospel  afforded  no
scientific  or  historic  basis  for  Marcion,  and  that  not  even  by  interpolation  or  excision
could  he  have  utilized  this  document ;  so  that  his  silence  and  neglect  must  count  for
nothing  in  determining  the  date  of  the  latter.  Effort  was  made  to  find  reference
(ch.  xvi.  2)  to  the  massacres  of  Christians  in  the  insurrection  of  Barchochab  (a.d.  132);
but  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen,  of  James  the  Just,  and  others,  to  say  nothing  of  the
Neronian  persecution,  and  the  deaths  of  Peter  and  Paul,  are  more  than  sufficient  to
justify  even  a  forger  between  a.d.  80  and  100  in  attributing  these  words  to  Jesus.

Keim,  who  in  1867  was  content,  while  repudiating  the  authenticity  of  the  Gospel,  to
accept  the  date  a.d.  100-115  for  its  production,  yet  in  1875,  without  any  apparently
sufficient  reason,  altered  his  opinion  and  regarded  a.d.  130  as  a  probable  date.

Dr.  Davidson,  mainly  on  the  ground  of  the  insufficiency  of  the  evidence  for  the
anteriority  of  the  Gospel  to  the  writings  of  Basileides  and  his  followers,  settles  down
to  the  iame  date.  The  proof  of  the  earlier  date,  which  was  admitted  by  Keim  in  1867,
turns  on  the  use  made  of  the  Gospel  by  the  apostolic  Fathers.  The  powerful  evidence
produced  by  Zahn  and  by  Bishop  Lightfoot  for  the  authenticity  of  the  seven  epistles  of
Ignatius  and  the  epistle  of  Polycarp,  does,  as  we  shall  see,  go  far  to  demonstrate  the
existence  of  the  Gospel  in  the  first  decade  of  the  second  century,  as  well  as  to  pulverize
the  entire  hypothesis  of  the  great  breach  in  the  Church  of  Christ  to  heal  which  many
critics  suggest  that  this  Gospel  was  composed.

If  the  epistles  of  Ignatius  be  genuine,  they  reveal  a  state  of  ecclesiastical  government
for  in  advance  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  of  Paul,  and  certainly  throw  back  the  date  of
those  Epistles  for  a  generation  behind  them.  The  Pauline  Epistles  as  the  Acts  of  the
Apost'es  and  the  First  Epistle  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians,  recognize  no  difference
of  rank  or  of  duty  between  bishops  and  elders;  whereas  about  a.d.  110  the  Ignatian
epistles  emphasize  the  distinction  between  these  Church  officers.  Ergo  these  pastoral
Epistles  cannot  well  be  a  birth  of  a  period  subsequent  to  the  ignatian  letters.  If  so,
whether  the  production  of  Paul  or  not,  they  reveal,  towards  the  close  of  the  first  century,
the  germ  of  the  Gnostic  virus  which  had  already  distressed  the  early  Church.

Even  the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  by  St.  Paul  show  very  forcibly  that  the  Church
at  Corinth,  between  a.d.  57  and  58,  had  been  cursed  by  the  very  spirit  which  the  First
Epistle  of  John  so  powerfully  condemned.  Why  should  we  on  this  accotmt  travel  into
the  midst  of,  or  towards  the  end  of,  the  second  century  to  find  the  "  historical  situation"
when  Gnostic  Ebionism  and  Docetic  t'aeosophy  had  emasculated  the  Christian  faith  of
many  ?  and  why  should  we  fancy  that  the  Church  required  the  questionable  aid  of  &  falsa-
rius,  who  must  have  set  himself  by  immoral  means  to  refute  the  enemy  by  inventing jpro
hoc  vice  the  words  and  works  of  Jesus  ?  If  Valentinus  and  Marcion,  Barchochab  and
the  followers  of  Basileides,  the  Easter  controversy,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  Montanus  were
all  constituents  in  the  creation  of  the  Gospel ;  and  if  the  author  were,  moreover,  saturated
with  Pauline  ideas,  and  intent  on  giving  practical  and  concrete  illustration  to  the  Logoi
doctrine  of  Philo  and  of  Justin,  and  also  delicately  to  correct  and  combine  the  tendenciei


xTl  INTRODUCTION  TO


conspicaong  in  the  First  and  Third  Gospels ; — what  a  miracle  of  ingenuity  the  Fourth
Gospel  becomes  I  It  is  even  more  wonderful  than  if  it  be  regarded  as  a  simple  record
of  the  memories  of  an  unforgotten  past.

That  Justin,  Montanus,  and  Valentinus,  that  Ignatius  and  Polycarp,  should  have  had
this  venerated  fragment  in  their  hands,  and  used  it  severally  in  defence  of  their  own
positions,  is  quite  as  credible  as  that  Irenaeus  and  Origen,  Clemens  Alex.,  and  TertuUian,
or  the  followers  of  Basileides,  should  subsequently  have  done  the  same.  But  this
hypothesis  demands  the  first  appearance  of  the  Gospel  in  the  first  century.  Such  a
conclusion  renders  the  Johannine  authorship  so  immensely  probable  that  those  who
are  driven  to  the  former,  but  deny  the  latter  view  adopt  a  variety  of  methods  to  evade
the  inference.

Granting  an  early  date,  Keim,  e.g.,  has  evaded  the  force  of  the  conclusion  by  agreeing
with  Eeuterdahl  and  Lutzelbuiger  in  the  endeavour  to  refute  the  widely  spread
tradition  of  St.  John's  residence  in  Ephesus  and  to  rehabilitate  the  old  shadow
of  the  Presbyter  John.  He  refuses  credence  to  the  point-blank  assurance  of  Iretiseus,
who  is  said  to  have  blundered  in  reporting  what  Polycarp  had  told  him.  He  thinks
that  Irenseus  led  all  subsequent  writers  to  regard  Polycarp  as  a  disciple  of  the  Apostle
John,  whereas  he  supposes  that  the  martyr's  intimacies  had  never  gone  beyond  those
of  the  venerable  Presbyter  John.  Scholten  even  goes  so  far  as  to  deny  the  apostolic
origin  of  the  Apocalypse,  which  the  school  of  Baur  and  Hilgenfeld  had  made  the  key-
stone of  their  construction.  He  thinks  an  unknown  person  in  Ephesus  was  its  author,
who,  having  adopted  the  name  of  John  in  order  to  give  his  work  greater  currency,  was
supposed  afterwards  to  have  been  the  apostle.  The  consequence  of  these  violent
hypotheses  is  that  John  the  son  of  Zebedee,  instead  of  being  regarded  as  the  author  of
five  of  the  New  Testament  books,  sir.ks  into  utter  obscurity  after  the  reference  made
to  him  in  Gal.  ii. ;  and  that  tradition  and  literature  have  been  equally  deceived  through
a  perverse  and  unfortunate  blunder  of  Irenaaus.

In  the  course  of  our  exposition  we  shall  have  frequent  opportunities  of  indicating  the
extraordinary  positions  of  Albrecht  Thoma  ('Die  Genesis  des  Johannes-Evangeliums
ein  Beitrag  zu  seiner  Auslegung  Geschichte  und  Kritik ').  He  reviews  the  sources,  the
history,  the  contents,  of  the  Gospel  with  great  eloquence  and  vast  knowledge ;  but  he
sees  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  the  artistic  setting  forth  of  the  ideas  of  the  middle  of  the
second  century  with  reference  to  the  origin  of  Christian  history  ;  e.g.  the  ninth  chapter
is  the  evangelist's  method  of  describing  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul ;  "  Judas  "  is  a  covert
reference  to  Simon  Magus;  and  the  twenty-first  chapter  is  the  Johannine  version  of  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles.  In  every  line  of  the  Gospel  he  discerns  the  influence  of  the
Alexandrine  school  of  thought.

Gebhart,  in  his  '  Theology  of  the  Apocalypse,'  defends,  with  great  ability,  the  identity
of  its  authorship  with  that  of  the  Gospel,  but  he  renounces  the  historicity  of  the
Gospel.  Both  documents,  he  tbinks,  may  have  been  produced  by  the  son  of  Zebedee,
but  they  are  both  imaginative  elaborations  of  the  same  fundamental  ideas — one  in  the
form  of  history  and  the  other  in  that  of  apncalvptic  vision.

Ewald  and  Eeuss  do  in  a  certain  way  admit  the  authenticity,  but  deny  the  historical
character  of  the  discourses  and  miracles  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  In  his  latest  edition  of
'  The  History  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,'  translated  by  Houghton,
Reuss  will  not  admit  more  than  a  bare  possibility  that  it  was  produced  by  the  son  of
Zebedee.  "  It  was  certainly  not  written  by  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse,"  nor  by
"  the  John  of  Gal.  ii. ; "  but  Eeuss  admits  that  this  John  may  have  suffered  as  great
a  transformation  as  Paul  and  as  Peter  are  seen  to  have  done.  "  A  germ  of  profound
religiosity  may  have  been  implanted  in  a  heart  which  needed  only  change  of  air  and
soU  to  bring  it  to  maturity."  Eeuss  will  not  be  moved  by  the  Easter  controversy  to
decide  against  the  Johannine  authorship,  nor  does  he  think  that  the  speculation  that
some  pupil  of  the  apostle  produced  it  on  the  basis  of  some  genuine  and  original  informa-
tion, solves  the  difBoulty.

Tobler  ('Die  Evangelien-Fragm. :'  1858)  advocated  the  view  that  ApoUos  was  the
tuthor,  in  virtue  of  the  most  important  chronological,  historical,  and  autoptio  matter
which  it  contains ;  and  Eenan,  in  the  latest  editions  of  the  'Life  of  Jesus,'  supposes  that
a  "  semi-Onostic  constituted  himself  the  editor  of  the  narratives  of  the  aged  apostle,
and  perhaps  possessed  iome  notes,  dictated  by  the  lalter,  which  formed  the  primary


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xvil

materials  of  his  work.  Reuss  pronounces  that  this  view  "  sacrifices  the  spirit  to  the
appearance,  and  in  fact  is  too  sharp-sighted."  Mangold's  edition  of  Bleek's  '  Eiiileitung '
admits  the  sufficiency  of  the  external  evidences,  but  regards  the  internal  difficulties  of
the  authenticity  to  be  insurmountable.  On  the  other  hand,  B.  Weiss,  in  his  '  Life  of
Jesus'  (Eng.  trans.),  lays  powerful  emphasis  on  the  historicity  of  the  Gospel,  and
loses  no  opportunity  of  demonstrating  the  light  which  it  throws  upon  the  synoptic
narrative.

Holtzmann  ('Lehrhuoh  der  historisch-kritischen  Einleitung  in  das  N.T. :'  1885)
has  emphasized  the  strongly  subjective  elements  of  the  narrative,  its  artistic  arrange-
ment, the  sources  from  which  the  author  must  have  drawn  his  material.  Of  these,  with
Albrecht  Thoma,  he  assigns  a  large  place  to  the  Pauline  Epistles.  He  measures  the
amount  of  dependence  upon  the  synoptic  Gospels,  discriminating  between  the  kind  of
aid  he  derived  from  Marie  and  Luke ;  he  finds  the  unhistorical  in  the  method  by  which
the  great  attributes  of  God  are  revealed  in  the  concrete  life  of  the  incarnate  Logos,  but
uses  some  of  the  worn-out  argmnents  to  rid  these  instances  of  the  Divine  energy  of
Jesus,  of  their  historic  character.  The  great  puzzle  appears  to  him  to  consist  of  the
twofold  character  of  the  Gospel — the  blending  of  historic  detail  with  lofty  ideality.  The
solution  of  it  attempted  by  B.  Weiss  does  not  satisfy  Holtzmann.  The  symbolism  of
the  Gospel  for  him  detracts  from  its  historicity,  forgetful,  as  it  seems  to  us,  that  the
live*  of  our  greatest  men  and  the  history  of  the  epochs  of  our  race  are  charged  with
events  which  become  symbolic  of  life-purposes  or  world-wide  tendencies.  Julius  Casar
crossing  the  Rubicon,  Socrates  in  his  prison,  William  of  Normandy  falling  on  the  soil
of  Pevensey,  Luther  at  the  Diet  of  Worms,  etc.,  are  instances  in  point.  Holtzmann
falls  back  on  the  Baurian  method  of  discovering  an  "  historical  situation,"  but  does  not
feel  that  he  has  solved  the  problem.

The  defenders  of  the  authenticity  against  every  attack  and  on  every  ground  have
been  very  numerous.  .Every  one  of  the  special  assaults  has  called  up  an  army  of
defence,  and  in  the  writings  of  Hengstenberg,  Tholuck,  Luthardt,  Lange,  LUcke,  Bleek,
Meyer,  De  Pressens^,  and  Godet,  few  points  or  speculations  have  been  left  untouched.
Canon  Westcott's  '  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Gospels '  and  the  '  Introduction  to
the  Commentary  on  St.  John;'  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott's  '  External  Evidence  of  the  Authorship
of  the  Gospel ; '  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold,  in  '  God  and  the  Bible ; '  Mr.  R.  Holt  Hutton,  in
an  essay  of  great  value, '  Essays,  Theological  and  Literary,'  vol.  i. ;  Beisohlag, '  Studien
und  Kritiken,  1874-5,'  and  published  se])arately), — have  discussed  the  chief  points  with
masterly  hand.  Mr.  Sanday,  '  The  Authorship  and  Character  of  the  Fourth  Gospel '  and
'  The  Gospels  in  the  Second  Century,'  with  quiet  force  has  set  aside  the  conclusions  of
the  autiior  of  '  Supernatural  Religion ; '  Oosterzee  ('  Das  Johannes-evaniieliiim,  Vier
Vortrage,'  and  Eng.  trans.,  18G9) ;  Milligan,  in  Contemporary  Eeview,  1867-1871,  and
in  'Introduction  to  Commentary'  by  himself  and  Professor  Moulton,  have  grappled
with  various  parts  of  the  controversy.

Seeing  that  Holtzmann,  Mangold,  S.  Davidson,  Thoma,  and  others  maintain  the
adverse  opinion  still,  the  controversy  cannot  be  said  to  have  terminated;  and  we  cannot
proceed  with  our  Exposition  without  placing  before  the  readers  of  the  '  Pulpit
Commentary'  an  outline  of  the  evidences  both  "  external "  and  "internal"  on  the  faith
of  vi  hioh  we  hold  that  this  most  wonderful  of  all  the  biblical  writings  is  not  the  dreara
of  a  second-century  sage,  but  the  sacred  record  of  a  personal  experience.  That  which
is  to  some  students  clear  evidence  of  the  antecedency  of  the  Gospel  becomes,  in  the
hand  of  others,  proof  that  "  the  evangelist "  had  mateiial  ready  to  his  hand  in  the  floating
ideas  of  the  second  century.  Prepossession  and  preconceived  opinion  may  bias  the
impartial  critic.  Let  it  be  understood  that  prepossessions  are  not  all  on  one  side.  The
"  sceptic  "  here  has,  moreover,  far  more  at  stake  than  the  "  apologist."  The  Christian
believer  is  not  dependent  on  the  Fourth  Gospel,  however  much  he  might  deplore  the
sacrifice  of  its  historicity.  The  fall  of  this  Gospel  from  its  high  place  would  not  touch  the
authenticity  of  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  nor  that  of  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans,  CorinthiRns,
Galatians,  and  Philippians.  All  the  essentials  of  the  faith  would  be  left  intact.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  the  authenticity  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  becomes  an  impregnable
defence  of  supernatural  revelation,  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  of  the  resur-
rection and  glory  of  the  Christ.  If  the  Fourth  Gospel  was  the  work  of  the  beloved
disciple,  then  the  "  scientific  "  instrument  which  has  been  elaborated  with  infinite  car*


wa  HJTBODUOTION  TO


by  successive  opponents  of  the  mystery  of  God  therein  revealed  is  hopelessly  shattered.
Consequently,  there  is,  to  say  the  least,  as  much  room  for  predisposition  and  bias  on
the  one  side  as  on  the  other.

HI.  External  Evidenok  of  thb  Early  Existence  or  the  Four  Gospels.

1.  Introductory  remarks.  (1)  In  discussing  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of
any  ancient  writing,  we  are  confronted  with  the  positive  and  negative  evidence  of  its
existence  at  a  time  consistent  with  the  alleged  authorship.  The  external  evidence  of
the  existence  at  any  particular  date  of  any  ancient  document,  to  be  absolutely  satis-
factory, would  be  the  existence  of  other  ancient  trustworthy  documents,  whose  date
can  be  approximately  fixed  near  the  date  of  the  life  of  the  supposed  author,  in  which
quotations  from  the  work  in  question  occur,  and  wherein  such  quotations  are  definitely
ascribed  to  a  work  which  can  be,  without  reasonable  doubt,  identified  with  that  about
which  we  make  the  inquiry.  If  an  unimpeachable  contemporary  authority,  either
with  favourable  or  hostile  intent,  has  left  behind  him  such  a  quotation  from  one  of
Paul's  Epistles  or  from  one  of  Plato's  dialogues  or  Horace's  odes,  the  question  of  the
existence  of  either  of  these  documents  at  the  period  when  the  quotation  was  made
would  be  practically  settled.

It  is  not  often  possible  to  arrive  at  evidence  so  entirely  conclusive  as  this.  We  may
have  to  travel  down  the  stream  of  time  for  a  whole  generation  or  more  before  we  find
ft  single  trustworthy  quotation,  and,  when  We  discover  one,  we  may  be  surprised  to  see
that  it  is  not  accurate,  and  that  it  is  not  referred  to  the  previous  author.  Still,  from
the  manner  of  its  introduction,  the  second  authority  may  reveal  the  place  which  the
former  writing  held  in  the  opinion  of  his  contemporaries ;  and  it  may  happen  that
obvious  reasons  occur  why  the  authorship  of  such  quotation  should  not  have  been  cited
or  appealed  to ;  and  yet  (uch  a  citation  may  prove  to  be  of  very  convincing  and  import
tant  character.

(2)  The  non-existence  of  the  evidence  which  we  have  described  as  unimpeachable  by
no  means  establishes  the  spuriousness  or  later  origin  of  the  document  whose  date  wa
wish  to  verify.  The  letter  to  Diognetus,  which  has  taken  its  place  among  the  sub-
apostolic  literature — a  position,  we  admit,  by  no  means  unquestioned— does  not  appear
to  have  been  quoted,  or  copied,  or  referred  to  by  any  ancient  writer,  nor  by  any  writer
at  all  till  the  sixteenth  century.  The  Second  Epistle  of  Peter  was  not  mentioned,
nor  quoted  from,  nor,  so  far  as  we  know,  translated  into  any  other  langu^e  until  the
beginning  of  the  fourth  century ;  yet  it  would  be  the  height  of  hypercriticism,  even
among  those  who  doubt  its  apostolic  origin,  to  refer  its  production  by  afalsarius  to
a  date  later  than  the  second  century.  Positive  evidence  of  an  external  kind  may  not  be
forthcoming,  but  this  circumstance  will  not  prove  the  non-existence  of  the  document.
All  that  can  be  deduced  from  such  a  fact  is  that  the  authors -of  the  few  and  frag,
mentary  treatises  which  have  survived  did  not  in  them  allude  to  or  quote  from  the
document  we  are  anxious  to  identify.

(3)  Further,  we  see,  at  a  glance,  that  the  writers  who  do  quote  a  more  ancient
authority  may,  when  they  made  iheir  citation,  have  had  no  reason  for  any  specific
mention  of  the  name  of  the  previous  writer.  If  Justin  Martyr,  e.g.,  had  called  the
attention  of  the  Roman  emperors  to  the  obscure  names  of  Matthew,  Mark,  or  John,  it
would  not  have  conciliated  their  regard.  The  more  general  title  of  "  memorials  by  the
apostles  of  Christ  and  by  their  companions" — a  phrase  peculiarly  applicable  to  our  four
Gospels — was  much  more  likely  to  secure  attention  from  his  readers,  although  it  may
fail  to  satisfy  the  demand  of  modern  criticism  and  of  technical  accuracy.

(4)  Again,  we  may  find  that  some  of  the  quotations  are  inaccurately  made.  They
may  be  rather  the  transfusion  into  the  language  of  the  later  writer  of  the  thought  of
the  older  writer,  with  only  a  few  verbal  coincidences,  and  yet  they  may  fmrnish  us  even
now  with  powerful  evidence  of  the  kind  we  seek.

The  books  were  often  quoted  from  memory — a  practice  stimulated  by  the  difficulty
of  making  accurate  citations  at  any  time  by  the  cumbrous  form,  difficult  caligraphy,
^nd  great  rarity  of  the  books  themselves.  Lengthened  passages,  such  as  Ps.  xxiL  and
Isa.  Uii.,  which  are  quoted  t»  extenao,  accurately  correspond  with  the  LXX.  Yersioii ;
bat  aamwQUf  quota^ons  an  inad«  from  th«  Old  Testament  with  the  sama  raguenesi


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


as  we  find  attributed  to  the  citations  from  the  Gospels.  It  is  not  possible,  on  the
ground  of  this  vagueness  or  inaccuracy,  to  argue  that  the  apologists  never  saw  or  read
the  Greek  translations  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  same  indulgence  should  be  afforded
to  the  apostolic  Fathers  and  apologists,  when  they  cite  the  words  of  Jesus.  The  devi-
ations of  Justin  Martyr's  quotation  of  the  celebrated  passage  in  Matt.  xi.  25,  etc.,  have
been  supposed  to  invalidate  the  proof  of  the  pre-existence  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel
given  therein  (author  of  '  Supernatural  Religion  ') ;  but  the  argument  has  been  turned
by  Dr.  Abbott  producing  a  long  series  of  quotations  of  the  very  same  passage,  from
Irenjeus  to  our  own  day,  and  many  made  by  writers  who  had  the  Gospel  before  them
in  printed  form,  and  were  perfectly  familiar  with  its  apostolic  origin,  who  also  have
deviated  firora  the  original  text  and  more  widely  than  Justin.

Some  of  the  early  writers  are  known  to  have  produced  numerous  books,  but  the
smallest  portion  only  of  some  of  these  is  extant.  Because  a  Gospel  or  Epistle  is  not
referred  to  in  these  fragments,  we  have  no  right  to  conclude  that  the  author  was
ignorant  of  their  existence.  Suppose,  eighteen  hundred  years  hence,  a  fragment  of  one
of  Euskin's  volumes  of  'Stones  of  Venice'  should  be  all  that  the  most  vigilant  book-
collector  could  find  of  his  works  ;  and  if  in  it  no  mention  was  made  of  Turner  or  Hunt,
will  it  therefore  become  reasonable  to  say  that  Turner  did  not  live  until  two  hundred
years  after  Ruskin  ?  A  thousand  other  illustrations  might  be  given  of  the  unreason  of
the  modern  methods  of  identifying  and  disparaging  the  books  of  the  New  Testament.

(5)  One  of  the  most  powerful  testimonies  to  the  existence  of  an  ancient  document  is
the  fact  that  it  was  translated  into  a  foreign  tongue  at  an  ascertainable  date.  We  are,
therefore,  justified  in  placing  great  confidence  on  the  fact  that  the  Gospels  and  the
Epistles  of  Paul  are  found  in  the  Peschito  Syriac  and  the  Old  Latin  translations  of  the
New  Testament ;  but  even  this  evidence,  if  it  be  negative,  is  not  finaL  The  Apocalypse,
e.g.,  is  not  found  in  this  most  ancient  Syriac  Version.  Moreover,  first-class  manuscript
authority  for  its  presence  in  the  canon  of  the  New  Testament  is  lacking ;  and  yet
other  positive  external  evidence  of  authenticity  is  so  strong  that  perhaps  there  ig  no
portion  of  the  New  Testament  that  stands  upon  a  more  irrefragable  basis.  Our  con-
clusion is  that  the  non-mention  of  a  book  in  the  fragments  that  remain  of  the  literature
of  the  second  century,  even  in  places  where  one  might  expect  a  reference  to  it  from
the  nature  of  the  subject-matter,  affords  no  reason  for  concluding  that  the  book  in
question  was  not  known  to  the  author  of  the  fragment.  Other  reasons  for  the  omission
can  be  conjectured,  just  as  satisfactory  explanations  for  the  omission  of  the  Apocalypse
from  the  Syriac  canon  of  the  New  Testament  can  be  easily  advanced.

2.  We  may  now  proceed  to  show  that  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  second  century,
we  have  indubitable  proof  of  the  existence  of /our  Gospels,  distinguished  from  all  other
narratives  of  the  life  and  sayings  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  that  the  four  Gospels
thus  selected  were  regarded  in  every  part  of  the  Roman  empire  with  peculiar  reverence,
and  were  quoted  and  appealed  to  with  the  same  frequency  as  they  have  been  in  every
decade  from  that  day  to  this.  There  is  no  discussion  now  as  to  the  substantial  identity
of  the  documents  thus  signalized  with  our  four  Gospels,  attributed  tc  or  described  as
being  according  to  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John.

Granting  for  the  moment  that  the  previous  references  to  these  documents  are  less
explicit,  it  is  expedient  to  look  at  the  nature,  quality,  and  fulness  of  the  evidence
which  we  possess  for  the  fourfold  character  of  this  wonderful  narrative  at  the  date  in
question.  In  earlier  times  the  entire  substance  of  the  apostolic  teaching  on  this  subject
was  called  rb  tvayythxav — "  the  Gospel,"  and  this  word  was  used  somewhat  vaguely  by
both  Christian  and  heretical  writers,  as  descriptive  of  the  good  message  or  acceptable
speculation  which  they  were  offering  to  their  readers.  Thus  the  followers  of  BasUeida
are  said  by  Hippolytus  ('Eef.  Ha9r.,'  vii.  27)  to  have  had  a  "gospel"  which  was  v  ran
imffKoaiiiur  yvaaa,  "  the  knowledge  of  supramundane  things,"  and,  though  a  Gnostic
speculation,  it  was  dignified  by  this  great  name.  The  same  name  was  subsequently
by  Theophilus  applied  to  the  four  separate  Oospds ;  and  from  that  date  we  begin  to
hear,  not  only  of  rh  (iayy^^iov,  but  rh  ebayyeKia.

(1)  The  first  and  greatest  authority  Is  Ibbnaus,  Bishop  of  Lyons,  in  Gaul,  who  lived
between  a.d.  140  and  202,  and  who  probably  wrote  his  great  and  important  treatise
between  a.d.  180  and  190,  of  whom  also,  with  other  fragments,  is  preserved  by  Euse-
Inus  C'Hist,  EcoL,'  r.  20)  a  letter  written  by  him  to  one  Florinua,  who,  towardi


XX  INTRODUCTION  TO


the  close  of  the  second  century,  was  a  presbyter  in  Eome,  and  was  in  danger  of
lapsing  into  the  Valentinian  heresy  coucerniag  the  unity  of  Grod.  The  letter  records
the  early  experience  of  Irenseus  and  his  youthful  recollections  of  Polyoarp,  the  disciple
of  St.  John,  and  the  grief  that  Polyoarp  would  have  felt  if  he  had  known  the  heretictl
tendencies  of  Florinus.

"  These  doctrines,"  says  he,  "  0  Florinus,  to  say  the  least,  are  not  of  a  sound  under-
standing. These  doctrines  are  inconsistent  with  the  Church,  and  calculated  to  thrust
those  that  foUow  them  into  the  greatest  impiety.  These  doctrines,  not  even  the  heretics
out  of  the  Church  ever  attempted  to  assert.  These  doctrines  were  never  delivered  to
thee  by  the  presbyters  before  us,  those  who  also  were  the  immediate  disciples  of  the
apostles.  For  I  saw  thee  when  I  was  yet  a  boy  in  the  Lower  Asia  with  Polyoarp,
moving  in  great  splendour  at  court,  and  endeavouring  by  all  means  to  gain  his  esteem.
I  remember  the  events  of  those  times  much  better  than  those  of  more  recent  occur-
rence. As  the  studies  of  our  youth,  growing  with  our  minds,  unite  with  them  so
firmly  that  I  can  tell  also  the  very  place  where  the  blessed  Polyoarp  was  accustomed  to
sit  and  discourse ;  and  also  his  entrances,  his  walks,  his  manner  of  life,  the  form  of  his
body,  his  conversations  with  the  people,  and  his  familiar  intercourse  with  John,  as  he
was  accustomed  to  tell,  as  also  his  familiarity  with  the  rest  of  those  that  had  seen  the
Lord.  How  also  he  used  to  relate  their  discourses,  and  what  things  he  had  heard  from
them  concerning  the  Lord.  Also  concerning  his  miracles,  his  doctrine ;  all  these  were
told  by  Polycarp,  in  consistency  with  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  he  had  received  them  from
the  eye-witnesses  of  the  doctrine  of  salvation.  These  -things,  by  the  mercy  of  G-od,
and  the  opportunity  then  afforded  me,  I  attentively  heard,  noting  them  down,  not  on
paper,  but  in  my  heart ;  and  these  same  facts  I  am  always  in  the  habit,  by  the  grace
of  God,  of  recalling  faithfully  to  mind.  And  I  can  bear  witness  in  the  sight  of  God
that,  if  that  blessed  apostolic  presbyter  had  heard  any  such  thing  as  this,  he  would
have  exclaimed,  and  stopped  his  ears,  and,  according  to  his  custom,  would  have  said,
'  O  good  God,  unto  what  times  hast  thou  reseiTed  me,  that  I  should  tolerate  these
things  ? '  He  would  have  fled  from  the  place  in  which  he  had  sat  or  stood  hearing
doctrines  like  these.  Prom  his  epistles,  also,  which  he  wrote  to  the  neighbouring
Churches  in  order  to  confirm  them,  or  to  some  of  the  brethren  in  order  to  admonish  m
to  exhort  them,  the  same  thing  may  be  clearly  shown."

This  paints  the  character  of  the  man,  his  confidence  in  what  he  calls  "  the  Scriptures,*"
and  the  exceeding  improbability  that  he  should  have  repeatedly  quoted  from  John'i
Gospel,  as  his,  words  which,  according  to  some  modern  critics,  had  only  seen  the  light
very  lately,  and  had  no  connection  whatever  with  the  apostle,  who  was  known  and
beloved  by  his  personal  friend.

Let  it  be  also  observed  that  Irenaeus  speaks  of  the  "  two  testaments  "  as  proceeding
from  one  and  the  same  God.  "  The  argument,"  says  he,  "  of  a  presbyter  the  disciple  of
the  apostles"  ('Hser.,'  iv.  32:  '  Anti-Nicene  Library,' ii.  4,  5).  ^nd  in  defending  the
view  of  this  presbyter,  he  quotes  unmistakably  ch.  i.  3  (cf.  v.  36.  1,  2).  He  speaks
(i.  3.  6 :  '  Anti-Nicene  Library,'  i.  15)  of  the  writings  of  the  evangelists  and  apostles
being  perverted,  as  well  as  those  of  the  prophets,  to  their  own  ends.

In  the  commencement  of  iii.  1  we  find  a  special  enumeration  of  the  four  Gospels,
which  are  attributed  to  the  respective  authors.  Frequent  allusions  are  made  to  the
Gospel  of  John  by  name,  and  a  mystic  reason  is  given  for  there  being  "four  Gospels,"
neither  more  nor  less.  And  some  account  follows  of  the  special  use  which  the  heretics
had  made  of  these  Gospels,  revealing  therefore,  not  only  their  wide  difi'usion  in  the
Churches,  but  their  influence  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Churches,  and  proving  that  they
must  have  held  a  position  of  high  significance  and  authority  to  be  appealed  to  by
friend  and  foe.  This  occurs  about  a.d.  180 — 190,  and  some  of  these  references  look
back  over  a  period  of  twenty  to  thirty  years  at  least.  The  quotations  from  the  four
Gospels  made  by  Irenaeus  fill  eleven  closely  printed  folio  pages  in  Massuet's  edition  of
his  works,  and  amount  to  no  fewer  than  five  hundred,  one  hundred  of  these  being
taken  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  (see  index  of  '  Anti-Nicene  Library : '  '  Works  of
Irenseus,'  ii.  pp.  193—197).

(2)  While  Irenaus  thus  proves  for  us  the  wide  diffusion  of  these  four  Gospels  in  the
western  division  of  the  empire,  we  have  an  equally  extensive  circulation  of  these
documents  in  the  East ;  for  Theophilub,  Bishop  of  Antioch  before  a.d.  170  (and  who


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  ui

died  before  tke  end  of  the  century),  writing  to  a  heathen,  Autolycua,  declares  that  in
the  prophets  and  in  the  Gospels  the  same  things  were  advanced,  and  that  all  alike  was
spoken  under  the  inspiration  of  the  one  Spirit  of  God.  Among  these  testimonies  he
quotes,  from  John's  Gospel  and  under  that  designation,  ch.  i.  1,  also  Matt.  v.  38  and
other  passages  of  the  New  Testament.  He  is  said  to  have  written  commentaries  on
the  Gospels — a  oiroum.stance  which  proves  the  estimation  in  which  they  were  held.

(3)  Clement  op  Alexandria,  the  teacher  of  Origen  and  Hippolytus,  the  head  of  the
catechetical  school  from  a.d.  189,  was  a  presbyter  whose  knowledge  of  philosophy  and
literature,  though  somewhat  superficial  and  discursive,  was  without  question  varied.
He  was  a  litterateur  rather  than  a  theologian.  He  held  in  reverence  other  Christian
writings  as  well  as  the  New  Testament,  and  thus  his  evidence  as  to  the  character  and
nature  of  the  New  Testament  books  is  weakened;  but  his  testimony  as  to  the  number
of  the  evangelists  is  weighty,  and  the  use  he  made  of  their  narratives  explicit.  He
gives  to  the  four  Gospels  the  same  authority  that  he  attributed  to  the  Law  and  prophets.
He  coutrasts  the  teaching  of  the  'Gospel  of  the  Egyptians'  with  that  of  "the  four
Go.spels,  which,"  he  says,  "  were  handed  down  to  us."  Eusebius  preserves  ('  Hist.  Bccl.,'
vi.  14)  an  important  passage,  in  which  Clement  declares  that  Peter  was  the  virtual
author  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel,  and  that  "  John  wrote  a  spiritual  Gospel,  divinely  moved
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  on  observing  that  the  things  obvious  to  the  senses  had  been  clearly
set  forth  in  the  earlier  Gospels."  There  are  between  four  and  five  hundred  quotations
made  by  him  from  the  four  Gospels.

(4)  To  Irenaeus  in  Gaul,  Theophilus  in  Syria,  Clement  in  Eastern  Africa,  must  be  added
Tebtuilian,  who  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  literary  life  in  Carthage.  Towards  the
close  of  the  second  century  Tertullian  revealed  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  four
Gospels.  His  testimony  is  important,  because  there  is  not  a  chapter  in  the  Gospels  of
Matthew,  Luke,  and  John  from  which  he  does  not  quote.  In  his  work  'Adv.
Marcionem'  (iv.  2)  he  says,  "  .4mong  the  apostles,  John  and  Matthew  form  the  faith
within  us ;  among  the  companions  of  the  apostles,  Luke  and  Mark  renovate  it."
Evangelists  and  apostles  are  placed  by  him  on  the  same  platform  with  the  prophets  and
apostles.     The  Gospels  are  said  by  him  to  be  read  in  the  assemblies  ('  Apol.,'  39).

The  testimony  of  Tertullian  is  indirectly  of  greater  importance  than  that  of  Irenaeus
or  of  Clement,  in  the  following  way.  Tertullian  contested  the  philosophical  position  of
the  great  heresiarch  Marcion.  The  assault  against  Marcion  brought  to  light  the  fact
that  that  writer  had,  as  Tertullian  thought,  iniquitously  mutilated  the  Third  Gospel,
with  the  view  of  making  it  confirm  his  views  with  respect  to  the  Person  of  the  Lord,
the  opposition  between  the  new  covenant  and  the  Old  Testament,  and  even  between  the
God  of  Moses  and  of  the  prophets  and  of  the  Father  who  was  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ.

Some  writers,  at  one  time  Baur  and  Eitschl,  took  advantage  of  this  representation
t»  hazard  the  theory  that  Tertullian  was  in  the  wrong ;  that  Marcion  had  not  mutilated
the  Third  Gospel,  but  had  edited  the  earliest  form  of  an  evangelical  narrative ;  and  that
our  Third  Gospel  is  an  eidargement  and  development  of  this  primaeval  document.
Volkmar,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the  Tiibingen  critics,  took  up  the  defence  of
the  patristic  writers  in  this  respect,  and  convinced  even  Baur  and  Bitschl  that  their
argument  was  false.  The  author  of  'Supernatural  Religion,'  in  his  first  edition,
/eturned  to  the  subject,  and  reasserted  the  Tiibingen  hypothesis,  with  the  view  of
depreciating  the  antiquity  and  originality  of  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  Dr.  Sanday,  in  his
admirable  work  'The  Gospels  in  the  Second  Century,'  met  this  writer  on  his  own
ground.  He  showed  that  the  Gospel  of  Luke  contains  three  hundred  and  nine  verses
not  found  in  Marcion's  Gospel.  If  these  three  hundred  and  nine  verses  were  the
work  of  some  later  hand,  they  would  reveal  striking  differences  from  the  style  of  the
remaining  portion  of  the  work  which  Marcion  had  preserved ;  but  it  is  capable  of
proof,  according  to  Dr.  Sanday,  that  these  three  hundred  and  nine  verses  contain  no
fewer  than  a  hundred  and  eighty-five  peculiarities  of  the  style  which  characterizes  the
residuary  Gospel,  and  two  hundred  and  twenty-four  words  or  phrases  specially  familiar
to  the  writer  of  these  main  portions  of  the  work.  Dr.  Sanday  discusses  every  one  of
the  omissions,  and  shows  that  there  was  sufficient  reason  for  Marcion  to  have  been
anxious  to  expunge  them.  He  shows  that  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  alterations  or
deviations  of  Marcion's  Gospel  from  that  of  the  canonical  Luke  may  have  been  due  to
a  differeace  of  text ;  for  they  have  been  confirmed  by  some  of  the  oldest  maniiscripisL


xxil  nSTTRODUOTION  TO

This  CTrcumstance  reveals  the  fact  that  divergences  of  text  arose  before  either  the
Syriao  or  Old  Latin  Version  was  made,  and  we  are  thrown  still  further  back  to  a  period
long  before  the  time  of  Marcion  for  the  original  autograph  from  which  these  two
families  of  texts  must  genealogically  have  descended.  Tertullian,  therefore,  is  witness
unconsciously  to  the  great  antiquity  of  a  document  which  in  a  particular  form  of  codex
moit  have  been  long  honoured  and  widely  diffused  before  the  date  of  Marcion.  Now,  it
is  generally  agreed  that  Marcion  diffused  his  sentiments  between  a.d.  139  and  142,
The  author  of  '  Supernatural  Eeligion '  has  acknowledged  that,  in  this  argument.  Dr.
Sanday  has  refuted  his  own  hypothesis;  and  so  we  may  consider  the  question  as
finally  settled.  The  examination  goes  very  far  towards  demonstrating  the  authenticity
of  the  Third  Gospel.  Godet  ('  Introduction  to  John's  Gospel,'  i.  221)  makes  it  appea*
eminently  probable  that  Marcion  was  acquainted  with  the  Gospel  of  Johiu

3.  Further  testimonies  are  borne  to  the  existence  of  the  four  Gospels  by  the  writings
of  JnsTiN  the  Martyr.  These  writings,  consisting  of  the  '  Dialogue  with  Trypho '  and
the  two  'Apologies,'  according  to  the  best  critics  must  have  been  written  between
A.D.  145  and  148,  the  latter  year  being  that  of  his  martyrdom.

The  narratives  and  teachings  in  the  four  Gospels,  and  especially  in  the  first  and
third,  are  frequently  cited  by  Justin.  He  professes  to  have  appealed  to  the  "  Memorials
composed  by  the  apostles  and  their  followers,"  without  mentioning  their  names-
names,  however,  which  would  have  carried  no  weight  either  with  bigoted  Jews,  Greek
philosophers,  or  Eoman  emperors.  In  'Apol.,'  i.  66,  he  refers  to  those  memorials
"  which  are  called  Gospels."  Opponents  are  eager  to  evade  the  force  of  this  reference
by  saying  that  the  parenthetical  clause  is  a  gloss  foisted  into  the  text  from  the  margin.
This  is  not  impossible,  but  we  know  that  Marcion  had  already  called  the  narrative
which  he  published  "a  Gospel,"  or  "the  Gospel."  The  expression,  "memoirs  by
apostles,"  is  used  eight  times.  Four  times,  "  memoirs  "  or  "  memorabilia  "  (ATtopanmo-
veiiMTo) ;  once  ('  Apol.,'  i.  66),  "  memoirs  made  by  the  apostles  "  (o  koXcitoI  evayye\ui) ;
once  ('  Dial.,'  103),  "  memoirs  composed  by  apostles  of  Christ  and  those  who  followed
them,"  when  quoting  Luke ;  and  once  from  "  Peter's  memoirs,"  when  quoting  a  fact
only  mentioned  in  the  Second  Gospel.  He  uses  the  expression,  "  the  apostles  wrote  "
('  Dial.,'  88),  when  speaking  of  an  incident  mentioned  by  all  four ;  and  ('  ApoL,'  i.  67)
he  refers  to  the  "  memoirs  by  the  apostles  "  as  of  equal  value  with  the  writings  of  the
prophets.  The  author  of  '  Supernatural  Religion '  says  this  description  cannot  apply
to  the  fovu-  Gospels,  because  only  two  professed  to  be  written  by  apostles,  whereas  the
term  "  the  apostles  "  ought  to  have  meant  the  twelve  1

Now,  the  references  which  Justin  makes  do  in  a  few  places  add  interesting  and
picturesque  details  to  the  narratives  of  the  synoptists ;  such,  e.g.,  as  that  the  Magi
came  from  Arabia ;  that  a  fire  was  kindled  in  Jordan  at  the  baptism  of  Christ ;  that
in  a  cave  at  Bethlehem  Christ  was  born ;  and  that  as  a  carpenter  he  made  ploughs  and
yokes.  Some  sayings  not  recorded  in  our  canonical  Gospels  are  cited  by  Justin ;  but
the  great  proportion  of  these  quotations  or  references  correspond  in  a  remarkable  way
with  the  narrative  of  the  four  Gospels,  and  record  matters  peculiar  to  all  four  of  them.
The  story  told  by  Justin  was  substantially  identical  with  that  of  the  Gospels,  both  as
to  the  great  character  portrayed,  the  miraculous  accompaniments  of  his  ministry,  the
sorrow  and  mystery  of  his  death,  the  incidents  of  his  trial,  which  he  characteristically
confirms  by  appealing  to  the  'Acta  Pontii  Pilati.'  He  refers  to  the  last  Supper,  to  the
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  contained  in  the  twenty-second  psalm,  to  the  nails  and
spear,  to  the  sneers  of  his  murderers,  and  to  the  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou
forsaken  me?"  He  refers  to  the  resurrection  on  the  third  day  being  a  first  day  of  a
week,  to  his  ascension,  and  the  institution  of  baptism  in  the  Name  of  the  Father  of  all,
and  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Now,  Dr.  Sanday,  admitting  for  the  sake  of  argument  that  Justin  may  have  had
before  him  some  digest  or  harmonistio  document  which  he  used  as  well  as  the  original
Gospels,  makes  it  extremely  probable  that  such  a  document,  if  it  existed,  must  have
been  one  framed  out  of  the  original  Gospels,  and  not  that  from  which  they  can  have
been  supposed  to  have  been  fashioned.  The  alterations,  deviations,  and  additions
are  of  the  secondary  and  derivative,  not  of  the  primary  and  germinant,  kind.  The
author  of  '  Supernatural  Religion '  points  to  the  '  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews '
u  the  primitive  source  of  these  quotations,  but  unfortunately  for  the  theory,  it  is


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  8T.  JOHN.  sxffl

known  that  this  Gospel  did  not  contain  passages  which  were  undoubtedly  in  Justin'i
authorities.

There  is,  in  fact,  nothing  in  Justin's  quotations  from  the  "memoirs"  which  is  not
■ubstantially  contained  in  the  canonical  Gospels,  and  the  deviations  are  only  such  as
can  he  paralleled  by  the  later  writers  who  did  indubitably  quote  from  the  four  Gospels
as  ve  now  have  them.

It  is  beyond  credibility  that,  seeing  that  Irenseus  must  have  been  in  early
manhood  when  Justin  was  making  such  abundant  use  of  the  "memorabilia  by  the
apostles  and  their  followers,"  that  these  books  could  have  perished,  and  in  the  brief
period  that  elapsed  before  Irenseus  wrote  his  '  Eefutation  of  Heresies,'  the  four  Gospels
could  have  been  manipulated  into  existence,  and  should  have  entirely  displaced  the
earlier  documents.  Already,  Justin  tells  us,  these  memoirs  were  read  in  churches  at
their  solemn  festivals,  and  yet,  according  to  our  opponents,  they  must  have  been  ousted
between  the  date  of  Justin  and  that  of  Irensus,  and  four  other  documents  have  gained
universal  acceptance  from  Lyons  to  Alexandria,  from  Antioch  to  Carthage.  The  author
of  '  Supernatural  Eeligion '  thinks  this  possible,  because  the  first  epistle  of  Clement,
and  the  epistle  of  Barnabas,  were  also  read  at  first  in  some  churches,  and  that  these
"  memoirs "  of  Justin  may  in  like  manner  have  ceased  to  retain  the  high  position  to
which  he  refers.  But  there  is  no  proof  whatever  of  such  or  similar  importance  ever
having  been  ceded  to  these  books,  and  the  mode  in  which  they  are  cited  is  profoundly
different.'

We  are  bound  to  inquire  whether,  in  addition  to  our  Gospels,  Justin  also  used  some
document  like  them,  which  may  have  formed  the  basis  of  one  or  more  of  the  canonical
Gospels.

Whether  that  were  the  case  or  not,  the  following  incidents  are  recorded  by  Justin,
and  we  know  of  no  other  authority  for  them  but  Matthevfa  Gospel :  (1)  Joseph's
suspicion  of  Mary ;  (2)  the  name  of  Jesus  ;  (3)  the  visit  of  the  Magi ;  (4)  the
massacre  at  Bethlehem ;  (5)  the  descent  into  Egypt ;  (6)  the  order  of  the  temptations;

S7)  six  passages  from  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  as  given  in  Matthew  only ;  (8)  ch.  xxiiL
.5, 24 ;  (9)  the  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonas ;  (10)  the  triumphant  entry  with  the  colt ;
(H)  the  calumnious  report  of  the  Jews  (ch.  xxviiL  12 — ^15) ;  and  (12)  the  baptismal
formula.

Very  few  details  are  peculiar  to  Mark.  Some  of  these,  however,  Justin  refers  to ;
e.g.  (1)  the  name  of  "  Boanerges ; "  (2)  the  near  approach  to  a  statement  (Mark  vi
3)  that  Christ  followed  the  trade  of  a  carpenter ;  and  (3)  ch.  ix.  21,  that  he  healed
those  who  were  diseased  from  their  birth  (of.  also  John  ix.).

The  peculiarities  of  Luke  are  also  quoted  by  Justin ;  e.ff.  (1)  the  coming  of  Gabriel
to  Mary ;  (2)  that  John  the  Baptist's  mother  was  Elisabeth ;  (3)  the  census  under
Cyrenius;  (4)  that  Jesus  was  thirty  years  old  when  he  began  his  ministry;  (5)  that
on  his  trial  he  was  sent  from  Pilate  to  Herod ;  (6)  special  passages  are  quoted  from  the
commission  given  to  the  seventy  disciples ;  (7)  references  occur  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and
the  agony  in  the  garden,  and  to  the  Besurrection  and  Ascension,  in  a  form  only  found
in  Luke.

While  these  quotations  do  strongly  sustain  the  thesis  that  Justin  made  use  of  the
lynoptic  Gospels,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  he  appears  to  have  studied  the  genealogy  of
Mary  rather  than  of  Joseph.  This  may  have  arisen  from  his  better  understanding  of
the  genealogies,  and  his  knowledge  of  the  high  probability  that  they  are  both  of  them
genealogies  of  Mary  as  well  as  Joseph  ;  *  or  it  may  have  been  his  conjecture  touchit^  the
genealogy  in  Luke,  It  is  also  clear,  from  another  reference,  that  he  knew  that  Joseph
was  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  He  speaks  of  a  cave  near  Bethlehem,  where  Jesus  was  born.
But  this  cave  was  referred  to  by  Origen  at  a  period  when  we  know  that  the  synoptic
Gospels  were  in  universal  estimation  ('  Con.  Cels.,'  i.  51).  And  ten  times  over  he  speaki
of  the  Magi  as  having  come  from  Arabia  rather  than  from  the  East  He  says  all  the
children  of  Bethlehem  were  slain.  He  declares  that,  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  "a  fire
was  kindled  in  the  Jordan,"  and  that  a  voice  was  heard  from  heaven,  "  Thou  art  my
Bon;  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee."    Now,  it  should  be  remembered  that  an  additiea

>  •  AnthoTship  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,'  by  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott,  pp.  27, 28l
*  Lord  A.  Hervey  on  '  Genealogies  of  our  Lord.'


xxIt  INTEODUOTION  TO


to  the  Old  Latin  translation,  in  one  of  its  best  manuscripts  of  Matt.  iii.  15  (a.  Codex
Vercellensis),  has  a  passage  almost  identical.  Nor  does  this  stand  alone ;  for  Codex
D  of  Luke  iii.  22  gives  iyh  <rfiiiepov  yeyinriKa  <re  for  ir  ao\  eiSixnira,  together  with  a,  b,
c,  ff,  I.  Moreover,  they  are  quoted  by  Lactantius,  Hilary,  and  even  Augustine.
Whether  or  not  Justin  originated  the  error,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  it  is  saying  too  much
to  make  it  a  reason  for  holding  that  he  had  not  seen  the  Gospels  of  Matthew,  John,
or  Luke.  Twice  Justin  refers  to  the  '  Acts  of  Pontius  Pilate.'  He  quotes  two  sayings
not  found  in  the  synoptists.  These  are  interesting,  and  may  be  paralleled  by  a  few
others,  some  of  which  are  manifestly  apocryphal.  The  references  to  the  '  Acta  Pontii_
Pilati '  are  supposed,  with  reason,  to  have  arisen  from  the  assumption  that  public
documents  must  have  contained  such  records,  whether  he  had  ever  seen  them  or  not.

Now,  if  these  explanations  are  insutBcient,  and  granting  the  possibility  of  his  use  of
some  other  narrative,  it  becomes  very  difficult  to  say  what  this  can  have  been.  The
most  probable  is  the '  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,'  which,  nevertheless,  is  known
to  have  omitted  certain  most  important  passages,  with  which  it  is  certain  that  Justin
was  familiar.  The  '  (Jospel  of  James '  states  the  narrative  of  the  Magi  differently,  in  a
manner  far  less  in  harmony  with  the  synoptic  narrative.

The  best  way  to  come  to  something  like  a  determination  of  the  meaning  of  Justin's
deviations  from  the  evangelic  narratives  is  to  observe  the  degree  of  accuracy  with  which
he  quotes  from  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Old  Testament  generally.  The  following  table
has  been  made  out  by  Dr.  Sanday : —

Exact.  Slightly  variant.        Marked  divergence.

Pentateuch      „  ...     18  „.  19  „  11

Psalms  ...  ...     16  ^ine  whole  psalms)     2  ...  8

Isaiah  ...  ...    25  (ch.  Iii.,  liii.)  12  „  16

Other  great  propheti     ...      3  _  4  _  11

Minor  propheti,  etc.       .>.      2  .  7  _  13

64  44  54

In  the  Gospels  Justin  has  made  ten  exact  quotations,  twenty-five  variant,  and
thirty-two  divergent.  The  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  reduced  to  the  same
standard  of  comparison,  would  give  ten  exact,  seven  variant,  nine  divergent.  This
shows  a  higher  range  of  variation  in  the  Gospels,  and  reveals  the  fact  that  he  was  not
so  familiar  with  the  latter  as  with  the  former,  that  he  took  more  liberty  with  his  text,
and  that  he  scarcely  regarded  them  in  the  same  category  as  the  older  and  venerable
Scripture.  It  is  also  not  impossible  that  he  made  use,  along  with  them,  of  some  other
documents,  which  by  the  time  of  Irenaeus  were  no  longer  extant.  The  positive  evidence
that  he  did  quote  from  Matthew's  Gospel  is  very  strong  in  cases  where  he  introduces
not  merely  the  words  of  Jesus,  but  the  comment  of  the  evangelist,  as  in  Matt.^vii.
11 — 13.  Justin  quoted,  moreover,  the  ipsissima  verba  of  Luke,  where  these  differ  from
Matthew  and  Mark.

It  has  been  argued  by  the  author  of '  Supernatural  Religion  '  that  similar  deviations
from  the  syno|jtic  text  are  found  in  the  Clementine  Homilies  and  in  Justin,  suggesting
that  the  origin  of  the  double  quotation  is  some  other  authority  rather  than  that  of  the
canonical  Gospels ;  but  the  peculiarity  to  be  noted  is  this — that  several  of  these  quota-
tions are  given  in  two  forms  by  the  Clementines  and  Justin,  and  they  "alternately
adhere  to  the  canonical  text  when  they  differ  from  each  other."

One  curious  fact  is  that  many  of  the  texts  of  Justin  correspond  with  what  are  proved
to  be  corrupted  Western  texts,  such  as  we  find  afterwards  embodied  in  Codex  Bezaj
and  the  Old  Latin  Version.  No  critic  of  any  school  would  base  his  text  on  these
authorities,  but  it  is  certain  that  they  represent  a  much  older  text  than  the  age  of  the
codices  themselves,  and  that  they  point  back  to  a  period  of  corruption  of  text  in  the
midst  of  which  Justin  lived  and  laboured.  That  simple  fact  suggests  a  much  more
remote  period  when  such  paraphrastic  modifications  were  made.  Dr.  Sanday  inclines
to  the  idea  that,  if  Justin  used  any  other  authority  than  our  Gospels,  he  made  use  of  a
harmony  that  was  then  existing

Let  it  be  also  noted  that  Justin  makes  sundry  quotations  from  the  LXX. ;  in  doing
so  he  occasionally  deviated  from  it,  and,  moreover,  in  the  deviation  followed  the  leading
of  the  Goipels.    Thus  Zecb.  ix.  9  is  twice  cited  inaccurately.    Sometimes  he  blended


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xxw

three  prophetic  passages  together,  and  mixed  them  up  with  remarks  of  his  own;  once
he  quoted  Zechaiiah  professedly,  but  the  passage  is  really  his  own  composition,  founded
on  words  and  thoughts  derived  from  Zeohariah,  Isaiah,  and  Joel.  The  only  quotation
from  Plato  is  from  the  '  Timaeiis,'  and  consists  of  words  which,  though  attributed  by
Plato  to  TimsBus,  are  cited  by  Justin  as  the  words  of  Socrates,  and  are,  moreover,
strangely  modified.  Heace  the  words  that  Justin  quoted  from  the  Gospels  cannot,  on
any  show  of  fairness,  be  put  down  to  any  other  source,  simply  on  the  ground  of  the
variation  from  the  text  of  our  Grospels  (Norton,  '  Genuineness  of  the  Gospels,'  vol.  i.
note  E,  pp.  306—330 ;  Mangold  and  Bleek,  '  Binleitung,'  p.  270).

A  further  proof  that  Jastin  was  not  aiming  at  verbal  accuracy  is  that  he  has  not
infrequently  quoted  the  same  passage  more  than  once  with  characteristic  variations.

The  fact  that  Justin  is  not  more  explicit  than  we  have  found  him  to  be  concerning
the  documentary  sources  of  his  information,  is  parallel  with  the  circumstance  that
TertuUian,  who  knew  and  said  so  much  in  his  controversial  works  about  the  four
Gospels,  yet,  when  writing  his  'Apologia'  or  his  'Ad  Nationes,'  makes  no  distinct
reference  to  them  whatever ;  and  that  Cyprian,  in  writing  in  the  third  century  to
Demetrian,  a  heathen,  does  not  once  name  either  the  Gospels  or  evangelists.  The  same
remark  may  be  made  about  Arnobius,  and  the  very  same  kind  of  objeotion  taken  to  the
modification  of  Gospel  narrative  by  Justin  may  bo  brought  against  Laotantius  towards
the  end  of  the  third  century  ('  Div.  Ins.,'  v.  3).

Now,  if  we  suppose  the  existence  of  even  a  modified  text  of  the  Gospels,  and  a  harmony
•if  the  Gospels,  to  have  been  in  his  hand,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  these
Gospels  were  in  existence  long  before  his  day — an  argument  confirmed  by  the  pheno-
mena of  the  Gospel  of  Maroion.  The  bearing  of  this  argument  upon  the  Fourth
Gospel,  even  if  no  quotation  from  it  could  be  found  at  any  earlier  period,  is  remarkable.
When  Irenseus,  Theophylact,  Clemens  Alex.,  and  Tertullian  wrote,  there  is  no  manner
of  doubt  that  the  four  Gospels  were  in  current  use,  and  held  a  lofty  position  in  the
estimation  of  the  Churches  of  Gaul,  Alexandria,  Antioch,  and  Carthage.  Now,  the
Gospel  of  John  is  so  different  in  form,  scene,  and  subject-matter  from  the  first  three
Gospels,  that,  if  it  had  been  fashioned  in  the  interim  between  Justin  and  Irenasus,
surely  some  trace  would  have  been  left  behind  of  the  difficulty  of  its  reception.  Unless
it  had  stood  on  the  highest  authority  of  tradition  and  long  usage,  it  would  never  have
borne  the  assault  to  which  it  would  have  been  exposed.  It  must  have  been  believed  to
be  apostolic  in  its  origin,  and  the  trustworthy  report  of  apostolic  memorials,  or  it
would  never  have  been  accepted  as  genuine.  The  oft-quoted  discrepance  of  style  and
chronology,  etc.,  therefore  becomes  a  powerful  argument  to  show  that  the  Fourth
Gospel  must  be  much  older  than  Justin.

IV.  The  Spkooto  External  Evidbkob  fob  the  Eaelt  Existence  of  the

Fourth  Gospel.

1.  Testimony  of  Justin  Martyr  to  the  Fourth  Gospel.  I  shall,  therefore,  proceed
with  the  proof  that  Justin  was  acquainted  with,  and  cited,,  the  Fourth  Gospel,  as  well
as  the  other  three.

(1)  One  of  the  most  remarkable  quotations  is  from  ch.  iii.  3 — 5 ;  to  which  Justin
refers  thus  ('  Apol.,'  i.  61) —

Kal  y^p  6  Xpttrrhs  etnev,  ''Av  jui)  &vay€i/i'7j8riref  oS  /x^  elotKBriTe  eis  rrfy  $aiTi\dav  t£>
ovpctvaj/.  "Oti  5^  leal  aSiiyaToif  els  t^ls  fi-^rpas  rijov  TSKOvaap  Tohs  oEjral  yeyvcofxevovs  ^fi^rjyat
fitvephv  iraffiv  iffrtv.

Let  this  be  compared  with  the  Gospel —

'KirexpiBi)  5  'Iriirovs,  «ctl  eTirei'  auT^,  'Afi^v,  ft/tV  Aeyoi  trot,  'Ectv  /»^  Tir  yi»vr]8f  &vm8ev,
oh  Sivarai  ideiv  t^v  fiaffiKeiai/  tov  ©eou,  Aeyet  irphs  avrhv  &  NiK6S7ifios'  tr&s  tvvarat  i,vBpanoi
yewijfl^yai  yepav  &v ;  iii)  Shiarai  eis  Trfy  KOi\lav  tJis  /iijrpbs  aumS  Seirepoy  elireMav,  Kst
yevyijB^vat ;

Many  efforts  have  been  made  to  resist  the  force  of  this  remarkable  coincidence.
Schwegler  imagined  that  Justin  had  the  passage  Matt,  xviii.  3  in  his  eye,  which,  how-
ever, does  not  sustain  the  central  point  of  the  comparison  between  the  first  and  second


mtI  INTEODUOnON  TO


birth.  He  alM  calls  attention  to  the  Clementine  'Homilies,'  xi.  26,  where  some  of  tha
■ame  deviation*  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  may  be  seen,  with  sundry  additions.  Baur
('  Kanon.  Evang.,'  352)  supposed  the  Clementine  author  drew  it  from  the  '  Gospel  to
the  Hebrews.*  So  also  Zeller.  The  author  of  '  Supernatural  Eeligion '  supposes  the
author  of  the  Fourth  GK>spel  to  have  made  up  his  conversation  with  ITicodemus,  partly
from  this  citation  of  Christ's  words.  Now,  as  Mangold  observes,  it  is  more  probable
that  the  author  of  the  Clementines  took  his  deviations  from  Justin,  and  that  Justin  had
the  Ghispel  before  him.    Let  the  deviations  be  considered.

In  John's  Gospel  the  question  of  Nicodemus  is  not  introduced  seriously,  and  receive!
the  solemn  rebuke  of  our  Lord.  In  Justin  the  remark  is  clumsily  and  uselessly  intro-
duced, as  though  it  were  an  important  argument  of  his  ovm,  and  shows  the  partial
remembrance,  the  shadow  of  the  inquiry  of  Nicodemus  Imperfectly  understood  and
carelessly  used.  The  difference  between  »lt  ris  /tfirpas  t&v  Taeovauv  and  ds  r^y  KoiAlav,
etc.,  is  thus  easily  explained.

Again,  we  are  told  that  when  Justin  introduces  a  passage  with  i  Xpurrht  ftwtr,  he
meant  to  be  verbally  accurate.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  the  Christian  Fathers  and
Christian  writers  of  note,  even  down  to  our  day,  introduce  the  substance  of  our  Lord's
words  rather  than  the  ipsissima  verba,  with  similar  formulte  of  quotation.

But  the  divergences  themselves  are  noteworthy.  Instead  of  iav  /ilj  ra  yeytrjBf  &vai0ti>
Justin  has  transformed  the  statement  into  iv  ii)i  ivaryevvrie'nTt,  i.e.  the  second  person
plural  in  direct  address,  in  place  of  the  pronoun  with  the  third  person  singular ;  but  in
explanation  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  ver.  7  our  Lord  has  himself  used  the  second
person  plural ;  and  seeing  that  Matt,  xviii.  3  was  also,  as  Scholten  observed,  probably  in
his  memory,  the  alteration  or  mixing  of  the  two  passages  is  explained.  In  confirmation
of  which,  Clemens  Alex., '  Strom.,'  iii.  13,  does  the  very  same  thing ;  and  not  only  early
Christian  writers,  but  Jeremy  Taylor,  and  doubtless  scores  of  modern  writers  and
preachers,  have  done  the  same.

The  change  from  ivaSev  to  ivayevrniBrirt  is  objected  to,  but  without  reason.  SufiBcient
authority  can  be  brought  to  show  that  ivuBev  is  used  for  "  again  "  or  "  anew,"  as  well
as  "  from  above,"  and  that  the  idea  of  new  birth  was  associated  with  baptism.  The
word  is  ambiguous  even  in  the  opinion  of  those  Fathers  who  give  it  the  sense  of  "  from
above,"  and  even  Nicodemus,  by  his  Seirepor,  suggests  the  same  interpretation.  But
that  Justin  need  not  be  thought  to  have  had  any  other  authority  than  the  Fourth
Gk)spel  for  this  passage  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  following  writers  are  known
thus  to  have  translated  the  words  which  they  certainly  quoted  from  it :  Irenasus
(•  Frag.,'  35),  Athanasins  ('  De  Incarn.,'  14),  Basil,  Ephrem  Syrus,  Chrysostom  (on  1
Cor.  XV.  29),  Cyril  Alex,  (on  John  iii,  5),  and  several  manuscripts  of  the  Vulgate.

The  variation  of  " cannot  see  "  into  "  by  no  means  enter"  is  partly  an  echo  or  repre-
sentation of  the  ver.  6  o4  Sivarat  (InMay.  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott  has  examined  quotations
made  of  this  verse  by  forty-two  authors,  and  found  no  fewer  than  sixty-nine  examples
of  similar  deviations  from  strict  accuracy.  Interchanges  of  "  kingdom  of  God  "  and
"  kingdom  of  heaven  "  are  found  in  all  periods  of  Christian  literature.  All  the  devia-
tions of  Justin  are  frequently  repeated  in  later  authors,  at  periods  when  the  Fourth
Gospel  was  undeniably  accepted  as  Holy  Scripture.  It  is  well-nigh  beyond  belief,  in
spite  of  the  variations,  that  Justin  had  not  before  him  ch.  iiL

(2)  Even  Hilgenfeld  and  Eeim  think  that  Justin  must  be  quoting  ('  Dial.,'  88)  from
ch.  i.  20,  23  (cf.  ch.  iii.  28),  where  the  Baptist  is  said  to  have  described  himsd/aa  '« not
the  Christ,  but  (parii  PoSi/tos."  The  synoptists  quote  Isaiah's  prophecy  as  fulfilled  in
John.  Justin  learned  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  that  the  source  of  this  reference  was
the  consciousness  of  the  Baptist.

(3)  In  '  Apol.,'  i.  63,  Justin  says  that  the  Jews  are  "  upbraided  by  Christ  himself,  as
knowing  neither  the  Father  nor  the  Son."  It  is  scarcely  credible  that  he  had  not  before
him  ch.  viii.  19  and  xvi.  3.

(4)  '  Dial.,'  c.  49,  and  '  Apol.,'  i.  22 :  Justin  says  that  Christ  healed  those  who  were
iK  YectT^i  inipois,  which  has  its  most  natural  explanation  in  a  reference  to  ch.  ix.  A
similar  passage  or  phrase  (vripis,  not  tv(I>\6s)  is  found  in  '  Apost.  Const.,'  v.  7,  §  17,  where
there  is  certain  reference  to  ch.  ix.

(5)  '  ApoL,'  I,  13 :  Christ  was  «i  tsuto  yfrniBirra,  irfth  the  tJi  tovt*  frffnyimtu  of
eh.  xviii.  37.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xxTiJ

(6J  'Dial.;  66,  with  ch.  viii.  28,  29.

(7)  '  Apol.,'  i.  66 :  "  We  were  taught  that  the  bread  and  wine  were  the  flesh  and
blood  of  that  Jesus  who  was  made  flesh"  We  can  scarcely  believe  that  Justin  had  not
seen  oh.  L  14  and  vi.  51 — 56.

(8)  '  Apol.,'  i.  60,  and  '  Dial.,'  91 :  he  refers  to  the  brazen  serpent  as  typical  of  the
Crucifixion — a  comparison  found  in  ch.  iii.  14.

(9)  In  the  one  place  where  he  uses  the  expression,  "  the  apostlei  have  written,"  he
says  it  of  Jesus  "  coming  up  from  the  water,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  dove  alighting
upon  him"  (cf.  Matt.  iii.  16;  ch.  i.  32,  33).

(10)  But  the  decided  proof  to  most  minds  of  Justin's  familiarity  with  the  Fourth
G-ospel  is  that  he  has  received  and  expanded  the  doctrine  of  the  Logos,  as  found  in  the
prologue  of  that  Gospel.

Thus  ('  Apol.,'  i.  23)  he  writes,  "  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  proper  sense  the  only  Son
begotten  of  Gfod,  being  his  Word  (jUyos)  and  firstborn  Power."  "  He  created  and
ordained  all  things  through  him "  (ii.  6 ;  cf.  i.  63  and  ii.  13) ;  also  i  \6yos  '6s  riva
rpoirov  irapKOToiriBeU  lip8piDiros  yiyovev  (i.  5 ;  ii.  6).  'ArBpaTos  yfi'6/ievos  is  a  phrase  descrip-
tive of  the  A6yos  in  a  great  variety  of  passages.  The  use  of  Aiyas  in  the  same  sense  as  in
the  prologue  is  not  denied  by  any  one.  Take  '  Dial.,'  105  :  "  I  have  previously  shown
that  he  was  the  only  Son  of  the  Father  of  all  things,  his  Logos  and  Power,  born  of  him-
self, and  afterwards  made  man  QhSpamos  yevS/iems  SA  ttjs  irapBerov)  of  the  Virgin,  as  we
have  learned  from  the  memoirs."  Volkmar  has  yielded  to  the  evidence  derived  from  this
quotation,  though  Hilgenfeld  thinks  that  the  clause,  "  as  we  have  learned,"  refers  only
to  the  previous  part  of  the  sentence ;  and  then  adopts  the  speculation  that  the  author
of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  so  immeasurably  superior  to  Justin,  had  absolutely  quoted  from
him.  Surely  "  the  prologue  of  John  is  the  primordial  revelation  of  the  Logos  in  its  imme-
diate majesty,  the  writings  of  Justin  are  the  first  attempts  at  a  rational  analysis  of  the
contents  of  the  revelation."  The  opponents  of  the  Johannine  authorship  have  tried  to
account  for  it  by  supposing  that  Justin  derived  his  ideas  of  the  Incarnation  and  "  man-
becoming  "  of  the  Logos,  who  created  all  things,  from  other  sources.

Now,  Theophilus,  Irenseus,  Clemens  Alex.,  and  Tertullian  held  the  same  or  similar
ideas  and  commented  upon  them  at  length,  and  made  no  secret  whatever  of  having  drawn
their  ideas  from  the  Fourth  GospeL  Why  should  not  Justin  be  allowed  to  have  done
the  same?  •  In  Dial.,'  c.  48,  he  is  enlarging  on  the  pre-existence  of  Christ  as  being  God
and  being  born  of  a  virgin,  and  indicates  to  Trypho  his  view  on  this  subject  as  having
been  one  "  taught  by  himself."  It  cannot  be  said  that  he  could  have  learned  this  from
the  synoptists.  Whether  true  or  not,  it  is  in  the  Gospel  of  John  alone  that  Justin
could  have  found  this  teaching  described  as  Christ's  own.  It  is  true  that  in  the  Book
of  Proverbs,  in  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  in  Ecolesiasticus  there  is  a  lofty  description
of  Wisdom  as  the  creative  energy  of  God,  hardly  though  approximatively  personified,
and  poetically  drawn  as  an  agency  or  form  of  Divine  energy  and  counsel ;  but  there  is
no  hint  of  this  Wisdom  having  become  man.  She  does  "sweetly  order  all  things,"  and
is  *'  airaiytttTfia  of  the  everlasting  light,"  but  nothing  could  be  less  like  the  teaching  of
the  Old  Testament  than  that  this  Wisdom  was  born  of  a  virgin,  and  was  the  Christ  of
God.

The  discussion  of  the  relation  of  Fhilo  to  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  will  be
considered  in  sect.  VII.  2.  We  have  here  simply  to  consider  the  question — Did  Justin
derive  his  Logos-doctrine  from  Philo,  with  the  assistance  of  the  additional  idea  that
Jesus  Christ  was  an  incarnation  of  the  Logos,  without  authoritative  help  from  John's
Gospel  ?  or  did  he  borrow  it  and  develop  it  directly  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  ?  Albrecht
Tboma  ('  Die  Genesis  des  Johannes-Evang.,'  etc.,  p.  824)  has  maintained  the  first  hypo-
thesis ;  though  he  does  not  deny  that  Justin  may  have  seen  the  Gospel,  he  suggests
that  he  treated  it  with  the  same  indifference  that  he  manifested  to  Paul's  writings.

Philo  speaks  of  ?i^yos  as  "  reason : "  "  The  reason  which  is  diffused  among  all  beings
in  common."  He  treats  the  A6yos  as  the  attribute  of  the  Divine  Being,  or  a  mode  of
his  activity.  He  calls  it  'ApxiyyAoSt  'Apxitpeis,  tUs,  Xlpaniyovos  wjtov  Aiyos,  Aeirtpos
e)e6s.  He  was  eclectic  in  his  notion  and  nomenclature— that  which  as  a  Jew  he  called
angels,  as  a  Stoic  he  called  causes,  as  a  Platonist  ideas,  as  a  popular  writer  for  Greeks
he  called  daemons,  in  one  place  he  called  iSivaroi  \i6yoi.  Moreover,  Philo  never  identified
the  A6yos  with  the  Messianic  idea,  of  which  he  sayt  very  little.    The  term  Aiyos  io


xxviU  INTEODUCTION  TO

Philo  scarcely  preserves  the  ambiguity  wWch  it  has  in  Plato  and  other  Greek  writers.
It  has  the  meaning  of  "  reason,"  or  Ajfyos  ivSideeTos,  rather  than  "  word,"  or  \iyos  irpo-
ijiopiKis,  and  when  Philo  referred  to  the  creative  "  Word,"  he  used  the  other  term  ^na,
or  even  a  combination  of  the  two,  the  \&yos-j>iiita.

In  Philo,  the  God  who  acts  by  the  AiJyos  is  absolutely  removed  from  all  contact  with
the  world,  and  thus  is  profoundly  different  from  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
as  displayed  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and,  more  than  this,  the  bare  idea  of  incarnation  is
abhorrent  to  the  Philonian  metaphysics.

The  notions  of  God  that  Justin  entertained  are  of  the  most  supersensuous  kind.  He
is  unspeakable  and  unnamable,  but  he  is  almighty ;  he  is  "  the  Father  of  all "  ('  Dial.,'
108);  "the  Maker  of  the  whole"  (ibid.,  o.  60);  he  is  the  providential  Ruler  of  all
('  Apol.,'  i.  15.  8),  "  merciful  and  gracious."

Several  critics  have  drawn  a  series  of  contrasts  between  the  positions  of  Philo,  J'i8tin,
and  "John,"  and  particularly  emphasized  as  Justin's  doctrine  the  origination,  constitu-
tion, and  begetting  of  the  Logos  in  time,  or  at  the  creation  of  the  world,  rather  than  as  a
personal  coexistent  Deity  "  with  God  "  before  all  worlds.  The  Logos  (in  Justin)  is  said  to
be  a  "  second  God  " — "  God  because  from  God  (  Verhum  Deus,  quia  ex  Deo)."  He  is  directly
subordinate  to  the  supreme  Deity,  because  derived.  He  is  liovtyytvi)  s  and  irpuToroKos,
and  after  the  manifestation  in  man,  after  he  was  made  man  (ydyovev  &pepwir6s),  and
that  then  he  is  called  yevmiiia.  Also  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the  fact  that,  instead  of  the
peculiar  Johannine  phrase,  S  A6yos  irhpi  iyivero,  Justin  uses  &v6panros  instead  of  iripl,
and  trapKOToiriSets  instead  of  adpi  iydvero.  However  the  idea  of  the  incarnation  of  the
Logos  may  have  arisen,  the  mode  of  its  expression  is  very  closely  allied,  if  not  identical,
in  both  writers.  If  Justin  had  been  more  alive  to  the  teaching  of  Paul  (whose  letters
must  have  been  in  general  circulation  long  before  Justin  wrote),  he  might  neither  have
shrunk  from  Paul's  use  of  adp^  in  the  sense  of  &v8pairos,  nor  called  attention  to  the
subordination  of  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ.  However,  the  Gospel  of  John  and  the
Apocalypse  alike  lay  emphasis  upon  the  subordination  of  the  Son,  and  seeing  that  the
Son  is  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,  and  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  before  his
incarnation,  A0r05  and  TIOS  are  terms  which,  in  the  evangelist's  mind  essay  to  set
forth  the  same  immanent,  eternal,  and  active  relation  of  an  hypostasis  that  is  essen-
tially one  with  God,  though  derived  from  him.  Furthermore,  it  is  open  to  question
whether  Justin  did  designate  the  Logos  as  yewriiM  in  time.  The  passage  to  which
miny  critics,  anxious  to  shut  off  the  influence  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  from  Justin  refer,  is
'  Dial,  cum  Trypho,'  62 :  "  But  this  oflspring  (yivvniio)  which  was  put  forth  from  the
Father  was  with  the  Father  before  all  created  things  (Trivrtev  rSv  voirifiiTay)."  The
"  offspring  "  was  not  an  "  attribute  "  of  God,  and  Justin  seeks  to  show  that  this  Logos
was  the  Person  to  whom  God  spake,  saying,  "  Let  us  make  man  "  (see  '  Apol.,'  ii.  c.
6).  "  His  Son,  who  alone  is  properly  called  Son,  the  Logos,  being  with  God  and  being
begotten  before  his  works,  when  in  the  beginning  he  created  and  set  in  order  all  things
through  him,  is  called  Christ."  Confused  in  expression,  and  capable  of  ditferent  inter-
pretations, this  passage  identifies  the  Son  with  the  Logos,  and  discerns  the  Logos  as
actively  accomplishing  the  creation  of  all  things.  He  avows  partially  an  agreement
with  Plato  on  these  very  lines  in  the  '  Address  to  the  Greeks,"  but  the  deviation  from
the  great  afBrmations  of  John's  prologue,  in  favour  of  Philo,  cannot  be  proved.

Dr.  Davidson  seeks  to  show  that  Justin's  Christ  is  a  portrait  drawn  from  the  synop-
tist  narrative  or  tradition ;  e.g.  that  Justin  appears  to  regard  our  Lord's  public  ministry
as  lasting  one  year;  that  he  represents  Jesus  as  apprehended  on  the  day  of  the  Pass-
over ;  that  he  does  not  adduce  passages  from  the  prologue  in  proof  of  Christ's  pre-
exiatence ;  and  ignores  the  miracles  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  the  sending  of  the  Paraclete,
and  the  great  saying,  "  A  new  commandment,"  etc.  These  observations  are  well  worth
pondering,  but  we  might  as  well  go  through  the  whole  Gospel  with  a  similar  string  of
omissions.  Take  a  similar  case :  Because  a  writer  of  the  present  day  quotes  a  poem
of  the  commencement  of  the  century,  but  does  not  refer  to  or  appears  in  ignorance  of
many  other  of  the  same  poet's  productions,  we  are  not,  therefore,  justified  in  concluding
that  the  quotations  that  he  does  not  make  are  proof  of  the  non-existence  of  the  said
poetry  at  that  date.  The  question  here  does  not  turn  on  the  accurate  or  scholarly  use  of
the  Fourth  Gospel  by  Justin,  but  on  the  simple  fact  that  he  had  seen  it  or  read  any
portion  of  it.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  Mix

Dr.  Abbott  (City  of  London  School),  in  two  articles  in  the  Modem  Review,  1882,
endeavours  to  minimize  the  effect  of  the  quotations  on  which  we  have  commented,  by
emphasizing  their  vetbal  disagreement  with  the  text  of  John  ;  and,  following  the  line
of  Dr.  Davidson  and  A,  Thoma,  he  shows  that  there  are  places  in  Justin's  argument
where,  if  the  martyr  had  believed  in  the  authoritative  value  of  John's  Gospel,  he  would
have  cited  it  as  far  more  apposite  than  the  passage  from  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, or  from  the  synoptists  that  he  does  cite.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  Justin
should  not  have  quoted  this  Gospel  when  endeavouring  to  prove  the  pre-existence  of
Christ ;  but  we  cannot  say  what  a  writer  of  the  second  century  would  think  most  con-
vincing, and  the  argument  e  silentio  is  very  perilous.

2.  In  addition  to  this  testimony,  let  us  review  the  confirmatory  evidence  which
undeniably  establishes  the  existence  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  between  Justin  and  Irenaeus.

(1)  Heracleon.  We  have  spoken  at  length  of  Irenssus,  whose  evidence  establishes
the  reverence  paid  to  the  Gospel  when  he  wrote  his  chief  work,  a.d.  180,  but  in  this
work  ('  Adv.  Haer.,'  ii.  4)  he  speaks  of  one,  Heracleon,  a  Gnostic,  whose  doctrines  of
asons  is  combined  with  that  of  Ptolem^us  (cf.  Hippolytus, '  Eef.  Hier.,'  vi.  35  and  29).
Heracleon  must  have  lived,  then,  before  Irenseus.  He  was  a  disciple  of  Valentinus,
the  great  poet  and  genius  of  the  Gnostic  schools.  Nuw,  if  that  fact  can  be  established
— and  nothing  seems  clearer — then  John's  Gospel  must  have  been  in  wide  circulation,
and  held  in  extraordinary  reverence  by  persons  both  within  and  outside  the  Church ;
for  it  can  be  shown  that  Heracleon  actually  wrote  a  complete  commentary  on  John's
Gospel,  to  which  Origen  set  himself  to  reply  in  later  times.  "Ah,  great  Godl"  says
Volkmar,  "  if  between  a.d.  125  and  155  a  commentary  was  composed  on  John's
Gospel,  such  as  that  of  which  Origen  has  preserved  considerable  extracts,  what  yet
remains  to  be  discussed  ?  It  is  very  certain  that  it  is  all  over  with  the  critical  thesis
of  the  composition  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century."

(2)  Tatian.  Tatian,  a  disciple  of  Justin,  between  a.d.  166  and  170,  wrote  his
'  Discourse  to  the  Greeks,'  and  a  work  the  name  of  which  is  preserved  by  Eusebius,
Tb  AiaTea-aipwv — a,  "  patchwork,"  or  "  combination,"  or  perhaps  "  harmony,"  of  "  fotir
Gospels."  What  four  Gospels  were  they  ?  Eusebius  does  not  say,  but  he  calls  them
"  the  Gospels,"  and  that  is  sufficient.  "Eusebius,  '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iv.  29 :  "  Tatian  put
together,  I  know  not  how,  a  sort  of  patchwork  or  combination  of  the  Gospels,  and  called
it  the  DiATESSAKON,!  which  is  current  with  some."  The  author  of  'Supernatural
Eeligion '  argues  from  this,  unadvisedly,  that  Eusebius  had  never  seen  the  document.

That  one  of  them  was  the  fourth  is  probable,  because  in  the  '  Discourse  to  the
Greeks '  we  find  a  quotation  from  ch.  i.  3,  5  and  iv.  24.  The  exact  words  are,  Kol  toSto
iarai  apa  rh  -ttprjuevov,  'H  aKoria  rh  (pas  oh  Kara^uiifidyti.  Altogether  too  remarkable  to
be  explained  away.

Further,  Theodoret  ('  Hser.  Fab.,'  i.  20)  tells  us  this  "harmony"  was  a  defective  per-
formance, omitting  the  genealogies,  denying  the  reality  of  the  body  of  Christ,  and  that
he  was  Son  of  David  according  to  the  flesh.  He  says  that  he  found  (about  A.D.  420)
two  hundred  copies  of  this  work  in  his  churches  in  his  small  diocese  of  Cyrils,  in  Syria,
and  that  the  faithful  did  not  discern  the  mischievous  character  of  the  compilation,  and
that  he,  Theodoret,  substituted  for  them  copies  of  the  four  Gospels.  [This  simple  fact
shows  to  what  an  enormous  extent  copies  of  the  Gospels  may  have  been  diffused
throughout  the  Christian  world,  and  is  used  by  Norton  (loc.  cit.,  c.  1)  to  defend  his
calculation  that  not  fewer  than  sixty  thousand  copies  of  the  Gospels  must  have  existed
in  the  fifth  century,]

Victor  of  Capua,  in  the  sixth  century,  speaks  of  Tatian's  work  as  a  8«4  ircKTe  instead
of  a  5iti  Tiacipuv.  But  surely  E  usebius  of  the  fourth  century  and  Theodoret  of  the  fifth
century  are  rather  better  authorities  than  Victor.     A  Syrian  writer,  Bar-Salibi,  in  the

•  Dr.  Salmon  ('  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,'  p.  98)  has  quoted  an  interesting
eommunication  from  Professor  Mahaffy,  illustrating  tlie  meaning  of  the  word  iib,  Tmcrapav.
There  were,  says  he,  three  combinations  of  notes  in  music  which  were  regarded  as  eoneord» :
Sia  iraawv,  the  whole  octave;  Sid  vhre,  the  first  and  fifth;  and  Sii,  reaaipav,  the  first  and
fourth ;  all  the  rest  of  the  intervals  were  discords.  This  he  explains  scientifioaUy  as  correct,
although  our  modern  methods  of  tuning  instruments  have  created  a  harmony  between  thirds
as  well.  The  term  Smreup-^pwc  may  have  been  iuoorreotly  used  when  transferred  from
music  to  literature,  to  denote  a  harmony  of  four.


INTRODUCTION  TO


twelfth  century,  says  that  Ephrem  Syrus  wrote  a  commentary  on  Tatian's  harmony
and  that  it  began  with  ch.  i.  1.

So  startling  a  fact  has  been  vehemently  repudiated  by  the  opponents  of  the  Fourth
Gospel,  and  certainly  the  testimony  appears  late  and  dubious ;  but  see  here  Lightfoot'a
(article  in  Contemporary  Review,  1877)  argument  in  defence  of  Bar-Salibi.  Confirma-
tion of  this  testimony  really  became  available  in  1836,  thouzh  unnoticed  by  Western
scholars ;  for  in  that  year  it  was  found  that  an  Armenian  Version  of  Bphrem's  Com-
mentary actually  existed,  and  the  Mechitarist  Fathers  in  Venice  published  it.  In
1876  Mffisinger  translated  this  into  Latin,  and  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott  called  attention  to  it
in  1880.  Dr.  Zahn  has  published  an  elaborate  dissertation  on  the  subject.  With  this
stimulus.  Dr.  Wace  gave  an  interesting  account  and  analysis  of  this  commentary
{Expositor,  1882),  and  of  Dr.  Zahn's  theories  concerning  it.  Zahn  thinks  that  the
^taniraipuiv  was  itself  written  in  Syriac,  that  the  commentary  consisted  of  a  series  of
homilies  upon  a  harmony  which  in  the  Syriac  Churches,  in  the  fourth  century,  assumed
the  place  of  the  Gospels  in  the  Greek  Churches.  This  commentary  reveals  the  text
upon  which  it  was  based,  and  wo  fiml  that  it  corresponds  with  Victor  of  Capua's  state-
ment, though  the  latter  had  restored  some  passages  which,  according  to  Thoodoret,
Tatian  had  omitted.  This  remarkable  document  begins,  as  Bar-Salibi  had  said,  with
ch.  i.  1,  etc.,  and  contains  numerous  passages  from  the  Gospel,  even  of  ch.  xxi.,  and
bases  its  chronology  upon  tliat  of  John  rather  than  on  that  of  the  synoptics.

The  only  question  is — Have  we  any  reason  for  doubting  that  the  harmony  on  which
Ephrem  Syrus  commented  was  Tatian's,  as  Bar-Salibi  asserted  ?  Might  it  have  been
a  harmony  made  by  Ammonius  of  Alexandria?  Against  this  the  strong  reason
appears  that  Ammonius's  harmony  made  Matthew's  Gospel  the  basis,  whereas  there  ia
no  hint  of  this  in  Bphrem's  commentary.  If  we  can  rely  upon  the  existence  of  the
"harmony"  of  Tatian  (a  disciple  of  Justin),  and  that  the  Fouith  Gospel  wag  an
essential  element  of  the  AittTea-aipuv,  the  debate  as  to  Justin's  quotations  is  closed.

(3)  The  Mdeatorian  Kbagment.!  Muratori,  in  1740  ('  Antiquitates  Italicao  Mcdii
iEvi,'  vol.  iii.),  published  a  manuscript  at  that  time  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  of  Milan,
formerly  in  the  monastery  of  Bobbio,  in  order  to  prove  the  inaccuracy  of  early  copyists  ;
but  he  and  others  at  once  saw  that  the  fragment  was  of  importance  in  determining
the  canon  of  the  New  Testament.  The  manuscript  begins  abruptly,  and  is  broken  ofl
in  the  middle  of  a  sentence ;  it  is  written  in  corrupt  Latin,  which  is  probably  a  poor
translation  of  an  original  work  in  Greek.  The  writer  says  that  "  Hermas  has  very
recently,  and  in  our  days,  written"  the  '  Shepherd,'  while  Pius,  his  brother,  was  Bishop
of  Home."  Pius  died  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  his  episcopate  extending
from  A.D.  142  to  147,  and  if  so,  the  composition  of  the  unknown  author  can  scarcely  be
put  later  than  a.d.  160  or  170.  Tregellcs  says,  "Its  evidence  is  none  the  less  trust-
worthy from  its  being  a  blundering  and  illiterate  transcript  of  a  rough  and  rustic  trans-
lation of  a  Greek  original."  With  him.  Mangold  and  Hilgenfeld  agree.  It  is  one  of
the  first  attempts  we  jossess  to  frame  a  canon  or  list  of  books  of  the  New  Testament.
We  have  to  make  sundry  conjectures  which  may  turn  out  to  be  false,  with  reference,
e.g.,  to  thB  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  ;  but  its  testimony  as  to  the  existence  of  the  Gospels
is  important,  seeing  that  it  mentions  forged  epistles  in  order  to  denounce  them,  and
discriminates  between  the  value  of  The  '  Shepherd '  of  Hermas  and  the  sacred  books.
Everything  in  our  present  question  depends  on  the  date.  If  "  nuperrime  temporibus
nostris  "  be  taken  in  their  ordinary  sense,  it  cannot  be  dated  much  after  the  death  of  Pius,
and  all  the  other  references  tally  with  this.  Desperate  hypotheses  have  been  made  to
avoid  the  inconvenient  force  of  the  testimony.  Some  have  suggested  that  the  passage
which  involves  the  date  is  an  interpolation.  Of  course  that  cannot  he  disproved.  The
mere  fact  of  mutilation  docs  not  in  the  least  suggest  interpolation ;  nor  is  there  any
appearance  of  its  hemg  a  gloss.  It  is  questionable  whether  any  mention  of  Matthew  and
Mark  was  made  in  the  original  document,  because  that  portion  of  the  manuscript  is
mutilated ;  but,  as  far  as  our  present  contention  is  concerned,  that  is  unimportant.   What

•  •  Oanonioity,'  by  A.  H.  Charterls,  D.D.,  where  the  original  form  and  the  emended  text
are  seen,  pp.  3 — 8 ;  '  Canou  of  the  Now  Testament,'  by  Westoott,  p.  557,  etc. ;  '  Bible  in
the  Church,'  by  Westoott,  p.  113,  etc.;  Liglitfoot,  Contemporary  Review,  October,  1875;
Holtzrcann.  '  Lehrbuch  der  Einleitung  in  das  N.  T.,'  p.  143  ;  Beuss,  '  History  of  New
iLstament,'  $  310.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  BT.  JOHN.  utxi

is  Baid  with  reference  to  Luke  and  John  is  as  follows.     It  is  noticeable  that  the  way  in
which  Luke  is  introduced  shows  that  it  was  regaided  by  the  writer  as  the  Third  Goupel.

"  The  third  book  of  the  Gospel  is  that  according  to  Luke.  Luke,  that  physician,
after  tlie  ascension  of  Christ,  when  Paul  has  taken  him  .{secundum  or  secunt)  as  his
second  [or, '  helper,*  as  one  studious,  anxious  for  the  trutli  or  right?],  wrote  to  the  best
of  his  judgment  (ex  opinione,  equivalent  to  xaBiis  e5o|«»  air^,  Luke  i.  3),  nor,  never-
theless, had  he  himself  seen  the  Lord  in  the  flesh — and  this  same,  so  far  as  he  was  kble
to  ascertain,  and  so  he  began  to  speak  from  the  birth  of  John."

There  are  no  new  facts  to  be  gathered  from  this;  but  it  is  clear  that  the  writer  is
speaking  of  what  was  kuown,  in  the  Church,  as  the  Third  Gospel,  and  thus  throws  the
composition  of  the  work  much  further  back,  conflrming  all  that  we  have  said  about  the
independent  proof  of  the  precedence  of  the  Third  Gospel  to  that  of  Marcion.  Then
the  document  proceeds —

"  Of  the  fourth  of  the  Gospels  (the  author)  was  John,  one  of  the  disciples  "  (i.e.  to
distinguish  him  from  John  the  Baptist,  to  whom  he  had  just  made  reference).  "[He
wrote  it]  at  the  request  of  his  fellow-disciples  and  bishops,  to  whom  he  said,  '  Fast
with  me  from  to-day  until  the  third  day,  and  whatsoever  shall  have  been  revealed  to
auy  one,  we  will  tell  you.'  On  the  same  night  it  was  revealed  to  Andrew,  (one)  oC  the
apostles,  that,  aided  by  the  revision  of  all  {recognoscentihus  cunctis),  John  should
describe  all  things  in  his  own  name  (on  his  own  authority) ;  and  so,  though  various
principles  are  tau;iht  in  each  of  the  Gospels,  it  makes  no  difference  to  the  faith  of
believers,  since  in  all  of  them  all  things  are  declared  by  one  ruling  Spirit,  concerning  the
nativity,  concerning  the  passion,  the  resurrection  [of  Christ],  the  conversation  with  his
disciples,  and  his  double  (geinino)  advent.  First  he  was  contemned  in  his  humility,
then,  secondly,  illustrious  in  rojal  power,  which  will  occur  (^quod  futurum  est).  What
wonder  is  it,  then,  that  John  so  constantly  should  bring  it  forth,  even  in  his  Epistles,
and  mentioniiig  details,  should  say  as  frora  himself  alone,  '  What  we  have  seen  with
our  eyes,  and  heard  with  our  ears,  and  our  hands  have  handled,  these  things  have  we
written  to  you '  ?  For  so  he  professes  that  he  was  not  only  an  eye-witness,  but  also  a
hearer,  and,  moreover,  a  writer  in  order  (scriptorem  ,  .  .  per  ordinem,  an  historian)  oi
all  the  wonderful  things  of  our  Lord."

Because  of  the  air  of  legend  that  the  writer  of  this  fragment  has  thrown  round  the
composition  of  the  Gospel,  some  of  our  recent  critics  discount  its  value ;  but  the  very
fact  that  Andrew  and  the  other  apostles  should  conjoinedly  have  been  supposed  to  testily
to  the  truth  of  John's  communications,  throws  the  date  of  the  composition  of  what
was  then  a  well-ijnown  work  into  a  remote  past.  The  statement,  moreover,  cor-
responds with  the  concluding  words  of  the  Gospel  itself.

The  value  of  this  document  is  that  it  makes  it  impossible  for  us  to  suppose  that
Justin  could  have  had  any  other  document  before  him  than  that  which  we  thus  show
very  shortly  after  Justin's  death  to  have  been  called  "  the  Fourth  Gospel,"  and  is  declared
to  be  written  by  an  eye-witness,  etc.,  and  by  the  author  of  the  Epistle  which  bears  his
name.  ,

Holtzmann  contends  mainly  that  the  principle  on  which  books  are  approved  or  con-
demned throughout  this  archaic  fragment  is  their  acceptance  by  what  was  then
becoming  recognized  as  the  Apostolic  Catholic  Church.  Davidson  suggests  that  tho
account  of  the  origin  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  shows  that  its  "  apostolicity  "  was  still  open
to  grave  doubt.

It  ought  to  be  here  stated  that  Dr.  Salmon  is  disposed  to  attribute  the  authorship  of
this  document  to  Cains,  Presbyter  of  Rome  about  a.d.  ^00,  and  theiefore,  valuable  as
it  would  still  be,  it  would  have  no  bearing  on  the  quotations  of  Justiu.  lleuss,  however,
in  1884  (lib.  cit.),  repudiates  the  authorship  of  Caius.

(4)  Papias.i  These  testimonies  of  Papias  concern  more  closely  the  first  two  synoptic
Gospels,  though  they  are  not  without  interest  in  their  bearing  on  the  Fourth  Gospel.

First,  who  was  he?  and  what  records  throw  light  upon  the  date  of  his  episcopate  or
death,  or  the  value  of  his  testimonies  or  his  silences  ?

'  Article  by  Archdeacon  Farrar,  Expositor,  November,  1881,  very  important,  conEidering
the  extraordiniiry  use  made  by  Keim  ('  Ijife  of  Jesus  of  Nazara,'  i.  207,  Eng.~  trans.),  of  tlw
references  of  Papias  to  one  who  is  supposed  to  be  John  tlie  presbyter;  Contemporary  Review,
Bishop  LigUtfoot,  vol.  xxvi. ;  Dr.  Salmon,  '  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,'  p.  lOU,  etc.


van  INTEODUCTION  TO


Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iU.  36)  says,  "  "While  Polycarp  was  In  Asia,  and  was  Bishop
of  Smyrna,  Papias  was  well  known  as  Bishop  of  the  Church  in  Hierapolis,  a  man  weU
skilled  in  all  manner  of  learninpr,  and  well  acquainted  with  'the  Scriptures.*"  In
iii.  39  Eusebius  again  speaks  of  liim  as  aipoSpa  a/iMphs  t>v  riv  vovv,  asbeiug  intollectually
small  or  weak.  Tiiese  apparently  contradictory  passages  are  not  difficult  to  recoQcile.
Eusebius  was  a  strenuous  ante-raillenarian,  but  Papias,  according  to  certain  extracts
given  by  the  historian  from  his  last  work,  entitled  '  An  Exposition  (or  Expositions)  of
the  Oracles  of  our  Lord,'  recorded  some  extreme  chiliastio  views  based  on  the  literal
interpretation  of  some  apocryphal  sayings  of  Christ.  These  were  enough  to  justify
Busebius's  view  of  his  intellect,  while  at  the  same  time  he  might,  after  seeing  the  care
displayed  in  his  '  Expositions,'  and  the  reputation  he  had  won,  have  admitted  his  learn-
ing. Drs.  Dryasdust  and  Syntax  may  be  even  at  the  present  day  small  men.  It
would  be  a  most  wonderful  event  if  these  '  Exposiiions '  of  Papias  were  discovered,  as
he  was  undoubtedly  a  link  between  the  apostles  and  their  immediate  followers,  and
Irenaaus.  Now,  Irenseus  ('  Adv.  Haer.'  v.  33. 4)  speaks  of  liim  as  a  man  of  the  olden  time,
and  a  hearer  (iKovat^s)  of  John  aiid  Polycarp.  Later  tradition  makes  Irenaeus  a  "  hearer  "
of  Papias,  as  well  as  Polycarp ;  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  Ircnjeus,  when  in  Lao-
dicea,  saw  and  conversed  with  the  old  man  at  Hierapolis.  We  do  not  know  for  certain
when  he  died.  The  accounts  differ  as  to  the  date  of  his  martyrdom,  and  that  of  Poly-
carp, between  155-6  and  165-7.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that,  if  he  were  an  "  ancient
man  "  when  Ireujeus  saw  him,  he  must  have  lived  between  the  last  quarter  of  the  first
and  the  first  two  quarters  of  the  second  century — between  a.d.  70  and  150.  Moreover,
Eusebius  himself,  in  an  earlier  work,  the  '  Chronicon,'  does  not  scruple  to  say  that
Papias  was  a  hearer  of  John  the  apostle ' — a  statement  undoubtedly  confirmed  by
Ireuseus  ('  Adv.  Hser.'  v.  33).  The  sfjecial  and  wonderful  event  which  he  recorded  as
ha/iiig  learned  from  the  daughters  of  Philip  the  apostle  (Eusebius, '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii,
39),  shows  that  he  must  have  lived  contemporaneously  with  those  who  had  known  the
apostles  and  their  immediate  associates  and  followers.

One  very  important  fragment  of  Lis  last  work  is  preserved  by  Eusebius  (iii.  39  or
40),  which  Las  abundant  bearing  on  the  authenticity  of  Matthew  and  Mark's  Gospel,
and  also  inferentially  on  that  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  quotation  is  made  by  Euse-
bius from  the  fourth  book  of  Papias's  '  Expositions,'  on  the  authority  of  Irenasus  that
Papias  wrote  five  books.  Eusebius  adds  that  Papias,  in  the  preface  to  these  books,
does  not  claim  to  be  a  hearer  or  eye-witness  of  the  holy  apostles,  but  reieived  the  doc-
trines of  the  faith  from  their  intimate  friends.

"  I  shall  not  hesitate  or  scruple  for  your  ad\  antage  to  set  down,  side  by  side  with  my
interpretations,  whatsoever  things  I  at  any  time  well  (or  rightly)  learned  or  rightly  or
well  recorded  or  remembered,  sole.nnly  affirming  (Siafle^aiou/itVos)  the  truth  about
them.  For  I  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  delisht  (not  as  the  many)  in  those  saying
(K^youiriv)  many  things,  but  in  those  teacLing  the  truth,  nor  in  those  who  remembered
the  teacLing  of  strangers,  but  in  those  who  remembered  the  commandments  which
wore  given  by  the  Loid  to  our  faitL,  and  in  those  that  proceeded  vapayivoiiivoit  from
the  truth  itself  (cf.  cL.  .'civ.  6,  "I  am  the  Truth").  But  also  if  at  any  time  any  one
chanced  to  couie  who  Lad  been  a  follower  of  (vaj>iiKo\ou9i)K<is ;  cf.  Luke  i.  3)  the  elders,
I  used  to  inquire  about  the  discouvtes  (or  words)  of  the  elders,'  what  Andrew  and
what  Peter  said,  tlvtv,  or  wbat  Philip  or  what  Thomas  or  James,  or  what  John  or
Matthew,  or  auy  one  ol  the  disciples  (jxaBrtTuv)  i-aid,  and  what  Aristion  and  the  ilder  John,
the  disciples  of  the  Loid,  say  (Kiyovai).  For  I  did  not  account  my  self  so  much  indebted
to  what  comes  from  books  as  to  that  which  comes  from  the  living  and  abiding  voice."

Eusebius  then  calls  attention  to  the  double  reference  to  the  elder  John,  and  concludes
from  it  that  "  Aiistiou  and  the  elder  John"  were  living  in  Papias's  day,  and  that  he,
"  the  eider,"  was  the  probable  author  of  the  Apocalypse.  He  confirms  this  supposition
by  the  statement  that  some  assert  that  there  were  two  who  bore  this  name;  that  there
were  "two  tombs  in  Ephesus,  and  that  both  are  called  .John's  even  to  this  day."

'  Eusebius,  'Chronicon  ad  Olymp.,'  220:  'Iwawriv  -rbv  B^oKSyov  Ka\  mraa-ToAov  Eipi)i/aioi
Kal  liWoi  laTopmai  irapa/ieTvai  Tip  plcp  ecus  rS>v  XP^""'  Tpaiavov'  /ueff"  Sv  naimlas  'IcpairoA^Ti)!
Kol  TloA^Kapiros  %fi.^pv(\s  iTriffKoiros  Sueovtrrai  avrov  hyvupl^ovTo.

'  It  is  highly  important  to  notice  whom  he  meant  by  "  the  elders,"  because  Eusebiug
nndeiralues  this  toatimouy,  and  coutrudlcts  the  statements  of  IreniBua.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xxiiW

Now,  this  "  elder  John  "  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  the  author  of  the  Second  and
Third  Epistles  of  John.  Keim  has  urged,  in  his  'Jesus  of  Nazara,'  that  this  second  John
is  author  of  the  Gospel,  the  John  alone  known  to  Fapias  or  to  Poly  carp ;  and  he  denies
that  John,  son  of  Zebedee,  was  ever  at  Ephesus  at  all.

Etisebius  farther  dilates  on  his  literal  millenarianisni,  and  treats  him  as  the  mistaken
author  of  these  foolish  opinions,  thinking  that  Irenseus  was  led  astray  in  this  direction
by  the  antiquity  of  the  man.  Keim  has  no  right  to  follow  Eusebius  in  a  dogmatic
assertiOQ  that  Papias  knew  nothing  of  the  elders  themaelves ;  for  his  first  assertion  is
that  he  had  learned  and  remembered  much  of  their  instructions.  It  is  very  noteworthy
that  he  calls  Peter,  Thomas,  Andrew,  John,  and  Matthew,  "  elders ; "  and,  though  he
mentions  a  John  over  again  as  "  the  elder  John  "  with  Aristion  as  "  disciples  of  the
Lord,"  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  he  is  referring  to  another  person  at  all.  It  is
Interesting  to  observe  that  he  first  refers  to  second-hand  information  derived  from  the
group  of  elders,  and  then,  as  though  Aristion  and  the  elder  John  were  still  living,  he
adds,  "  what  they  say."  If  John  the  apostle  lived  till  Trajan's  time,  this  is  perfectly
comprehensible ;  and  the  passage  is  a  very  powerful  confirmation  of  the  hypothesis  so
well  maintained  by  Archdeacon  Farrar,  that  the  Presbyter  John  is  a  mere  invention  of
Eusebius,  who  is,  after  all,  the  only  source  of  the  tradition  worth  any  consideration,  and
that  he  based  his  opinion  on  the  loose  story  of  the  two  tombs  of  John  in  Ephesus.

The  testimony  which  Papias  gave  as  to  the  synoptic  narratives  has  been  discussed
and  argued  from,  as  thou2;h  it  were  a  detailed  treatise ;  and  two  solitary  phrases  which
he  used  have  afforded  matter  for  enormous  debate,  (a)  He  says  that  "  Matthew  com-
posed TB  \6yia  in  the  Hebrew  dialect,  and  each  one  interpreted  them  as  he  was  able."
From  this  sentence  it  has  been  concluded  that  Matthew  merely  edited  "  discourses  "  of
our  Lord,  and  that  this  Hebrew  work  is  the  foundation  of  our  canonical  "  Matthew,"
and  diifereijt  from  it.  It  is,  however,  clear  from  New  Testament  usage  of  the  word
that  we  have  no  right  to  limit  the  \6yia  to  the  discourses.  The  word  is  used  for
"oracles,"  whether  "  sayinsjs"  or  narratives  (Eom.  iii.  2 ;  Heb.  v.  12 ;  2  Clem.  13),  and
may  be  regarded  as  nearly  equivalent  to  our  modern  usage  of  the  word  "  gospel."
Papias,  in  this  brief  sentence,  does  not  say  that  Matthew  had  not  written  his  Greek
form  of  the  Gospel,  but,  as  Charteris  says,  "It  may  be  fairly  argued  that  now  the
time  for  haphazard  translations  was  passed."*  (6)  He  gives,  on  the  authority  of  "  the
elder  John" — and  this  is  profoundly  impressive  if  the  elder  John  be  none  other  than
the  venerable  apostle — the  well-known  story  of  Mark  being  the  interpreter  of  Peter.  He
comments,  therefore,  on  the  authority  of  Mark's  work,  its  accuracy,  and  his  scrupulous
attention  to  the  facts.  There  is,  however,  one  word  in  this  passage  on  which  much
controversy  has  been  spent — o4  /ihroi  t<S|« — ".not  indeed  in  order;  he  wrote  the  things
that  were  said  and  done  by  our  Lord."  It  has  been  urged  that  Mark's  Gospel  is  the-
raost  chronological  in  order  of  the  three  synoptic  narratives.  Judging  by  the
various  harmonies  that  have  been  made,  the  order  ot  Mark  is  that  which  is  more  often
adhered  to  by  Matthew  and  Luke,  and  moreover  their  respective  adhesions  to  Mark's
"  order,"  when  they  differ  from  one  another,  are  far  more  numerous  than  their  com-
bined deviations  from  Mark.  That  may  be  true.  But  does  Papias  mean  by  rafci
"chronological  order"?  All  those  who  are  anxious  to  separate  the  canonical  Matthew
and  Mark  from  the  documents  to  which  Papias  refers  hold  that  it  does.  Even  Dr.
Sanday  here  seems  to  yield  to  the  pressure,  and  to  agree  with  the  author  of '  Supernatural
Beligion.'  But  consult  Ebrard's  'Gospel  History,'  where  he  endeavours  to  set  forth
the  sequences  of  Mark's  narrative,  and  shows  that  be  is  guided  by  the  resolve  to  exhibit
in  a  series  of  tableaux  the  leading  momenta  of  the  life  of  Christ,  Even  if  Mark's  suc-
cession of  events  best  explains  the  differences  in  arrangement  seen  in  Matlljew  and
Luke,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  has  placed  the  details  of  his  narrative  any  more  than
they  have  in  true  chronological  sequence.

The  supposition  that  this  testimony  about  Mark  came  from  the  "elder  John,"  who  is
none  other  than  the  sou  of  Zebedee,  and  who  alone  approaches  a  full  exhibition  of
chronological  outline,  will  throw  light  on  the  ou  iiivroi  riiei.  As  compared  with  the
Fourth  Gospel,  which  we  cannot  suppose  Papias  did  not  know,  Mark's  might  well  beat
this  character.

If  John  the  elder  be  the  author  of  the  Second  and  Third  Epistles,  we  cannot  doubt
>  Alex.  Boberts's  '  T)i3cussions  on  the  Gotpels,'  p.  388.
wnr.  4


xxxW  INTROnUCTION  TO


that  they  are  by  the  same  author  as  that  of  the  First  Epistle,  from  which,  Eusebius  also
states,  Papias  quoted,  giving  another  reason  lor  tlie  identification  of  the  two  Johns.
Though  Eusebius  is  really  the  author  of  the  tradition  of  the  two  Johns,  yet  he
does  not  hesitate  to  say  ('  Chronicon,'  loc.  cit.)  that  Papias  had  been  a  hearer  of  John
the  apostle,  in  accordance  with  the  already-quoted  testimony  of  Irenajus  to  the  same
effect.  The  other  testimonies  to  the  supposed  existence  of  the  presbyter  vanish  on
approach.  The  hypothesis  that  John  the  presbyter  was  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse,
and  none  other  than  the  exile  of  Patmos,  and  who  could  with  authority  address  the
seven  Churches  of  Asia,  is  incompatible  with  John  the  apostle's  residence  in  Asia  alto-
gether, and  so  recklessly  sets  aside  a  wide  and  cogent  tradition.

The  greatest  puzzle  in  connection  with  the  passage  is  the  mention  of  Arittion  in  the
same  breath  with  the  elder  John.    Of  this  name  we  elsewhere  find  no  other  trace.

Kenan  and  others  have  adopted  different  conjectures  to  get  rid  of  the  reference  to
these  two  men  as  disciples  of  the  Lord.  Godet  makes  the  suggestion  that  the  "  two
other  disciples "  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi.  may  be  Aristion  and  Presbyter  John.  Dr.
Parrar  and  Krenkel  independently  make  the  supposition  that  Aristion  conceals  some
well-known  name ;  and  since  Polycrates  said  that  at  this  time  John  and  Philip  were
the  two  "  great  lights  of  Asia,"  it  is  not  impossible  that  Aristion  is  the  name  by  which
Papias  was  accustomed  to  speak  of  him.  "  What  Papias  meant  to  say  was  that,  long
before  he  wrote  his  book,  it  had  been  his  habit  to  gather  all  he  could  about  the  state-
ments of  the  apostles,  whom  he  calls  '  elders,'  and  among  them  the  statements  of  John,
from  those  who  had  seen  the  elders ;  and  that  he  also  took  notes  of  the  living  '  oracles,'
furnished  to  him  directly  by  Aristion  (who  was  well  known  to  Papias's  readers),  and
even — which  is  the  reason  why  he  keeps  the  name  to  the  last  as  being  the  fact  w'hich
he  most  wished  to  emphasize — by  '  John  the  elder ; '  the  same  John,  i  trivv,  the  only
John  of  whom  any  one  knew  anything,  who  so  long  survived  his  brother  apostles,  and
to  whose  indirect  testimony  Papias  has  just  referred"  (Parrar,  Mcpositor,  vol.  ii.  2nd
series,  p.  343,  etc.).

Although,  in  the  exceedingly  brief  extant  fragments  of  Papias,  no  quotation  is  made
from  John's  Oospel,  yet  it  is  stated  by  Eusebius  that  Papias  quoted  (as  Polycarp  did)
from  the  Pirst  Epistle,  and  likewise  from  Peter's  Epistle,  which  makes  it  probable  that
he  was  referring  to  John's  Gospel  and  Epistle,  just  as  he  referred  to  Mark's  Gospe'  and
Peter's  Epistle.

Before_  leaving  Papias,  it  is  incumbent  to  notice  that  Irenseus  (v.  36)  gives  an
explanation  of  ch.  xiv.  1,  "  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions,"  as  one  given  by
the  presbyters  of  Asia  Minor,  in  the  number  of  which  Mapias  occupied  a  chief  place.

The  so-called  silence  of  Eusebius  concerning  the  testimonies  of  more  ancient  writers
than  himself  to  the  existence  ol^  the  Gospels  has  a  curious  bearing  on  (his  subject  (see
JjightfootfContemporary  Eeview,  vol.  xxvi.).  It  all  turns  on  the  principle  adopted  by
Eusebius  in  these  references.  Thus,  'Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  8,  "He  wishes  to  point  out  what
ecclesiastical  writers  made  use  of  the  disputed  hooks,  tvnd  of  which  of  them,  then  some
(riv£)  of  the  things  which  have  been  said  about  the  iii.o\oyovneiioi,  and  all  that  has  been
said  about  those  which  are  not  so."  He  did  not  for  a  moment  aim  at  •  complete
inventory  of  all  that  was  said  by  the  earlier  writers  about  the  ifjioXoyovixtvoi.  That  was
taken  forgnmted;  e.jr.  he  says  nothing  about  Irenajus's  and  Origen's  quotations  from
John.  Nobody  doubted  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  the  time  of  Eusebius.  The  fact  thai
Papias  quoted  the  First  Epistle  of  John  and  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter  is  to  the  point  ;
iind  the  very  fact  that  Eusebius  does  not  refer  to  citations  made  by  Papias  from  the
Oospel  of  John  goes  far  to  prove  that  Eusebius  knew  that  Papias  quoted  it  largely.

The  conclusions  we  draw  are  that  his  jiersonal  acquaintance  with  John  and  Poly-
carp gives  extraordinary  importance  to  the  testimony  which  Irenseus  bears  to  the
Gospel  as  well  as  to  him,  and  connects  the  apostolic  period  with  that  in  which  the
quotations  from  and  admissions  of  John's  Gospel  are  abundant,  indubitable,  ami  univer-
sally conceded.

3.  The  testimony  of  the  ArosTOLio  Fathers.  (1)  Poltcarp.  Another  evidence  of  high
antiquity  is  given  in  the  solemn  quotation  from  the  First  Epistle  of  .John  in  Polvcarp'a
Kpist.  to  Phil.,  c.  vii.  The  evidence  for  the  identilicatinn  of  autiiorship  of  the  Epistle
and  (Jospel  is  as  strong  as  any  internal  evidence  cun  be  (see  sect.  VII,  5.  (3)  d).  Dr.  David-
•on  baa  strenuously  disputed  it  by  calling  attention  to  differences  of  doctrine  between


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xix»

them,  which  are  in  fact  microscopic.  But  the  transfusion  of  1  John  iv.  2,  3  into  the
following  passage  is  convincing  to  many  sceptical  minds:  "For  every  one  who  does
not  confess  tliat  Jesus  Christ  has  come  in  the  flesh  is  autichrist ;  and  whosoever  does
not  confess  the  testimony  of  the  cross  is  of  the  devil."  This  becomes  more  striking
from  the  fact  that  in  c.  vi.  Polycarp  is  referring  to  the  apostles  who  preached  the
gospel  to  us.

Volkmar  suggests  that  Polycarp's  epistle  to  the  Philippians  may  have  been  in  the  handi
of  the  writer  of  the  First  Epistle  of  John.  But  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  Papias,
a  companion  of  Polycarp,  made  use  of  the  First  Epistle  (according  to  Eusel)ius),  which
renders  it  eminently  improbable  that  the  Epistle  of  John  was  written  after  the  time
of  Polycarp  and  Papias.  The  superiority  and  independence  of  the  First  Epistle  of  John
are  conapicnoiis  throughout.

Polycarp's  letter  shows  that  it  must  have  been  written  after  Ignatius  left  him,  and
before  the  news  of  his  martyrdom  reached  him  at  Smyrna.  It  has  been  said,  if  Poly-
carp quoted  the  First  Epistle,  why  should  he  not  have  quoted  the  Gospel?  One  might
as  well  ask  why  he  did  not,  in  the  short  letter,  quote  1  Corinthians,  or  Job,  or  Jeremiah,
or  Daniel,  or  the  '  Phsedo '  1  The  authenticity  of  Polycarp's  letter  is  placed  beyond
dispute  by  Lightfoot  (article.  Contemporary  Review,  1877,  and  '  Apostolic  Fathers,'
part  ii.  vol.  i.  and  vol.  iii.),  and  the  fact  that  this  letter  is  interfused  and  saturated  with
Pauline  thought  is  in  itself  a  standing  contradiction  of  the  theory  of  the  existence  of
hostile  parties  within  the  bosom  of  the  apostolic  company.  The  one  ground  on  which
Polycarp's  epistle  has  been  questioned  is  that  it  sustains  the  authenticity  of  the  Ignatian
letters,  which  had  been  referred  to  a  forger  of  the  close  of  the  centm^' ;  but  if  the  Igna-
tian Epistles  are  proved  to  be  authentic,  the  one  stumbling-block  has  been  taken  away.
This  Zahn  and  Lightfoot  have  done  so  much  to  accomplish.

(2)  Clemens  Bomanus  and  Barnabas.  It  is  more  than  possible  that  the  epistle
of  Clement  of  Rome  was  written  before  the  Fourth  Gospel,  therefore  we  do  not  expect
to  find  traces  of  the  presence  of  that  Gospel  in  this  epistle.  The  same  may  possibly  be
true  of  the  epistle  of  "  Barnabas."  The  antiquity  of  the  latter  has  bpen  accepted  by
some  critics  because  they  find  in  it  no  trace  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Volkmar,  Riggenbach
(and  cf.  Dr.  Milligan's  art.  "  Barnabas : "  '  Diciionary  of  Christian  Biography ').  Keim
has,  however,  strongly  maiutained  the  presence  of  the  Johannine  tboiii;ht  throughout
the  epistle,  and  contends  that  the  root-ideas  of  the  epistle  cannot  be  found  either  in
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  or  in  Paul's  Epistles,  but  only  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  If  so,
we  are  diiven  back  to  the  very  commencement  of  the  second,  or  the  close  of  the  first,
century  for  such  recognition  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Keim  thinks  there  is  specific
reference  to  the  building  of  the  temple  in  the  reigo  of  Hadrian,  about  the  year  a.d.  120,
at  latest  a.d.  130.

If  the  epistle  were  genuine,  it  must  have  been  written  as  early  as  between  A.D.  70
and  79,  as  many  seem  to  think,  and  the  presence  of  what  Keim  regards  as  Johannine
thouglit  can  scarcely  have  been  derived  directly  from  the  Gospel.  The  thoughts  may
have  been  conveyed,  as  they  were  probably  to  Paul,  by  the  teaching  of  John  himself,
which,  by  the  study  of  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  can  be  shown  to  have  been  widely  diffused
in  the  first  century.  1  homa  finds  almost  every  idea  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  tJready
embodied  in  the  Pauline  Epistles  (see  '  Barnabap,'  cc.  5.  7.  11.  12).

(3)  The  Shepherd  of  Hermas.*  This  curious  document  belongs  to  the  middle  of  the
second  century,  between  A.D.  140  and  150.  The  earliest  date  is  thought  by  Charteris  to
be  A.D.  138,  as  we  find  that  Christians  are  heing  Judicially  condemned  to  the  wild  beasts.
This  catmot  have  been  the  case  before  the  reign  of  Hadrian.  There  are  few,  if  any,
references  to  the  New  Testament.  Clemens .  Alex,  and  Origen  frequently  quote  it,
without  regarding  it  as  canonical.  Tlie  'Muratoriau  Fragment'  says,  "The Pastor  was
written  nuperrime  in  Rome,  by  Hermas,  while  Bishop  Pius,  his  brother,  was  in  the
chair  of  the  Church  of  the  city  of  Rome."  There  are  many  who  believe  that  they
trace  the  presence  of  the  Johannine  idea  of  the  pre-existence  of  the  Son  of  God,  the
identification  of  the  Gate  with  the  Son  of  Ood,  and  that  those  who  are  to  be  saved
must  enter  by  it  into  the  kingdom  ('  Simil.,'  ix.  12).     Sanday  regards  this  as  a  very

'  Hilgenfeld,  '  Novum  Testamentum  °xtra  Canonem  ;' Donaldson,  "Apostolic  Fathers"
in  'History  of  Cliristian  Literature  and  Doctrine;'  Keim,  'Geschiehte  Jesu  von  Nazari^'
i.  Ua.


tittl  iNTRODtJCTION  TO


problematical  reference,  though  not  impossible  (p.  274;  see  also  Westoott  on  th«
Canon,  p.  211 ;  and  '  Introduction  to  the  Gospel,'  xxxii.).  Davidson  does  not  admit  any
resemblance.

(4)  The  so-called  Second  Epistle  of  Clement.  The  recent  discovery  of  Bryennio*
(see  Bishop  Lightfoot's  edition, '  Apostolic  Fathers,'  vol.  i.)  proves  this  document  to
be  the  "  ancient  homily  of  an  unlrnown  author,"  about  the  year  a.d.  140  at  the
latest,  but  it  betrays  no  positive  acquaintance  with  the  writings  of  either  Paul  or  John,
yet  there  are  interesting  traces  of  the  Gospel.  That  in  c.  xvii.  is  very  precarious,  and
turns  simply  on  <ri  •?$,  "Thou  wast  he;"  but  reminds  Lightfoot  of  John  viii.  24  and
xiii.  19.  But  in  c.  ix.  there  is  a  stronger  reference,  "  If  Christ  the  Lord  who  saved
us,  being  first  spirit,  then  became  flesh  (iyeviTo  aipQ,  and  so  called  us ;  in  like  manner
in  this  flesh  we  shall  receive  our  reward;  let  us  therefore  love  one  another."  This
reminds  us  of  John  i.  14  and  of  the  spirit  of  the  valedictory  discourse  (see  also  o.  iii.).
"  We  through  him  have  known  the  Father  of  truth  "  (cf.  John  i.  18  ;  xiv.  9).

(5)  The  Epistles  op  loNATins.  Of  course,  the  vast  question  of  the  authenticity  of  the
Ignatian  Epistles  cannot  here  be  examined  further  than  to  sav  that,  after  the
publieaiion  of  the  Syriao  translation  (edited  by  Cureton),  criticism  for  a  while  settled
into  the  conviction  that  the  three  epistles — to  the  Eomans,  to  Polycarp,and  Ephesians,
of  which  we  possess  in  Syriac  apparently  the  shortest  version — are  tbe  sole  portions
which  represent  the  authentic  correspondence  of  the  martyred  Father  on  his  way  from
Antioch  to  Rome  ;  that  the  Vossian  shorter  Greek  form  of  the  seven  epistles  are,  like
the  still  longer  form  of  the  thirteen  epistles  which  long  went  under  the  same  name,
spurious  additions  to  the  original  text.  Many  of  the  Tiibingen  critics,  however,  rejected
even  the  Curetonian  Syriac,  as  well  as  both  the  shorter  and  longer  forms  of  the  Greek
epistles.  But  since  Zahn's  work,  '  Ignatius  von  Antiochien,'  Lightfoot's  article  on
"  The  Ignatian  Letters,"  Contemporary  Review  (1877),  and  the  exhaustive  treatment  of
the  authenticity  of  the  middle  form  of  the  epistles,  by  Bishop  Lightfoot,  'Apostolic
Fathers,'  vol.  ii.,  it  is  becoming  more  clear  to  candid  minds  that  the  Syriac  translation
is  nothing  but  an  extract  from  the  seven  epistles  for  purposes  of  edification,  that  a
complete  Syrian  text  existed  in  the  fourth  century,  and  that  it  had  been  translated
into  the  Armenian  language  from  the  Syriao  in  the  sixth  century.  Fetermanu
published  (1849)  this  Armenian  version,  corresponding  with  the  three  Curetonian,  but
containing  all  seven  Vossian,  and  even  the  six  spurious  ones  as  well.  It  would  be
wrong  to  place  absolute  dependence  upon  these  seven,  or  even  the  three  in  their
shortest  form,  because  it  is  more  than  probable  that  even  they  have  been  manipulated
in  the  direction  of  an  ecclesiastical  system,  certainly  profoundly  dissimilar  from  that  in
Clement  of  Eome,  or  the  pastoral  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  Dr.  Lightfoot  shows  that  the
Martyr  recognizes  and  enforces  the  distinction  between  presbyter  and  bishop  in  Asia
minor,  but  reveals  the  fact  that,  both  in  the  Philippian  and  the  Roman  Church,  the
distinction  on  which  he  elsewhere  insists  so  much  had  not  establii-hed  itself.  Still,  they
are  immensely  valuable  in  every  way,  if  they  represent  the  thought  of  a  writer  who
cannot  have  been  martyred  later  than  a.d.  116  in  Trajan's  time,  and  must  have  been
contemporary  with  the  aged  apostle  himself.

There  are  many  refermces  and  quotatilns  of  the  kind  that,  though  loosely  made  in
those  days,  reveal  the  antecedent  existence  of  the  Gospel.  I  choose  the  more  remark-
able— that  to  ' Magnesians,'  c.  8.  2 :  "There  is  one  God,  who  manifested  himself
through  'IrjiroCs  Xpiards,  his  Son,  who  is  his  \6yos,  proceeding  from  X'yfi " — a  term  showing
how  Gnosticism  had  already  made  its  appearance — "  who  in  all  respects  was  well  pleasing
to  him  that  sent  him  "  (ch.  viii.  29).  Volumes  have  been  written  on  this  one  word
Siy<  occurring  in  the  Ignatian  Letters.  The  old  and  common  text  is,  "  One,  Ood  who
has  manifested  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  who  is  his  [eternal]  Word,  [noO
proceeding  from  [2i7^]  silence,  and  who  in  all  things  pleased  him  who  sent  him."
This  has  the  appearance  of  a  reply  to  the  Valentinian  speculation  with  reference  to
"  silence  "  as  the  source  of  the  Logos,  and  hence  has  been  regarded  as  proof  of  the  late
origin  of  the  whole  epistle.  It  has  been  definitely  proved  that  the  mysterious  term  is
much  older  than  Valentinus,  and  was  much  used  in  the  first  century.  Bishop  Lightfoot
has  endeavoured  to  establish  a  diffeient  form  of  the  text,  as  given  above,  and  appears
to  solve  the  difficulty  by  showing  that  the  veritable  Ignatius  had  a  certain  leaning
to  some  of  the  pre-Valentinian  speculations,  which  were  sufficiently  rife.     On  either


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xixirif


hypothesis  of  text,  the  reference  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  very  marked,  and  could  not,
as  the  author  of  '  Supernatural  Beligion '  urges,  have  been  derived  from  the  theosophy
ofPhilo.

In  the  '  Epistle  to  the  Eomans,'  c.  vii.  2  (in  both  Curetonian  and  Vossian  texts),
•  The  living  water  (SSaip  8i  (&v},  speaidtig  within  me,*  says  withiin  me,  '  Come  to  the
Father.'  1  desire  the  Bread  of  (iod,  which  is  the  flesh  of  Jesus  Christ . .  .  and  I  desire
the  Drink  of  God,  his  blood,  which  is  incorruptible  love."  The  ordinary  Greek  reads,
"  incorruptible  love  and  eternal  life  (oeVnos  fa^),"  instead  of  fa^  at^vios,  the  common
phrase  in  John.  Lightfoot  omits  the  last  clause.  Still,  the  resemblance  to  ch.  vi.  55,
and  32, 33, 58,  and  to  ch.  iv.  14,  are  conspicuous.  The  letter  to  'Philadelphians,'  c.  vii.  1 :
"  If  any  should  wish  me  to  go  astray, .  .  .  but  the  Spirit  does  not  go  astray,  being  from
God,  for  he  knows  whence  he  cometh  and  whither  he  goeth,  and  searches  out  (condemns,
^\4yXfi)  secret  things."  The  unusual  use  of  epx^rat  and  uviyet,  found  in  oh.  iii.  8,  is  found
twelve  times  in  the  Gospel  and  once  in  the  Epistle,  and  thus  has  become  a  commonplace
in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  who  is  far  less  original  in  the  employment  of  it  than  was  the
evangelist.  Ignatius's  use  of  it  is  a  deduction  from  the  words  of  Christ :  "  We  know  not
the  way  of  the  Spirit,  but  the  Spirit  himself  knows  his  own  movements."

Hilgenfeld,  who  places  the  composition  of  these  letters  in  a.d.  166,  says,  "The  whole
theology  of  the-letters  of  Ignatius  rests  on  the  Gospel."  If  the  seven  episiles  are  the
genuine  woik  of  Ignatius  himself,  then  we  have  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  Gospel
from  the  year  a.d.  110,  if  not  earlier.

(6)  The  Letter  to  Diognetus.  Much  dependence  cannot  be  placed  on  the  references
contained  in  this  beautiful  fragment,  simply  for  the  reason  that  we  know  nothing  for
certain  as  to  its  date.  At  one  time  it  was  supposed  to  be  from  Justin's  pen,  and  was
published  with  his  works.  The  manuscript  whicb  contained  it  was  burnt  in  the  siege  of
Strasburg,  1869.  It  is  just  possible  that  Stephens  wrote  it,  and  this  theory  has  lieen
maintained  by  some.  Eeuss  places  it  at  a.d.  135;  Nitzsch,  between  a.d.  110  and  125  ;
Westcott  gives  a.d.  117  as  its  date ;  Ewald  places  it  between  a.d.  120  and  130 ;  Bunsen,
in  his  'Hippolytus  and  his  Age,'  a.d.  135;  Davidson  and  Hilgenfeld,  a  much  later
<iate,  between  a.d.  160  and  180.

Graiiting  it  to  have  been  an  early  document,  which  cannot  be  di.sproved,  then  the
testimonies  of  acquaintance  with  the  Gospel  are  unequivocal.  "Christians  dwell  in
the  world,  though  they  are  not  of  the  world  " — the  remarkable  phrase,  ovk  ei<rl  Sh  Ik  rod
nSanov,  c.  vi.  (cf.  John  xvii.  14);  "  For  God  loved  the  men  for  whom  he  made  the  world,  to
whom  he  has  subjected  all  things  in  the  world  ...  to  whom  he  sent  his  only  begotten
Son,  to  whom  he  promised  the  kingdom  in  heaven,  and  will  give  to  those  that  loved
him,"  c.  X.  (cf.  c.  vii.  and  o.  xi.,  for  further  reminiscences,  as  well  as  remarkable  resem-
blance to  1  John  iv.  19  in  o.  x.).

(7)  The  Aitaxh  tSv  AwSe'/ca  ' KiroaToKSyii.  The  early  period  when  this  remarkable
document  was  probably  written  precludes  any  reference  to  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  yet  we
breathe  throughout  the  references  to  the  Eucharist,  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  God  is
addressed  as  "  Holy  Father  "  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  11) ;  the  "  Holy  Vine  of  David  "  may  point  to
ch.  XV.  1.  The  reference  to  the  "Holy  Name"  which  is  said  to  "tabernacle"  in  i;he
faithful,  whereby  "immortality  is  made  known;"  "eternal  life,"  connected  with
the  spiritual  fooii  and  drink  imparted,  and  with  the  knowledge  of  God ;  remind  us  of
ch.  vi.  and  xvii.  3.  Much  of  the  spirit  of  the  injunction  had  its  origin  in  a  community
perfectly  familiar  with  Johannine  teaching  such  as  we  have  it  in  the  Goipel  (see
British  Quarterly  Beview,  clxii.  pp.  367,  368).

V.    FuBTHEB  Testimonies  from  outside  the  Church  and  from  Apocrtphal  and

PSEUDEPIORAPHIO    LITERATURE.

In  some  respects  these  testimonies  are  of  even  greater  weight  than  those  which
proceed  from  Christian  writers,  because  they  show  that  the  dopuments  had  acquired  in

'  Lightfoot  is  disposed  to  believe  that  the  right  reading  is  preserved  in  the  interpolator**
text,  ahhSiiivov  for  koI  AaAoiii'.  If  this  be  the  case,  we  have  undoubted  reference  te
ch.  iv.  14.  From  this  passage  and  the  preceding  passage  (vers.  10,  11)  the  expression,  SSaip
CSiv  aWiiiivou,  took  prominent  place  in  the  discussions  of  the  second  century,  of  which  ample
proof  is  given.


xxxrUi  INTEODUCTION   TO


the  Christian  Church  a  character  of  coDsiderable  importance  when  thus  used  and
quoted  as  authorities  for  ideas  which  the  writers  did  not  hold.

We  will  commence  with  those  which  establish  this  far-reaching  influence  in  the  close
of  the  second  century,  and  then  move  backwards.

1.  Celsus.  We  are  brought  into  contact  with  this  writer  by  means  of  Origen's  reply
to  his  assault  on  Christianity.  This  was  designated  A0701  "AXTje^i.  Keimhas  proved
(1S73),  in  his  restoration  of  the  work  of  Celsus  from  the  ereat  treatise  of  Origen,  that  it
was  written  about  a.d.  178.  Keim  has  made  it  probable  that  the  friend  of  Lucian,
supposed  Vjy  Origen  to  be  an  Epicurean,  and  with  whom  Origen  identified  him,  may  have
been  the  man,  and  that  his  Epicureanism  is  of  very  doubtful  character.  Volkmar
and  the  author  of '  Supernatural  Eeligion '  try  to  establish  a  later  date  than  this ;  but  the
great  bulk  of  critics  think  the  date  is  earlier  rather  than  later  than  tliat  fixed  upon  by
Keim,  It  is  unquestionable  that  Celsus,  whoever  he  was,  was  intimately  acquainted
with  the  four  Gospels,  and  recognized  them  as  common  authorities  for  the  doctrines  of
the  faith  which  he  despised.*

Origen, '  Contra  Celsum,'  i.  50,  shows  that  Celsus  accuses  the  Christians  of  believing
that  "  the  Son  of  God  is  come  down  from  heaven  "  (cf.  ch.  iii.  31 ;  viii.  23).  I.  67,  he
quotes  from  Celsus  :  "  Thou  hast  made  no  manifest^ition  to  us,  although  ihey  challenged
thee  in  the  temple  to  exhibit  some  unnystakable  sign  that  thou  wert  Son  of  God  "
(cf.  oh.  ii.  18  ;  x.  24  ;  Matt.  xxi.  23).  1.  70  implies  that  Celsus  objected  to  Christ,  that
the  body  of  a  God  could  not  be  thirsting  at  the  well  of  Jacob,  or  eating  broiled  fish  and
honeycomb  (cf.  ch.  iv.  and  xx.).  II.  31,  he  refers  to  the  charge  that  Christians  were
guilty  of  sophisticating  leas  'uing  in  saying  that  "  the  Son  of  God  is  the  Logos  himself,"
and  "  when  we  declare  that  the  Logos  is  Son  of  God,  we  present  not  pure  and  holy
Logos,  but  a  degraded  man  punished  by  scourging  and  crucifixion."  II.  36,  Celsus
referred  to  the  ichor  flowing  in  the  veins  of  the  Crucified  (of.  ch.  xix.  34,  35).  II.  49,
the  apparent  quotation  of  <ps>s  /col  a\i)6em  from  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Now,  that  a  heathen
opponent  should  have  made  use  ot  these  citations  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  a.d.  178
shows  how  widely  it  must  have  been  diffused  before  his  day.

2.  Testament  of  the  XII.  Patkiarohs.  Written  by  a  Jewish  Christian,  who  puts
into  the  mouth  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  the  pious  advice  which  these  patriarchs  might
with  most  singularly  gifted  prevision  have  given  to  the  ChriBtians  who  were  nevertho-
less  proud  of  their  ancestral  faith  and  race.  TertuUian  and  Origen  refer  to  this  work.
(Sinker  has  edited  the  document  with  many  discussions,  '  Anti-Nicene  Library  ;  '
cf.  Hilgenfeld, '  Nov.  Test.,  Extra  Canonem.')  The  work,  in  Godet's  judgment,  was
written  before  the  second  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  therefore  before  A.D.  130.  In  this
document  the  Messiali  is  spoken  of  as  "  Light  of  the  world,"  "  Saviour,"  "  Son  of  God,"
"  Only  Son,"  "  Lamb  of  God,"  "  God  come  in  the  flesh,"  "  The  Spirit  gives  witness  to
the  truth  ; "  all  of  which  phrases  reveal  Johannine  thought.

3.  The  Clementine  Homilies.  The  work  of  Dr.  Sanday,  frequently  referred  to,
gives  a  most  exhaustive  treatment  of  the  bearing  of  the  text  of  the  Clementine  homilies
of  the  pseudo-Clement,  on  the  previous  existence  of  the  four  Gospels.  Seeing  that  wo
huve  only  a  Latin  translation  of  the  '  Eecognitions,'  no  dependence  can  be  placed  upon
their  testimony  ;  but  if  the  '  Homilies '  were  the  original  work,  which  was  expanded
into  the  form  of  the  '  Recognitions,'  and  which  is  the  opinion  of  Ewald,  Renss,  Liicke,
and  many  others,  we  are  in  possession  of  a  document  of  the  middle  of  the  second  century,
written  by  a  Judreo-Christian,  who  reveals  acquaintance  with  the  four  Gospels.  "  There
are  no  material  differences  from  our  Gospels"  in  these  quotations.  Some  are  exact,
some  are  variant,  some  are  nieiely  allusive,  some  are  combinations  Irom  all  three.
They  contain  passages,  moreover,  which  are  p(  culiar  to  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,
and  some  proving  acquaintance  with  our  canonical  Gospel.

For  a  long  time  it  was  said  that  the  Clementines  contained  no  referencs  to  the
Gospel  of  John.  This  Hilgenfeld  mainiained  to  1850;  but  ch.  x.  3,  9,  and  27,  are
unmistakably  referred  to  in  '  Horn.  Clem.,'  iii.  52  :  "  On  this  account  the  true  Prophet
said, '  I  am  the  Gate  of  life ;  he  that  entereth  by  me,  entereth  eliripxfrat  into  life ; '  and
again,  'My  sheep  hear  my  voice.' "  '  Hom.,'  xi.  26  :  "  Thus  hath  the  Prophet  sworn
to  us,  saying,  '  Except  ye  be  born  again  of  or  in  living  water,  into  the  Name  of  th«
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.' "
'  See  Proude,  in  Fraser't  Magazine,  February,  1878.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xxxlx

But  Dressel,  In  1853,  having  discovered  the  manuscript  of  'Horn.,'  xix.,  not
previously  known  to  exist,  published  it.  In  this  is  contained  the  remarkable  quotation
(xix.  22) :  "  It  is  for  this  reason  also  that  our  Lord  replied  to  those  who  questioned
him  concerning  the  man  blind  TnjpoB  from  his  birth,  who  received  his  sight,  and  who
asked  him  whether  this  man  sinned,  or  his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  (tu^a^i),
answered.  Neither  did  this  man  sin  nor  his  parents,  but  that  by  him  the  power  of  God
should  be  made  manifest,  curing  the  sins  of  ignorance."  Uilgenfeld  yielded  to  this
evidence.  Those  who  hold  out  against  it  are  compelled  to  admit  that  (save  from  this
quotation)  there  is  nothing  to  bring  the  homilies  later  than  a.d.  160.

The  opponents  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  are  urgent  in  drawing  attention  to  the  strongly
expressed  divergence  between  the  Clementine  homilies  and  the  Gospel.  If  this  be  so,
these  Ebionites  from  whom  the  homilies  proceeded  would  never  have  quoted  firom  a
work  of  an  opposite  school,  if  it  were  of  modem  origin,  or  if  there  had  been  any
colourable  reason  for  repudiating  its  apostolicity.  This  quotation,  therefore,  together
with  Justin's,  Tatian's,  and  the  other  evidence  ndduced,  renders  the  date  assigned
by  Baur  for  the  composition  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  viz.  a.d.  160 — 170,  entirely
incredible.

4.  MoNTANUs  and  Montanism.  Montanus,  the  leader  of  this  sect,  made  his  appear-
ance in  Phrygia  about  a.d.  140,  and  he  based  his  theory  on  the  prophecy  of  a  Paraclete,
and  on  the  promised  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  perpetual  and  supernatural  presence  and
l)rophetic  energy  in  the  Church.  No  intelligible  explanation  can  be  put  upon  the  adoption
of  the  terms,  Logon,  ParacUtos,  Numphioa,  which  (Theodoret  says)  Montanus  claimed
for  himself,  but  his  own  misuse  of  an  acknowledged  source  of  authoritative  tradition
and  doctrine.  Montanism,  as  a  reaction  into  disciplinary  forms  and  millennarian  views,
was  not  called  forth  by  this  Gospel,  which  nowhere  sustains  it;  but,  as  Keim  says,
"  Montanism  derived  its  ideas  from  the  surrounding  Church,  which  was  or  might  be
nnder  the  influence  of  the  Fourth  Gospel."  Then  coupling  this  fact  with  the
undoubted  quotations  and  allusions,  it  brings  the  composition  back  to  at  least  before
A.D.  120 — 140,  during  which  time  it  must  have  been  well  known  in  the  Church.

5.  Marcion.  Marcion,  as  we  have  stated  in  earlier  remarks,  has  now  been  definitively
proved  to  have  mutilated  for  his  purposes  the  Third  Gospel,  and  to  have  endeavoured
to  establish  his  doctrine  of  Christian  dualism  by  representing  the  demiurge  as  hostile
to  the  supreme  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  to  have  had  no  part  in  him  or  his  work,  as
one  essentially  hostile  to  "  matter,"  and  to  Jews  who  were  the  very  work  and  agents  of
the  demiurge.  How  could  he  have  foimd,  even  with  abundant  mutilation,  anything  to
satisfy  him  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  where  the  humanity  of  Jesus,  his  body  and  its
characteristics,  are  so  abundantly  insisted  upon  ?

It  is  very  perplexing  that  scholars  like  Hilgenfeld,  Volkmar,  and  Davidson  should
think  that  John's  Gospel  would  have  been  more  suitable  than  Luke's  if  it  had  been  in
existence.  The  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation,  of  the  weariness  of  Christ,  of  the  flesh  of
Christ,  his  proof  of  the  sameness  of  the  body  that  had  risen  with  that  which  had  been
crucified,  the  marriage-feast,  etc., — all  have  led  great  critics  like  Bleek,  Weiszaoker,
Luthardt,  Godet,  and  others,  to  take  a  very  different  view.

That  Marcion  was  acquainted  with  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  rejected  it,  is  distinctly  said
and  argued  upon  by  TertuUian  ('  Adv.  Marcion,'  iv.  3),  who  recites  Marcion's  use  of
Gal.  ii.  to  justify  his  rejection  of  the  authority  of  the  apostles,  and  to  justify  his
repudiation  "  of  the  Gospels  published  in  the  name  of  apostles,  and  also  of  apostolical
men."  "James,  Cephas,  and  John"  are  the  apostles  or  apostolical  men  whom
Marcion  knew  to  be  authors  of  Gospels.  In  the  '  De  Came  Christi,'  c.  iii.,  TertuUian
says,  when  simply  arguing  against  the  Gnosticism  of  'Marcion,  "  If  thou  hadst  not
rejected  the  writings  opposed  to  thy  system,  the  Gospel  of  John  would  be  there  to
convince  thee."  The  inference  that  Marcion,  who  reached  Borne  a.d.  140,  knew  and
rejected  John's  Gospel,  strongly  confirms  its  wide  diffusion  in  the  period  already  referred
to,  viz.  A.D.  120—140.

6.  Valentinus  cmd  the  Valentinians.  The  philosophy  of  Valentinus,  the  most
interesting  and  poetic  of  all  the  Gnostic  systems,  cannot  here  be  expounded.  Much
light  has  been  thrown  upon  it  by  Irenasus,  who  was  positively  induced  to  write  the
great  work  against  heresies  by  his  knowledge  of  this  system,  and  of  the  two  parties
Lto  which  his  disciples,  Ptolemseus  ai>d  Heracleon,  drifted.    Moreover,  Hippolytus,  in


xl  mTRODUOTION  TO


the  '  Refutation  of  all   Heresies,'  now  generally  attributed  to  him,  has  given  much
additional  information.

It  is  admitted  that  our  knowledge  of  Valentinns  and  of  his  disciples  comes  to  us
second  hand,  but  we  find  a  decisive  proof  that  Irenseus  wrote  his  work  against  heresies
nut  later  than  a.d.  182,  perhaps  earlier,  and  this  by  a  number  of  coincident  references.'
lienaeus  describes  the  writing  and  system  of  Valentinus  and  his  two  followers,
I'tolcmsus  and  Heracleon,  who  are  generally  mentioned  together.  Now,  Irenasus  says
"  that  the  Valentiiiians  ('  Adv.  Haer.,'  iii.  11.  7)  avail  themselves  in  the  most  complete
luanner  of  the  Gospel  according  to  John  to  demonstrate  their  syzygies  (pair  of  seons)."
IrenaBus  also  asserts  that  they  made  use  of  the  Scriptures,  twisting  them  to  their  own
purpose  (lii.  12.  12).  In  numerous  passages  they  are  shown  to  have  quoted  the
synoptists,  and  (i.  8.  5)  he  quotes  at  length  numerous  passages  from  ch.  i.  1 — 18,
which  were  tortured  to  sustain  their  peculiar  system  of  emanation,  with  other  references  to
their  similar  use  of  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Colossians,  Romans,  Corinthians,  and  Galatians.

Moreover,  TertuUian  (whose  evidence  Davidson  puts  on  one  side,  because,  says  he,
"that  father  knew  very  little  about  Valeutinus")  says  that  Valentinus  made  use  of
"  the  whole  instrument" — the  entire  collection  of  sacred  books  ('  De  Praes.  Hsret.,'  c.  38).

We  have  already  seen  above  that  Irenseus  does  mention  Ptolemaeus  and  Heracleon
by  name,  as  two  of  these  disciples  of  Valentinus,  and  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt
that,  in  his  extant  writings,  the  former  quotes  the  synoptic  Gospels  fully  aud  repeatedly.
Epiphanius  has  preserved  an  epistle  of  Ptolemaeus  to  Flora  (Epiphanius,  'Hser.,'
xxxiii.),  Iti  which  Matt.  xii.  25 ;  six.  6,  8 ;  xv.  5 — 8 ;  v.  17,  38,  39,  are  undoubtedly
imbedded,  revealing  intimate  acquaintance  with  peculiar  characteristic  phraseology  of
the  First  Gospel.  Moreover,  in  the  same  letter  occurs  an  unmistakable  quotation  from
ch.  i.  3.  Clemens  of  Alex.  ('  Strom.,'  iv.  9)  declares  that  Heracleon  was  personally
known  to  Valentinus  himself  (yyaptnos),  which  would  throw  his  date  back  to  at
least  A.D.  160;  for  Valentinus  came  to  Rome  to  proclaim  his  peculiar  philosophy  about
A.D.  140,  and  he  died  in  Cyprus,  a.d.  160 ;  i.e.  Busebius  says,  Valentinus  came  to  Rome
in  the  time  of  Hyginus,  between  a.d.  136  and  140.  Now,  this  fellow-disciple  with
Ptolemseus,  viz.  Heracleon,  actually  wrote  a  commentary  upon  John's  Gospel,  from
which  Origen  makes  laige  quotations.  So  that  we  are  thrown  back  to  the  date  of
A.D.  160 — ^170,  and  possibly  earlier,  when  a  heretic  treats  the  Fourth  Gospel  with  so
much  respect  as  to  regard  it  as  of  high  Christian  authority.  Notwithstanding  this
evidence,  Dr.  Davidson  does  not  allow  that  Valentinus  himself  made  use  of  the  Gospel,
and  suggests  that  it  may  have  been  produced  a  little  before  Heracleon's  time,  and  that
he  found  it  useful  for  his  specific  purpose.  Here,  however,  as  if  to  refute  the  speculation,
we  find,  in  the  'Refutation  of  all  Heresies,'  by  Hipijolylus  (vi.  35  [30,  Eng.  trans.]),
"  All  the  prophets,  therefore,  and  the  Law  spoke  by  means  of  (iirii)  the  demiurge,  a
foolish  god,  he  says  (referriiTg  to  Valentinus  himself).  On  this  account  (i/>i)ffO>  he  says,
saith  the  Saviour, '  All  that  came  before  me  were  thieves  and  robbers.' "  A  similar
method  is  adopted  by  Hippolytus  (viii.  10)  in  quoting,  on  the  authority  of  Valentious,
John  iii.  5,  6.  So  also  (ix.  12),  ch.  xiv.  11 ;  and  the  phrase,  i  ipx^y  toS  xoir/taS  tsutou
in  vi.  52.

There  is,  perhaps,  a  little  vagueness  as  to  whether  Hippolytus,  in  the  sixth  book,
is  referring  to  Valentinus  or  to  his  followers;  but  when  Valentinus's  whole  system
bristles  with  references  to  A6yos,  riariip,  *ui,  Zai^,  'AKitSeta,  Moi/oy^cijs,  IlapaKA^Tai,  as
elements  in  his  philosophic  system,  we  are  convinced  of  one  or  two  things — either  that
the  Fourth  Gospel  was  based  on  Valentinus,  or  that  the  latter  made  use  of  this  Scripture,
as  of  the  rest,  in  defence  of  his  system.  Putting  the  simple,  natural,  biblical  use  of
these  terms  in  John's  prologue  and  elsewhere  against  the  artificial  cumbrous  use  of
them  in  Valentinus, -with  all  the  other  evidence  of  the  hij;h  value  put  upon  the  Gospel
at  this  time,  it  becomes  as  nearly  certain  as  is  possible  in  such  regions  that  Valentinus
himself  was  familiar  with  the  Fourth  Gospel.  This,  then,  throws  the  existence  of  the
Gk>8pel  back  to  the  very  beginning  of  the  second  century.  -  In  this  conclusion  both
Bleck  and  Keim,  as  well  as  Buneen,  agree.

•  The  death  of  Eleutherus,  in  A.D.  190,  after  the  appearance  of  Theodotion'g  translation
of  the  Old  Testament,  whioh  we  are  told  by  Epiphanius  came  out  in  the  reign  of  Commodus
(A.D.  180 — 190),  and  which  is  dated  in  the  '  Paschal  Chron.'  a.d.  181,  during  the  consulate
of  Marcellus  and  CElian,  is  one  of  the  data.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xll

Hilgenfeld  ('  Das  Evangeliutn  und  die  Briefe  Johannis  nach  ihrem  Lebrbegriff
dargestellt : '  1849)  seeks  by  a  most  elaborate  process  to  trace  tbe  subject-matter  of  the
prologue  and  the  Logos-idea,  that  of  God  and  redemption,  to  the  Gnostic  speculations,
especially  those  of  Yalentinus.  Thoma  Qoc.  cit.,  p.  822)  admits  that  the  use  of  the
Gospel  by  Valentinus  is  neither  chronologically  nor  dogmaticaUy  impossible,  though
it  is  indemonstrable.

7.  Basilides  and  the  Basilideans.  We  now  approach  another  name  of  still  more
importance;  for  if  Basilides  can  be  shown  to  have  quoted  or  used  the  Gospel,  it  is
morally  certain  it  was  not  produced  after  the  time  of  Yalentinus.  For,  according  to  the
statements  of  Jerome  ('De  Viris  111.,'  c.  xxi.),  he  must  have  died  after  a.d.  132.
Eusebius  places  his  activity  under  Hadrian  (a.d.  117 — 138).  Hippolytus  ('  Eef.  Hser.,'
vii.  8,  Eng.  trans.):  "Basilides  and  Isidorus,  the  true  sons  and  disciples  of  Basilides,
say  that  Matthias  communicated  to  them  secret  discourses,  which,  being  specially
instructed,  he  heard  from  the  Saviour."  Whether  the  two  heresiarchs  lied  or  not
about  Matthias,  they  could  hardly  have  laid  such  a  claim  if  their  date  of  birth  and
age  had  rendered  this  incredible  or  impossible.  Bpiphanius  ('  Hasr.,'  xxiii.  1 — 7 ;  xxiv.  1)
tells  us  that  Basilides  was  teaching  in  Antioch  before  he  went  to  Alexandria,  and
at  Alexandria  he  was  the  predecessor  of  Yalentinus.

Now,  if  Basilides  made  use  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  we  are  thrown  back  to  the  very
first  years  of  the  second  century  as  the  latest  period  when  it  could  have  been  written.

The  question  of  questions  is  whether  Hippolytus,  in  discussing  his  philosophy  and
quoting  his  quotations,  had  the  great  work  of  Basilides  before  him,  and  referred  to
Basilides  himself  or  to  some  later  Basilidean.  If  we  take  his  general  method  into
account,  that  he  contrasts  the  system  of  Basileides  with  the  school  of  Valentinus,  and
that  when  he  refers  to  a  school  he  uses  the  term  <pa<rlv,  or  xar'  aiirois,  or  \eyou(ri,  and
when  he  refers  to  a  man  or  to  a  hook  he  uses  the  singular  4>^(ri,  we  can  hardly  enter-
tain a  reasonable  doubt  that  Hippolytus  was  quoting  (totidem  verbis)  the  method  in
which  Basilides  defended  his  views.  Let  the  whole  (bk.  vii.  22  [8,  Eng.  trans.])
passage  be  read  in  which  Hippolytus  represents  Basilides  quoting  from  the  Gospels :
"He  was  the  true  Light  that  lighteth  every  man  coming  into  the  world."  High
authorities  and  great  critics  concur  in  the  belief,  if  not  the  moral  certainty,  that  this  is
the  case  (see  Sanday ,  lib.  cit,  pp.  298,  etc.).  See  also  ch,  ii.  4  of  the  Gospel  in  bk.  vii.  27
(15,  Eng.  trans.);  Matthew  Arnold, '  God  and  the  Bible,'  p.  268,  concludes  that  Basilides
had  before  him  (a.d.  125)  the  Fourth  Gospel;  Mangold's  edition  of '  Bleek's  Einleitung,'
265.  It  is  true  that,  in  the  midst  of  the  passage,  Hippolytus  does  use  the  term  \4yov(ri
ovToi,  although  in  the  former  part  of  it  he  does  make  special  reference  by  name  to
Basilides  himself;  and,  as  if  going  back  to  him,  after  a  momentary  digression.  Thus
he  suggests  the  fact  that  he  had  the  work  of  Basilides  open  before  him  (art.  on
"  Basilides  "  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  Christian  Biography ').

8.  Ophites,  or  Naaseni.  Baur  admits  that  the  sect  calling  themselves  by  this
name  were  amongst  the  earliest  of  the  Gnostics  ('  Das  Chr.  und  die  Chr.  Kirtihe  der
ersten  Jahrh.,'  p.  192).  Irenseus  (i.  29. 1  and  31.  3)  speaks  of  them  as  predecessors
of  the  school  of  Valentinus,  its  "  fathers  and  mothers ; "  and  Hippolytus  (vi.  6)  even
names  '  Simon  Magus '  among  their  offshoots.  They  were  subdivided,  according  to  him,
into  several  groups — Perataa,  Oainites,  Sethians,  Justinians.  They  all,  in  their  violent
hostility  to  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament,  reverenced  the  serpent ;  henoe  their  title,
cither  from  the  Hebrew  vim,  nachash,  a  serpent,  or  from  the  Greek  6<l>ts.  The  serpent
was  regarded  by  them  as  the  author  of  intelligence  and  of  emancipation  to  enslaved
man.  Consequently,  "the  seed  of  the  serpent"  from  Cain  to  Judas  received  homage
from  them.  Intense  dualists,  charging  evil  of  all  kinds  upon  man's  corporeal  frame,
they  sought  in  "  intelligence  "  (yvSoris)  deliverance  from  evil.  Now,  the  New  Testament
affords  strong  evidence  of  the  existence  of  these  sectaries  and  Gnostic  speculations  in
the  first  century.  If  we  can  accept  tbe  authenticity  of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  there  is
abundant  proof  of  such  a  tendency,  against  which  those  Epistles  are  a  warning.  So
strong  is  the  protest  contained  in  them  against  "  endless  genealogies,"  against  the  evil
inherent  in  things  created  by  God,  against  a  "yva<ris  falsely  so  called,"  that  many  have
endeavoured  to  drag  the  pastoral  Epistles  down  to  the  time  of  Marcion,  in  order  to
account  for  these  references.  Other  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  also  contested  on  the  sartie
ground,  such  as  the  Epistle  to  the  Colussians,  are  equally  explicit  (ii.  18)  (see  Light*


ilii  INTBODUOTION  TO


foot's  '  Comm.  on  Coloss.').  The  first  reply  to  such  a  proceeding  is  simply  this — thai
the  germs  of  Grmstic  evil  lay  in  the  religious  speculations  of  the  first  century,  and  were
derived  from  Oriental  sourcea.  Moreover,  satisfactory  external  evidence  for  these
pastoral  Epistles,  at  much  earlier  date  than  a.d.  150,  is  forthcoming.  They  aw  proof
of  the  coexistence  of  the  perilous  dualism  in  the  first  century.  The  genuineness  of
the  Ignatian  letters  would  establish  Iwyond  contradiction  the  much  earlier  date  of  the
pastoral  Epistles.

But  fiirther,  unmistakable  proof  is  found  in  the  Apocalypse  (ii.  24)  of  the  use
of  Gnostic  phraseology  by  the  teachers  in  Thyatira.  Their  knowledge  of  "  the  depths
of  Satan,"  and  of  other  mysteries  of  evil,  is  sternly  repudiated  by  the  Lord ;  and  St.  Paul
is  believed  by  Godet  to  have  encountered  the  same  hostile  spirit  in  Corinth.  When
Paul  hints  that  some  "  in  the  S/Jtrit "  actually  dared  to  "  call  Jesus  accuried,"  he  is
in  all  probability  referring  to  those  who  separated  "the  Christ"  from  Jesus,  believing  that
the  former  was  an  emanation  from  God  who  came  down  to  earth,  and  that  the  human  life
of  Jesus  was  united  to  him  by  the  loosest  vinculum;  that  the  Christ  could  neither  be
incarnate,  suffer,  nor  die,  nor  be  raised  again.  The  existence  of  such  a  party,  who  called
themselves  the  "  Christ "  party,  who  repudiated  Jesus  Christ,  who  denied  the  resurrection
of  C/irjsi,  though  they  might  have  allowed  the  death  or  resuscitation  of  c/esus,  does
much  to  explain  the  allusions  in  the  two  undoubted  Epistles  to  Corinthians  (see  2  Cor.
xL  3,  4;  1  Cor.  xii.  3).  This  hypothesis  is  confirmed  by  the  statement  of  Epiphanius
that  1  Corinthians  was  written  against  the  error  of  Cerinthus.  Now,  it  becomes  almost
certain,  from  the  statement  of  Polycarp  (recorded  by  Irenaus,  iii.  3.  4),  that  in  the
later  years  of  John  and  Cerinthus,  these  two  men  came  into  contact  at  Ephesus;
consequently,  the  errors  of  Cerinthus,  who  held  views  akin  to  the  Ophites,  may  have
infected  the  Church  at  Corinth.  Therefore  the  concurring  testimony  of  Paul's  Epistles,
of  the  Apocalypse,  of  Irensus,  and  of  Epiijhanius,  shows  tlie  existence  of  the  evil  towards
the  end  of  the  first  century,  even  so  early  as  a.d.  56 — 68.  And  such  a  view  aids  the
reception  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  as  well  as  the  Corinthian  Epistles.  But  great  additional
light  is  thrown  upon  the  subject  by  the  writings  of  Hippolytus  ('Eef.  H»r.,'  bk.  v.).
He  described  at  great  length  the  views  of  these  Ophites  or  their  subordinate  sects,  and
regarded  them  as  the  earliest  of  the  Gnostics,  and  he  also  reports  the  uses  they  made
of  testimonies  from  the  four  Gospels.  The  quotations  made  by  them  from  the  Fourth
Gospel  (so  far  as  this  question  of  date  is  concerned)  are  of  very  explicit  character.
Thus  ch.  iii.  6;  i.  3,  4;  ii.  1 — H;  with  strong  references  to  ch.  vi.  53.  Ch.  viii.  21;
xiii.  33;  x.  9;  iv.  21;  ix.  1,  were  cited  by  them.  Hippolytus^  moreover,  gives  extracts
from  the  books  of  the  Peratse,  in  which  John's  Gospel  is  frequently  quoted.  We  can-
not say  positively  when  the  books  were  written,  but  we  have  seen  reasons  for  believing
that  there  is  much  in  the  New  Testament  to  justify  belief  that  the  statements  of
Hippolytus  and  Irenfflus  are  correct  when  they  assign  to  them  great  antiquity.  It  is
highly  probable  that  they  were  among  the  earliest  to  try  and  twist  to  their  own
purpose  the  sacred  words  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.

9.  Conclusion.  Our  conclusion  is  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  quoted  by  heretics  and
Christian  philosophers,  by  apostolic  Fathers  and  early  ai>ologists,  by  pseudo-epigraphic
writers  and  historians,  by  the  harmonist  and  commeutator,  in  one  stream  from  the
close  of  the  first  century  to  the  close  of  the  second,  when  we  find  it  classed  without
any  hesitaliua  by  Ireuasus,  Atheuagoras,  and  Theophylact  as  John's  Gospel.  It  is  used
by  the  Clementine  homilists,  the  most  extreme  form  of  Jewish  Christianity ;  and  by
Gnostics,  who  went  so  far  in  their  antagonism  to  Judaism  as  to  call  themselves  by  the
most  opprobrious  names  iu  Jewish  history.  The  apologies  ami  dialogue  of  Justin
reveal  its  presence,  as  the  original  of  a  vast  amount  of  independent  B|  eculation.  The
external  evidence,  therefore,  is  as  strong  as  lor  that  of  the  synoptisis — a  fact  which
Keim  admits.  It  is  immeasurably  greater  thaii  for  half  of  the  well-known  classical
compositions.  So  far  as  its  existence  is  concerned,  there  can  be  no  manner  of  question,
nor  for  its  wide  diffusion,  nor  for  the  general  respect  in  which  it  must  have  been  held.
There  is  not  the  smallest  trace  of  the  friction  or  excitement  which  its  production  in
the  middle  of  the  second  century  would  have  produced.

We  conclude  this  part  of  the  subject  with  the  external  testimony  of  its  closing
verses,  which  correspond  with  the  narrative  preserved  in  the  Muratorian  Canon.  No
manuscripts  have  been  found  without  these  verses,  and,  as  they  use  the  present  tetse,


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xllU

luipTvpSv,  in  contradiiitmction  with  the  ypdrjias,  a  very  strong  evidence  is  supplied  that  they
are  the  appendix  of  the  Ephesian  presbyters  before  the  death  of  the  venerable  writer,
afBrming  their  autLorship  and  their  autlienticity.  Moreover,  as  Luthardt  observes,  the
heading  in  all  the  njanuscrij'ts.  Karat  'laimrii',  rests  upon  the  tradition  that  accompanied
the  document  from  the  first.

VI.  The  Canonioitt  of  thb  Fourth  Gospel.

By  this  we  mean  the  proof  that  it  takes  its  place,  with  the  other  Gospels  and  the
most  authentic  Epistles,  in  the  oldest  collections  of  sacred  books,  in  the  earliest  versious
of  them  into  other  languages,  and  the  most  celebrated  and  earliest-known  manuscripts
of  the  New  Testament,  and  sacred  lists  of  the  earliest  councils  which  treated  of  the
question.  The  whole  of  this  evidence  is  not  forthcoming  for  the  Apocalypse,  nor  for
all  the  general  Epistles.  The  Fourth  Gospel,  however,  is  contained  (1)  in  the  Peshito
Syriac  of  the  second  century,  which  is  destitute  of  the  Apocalypse,  of  the  Epistles  of  Jude,
2  Peter,  and  2  and  3  John ;  (2)  in  the  Old  Latin,  which  translation,  though  prepared
in  the  second  century,  does  not  contain  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  nor  2  Peter,  nor
(?)  James ;  (3)  in  the  Muratorian  Canon ;  (4)  in  the  Caflon  of  Origen  (a.d.  184 — 253)  ;  (5)
in  the  Canon  of  Eusebius,  who  regarded  the  Epistles  of  James,  of  Jude,  2  Peter,  2  and  3
John,  as  disputed,  and  the  Apocalypse  as  spurious;  (6)  in  Codex  Vaticanus  (B)  and
Codex  Sinaiticus  (N)  of  the  fourth  century;  (7)  in  the  Canon  of  Atllana^lus;  and  (8)
in  the  Canon  of  the  Councils  of  Laodicea  (a.d.  364),  the  Third  Council  of  Carthage
(a.d.  397),  and  the  Canons  of  Epiphanius,  Jerome,  Augustine,  and  Clirysostom.

These  facts  do  not,  per  se,  establish  authenticity  or  greater  positive  antiquity  for  the
document  than  their  own  dates ;  yet  they  reveal  an  amount  of  widespread  belief  and
reverence  on  the  part  of  learned  and  by  no  means  credulous  writers,  by  bodies  of  men,
by  Cliurches  diffused  over  Asia,  Europe,  and  Africa,  from  Mesopotamia  to  Gaul,  from
Alexandria  and  Antioch  to  Smyrna  and  Koine.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  such  a
conibinntion  of  facts  as  compatible  with  the  late  origin  of  the  document,  by  some
utterly  unknown  and  untrustworthy  pseudepigrapher.  Other  questions,  sometimes
associated  with  the  external  evidence,  seem  to  me  better  discussed  when  we  have  made
further  inquiries  into  the  phenomena  of  the  authorship.

Having,  then,  made  it  bighly  probable,  if  not  a  demonstrable  fact,  that  this  Fourth
Gospel  was  known,  quoted,  and  accepted  as  an  authority  for  the  facts  and  teachings  of
the  new  faith,  and  having  shown  that  it  is  difBcult,  if  not  impossible,  to  put  its  origina-
tion later  than  the  commencement  of  the  second  century,  we  proceed  to  investigate —

VII.  The  Inteunal  Evidence  op  its  Authoeship.

1.  Tht  author  must  have  heen  a  Jew.  Great  effort  is  made  by  many  writers  to  prove
that,  whoever  wrote  it,  he  could  not  have  been  a  Jew,  but  must  have  been  some  Christian
Gentile  of  marl<ed  hostility  to  the  Jews  and  their  race,  and  that  the  author  displays  an
ignorance  or  indilleience  to  the  sacred  people  incompatible,  of  course,  with  his  being  the
Apostle  John,  the  son  of  Zobedee.  This  impression  is  created  by  calling  attention  to
a  few  peculiarities  of  the  Gospel,  which  seem  to  point  in  that  direction,  but  which  are
abundantly  counterbalanced  by  other  most  important  characteristics  of  the  document.

In  proof  of  the  position,  (1)  Dr.  Davidson  (ii.  427)  calls  attention  to  the  contrast
between  the  Old  'J'estameut  doctrine  of  the  creation  of  all  things  out  of  nothing,  and
the  statement  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  that  all  things  were  formed  by  the  Word  from  pre-
existent  materials.  How  that  can  be  possibly  reconciled  with  ch.  i.  3  it  is  difficult  to
see.  Other  statements  follow,  comparing  the  richer,  riper,  teaching  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  with  the  iJld  Testament  doctrine  of  Hades,  of  judgment.  It  is  argued  that  no
Jew  could  ha'e  spoken  of  eternal  life  on  this  side  the  grave,  and  that  the  revolution  of
thought  thus  indicated  carries  the  authorship  beyond  the  limits  of  Judaism.  In  reply,
we  call  attention  to  the  distinct  references  to  "judgment "  and  "  the  resurrection  of  the
dead  "  in  ch.  v.  29,  as  well  as  to  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  Paul  touching  the  essential
nature  of  eternal  life.  Moreover,  the  argument  of  our  opponents  here  precludes  the
posaibility  that  the  horizon  of  this  Jew  should  have  been  enlarged  by  his  contact  with,
to  say  the  least,  the  greatest  Teacher  that  the  world  had  ever  known.  Was  not  St,
Paul  a  Jew,  "  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews  "  ?


INTRODUCTION  TO


(2)  The  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  ia  charged  with  ignorance  of  topographical  fads
which  •  Jew  would  never  haro  displayed.  The  ignorance  of  enlightened  Englishnien,
in  the  days  of  school  boards  and  large  maps  and  ordnance  surveys,  about  geographical
facts  is  no  proof  that  they  are  not  Englishmen ;  and  ten  thousand  similar  illustrations
might  be  given  of  far  more  weight  from  well-known  writers.  But  what  are  these  signs
of  ignorance  ?  "  Bethany  beyond  Jonlan  "  (ch.  i.  28).  The  modem  and  approved  revision
of  the  text.  This  was  a  place  of  which  Origen  was  ignorant  in  his  day,  a  fact  which  probably
explains  the  alteration  into  Bethabara,  "the  house  of  the  ford,"  in  lieu  of  Bethany,  "the
house  of  the  boat."  Different  etymologies  are  given  of  the  word  "Bethany,"  as  "house
of  dates,"  etc.,  which  may  have  suited  the  well-known  Bethany  (see  notes  on  ch.  i.  28).
It  is  clear  that  the  author  was  not  confounding  it  with  Bethany  near  Jerupalem,  by
the  very  phrase,  "  Bethany  heyond  Jordan^  and  by  hiS  close  and  exact  .statement  as  to
tlie  distance  of  the  well-known  Bethany  from  Jerusalem  (ch.  xi.  18).  We  find  in  the
gospel  narrative  two  Antiochs,  two  Bethsaidas,  two  Caesareas :  why  should  there  not
have  been  two  little  villages  called  Bethany?  Ch.  ix.  7,  "  Siloam,  which  is  by  inter-
pretation. Sent,"  is  another  reference  which  is  supposed  to  prove  the  author's  ignorance.
The  latest  investigations  show  that,  even  to  the  present  day,  can  be  traced  the  link  of
connection  between  the  waters  of  Siloam  and  the  Fountain  of  the  Virgin.  That  the
evangelist  should  have  seen  some  typical  meaning  in  the  very  name  is  essentially  Jewish.
Now,  against  these  supposed  flaws  may  be  set  his  accurate  statements  about  "the  pool
of  Bethesrla  and  the  five  porches"  (ch.  v.  2).  Again,  the  Ephraim  near  the  wilderness  (ch.
xi.  54)  is  identified  with  Ophjah  (1  Sam.  xiii.  17) ;  the  "  iEnon  near  to  Salira,"  of  ch.  iii.
23  is  identified  by  the  modern  explorers.  "  The  brook  Kedron  "  (ch.  xviii.  1).  The  Prs-
torium  is  accurately  referred  to  in  ch.  xviii.  28 ;  the  "  Gabbatha  "  of  ch.  xix.  13  is  given
in  the  Aramaic  form,  as  of  one  acquainted  with  the  place  before  the  fall  of  the  city.
Besides  this,  the  Sycharof  John  iv.  5,  which  cannot  be  identified  with  Shechem,  though
it  was  once  thought  to  be  a  mere  corruption  of  the  name.  It  turns  out  thai  this
"  Sychar"  has  been  identified  conclusively  with  a  village  still  standing  under  the  name
of  'Askar,  which  reveals  traces  of  great  antiquity  ('Beport  of  the  Palest.  Expl.  Fund,'
1877,  p.  149 ;  and  1876,  p.  197).  Add  to  this  a  number  of  minute  topographical
touches,  more  abundant  than  in  most  books  of  the  New  Testament :  "  Solomon's  porch  "
(oh.  X.  23);  "the  treasury  in  the  temple"  (ch.  viii.  20);  the  scenery  of  the  sea  of
Galilee,  of  Tiberias;  and,  as  Westcott  admirably  indicates,  the  decoration  of  the  temple
by  the  great  golden  vine  which  adorned  its  exterior  (see  note,  ch.  xiv.  31 ;  xv.  1 — 7).

(3)  The  apparent  antipathy  of  the  writer  to  "  the  Jews,"  who  are  said  always  to  be
spoken  of  as  hostile,  and  as  people  from  whom  the  writer  regarded  himself  as  separated ;
e.g. "  The  purifying  of  the  Jews  "  (ch.ii.  6) ;  "  The  Jews'  Passover  "  (ch.  ii.  13) ;  "  A  feast
of  the  Jews  "  (ch.  v.  1 ;  vi.  4^ ;  "  The  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury  "  (ch.  xix.  40).  But
fhese  expressions  are  nothing  more  than  what  a  narrator,  writing  for  Gentiles,  would  be
sure  to  adopt,  when  giving  them  information,  and  there  is  no  opprobrium  involved  in  any
of  them.  'I'he  words  were  written  down  many  years  after  the  events  occurred,  and  when
the  Jewish  people  were  scattered,  and  had  proclaimed  themselves  bitterly  hostile  to  the
faith.  There  are,  however,  other  passages  where  "  the  Jews  "  are  referred  to  as  distinct
Irom  the  i  Sxf<os  of  Galiteans,  and  in  opposition  to  the  Lord.  This  is  a  terrible  fact  in
their  history ;  but  other  and  countervailing  statements  should  be  pondered.  The  writer
studiously  calls  attention  to  the  division  of  opinion  among  these  Jews,  and  to  certain
remarkable  exceptions,  such  as  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  (ch.  iii.  1 ;  vii.  50).
He  speaks  of  the  Jews  as  Christ's  own  people,  as  oi  IfSioi, "  who  received  him  not"  except
in  part.  There  was  always  "a  division  among  them."  As  a  nation,  they  rejected
their  Lord ;  as  individuals,  they  received  him  (ch.  ii.  23,  iroAAol  iirl<TTev(rai> ;  iii.  2,
olSa/iev,  etc. ;  iii.  26,  vivrts  ifxovTai  irpbs  auTw ;  iv.  1,  Jesus  made  more  disciples  in
Judiea  than  John  did;  iv.  22,  "^  aar-qpia  is  from  the  Jews."  The  true  interpretation  of
ch.  iv.  43 — 45  is  that  Jesus  considered  the  land  of  Judsea  to  be  par  excellence  "  his  own
country."

The  whole  narrative  in  John  v.  shows  a  bittei  enmity  to  Jesus  when  he  assumed
an  independence  of  Pharisaic  interpretation  of  the  sabbatic  law ;  but  the  narrative  is
interpenetrated  throughout  with  Jewish  ideas  of  the  sabbath,  of  the  Scriptures,  and  of
Moses.  In  ch.  vii.  the  next  visit  to  Jerusalem  is  characterized  by  the  resuscitation  of
their  malice,  and  reveals  "  jthp  for  of  the  Jews ;  '■  but  it  shows  also  the  knowledge  of  the


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xlr

minutiiB  of  the  Jewish  law  of  circumcision  (ver.  23),  and  the  current  notion  concerning
the  Biao-irofia  t5»  'EAA^yBK.  Mnreover,  the  result  of  the  solemn  debate  is  that  "  many
believed  on  him"  (vers.  31,  41,  46).  The  seventh  and  eighth  chapters  reveal  the
author's  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  ceremonial  of  the  lights  and  the  pouring  of
water  in  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  In  ch.  viii.  31  he  speaks  expressly  of  "the  Jews
which  believed  on  him ; "  and  it  is  not  at  all  incompatible  with  their  position  that  they
should  have  ignored  ri^zht  through  their  history  that  they  had  been  really  in  bondage
to  any  man,  as  Abraham's  seed.  In  ch.  x.  19 — 21  a  division  among  them  is  expressly
noticed  (cf.  ch.  x.  42 ;  xi.  4,  48 — xii.  11).

The  Pharisees  are  the  mouthpieces  of  the  purely  Jewish  feeling  of  bigoted  attach-
ment to  the  Law,  which  they  had  monopolized,  and  which  the  evangelist  and  our  Lord
spoke  of  as  "  their  Law,"  "  your  Law,"  but  which  Pharisees  had  misunderstood  and  per-
verted. The  priests  and  Sadducees  were  his  opponents  as  organs  of  sacerdotal  power
and  political  influence ;  and  both  these  tendencies,  sometimes  in  opposition,  occasion-
ally in  unhallowed  agreement,  are  represented  with  a  delicacy  »nd  accuracy  of  treatment
such  as  no  one  but  a  genuine  Palestinian  Jew  could  have  effected.  Moreover,  by  the
t6rni  "  the  Jews,"  the  writer  evidently  connotes  the  ruling  party,  the  chief  authorities
in  Jerusalem,  as  contrasted  with  the  Galilean  multitudes.

One  reference  of  a  prscisely  similar  usage  is  found  in  the  peculiarly  Jewish  Gospel  of
Matthew  (xxviii.  15),  showing  that  this  mode  of  speaking  of  "  the  Jews  "  was  not  con-
fined to  the  Fourth  Gospel  (see  also  Luke  xxiii.  51,  and  numerous  expressions  in  the
Pauline  Epistles :  2  Cor.  xi.  24  ;  Gal.  ii.  14 ;  1  Tbess.  ii.  14  and  also  Bev.  ii.  9  and  iii.
9 ;  Gal.  i.  13,  14 ;  Titus  i.  14).  Numerous  treatises  have  discussed  this  use  of  the  word
"the  Jews"  (A.  Airy,  'J&us  et  les  Juifs  dans  le  4*  Bvang.,'  Str.,  1866;  cf.  Eeuss,
'  Hist,  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,'  p.  221,  Eng.  trans.).

Another  supposed  indication  of  the  fact  of  the  writer's  ignorance  of  Jewish  customs
is  that  Annas  is  spoken  of  as  dpxKpe*is  ("high  priest"),  while  Caiaphas,  his  son-in-law,
is  also  repeatedly  called  such  at  the  same  time  (ch.  xi.  49 ;  xviii.  13,  19,  22,  24).  It  is
said  that  the  evangelist  thought  of  Annas  and  Caiaphas  as  performing  the  functions
alternately  every  year,  seeing  that  "  that  same  year  "  is  an  explanatory  addition  to  the
name  of  Caiaphas.  This  cannot  be  the  solution  of  the  supposed  difficulty ;  because,  the
"  same  year  "  in  which  Caiaphas  prophesied  involuntarily  the  expiatory  death  of  Christ,
he  represents  Annas  as  the  high  priest.  The  fourth  evangelist  is  not  the  only  writer
who  suggests  the  same  supposed  inaccuracy.  In  Luke  iii.  2  the  two  are  spoken  of
together  as  high  priests,  and  in  Acts  iv.  6  Annas  is  again  spoken  of  as  high  priest.
Dr.  Davidson  says  it  will  not  do  to  suppose  that  he  retained  the  official  title  after  he  had
been  deposed,  because  Ishmael,  Eleazar,  and  Simon,  his  relatives,  who  held  the  ofBce
between  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  would  also  have  retained  the  same  title.  But  we  cannot
prove  that  they  did  not.  They  are  never  referred  to  by  the  evangelist  John  or  Luke.
Moreover,  a  vast  difference  is  obvious  between  the  old  man  who  was  the  legal  high
priest,  and  whose  influence  was  great,  though  not  ofiScially  recognized  by  the  Eoman
government.  Caiaphas  was  the  man  from  whom  alone  Pilate  would  have  received  the
( fficial  charge  ;  and  therefore,  as  John  says,  Annas  sent  Jesus  bound  to  Caiaphas.  The
synoptists  nan  ate  more  at  length  what  took  place  in  the  court  of  Caiaphas.  Our  evan-
gelist, as  being  known  to  Annas  (ch.  xviii.  15, 16),  was  likely,  as  an  eye-witness,  to
have  given  a  more  definite  account,  and  one  supplementary  to  the  general  statement  of
the  synoptists.  The  exprc  ssion,  "  that  same  year,"  is  best  understood  of  the  solemnity
with  which  John  regarded  the  practical  duties  of  the  high  priest  de  facto  on  the
occasion  when  the  incarnate  Word  was  rejected  by  his  own  people.  Not  only  the
Fourth  Gospel,  but  the  other  three,  repeatedly  use  the  expression,  oi  apxiefeis,  of
the  most  distinguished  priests,  including  the  heads  of  the  courses,  the  president  of  the
Sanhedrin,  etc.,  in  days  when  the  old  ofBcial  title  was  held  in  fee  from  the  Boman
power.  The  rigidity  of  the  rule  that  there  should  be  only  one  high  priest  was  not
observed  even  in  the  reign  of  David,  when  Zadok  and  Abiathar  both  held  the  office  at
the  same  time.

(4)  Dr.  Davidson  considers  that  a  similar  argument  may  he  drawn  from  the  fact
that  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  the  Galileans  are  classed  among  "  the  Jews  "  who  were  hostile
to  Jesus,  whereas  he  says  that  "  in  the  synoptists,  the  Galilseans  are  the  warm  adherents
Knd  friends  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth."     Surely  he  could  not  sufliciently  have  borae  in  mind


iM  INTRODUCTION  TO


the  repeated  attempts  upon  Christ's  life  at  Nazareth  and  at  Capernaum ;  the  fact  that
Jesus  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head,  alone  mentioned  by  the  synoptrsts ;  that  Herod
Antipas  of  Gralilee  sought  to  kill  him ;  that  the  long  conflict  with  the  Pharisees  took
place  in  Galilee,  and  one  which  culminated  in  the  endeavour  to  take  him  by  force  and
confine  him  as  a  madman  (Mark  ii.,  iii.).  True,  the  multitudes  were  deeply  impressed,
but  their  fickleness  and  unspirituality  are  quite  in  harmony  with  the  language  about
the  Galilseans  attributed  by  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  our  Lord.

This  negative  argument  or  reply  to  objections  is  independent  of  the  fact  that
throughout  the  Gospel  there  are  abundant  traces  of  that  thorough'  and  intimate
acquaintance  with  Old  Testament  Scriptures  and  Hebrew  ideas,  which  only  a  Jew
would  be  likely  to  possess.  The  entire  references  of  the  prologue  are  based  on  Old
Testament  ideas.  His  reference  to  "the  Prophet"  (ch.  i.  21;  iv.  25)  ;  the  zeal  for
the  sanctity  of  the  temple  (ch.  ii.  13 — 20),  involving  chronological  details  about  the
period  occupied  in  its  building ;  his  knowledge  of  Old  Testament  history,  as  in  the
reference  to  the  image  of  the  serpent  (ch.  iii.  14);  the  subtle  ascription  to  Jesus
by  the  Baptist  of  the  title  of  Bridegroom  of  the  true  Israel — an  idea  which  pervades
prophetic  Scripture  (Jer.  ii.  2 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  8 ;  Hos.  iL  19,  20) ;  the  allusion  to  the
various  feasts,  e.g.  the  Passovers  (oh.  ii.,  vi.,  xii.,  xviii.),  the  unnamed  feast  (ch.  v.),  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles  (ch.  vii.),  the  Feast  of  the  Dedication  (ch.  x.  22)  ;  the  references
to  Moses  (ch.  v.  iS  ;  vii.  22),  and  to  Abraham  (ch.  viiL  33,  37,  56—58);  confirm  the
hypothesis.  His  declaration  that  "  the  Scriptures  cannot  be  broken  "  (ch.  z.  35) ;  that
what  is  written  in  the  prophets  and  in  the  Law  is  of  commanding  authority;  that  the
Scripture  must  be  fulfilled  (ch.  xiii.  18;  xvii.  12;  xv.  25);  but  pre-eminently  and
chiefly  the  repeated  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  where  the  evangelist  or  our
Lord  shows  that  these  quotations,  as  thus  reported,  are  not  dependent  upon  the  LXX.
Westcott  has  analyzed  them  carefully  (see  also  Turpie,  '  Old  Testment  in  the  New ').
There  are  fourteen  in  all — seven  made  by  the  evangelist,  five  by  Jesus,  two  by  others ;
and,  among  these,  four  almost  verball}'  agree  with  the  accurate  translation  of  the
Hebrew  by  the  LXX. ;  three  agree  with  the  Hebrew  against  the  LXX. :  ch.  xix.  37  (cf.
Eev.  i.  7).  This  quotation  from  Zechariah,  which  agrees  with  a  translation  found  in
Theodotion  and  Symmachus ;  the  quotation  in  ch.  vi.  45  of  Isa.  liv.  13  and  in  ch,  xiii.
18  of  Ps.  xli.  9  (xiii.  10) ;  lastly,  one  celebrated  passage  (ch.  xii.  40)  difiers  from  both
the  Hebrew  and  LXX.  where  they  do  in  the  main  agree  and  are  accurately  quoted  in
Matthew  and  Acts ;  others  differ  from  the  Hebrew  and  LXX.  where  these  do  not  agree ;
but  there  is  no  case  where  the  Fourth  Gospel  agrees  with  the  LXX.  against  the  Hebrew.

2.  The  author  must  have  heen  a  Palestinian  rather  than  an  Alexandrine  Jew.  The
above  remarks  go  far  to  prove  that  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  was  a  Hebrew,  and  a
Pale-tinian  Jew.  But  there  is  another  argument,  which  has  been  made  much  of,  in
disproof  of  this  position,  and  which  must  be  examined  with  some  detail.  It  has  often
been  said  that  the  author  was  an  Alexandrine  Jew,  if  a  Jew  at  all,  familiar  with  the
exegetio  and  philosophical  arguments  of  Philo-Judseus  and  his  compeers,  and  that
we  owe  this  marvellous  document  to  the  culture  and  Hellenic  influences  of  early
Neoplatonism  rather  than  to  the  teaching  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  veritable
tradition  of  the  discourse  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  This  kind  of  remark  is  taken  up  and
endorsed  by  men  like  J.  Stuart  Mill.'  The  more  or  less  active  dependence  of  the
evangelist  upon  the  Alexandrine  school  is  asserted  with  more  or  less  of  confidence  even
by  Liicke,  Bleek,  Baur,  and  others.  Keim  ('Life  of  Jesus  of  Nazara,'  Eng.  trans.,
vol.  i.  pp.  152, 167)  admits  the  great  originality  of  the  author,  who  adopted  and  modified
in  many  ways  the  Philonian  Logos ;  and  Dr.  Davidson  says  that  the  "  Incarnation  is
alien  to  the  Philonian  conceptions,"  and  that  an  "  important  link  between  Philonism

'  'Three  EsBays,'  p.  254;  "What  could  be  added  or  interpolated  (into  the  teaching  of
Jesus)  by  a  disciple  we  may  see  in  the  mystical  parts  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John — miittei
imparted  from  Philo  and  the  Alexandrian  Platonists,  and  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Saviour,
in  long  speeches  about  himself,  such  as  the  other  Gospels  contain  not  the  slightest  vestige
of,  though  pretended  to  have  been  delivered  on  oooasious  of  tlie  deepest  interest,  wlien  his
principal  followers  were  all  present ;  most  prominently  at  the  Last  Supper.  The  East  was
full  of  men  who  could  have  stolen  any  quantity  of  this  poor  stuff,  as  the  multitudinous
Oriental  sects  of  Gnostics  did."  The  passage  is  a  melancholy  instance  of  the  utter  careless-
oesi  of  Mr.  Hill.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xlvli

and  the  Logos  theory  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  missing  " — a  link  which  he  finds  in  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  and  in  some  of  Paul's  Epistles.  Luthardt  and  Godet  boldly
repudiate  the  influence  of  the  purely  Alexandrine  school  upon  the  Fourth  Gospel.*

We  must  admit  that  there  is  a  peculiar  phraseology  adopted  by  the  author  of  the
Fourth  Gospel  which  demands  soma  explanation,  and  which,  to  dissever  altogether
"  root  and  branch  "  from  the  Alexandrian  school  of  theosophy  and  biblical  interpreta-
tion, is  unreasonable  and  unnecessary.  Luthardt  and  Weiss,  Holeman,  De  Pressens^,
and  many  others  have  carried  their  sense  of  divergence  between  the  two  writers  to  an
extreme.  Thus  Luthardt  says,  "John  would  have  written  altogether  the  same,  if
neither  Plato  nor  Philo  had  ever  discussed  the  Logos,  or  said  one  word  on  the  subject."
De  Pressens^  "  knows  not,  in  the  history  of  human  thought,  contradictions  more  flagrant
than  exist  between  their  doctrines.  That  which  is  with  St.  John  a  capital  truth  would
be  to  the  Jew  of  Alexandria  appalling  blasphemy."  These  views  are  styled  by  Keini
"  puerilities  and  prejudices  of  which  advancing  science  can  take  no  note."

Tht!  1  eculiar  Johannine  expressions  to  which  reference  has  been  made  are  first  and
foremost  "  Logos,"  then  Life,  Truth,  Light,  the  Paraclete,  the  Archon,  the  Pleroma,  the
Only  Begotten  (both  itpardTOKos  and  t^ovoyeinjs) — torms  which,  though  not  all  of  them
exclusively  peculiar  to  the  Fourth  Gospel,  are  interrelated  there,  and  appear  there  as  part
of  a  system  of  thought  descriptive  of  the  Divine  Being  and  his  operations  in  the  universe
and  his  manifestation  of  himself  to  the  world.  Now,  numerous  writers  boldly  assert
that  "  the  fourth  evangelist  was  a  Christian  disciple  of  Pbilo  "  (Reville,  Bevue  de  Deux
Mundes,  May,  1866,  p.  107),  and  the  modern  assault  on  the  Fourth  Gospel  has  drawn
out  a  multitude  of  interesting  verbal  parallels  with  the  phraseology  of  Philo.  We  do
find  there  i  Qelos  A6yos,  i  A6yos  ©eoP,  who  is  spoken  of  also  as  (Ixav  &€oS,  as  ■irpiiiT6yoiios,
firstborn  Son,  even  the  dpx'^p^^^t  &vdpanros  ©eoB,  the  agency  by  which  the  world  was
create!,  and  the  like.  A  very  natural  conclusion  at  first  sight  is  to  imagine  the
philosophy  of  the  treatises  nepi  Xepov^l/i  and  Ilipl  Koanoirotas  to  be  the  source,  the  imme-
diate forerunner,  of  the  language  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  thus  to  relegate  the  author,
if  not  into  the  second  century  (for  which,  however,  there  would  be  no  necessity),  yet
away  from  Palestine  to  Alexandria  or  Bphesus  for  his  spiritual  instruction.  We  must
remind  our  readers  of  the  plausibility  of  this  view  arising  from  the  fact  that  Philo  the
Jew  had  endeavoured,  with  considerable  eclectic  force  and  some  learned  trifling,  to  blend
into  an  organic  unity  the  Platonic  theory  of  ideas  and  knowledge,  the  Stoic  ethics,  and
the  Hebrew  revelation,  to  make  the  Pentateuch  teach  or  sustain  the  Hellenic  specula-
tions. As  Thoma  says,  "  The  substance  uf  Philo's  system  is  the  Jewish  religion  and
the  Greek  philosophy,  which  may  be  blended  as  oil  and  water  are,  but  only  apparently
80,  for,  superficially  mixed,  they  flow  separately  side  by  side."  Philo  used  the  phraseo-
logy of  his  philosophic  school  to  allegorize,-and  so  interpret,  the  ancient  records  of  the
faith.  Just  as  Stoics  had  affected  to  find  thtir  teaching  embodied  in  the  poems  of  Homer,
he  had  used  this  high-flown  technicality  to  explain  the  various  events  in  patriarchal
history.  Moreover,  the  same  kind  of  place  which  Paul  and  the  author  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  had  assigned  to  "  Christ,"  to  "  the  Son,"  he  had,  at  about  the  same  time
and  date,  ascribed  to  the  "  Divine  Logos."  Thus  the  "  Rock  in  the  wilderness,"
the  "Bread  from  heaven,"  are  explained  by  Philo  as  manifestations  of  the  "Logos."
Again,  phrases  corresponding  with  that  in  Heb.  i.  1,  2  had  been  adopted  by  Philo,  and

'  See,  on  the  subject.  Professor  Jowett'a  '  Essay  on  St.  Paul  and  Philo  ; '  Button's  Essay,
'Historical  Problems  of  the  Fourth  Gospel ; '  Dorner  on  '  History  of  Doctrine  of  the  Person
of  Christ,'  vol.  i. ;  Canon  Westcott,  '  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Gospels '  and  Intro-
duction to  ' Commentary  ; '  Pye  Smith, '  Scripture  Testimony,'  vol.  ii. ;  Jules  Simon, '  Ecole
d'AlexBiidrie;'  Gfrorer,  'Das  Jahrh.  des  Hcils.  ;'  and  also  'Philo  und  das  Jud.  Alex.
Theosophie;'  Soulier,  '  La  Doctrine  du  Logos  ehez  Philon  d'Alexandrie' (1876);  CsesLir
Jlorgan,  D.D., '  An  Invistigation  of  the  Trinity  of  Plato  and  of  Philo- J  udseus '  (1795  ;  new
edit.,  1853);  Liddon  (Bampton  Lecture)  on  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord;  'Philoniau
DoetJrine;'  Jordan  Bucber,  '  Des  Apostela  Johannes  Lehre  vom  Logos '  (1856) ;  Alhrei'ht
Thoma,  'Die  Genesis  des  Johannis  Bvangeliums'  (1885),  pp.  32 — 62;  Hilgenfeld,  'Das
Evangeliuip  und  die  Briefe  Johannis  naoh  ihreip  Lehrbegriff  dargestellt '  (1849);  Carl
Siegfried, '  Philo  von  Alexandria  als  Ausleger  des  alten  Testaments  an  sioh  selbst  und  nach
eeinem  gesohiohtlichen  Einfluss  betractet '  (1875);  Ueberweg, '  History  of  Philosophy,'  Eng.
trans. ;  '  The  Jewish-Alexandrian  Philnsophy,'  vol.  i.  pp.  222 ;  Bigg,  '  Christian  Fhttonistg
of  Alexandria '  (Bampton  Lecture,  188U),  pp.  7 — 26.


xlvUl  mTRODDOTION  TO

by  the  authors  of  Wisdom  and  Eoclesiaaticus,  to  denote  either  the  "  Logos,"  or  the
"  Eternal  Wisdom."  Wherein,  then,  lies  the  difficulty  ?  and  why  should  we  hesitate  to
acknowledge  the  Philonian  origin  for  the  Johannine  phraseology  and  doctrinal  system  ?
On  the  following  grounds : —

(1)  Writers  who  urge  it  appear  to  ignore  the  twofold  connotation  of  the  term  "  Logos.*"
Strangely  enough,  the  term  was  used  to  denote  the  "  reason "  of  a  proceeding,
and  "the  method"  or  instrument  by  which  such  "reason"  could  be  conveyed  or
carried  into  effect.  It  is  used  for  the  self-consciousness,  for  the  ration;dity,  of  a  per-
son, and  for  the  "  word,"  the  account,  tlie  process,  of  revelation  by  which  a  person
may  carry  his  ratiocination  into  effect.  One  and  the  same  term  is  used  in  Greek  to
denote  the  "  reason  "  and  the  "  word  "  of  both  God  and  man.  The  question  arises—
Which  of  these  two  divergent  usages  is  that  which  Philo-Judaeus  and  the  Neoplatonic
school  generally  adopted,  and  which  do  we  find  in  the  Fourth  Gospel?  We  believe
that  it  can  be  siown  conclusively  that  the  Logos  of  Philo  corresponds  with  the  arche-
typal reason ;  and  the  Logos  of  John  is  the  eternal  self-manifestation,  the  creative  eneigy
the  Divine  personal  nature,  that  was  the  Source  of  both  life  and  light  in  man,  and  has
been  at  length  embodied,  incarnated,  manifested,  in  humanity,  full  of  grace  and  truth.

(2)  Notice  should  especially  be  taken  of  the  full  Personality  of  the  Word  in  the
Fourth  Gospel — a  conception  towards  which  the  language  of  Wisdom  touching  (ro^a,
and  the  language  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  touching  the  eternal  Son,  and  the
language  of  St.  Paul  in  Corinthians  and  Colossians,  had  prepared  the  way.  "  The
Word  made  flesh  "  is  identical  with  the  Son  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  who  hath
declared  him  to  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  the  Logos  of  Philo  is  not  an  hypostasis  at
all ;  in  a  vast  number  of  passages  Philo's  Logos  is  identified  with  the  K6aiios  iio-riTuc6s,
the  intelligible  world,  the  Divine  plan  of  the  great  Architect,  the  idea  after  wliich  the
world  was  created  or  evolved.  When  the  Logos  is  called  the  ilKiv  of  God,  it  is  in  the
sense  in  which  the  power  of  God  is  shadowed  forth  in  the  creation  of  the  world.  The
Logos  between  the  cherubim  ('De  Cherubim,'  p.  112)  is  the  "plan,"  the  "design,"  by
which  God  acted  in  the  creation  and  government  of  the  world.  ■  "  By  his  Logos,  God
&pXo*ra  Kol  dyaShv  flvai,  is  both  Governor  and  Good."  His  designs  concerning  the  several
parts  of  his  creation  are  called  his  K6yoi ;  by  these  was  fashioned  that  incorporeal  and
archetypal  world,  composed  of  invisible  ideas,  which  is  in  fact  his  \6yos.  Sometimes
passages  are  quoted  to  show  that  Philo  did  approximate  to  the  notion  of  a  Divine
Personality  corresponding  with  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  as  when  he  said  that  the  angel
who  met  Hagar  and  brought  her  back  to  Sarah  was  the  Logos  ('  De  Cljerubim,'  p.  108).
But  if  his  exposition  be  examined,  it  will  be  seen  that  by  "  Hagar  "  he  did  not  mean
the  woman  Hagar,  or  refer  to  an  historic  event  in  patriarchal  history,  typical  or  other-
wise, but  meant  human  arts  and  science,  and  that  in  her  departing  from  Sarah  he  saw
their  severance  from  the  true  virtue.  She,  i.e.  science,  was  brought  back  by  the  Divine
Logos  to  her  true  allegiance.  In  like  manner,  though  he  says  that  Balaam  was  withstood
by  the  Logos,  on  examination  (ibid.,  ii.  4)  Balaam  is  not  the  prophet  of  that  name,  but  is
"a  foolish  people  riding  on  the  ass  of  merchandise  or aijricultur.d  pursuits, longing  for  a
sword,  a  power  of  reason,  to  smite  the  failing  beast  of  burden,  and  drawing  forth  its
complaint  more  audibly  than  any  voice,  and  revealing  the  Divine  plan  of  life."  All  the
historical  characters  are  nothing  more  nor  less  than  emblematic  virtues,  and  the  sum  of
the  narratives  becomes  simply  some  phase  of  reliyous  or  metaphysical  dogmatitm.
Again,  it  is  the  "  archangel,"  the  firstborn  Logos,  who  throws  "  horse  and  rider  into  the
sea."  But  what  do  these  terms  denote  ?  The  rider  is  the  mind ;  the  horse  represents
the  passions  engaged  in  unholy  warfare  with  true  virtue.

Philo  never  makes  any  reference  whatever  to  the  Messiah,  or  identifies  him  with  the
Logos.  The  notion  of  incarnation  would  have  been  abhorrent  to  him.  Hence  we  see
the  most  astonishing  distinction  between  the  use  Philo  made  of  this  Platonic  phrase  in
his  attempt  to  deanthropomorphize  the  Old  Testament  references  to  God  or  the  ministers
in  his  revelation,  and  the  use  which  the  fourth  evangelist  made  of  the  same  term.
With  him  the  Logos  becomes  the  historic  Revelation  of  God,  the  Agency  by  which  light
has  been  given  to  men,  and  which  at  length,  after  ages  of  recoided  activity,  "  can,,e  into
the  world."     In  HSmX  flesh  which  the  Logos  became,  and  upon  which  Philonian  meta-

Ehysics  poured  scorn,  St.  John  says,  "we  saw  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  Only
legotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  ilix

(S)  While  gome  striking  superficial,  metaphorical  resemUauoes  can  be  traced  between
Fhilo  and  the  Fourth  Gospel,  it  must  not  be  forgolten  that  similar  parallels  are  drawn
between  Fhilo  and  other  books  of  the  New  Testament ;  and  Siegfiied  {lib.  cit.)  has
laboured  with  patient  scholarship  to  trace  the  influence  of  Philo  and  of  the  Alexan-
drine gnosis,  not  only  on  St.  Paul  and  St.  James,  but  on  the  Targums.  If  he  makes
this  good,  he  has  abolished  the  inference  that  others  have  drawn  from  the  presence  of
Philonian  imagery  and  ideas  in  the  Fourth  Gtospel,  viz.  that  its  author  could  not  have  been
a  Palestinian  Jew.  It  may  be  well  to  draw  attention  to  a  few  of  these  correspondences.
Some  are  as  vague,  at  least,  as  those  which  are  fastened  upon  St.  John,  and  some  of  them
are  far  more  explicit.  Thus  when  St.  Paul  speaks  of  KKvpovi/wi  0eo5,  he  is  supposed  to
be  thinking  of  Philo  ('  Quis  rerum  div.  hwr.,'  14),  who  speaks  of  the  just  as  being  KKripo-
v6iioi  @ela>v  liyaBuv.  "  The  first  and  second  Adam "  of  1  Cor.  xv.  45,  etc.,  points  to
'  Leg.  Alleg.,'  i.  12.  Siegfried  imagines  a  common  source  for  both  in  the  '  Midrasoh.*
The  0\(lironev  SP  iaiirrfov  of  1  Cor.  xiii.  12  is  compared  ('De  Decalog.,'  21)  with
SiJt  KaT6m-pov  of  PhUo ;  and  many  more  expressions  are  cited  by  himself  and  by  Loesner
(' Observationes  ad  Novum  Testamentam  e  Philone:'  1777)  to  demonstrate  Paul's
indebtedness  to  Philo.  He  finds  also  a  similar  influence  exerted  on  the  Petrine  Epistles.
Siegfried  makes  much  use  of  Schneokenbnrger's  ('  Annolatio  ad  Epistolum  Jacobi : '  1832)
series  of  parallels  between  James  and  Philo,  These  are  remarkable  enough ;  e.g.  the
antithesis  between  fiimapd  and  Aa/iirpA  iaeiis  in  Jas.  ii.  2  is  found  in  '  De  Joseph,'  p.  541,
D. ;  "  The  spark  which  kindles  a  great  flre  "  (Jas.  iii.  5)  with  '  De  Migr.  Abrah.,'  407,
A. ;  the  taming  of  wild  beasts  (Jas.  iii.  7)  with  '  De  Opif.  Mundi,'  19,  20 ;  "  The  hus-
bandman who  waits  for  the  precious  fruits "  with  '  Leg.  Alleg.,'  ii.  p.  103 ;  "  God  as
Father  of  lights"  (Jas.  i.  17)  with  Philo's  70)71)  tmc  oiVfljiTav  iusTfpaiv  ('De  Op.  Mundi,'  p.  6).
And  whereas  James  speaks  of  "  every  good  giving  and  every  perfect  gift  as  coming  from
above,"  etc.,  it  is  supposed  that  Philo's  language  ('  De  Sacr.  Abel  et  Caini,'  p.  138),
iXiK\iipot  KtX  iravTiKiK  al  rov  hyevvifTou  iwpeaX  itaaat,  may  have  suggested  it.  Jas.  i.  14  is
compared  with  Philo's  "  In  ourselves  are  all  the  treasures  of  evil  things."  The  idea
that  the  virtues  are  all  begotten  in  us  by  God  finds  its  parallel  in  '  De  Cherubim,'  p.  13,
"  Who  is  he  that  soweth  good  things  in  our  souls,  but  the  Father  of  all,  the  imbegotten
God,  who  generateth  all  things?"  The  praise  of  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is
compared  with  aoi^la  &vw9£v  in0piiSi!(ra  hf  obpavov  ('  De  Profug.,'  57).

The  same  kind  of  traces  of  relationship  are  found  in  the  synoptic  Gospels ;  e.y.  Matt.
V,  6  reminds  of  (•  De  Profug.,'  25)  "  Those  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  goodness
{KoKoKayaSiasj."

The  positive  hints  of  similar  relation  between  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  Philo,  when
the  nomenclature  or  the  emphasis  laid  on  the  use  of  the  words  K6yos,  fw^,  (p&s,  is
excluded,  are  not  more  numerous  than  those  found  between  the  Judseo-Christian  com-
position attributed  to  James  and  the  writings  of  Philo.  Some  of  them  are,  however,
deeper  than  mere  phraseolcgv.  With  ch.  v.  19,  "  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,"
etc.,  may  be  compared  with  ('De  Conf.  Ling.,'  14)  "  The  Logos,  gazing  on  archetypal
patterns,  imitating  the  ways  of  the  Father,  fashioned  the  forms  thereof."  Ch.  vi.
50,  51  corresponds  in  some  measure  with  '  Quis  rerum  div.  hsr.,'  15 — a  passage  where
"  the  Divine  Logos  is  the  heavenly  food  of  the  God-loving  soul."  Ch.  xiv.  23,  "  We
will  take  up  our  abode  with  him,"  with  ('  De  Poster.  Cain.,'  35)  "  The  Divine  Logos
dwells  within  those  in  whom  the  life  of  the  soul  is  honoured."  Passages  of  this  kind
are  numerous,  and  they  do  reveal  a  very  wide  diffusion,  even  in  the  Palestinian  schools,
of  a  style  of  expression  common  to  the  Alexandrine  and  Christian  writers.

Such  connection  between  the  two  phraseologies  is  admitted  by  Liicke,  De  Wette,
Meyer,  Lange,  Delitzsch,  and  Alford.  Delitzsch  ('  Bib.  Psych.,'  p.  178)  says,  "  It  is  an
undeniable  fact  that  the  Johannine  Logos  doctrine  stands  in  a  certain  relation  to  the
Philonian.  The  apostolic  representation  does  not  utterly  discard  the  ideal  forms
already  elaborated  by  Alexandrianism,  but  charges  them  with  the  material  significance
embodied  in  the  historical  fulfilment."  Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  observe  that
many  other  terms  and  phrases  of  Greek  life  and  thought  are  thus  invested  with
a  perfectly  new  significance,  and  transfigured  until  they  convey  entirely  new  ideas,
Buch  as  arfiirti,  vlirTii,  Stitaioaivii,  f»^,  Bivaros.  The  Platonic  word  \6yas  was  peculiarly
serviceable,  because  it  was  capable  of  very  diverse  meanings,  and  was  distinguished  aa
hiyos  irSiieerttt  the  Logos  inherent  in  God,  corresponding  with  the  reason  in  man,  an4
fOUS.  •


INTRODUCTION  TO


denoting  the  innermost  "  Essence  of  God ; ''  and  \6yos  irpo^opmSs,  the  Logos  issuing  fruna
God,  as  "  word  spoken,"  to  reveal  thought  and  manifest  activity.  Philo  had  spolcen
mainly  of  the  former  under  the  attributes  Oefos  and  the  like ;  and  he  is  speaking  still  of
the  former  when  he  calls  A1J70S  the  "  eldest  Son  of  the  Father,"  "  His  First-Begotten,"
"  the  Image  of  Gnd,"  "  the  Angel,"  "  the  Archangel,"  "  the  Demiurge,"  "  the  archetypal
Light,"  "the  High  Priest,"  "the  second  God,"  the  kSo-ihos  vorjTiKiiy.  The  Apostle  Paul
claimed  for  Christ  that  he  was  the  Wisdom  and  the  Power  of  God,  the  Giver  of  light,
the  Creator  of  all  things,  God  blessed  for  ever.  All  the  promises  of  God  were  seen  to
be  "  Tea  and  Amen  in  him."  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  declares  that  he  was  "tne
Effulgence  of  the  Divine  glory,  the  express  Image  of  his  substance,"  "  the  High  Priest  of
our  prolession."  Surely  no  word  in  the  Greek  language  was  so  advantageous  to  express
and  blend  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  nature  and  the  mission  of  the  Lord  Christ.  Hence
we  can  see  many  explanations  of  the  Johannine  phraseology  without  having  any
recourse  to  the  hasty  conclusion  that  the  fourth  evangelist  was  an  Alexandrine  philo-
sopher. We  see  further  that  the  language  and  the  terminology  which  had  been  adopted
by  the  Greek  philosophic  Jews  was  circulating  in  the  East  and  in  the  various  specu-
lative schools  of  early  Gnoslicism  ;  and,  so  far  from  being  adopted  by  the  writers  of  the
New  Testament,  it  was  interpenetrated  by  a  profoundly  different  philosophy,  by  a  per-
fectly hostile  .system  of  ethics,  and  utilized  in  its  higher  senses,  in  its  new  and  jiotent
connotation,  to  set  forth  the  Divine  nature  of  One  who  was  "  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  and
as  such  was  "  justitied  in  the  Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  among  the  nations,  believed
on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory."

The  entire  method  in  which  the  fourth  evangelist  treats  the  Old  Testament  differs
from  that  of  Philo.  St.  John  is  not  struggling  to  eviscerate  the  Bible  histories  of  their
healthy  anthropomorphism.  He  is  not  translating  the  language  of  ancient  history  into
the  terms  of  Platonic  philosophy.  Moses,  Jacob,  and  Abraham  were  to  him  historic
men.  The  well  of  Jacob,  the  temple  of  Sulomon,  the  rite  of  circumcision,  were  referred
to  as  well-known  things,  without  any  mythic  or  mystic  significance.  The  ancient  Word
was  searched  for  true  rather  than  recondite  meanina;s.  The  two  writers  differ 'to<o  c<ih
in  the  attitude  they  severally  sustain  towards  the  Old  Testament.  Their  conceptions  iJ
the  supreme  God,  of  the  Absolute,  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  One,  differ  profoundly.
Philo  exaggerated  the  abstraction  of  Plato  or  Aristotle,  and  emphasized  the  most  subtle
and  transcendent  expressions  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  order  to  adumbrate  the  inde-
finable and  shadow  forth  the  eternal.  N'umberless  passages  may  be  quoted  to  show
how  God  is  above  all  thought  and  pra'se,  superior  to  reason,  and  incapable  of  expression
by  perfection  or  attribute ;  how  he  is  ungraspable,  unthinkable,  unknowable,  unutter-
able ;  his  essence  is  an  eternal  secret ;  dazzling,  unapproachable  light  is  the  robe  of
his  spiritual  essence,  etc.  To  pass  fmni  these  hyjierbolical  expressions — which  are
akin  to  Hindu  pantheism  or  modern  idealism — into  the  vocabulary  and  atmosphere  of
the  Fourth  Gospel,  a  new  world  is  entered.  If  the  writer  were  a  pupil  of  Philo,  be  was
a  very  audacious  one,  and  profited  very  little  by  his  master's  teaching.  The  Johannine
teaching  of  the  "  Father  "  explodes  the  whole  Philonian  metaphj'sics.  Philo  did,  however,
heap  upon  the  Logos,  whom  he  regarded  as  the  bridge  between  the  Infinite  Unapproach-
able One  and  the  world,  every  kind  of  glowing  and  splendid  epithet.  He  called  the  Logos
the  Light  and  the  Life,  the  Prophet  and  Interpreter  of  the  archetypal  Light,  the  Prin-
ciple of  "  wisdom,"  Source  of  Inv,  "the  myal  Way  of  true  philosophy,"  the  Ground
of  virtue,  "the  Way  which  leads  to  God,"  the  Captain  of  the  vessel  of  the  soul,  the
Inner  Voice  of  conscience.  Accuser  and  Judge,  as  ivell  as  the  Shepherd.  Thoma  (loc.
cit.)  has  accumulated  these  traits  with  immense  skill  and  great  eloquence;  but  the  por-
traiture, as  a  vorhild  of  the  Fourth  (Jospel,  vanishes  when  we  find  that  all  this  is  but
the  tropical  phrase  for  the  discipline  through  which  souls  are  passing  to  the  rest  of  a
true  philosophy.

The  Old  Testament  itself  is  the  real  stiurce  of  the  two  meanings  of  Logos,  and,  apart
even  from  the  later  teaching  of  the  rabbis,  furnished  both  to  Paul  and  John  the  material
on  which  their  intellectual  phraseology  and  theological  system  were  built  up.

(•)  The  grand  agent  of  the  Lord  in  the  creation  of  the  world  is  in  Gen.  i.  through-
out represented  as  spoken  word.  The  coming  forth  of  light  and  life,  of  sun  and  stara,
of  m«n  himself,  is  preceded  by  the  assertion,  "  And  God  said."    This  had  so  deeply


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


entered  into  the  mind  of  Israel  that  the  psalmist  (Ps.  xxxiii.  6)  says,  "  By  the  word  of
4he  Lord  were  the  heavens  made,"  where  the  L,XX.  uses  the  word  K6yos  for  the  Hebrew
"a'l.  In  Ps.  cxlvii.  15,  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  runneth  very  swiftly,"  is  one  of  the
terms  used  to  describe  the  creative  and  providential  government  of  God  (of.  Isa.  Iv.  11).

The  Targums,  which  represent  the  Palestinian  teaching  of  the  Jewish  schools  in
their  translations  and  paraphrases  of  the  Old  Testament,  even  the  oldest  and  most
precious  of  them,  that  of  Onhelos,  substitute  for  "  God  "  the  periphrasis  of  his  "  Word."
They  used  continually  the  terms  "Debura"  and  "Memra."  Thus,  "the  Word  of  the
Lord "  was  with  Ishmael  in  the  wilderness  (Gen.  xxi.  20).  Jacob  made  a  covenant
that  "the  Word  of  the  Lord  should  be  his  God"  (Gen.  xxviii.  21).  In  multitudes  of
instances  "  the  Word "  is  substituted  by  these  Aramaic  translators  for  the  direct
representation  of  God's  presence  or  activity.  They  hoped  thereby  in  some  degree  to
bridge  the  otherwise  boundless  distance  between  the  Eternal  One  and  the  creatures  of
his  hand.  They  sought,  on  the  basis  of  Divine  revelation,  to  maintaiu  the  communica-
tion between  God  and  man,  while  striving  to  uphold  the  Divine  majesty;  and  they
sought  to  avoid  by  these  means  the  anthropomorphisms  which  might  lead  the  incau-
tious reader  into  unworthy  conceptions  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Siegfried  attributes
this  usage  of  the  Targums  to  Philo ;  but  the  method  of  the  Targumist  differs  from  that
of  Philo.

(6)  The  entire  doctrine  of  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord,"  which  pervades  the  Old  Testa-
ment, indicates,  as  within  the  bosom  and  mystery  of  the  Divine  Being,  the  conception
of  certain  inherent  relations  of  awful  sublimity.  The  Angel  or  Messenger  of  Jehovah
at  times  is  used  interchangeably  with  Jehovah  himself,  and  invested  with  all  his  glory.
Gen.  xxxii.  24 ;  Exod.  xxxiii.  14 ;  Hos,  xii.  4 ;  Tsa.  Ixiii.  9 ;  and  Mai.  iii.  1,  convey  the
assurance  that  the  manifestation,  the  active  energy,  the  covenant-maliing  grace  of  God
is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  created  angel,  on  the  one  hand,  who  is  distinguished
.  from  "  the  Presence,"  and  from  the  Eternal  One,  who,  save  in  and  through  his
chosen  Organ  and  Agent,  "dwells,"  as  St.  Paul  says,  "in  unapproachable  light,  whom
no  man  hath  seen  or  can  see."*  Tiie  fourth  evangelist  expressly  refers  the  Ad6n  of
Isa.  vi.  1  to  the  pre-existent  Christ,  or  Logos.  Before  him  the  seraphim  veil  their  faces,
and  yet  his  voice  is  heard,  and  awful  glory  confounds  his  earthborn  worshipper.  This
conception  of  the  Divine  Angel  had  been  utilized  by  Philo,  in  his  allegoric  interpreta-
tion, to  represent  the  operations  of  the  Logos  in  the  region  of  mental-moral  discipline;
but  the  Fourth  Gospel  discerns  its  bearing  on  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  Lord  Christ.
He  who  had  in  various  theophanies  manifested  himself  to  Abraliam  and  Jacob,  to  Hagar
and  Moses,  to  Joshua  and  Mauoah,  to  Isaiah  and  Zechariah,  etc.,  "came  into  the
world,"  "  became  flesh,  and  tabernacled  amongst  us."  The  preparation  was  laid  in  the
Old  Testament,  the  Alexandrines  resolved  it  into  a  sacred  metaphysic,  the  apostles  into
the  agelong  witness  of  the  possibility  of  a  concrete  historic  revelation.

Another  parallel  line  of  meditation  pervades  what  has  been  called  the  Chokmah
teaching,  or  the  Old  Testament  doctrine  of  "  wisdom,"  which  in  Alexandria,  but  before
the  days  of  Philo,  had  approached  a  personification  of  tliis  great  perfection  of  God,  and
reveals  its  influence  on  the  New  Testament  writings.  We  would  not  say  that  more
than  a  personification  can  be  found  in  Prov.  viii. ;  yet  the  occurrence  of  this  phraseo-
logy within  the  bosom  of  pxire  Hebrew  monotheism,  and  one  which  refers  to  such  an
aspect  or  affirmation  of  the  Divine  essence  as  eternal  Wisdom,  the  Creator,  Guide,  and
Guardian  of  all  things,  and  as  answering  to  certain  peculiarities  of  the  human  con-
sciousness and  experience,  is  clearly  an  important  factor  in  the  creation  of  those  senti-
ments concerning  the  Son  which  we  find  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Hebrews.
There  can  be  little  doubt,  e.g.,  that  the  author  (Heb.  i.  1,  2)  had  in  mind  the  language
of  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  where  phrases  which  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  claimed  to  be
descriptive  of  the  Divine  element  in  the  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  had  already
been  attributed  to   Wisdom.    Apart   from  the   theology  of  this  famous  passage,  it

■  See  dissertation  on  "  The  Angel  of  the  Lord,"  in  Kurtz, '  The  Old  Covenant,'  Eng.  trans.,
vol.  1.,  where  he  critioizeB  his  own  former  view  and  Hengstenberg's,  and  maintains  that  all
the  angelophanies  are  those  of  a  created  angel.  But  see  also  I.  Pye  Smith, '  Scripture
Testimony,'  vol.  i.  ;  G.  Steward, '  Mediatorial  Sovereignty  ; '  Stanley  Iieathes, '  AVitness  of
the  Old  Testament  to  Christ;'  Liddon's  Bampton  Lecture,  'The  Divinity  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,'  lecture  ii.,  especially  useful  in  tracing  the  Patristic  view  of  the  Theophanies,


INTRODUCTION  TO


establishes  a  connection  between  the  later  books  and  deutero-canonical  books  of  the  Old
Testament  and  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  which  are  not  only-
independent  of  Philo,  but  also  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  GospeL  It  becomes  probable
that  the  doctrine,  which  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  an  evolution  of  the  second  century,
really  preceded  that  period  by  some  ninety  or  a  hundred  years ;  that  it  is  apparent
throughout  Paul's  letters,  and  especially  in  his  earliest  and  most  indubitably  authentic
Epistles.  Where  did  Paul  obtain  such  notions,  if  not  from  the  sacred  tradition  of
those  parts  of  Christ's  teaching  which,  while  not  absent  from  the  synoptists  (as,  e.g.,
Matt,  xi.),  are  most  abundantly  revealed  in  the  language  of  the  Fourth  Grospel  ?  Before
the  Gospel  was  written,  it  is  indeed  almost  scientifically  demonstrated  that  some  of
the  disciples  had  thus  reported  and  reiterated  the  teaching  of  their  Lord.  "  This,"  says
the  Ephesian  presbyter,  "is  the  disciple  which  testifieth  of  these  things,  as  well  as
wrote  these  things,"  etc.  We  find  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  Nathanael  (Bartholo-
mew), Mary  of  Bethany,  Nicodemus  and  Joseiih,  Judas  (not  Iscariot),  Thomas  and
Philip,  and  others  of  his  disciples — ^why  not  Peter  and  Andrew? — all  contributed  to
swell  that  class  of  record  and  teaching  which  we  find  so  fully  reported  and  so  wonder-
fully enshrined  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.

3.  TA«  author  v)as  an  eye-vntness  of  much  that  he  describes.  Having,  then,  made  it
more  than  evident  that  the  writer  was  a  Jew,  and  a  Jew  of  Palestine,  we  proceed,  in
the  next  place,  to  show  that  the  writer  was  an  eye-witness  of  that  which  he  describes,
an  auditor  of  the  discourses  which  he  records.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  wishes  to  he
considered  an  eye-witness ;  that  he  practically  claims  to  have  been  such,  and  that  a  multi-
tude of  small  details  are  given,  either  with  a  consummate  art  which  almost  conceals
itself,  or  with  the  simple  object  of  recording  what  made  an  indelible  impression  on  his
mind  at  the  time.  I  am  willing  to  admit  that  pseudepigraphers  do  adopt  this  method.
Historical  romancists,  even  great  poets,  when  treating  events  well  known  in  tradition,
from  Homer  to  Goethe,  and  from  Walter  Scott  to  living  poets  and  novelists,  know  that
nothing  preserves  the  illusion  of  autoptic  memoir  better  than  the  use  of  these  appa-
rently useless  adjuncts  of  a  story.  Yet  we  think  that  this  author,  from  the  supple-
mentary character  of  his  Gospel,  and  from  the  numberless  additional  fragments  of
information  which  he  supplies,  as  well  as  from  touches  which  cannot  (as  Baur  urged)  be
due  to  any  theological  bias,  does  unconsciously  and  unintentionally  reveal  the  eye-witness.

Let  us  enumerate  some  of  these  artless  traits  of  the  presence  of  the  writer.  The
references  to  the  day  and  hour  when  so  many  of  the  memorable  scenes  occurred
(ch.  i.  29,  35,  43;  xii.  1,  12;  xiii.  1,  etc. ;  xx.  1;  ii.  1;  iv.  43,  52;  vi.  22;  xi.  6,  17);
the  hours  of  the  day  (ch.  i.  39 ;  iii.  2 ;  vi.  16 ;  xiii.  30 ;  xviii.  28).

In  ch.  i.  14  the  phrase,  "  We  beheld  his  glory,"  undoubtedly  places  the  writer  in  the
company^of  those  who  had  personal  and  irresistible  reasons  for  believing  that  he  was
the  incarnate  A6yos  of  God.  This  passage,  however,  derives  strong  emphasis  from
1  John  i.  1,  where  the  same  writer  declares  (not,  as  some  German  critics  have  assumed,
what  any  believer  might  claim)  that  he  and  others,  not  only  saw  with  their  bodily
eyes,  but  touched  with  their  hands,  the  "  Word  of  life."  The  object  of  the  writer  of
that  Epistle  was  to  bring  its  readers  into  a  state  of  fellowship  with  their  own  trium-
phant faith  in  facts  and  manifestations  of  such  transcendent  importance.  The  writer,
on  an  occasion  of  awful  and  immense  significance,  viz.  the  piercing  of  the  side  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  declares  that  a  strange  "  sign "  occurred,  and,  in  order  to  emphasize  the
fact,  adds  (ch.  xix.  35),  "  And  he  that  hath  seen  hath  home  witness,  and  his  witness  is
veritable;  and  he  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  also  may  believe."  The
opponents  of  the  authenticity  have  found,  in  the  use  of  Ikui/os,  some  proof  that  the
writer  is  here  only  quoting  a  credible  witness,  and  distinguishing  himself  from  the
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  and  who  had  gone  away  from  the  cross,  in  his  anxiety  to
protect  the  mother  of  the  Lord ;  but  the  frequent  use  of  IxeTms  elsewhere  in  reference
to  the  subject  of  the  sentence  has  disposed  of  this  suggestion  (ch.  ix.  37).  It  is  certain
that  either  the  author  quotes  what  he  regarded  as  perfectly  trustworthy  testimony  of
one  still  living  when  he  wrote,  or  refers  to  his  own  personal  experience  in  the  matter.
The  latter,  from  his  style,  is  far  more  probable,  and  the  fact  that  he  was  accustomed  to
regard  himself  in  the  third  person  would  in  this  passage  make  a  still  more  forcible
separation  in  thought  between  himself  as  witness  and  himself  as  writer.  It  is  in
fcvour  of  this  that  the  author  uses  the  perfect  lather  than  the  aorist,  which  last  would


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  M

have  been  far  more  appropriate  if  he  had  been  referring  to  a  testimony  once  for  all  giTen
by  a  third  party.

The  closing  words  of  the  Gospel  further  solemnly  associate  the  loved  disciple  with
the  author  of  the  Gospel,  revealing  the  very  early  tradition  and  the  uniform  testimony
of  the  manuscripts  to  the  identification;  and  there  can  be  no  question  that  by  "tha
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  " — a  phrase  of  high  significance  and  of  tender  and  impressive
reminiscence,  not  of  self-confident  boasting  (as  Keim  and  Weiss  say) — the  writer
intends  to  indicate  himself.

Before  proceeding  to  show  the  internal  evidence  for  this  identification  with  the  son
of  Zebedee,  we  see  that  the  writer  professes  very  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  feel-
ings of  the  disciples  themselves — he  knows  what  they  thought  at  the  time,  and  how
they  modified  their  views  afterwards  (ch.  ii.  11,  21,  22 ;  xii.  16).  The  author's  intimate
relations  both  with  them  and  the  disciples  of  John  (ch.  iii.  22) ;  the  inmost  converse
of  Jesus  with  his  fellow-disciples  (ch.  iv.  1,  2) ;  what  they  said  "  one  to  another  "  (ch.
iv.  33);  the  conversation  between  Jesus,  Andrew,  and  Philip  (ch.  vi.  5 — 9);  constitute
a  series  of  touches  which  reveal  quiet  observation  and  deep  and  subtle  intimacy  with
their  feelings  (ch.  vi.  17,  22 — 24,  60 — 71).  His  knowledge  of  the  Lord's  own  home
appears  in  oh.  vii.  3.  Similarly,  ch.  xi.  3 — 16  gives  a  striking  proof  of  his  intimacy
with  the  disciples  and  his  knowledge  of  their  feelings,  as  contrasted  with  the  siknce
which  he  observes  about  the  illness  and  death  of  Lazarus,  beyond  what  came  in  the
form  of  a  message  from  the  sisters  (ef.  ch.  xii.  16  for  another  interesting  prooQ.  It
must  be  admitted  that  he  also  knew  what  the  Pharisees  "  said  among  themselves,"  and
what  *•  the  people  murmured  concerning  him ; "  but  there  are  many  sources  of  informa-
tion open  to  him.  Again,  in  ch.  xii.  21 — 23,  in  the  feet-washing  scene  (ch.  xiii.  1 — 11),
and  in  ch.  xiv.,  xv.,  and  xvi.,  he  indicates  acquaintance  with  the  special  questions  that
Peter,  Philip,  Judas,  Thaddreus,  Thomas,  and  "  some  of  his  disciples,"  asked  on  that
last  memorable  night.  The  author  represents  himself  throughout  as  intimate  with  the
disciples,  and  in  the  closing  scene  on  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  he  has  artlessly  represented
manner,  tone,  and  emotion,  and  has  blended  the  whole  into  a  living  picture  as  one  who  knew.

4.  He  represents  himself  as  one  of  the  disciples  whom  Jesus  loved.  This  disciple  shown
by  constructive  evidence  to  he  John  the  son  of  Zebedee.  The  author  appears  from  the
first  to  have  clung  very  closely  to  our  Lord.  We  can  scarcely  resist  the  impression  that
he  was  a  silent  auditor  of  the  conversation  with  Nicodcmus,  which  obviously  took  place
in  Jerusalem  (of.  ch.  xix.  27),  probably  in  that  nameless  disciple's  own  house.  Again,
while  other  disciples  went  to  Syohar  to  buy  bread,  one  seems  to  have  remained  with  the
Lord,  and  heard  the  conversation  with  the  woman  of  Samaria.  The  fifth  chapter  con-
tains an  account  of  a  visit  to  Jerusalem,  on  which  the  writer,  and  it  would  seem  few
jf  any  other  disciples,  accompanied  him.  We  learn  that  the  beloved  disciple  was  known
to  the  high  priest,  and  had  a  home  in  Jerusalem  itself.  This  may  have  been  in  some
way  associated  with  the  business  of  Zebedee  as  a  fisherman,  and  the  market  for  his  produce
in  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the  public  national  festivals,  which  required  certain  visits  to
Jerusalem  at  these  periods,  and  may  explain  the  fact  that  John  alone  gives  detailed
accounts  of  the  intercourse  between  our  Lord  and  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem.  In  ch.  vi.  we
are  once  more  thrown  into  the  midst  of  one  of  the  capital  scenes  and  critical  moments
of  the  Galilaean  ministry  as  related  by  the  synoptists ;  but  this  writer  is  minutely
acquainted  with  the  sentiments  of  the  apostles,  the  principal  parts  assigned  to  specifiio
individuals,  and  even  the  inner  mind  of  the  Lord  himself  (ch.  vi.  5,  C,  7 — 9).  In
ver.  17  there  is  an  unconscious  and  unmistakable  touch  of  the  eye-witness  :  "Jesus  was
not  yet  come  to  them."  The  writer  had  been  sent  away  with  the  eleven,  but  expected
that  his  Lord  would  come  to  them.  In  ch.  vi.  60,  66  he  once  more  unintentionally
reveals  his  presence,  intimacy,  and  sympathy  with  the  twelve ;  and  while  he  does  not
become  their  chief  spokesman,  but  attributes  this  function  to  Peter,  yet  he  shares  the
sentiment  of  the  group,  "Thou  art  the  Christ,  Son  of  the  living  GK)d  .  .  .  thou  hast  the
words  of  eternal  life."  This  is  itself  one  of  the  proofs  that  there  is  no  animiu  against
Peter,  who  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  two  disciples  whom  Jesus  loved  {lipi\ei,  ch.  xx.  2).
This  is  singularly  impressive  when  we  find  that  Peter,  throughout  the  synoptic  narra-
tive, stands  in  such  close  and  affectionate  relationship  with  our  Lord.  At  the  Last
Supper  "the  disciple  (ti/  fijara  d  'Irjo-oSs)  whom  Jesus  loved"  was  "reclining  (cV  fy  KSKTrtf
T*v  Ii/<roC)  in  the  bosom  of  Jesns,"  i.e.  on  his  right  side,  at  the  head  of  the  triclinium.


liv  INTRODUCTION  TO


and  able  to  ask  a  private  question  and  receive  an  answer  unnoticed  by  the  rest  (ch.  xriii.
23).  "  Peter  and  tliis  other  disciple  "  are  both  wiih  our  Lord  in  the  court  of  Annas  (ch.
xviii.  16).  Peter  denies  his  Master,  and,  aa  we  learn  from  the  synoptic  narrative,  went
out,  but  "  the  other  disciple  "  remained,  and,  while  the  discussion  before  Caiaphas  is
omitted  by  the  present  writer  as  having  been  fully  detailed,  he  seems  to  have  clung  so
closely  to  his  Master  that  much  of  the  converse  with  Pilate,  omitted  by  the  general
tradition,  was  rescued  by  him  from  oblivion.  He  is,  moreover,  stationed  by  the  cross
(cli.  xix.  25,  26),  when  he  received  the  solemn  commission  to  guard  as  a  son  the  sacred
mother  of  the  Lord.  In  ch.  xx.  2 — 10  the  "  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  "  represents  him-
self as  believina;  in  the  Resurrection,  and  returning  (irphs  iavrois)  with  Peter.  The  other
most  interesting  reference  to  this  unnamed  disciple  is  in  the  fi[ial  scenes  of  ch.  xxi.
There  he  is  represented  as  the  first  to  recognize,  and  not  for  the  fir.-t  time,  the  risen
Lord.  The  interview  with  Peter  is  followed  by  the  question  (ver.  21),  "What  shall
this  man  be  [or  'do']?"  (oStoj  Se  ri-).  The  answer  is  one  which  led,  as  the  writer
admits,  to  the  report  (hiyos)  "  that  that  dinciple  should  not  die."  But  he  declares  that
this  was  a  misinterpretation  of  the  Lord's  words.  To  this  statement  there  is  an  appendix
of  vast  interest.  The  present  tense  (<S  /jtapTvpav)  is  used  when  speaking  of  the  life-
witness  of  that  disciple,  and  the  aorist  (i  ypd^as)  when  referring  to  his  work,  and  the
first  person  plural  (oiSaiiev)  when  announcing  a  momentous  fact  about  him.  "  We
know"  that  this  tesiimoiiy  is  (not  oA.ri9in7,  but  dKiiBiis — not  "  veritable,"  but)  "trust-
worthy." These  words  show  that  the  verses  were  written  by  those  who  knew  the
writer  and  valued  hi.s  living  words.  The  testimony  unhesitatingly  affirms  that  the
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  was  the  writer  of  the  Gospel.  There  is  no  proof  whatever
that  this  Gospel  was  ever  circulated  without  this  twenty-fourth  verse,  and  consequently
we  fjossess  a  singularly  early  vindication,  not  ouly  of  the  value  of  the  document,  but
of  the  closely  approximate  identification  of  the  author  with  one  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee.
The  group  of  the  disciples  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi.  2  consists  of  (1)  Simon  Peter,  who
is  especially  in  this  scene  distinguished  from  the  nameless  disciple ;  (2)  Thomas;  (3)
Nathaiiael;  (4,  5)  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee;  and  (6,  7)  two  other  of  his  disciples.  Now,
since  Thomas  and  Nathanael  are  speciallv  mentioned  by  name  elsewhere,  Nathanael  is
clearly  distinguished  from  the  nameless  disciple  in  ch.  i.  35,  etc.,  and  Thomas  from  the
rest  of  the  eleven,  so  it  is  certain  that  neither  Peter,  Thomas,  nor  Nathanael  could  have
been  the  beloved  disciple.  One  of  the  "sons  of  Zebedee,''  James,  was  the  firat  of  the
apostles  to  suffer  for  his  Lord  (Acts  xii.  1, 2).  It  remains  that  the  epilogue  asserts  that
he  was  eitlier  John  the  son  of  Z  bedee  or  one  of  two  others  who  are  altogether  unnamed.
It  has  been  conjectured  that  these  may  have  been  Andrew  and  Philip ;  but  since  these
apostles  are  elsewhere  mentioned  by  name,  it  is  improbable  that  they  are  thus  referred
to,  and,  from  being  pliiced  last,  were  far  more  probably  not  members  of  the  apostolic
circle  at  all.  It  would  be  quite  in  harmony  with  the  writer's  manner  throughout,
that  he  should  put  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee  last  in  his  enumeration  of  apostles.  Here,
in  fact,  the  synoptic  narratives  and  the  Acts  come  to  our  aid,  for  throughout  the  former
John  and  James,  with  Peter,  form  the  innermost  group  of  our  Lord's  best-loved  dis-
ciples, and,  from  the  lieginning  to  the  end,  John,  son  of  Zebedee,  occupies  a  prominent
position.  Whither  has  he  disappeared,  if  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  be  not  he?  for
if  he  be  not  the  son  of  Zebedee,  he  is  not  once  mentioned  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Again,
Peter  and  John  are  the  two  most  prominent  figures  in  the  early  Church  history  (Acts
iii.  1,  etc. ;  iv.  13 ;  viii.  14  ;  xii.  2,  3  ;  and  of.  Acts  xv.  with  Gal.  ii.  9),  where  Peter  and
John  were  still  together  witli  James  the  Lord's  brother,  pillars  of  the  mother  Church.
Seeing  that  we  know  from  the  synoptic  narrative  that  James  and  John  were  brothers,
and  from  several  passages  in  this  Gospel  and  in  the  synoptists  tliat  Andrew  and
Simon  Peter  (or  Cephas)  were  brothers,  and  that  the  four  were  fishermen  on  the  Sea  ot
Galilee,  it  is  next  to  impossible  to  refrain  from  the  impression  that,  when  in  ch.  i.  39,
etc.,  Andrew,  who,  mentioned  as  the  brother  of  Simon,  is  stated  to  be  one  of  the  two
discipli  8  of  Jolm  the  Baptist  who  followed  Jesus,  the  other  unnamed  one  was  John
the  son  of  Zebedee.  It  has  often  been  remarked  that  whereas  the  other  writers  speak
of  John  the  Baptist,  using  this  appellative  to  distinguish  him  from  other  Johns,  this
Fourth  Gospel  never  gives  tlje  Baptist  any  other  designation  than  John.  He  may  hav«
been  acquainted  with  the  Baptist  before  he  had  acquired  that  well-known  title  which
technically  distinguished  him.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


There  can  be  small  question,  and  it  is  admitted  by  some  of  tlie  most  rationalistic  oi
writers,  that  the  author  wishes  it  to  bo  sujiposcd  that  he  was  no  other  and  no  less  than
John  the  son  of  Zebedee.  The  author,  wlioever  he  was,  by  adopting  a  thin  disguise
(which  was  stripped  off  in  the  earliest  evangelical  tradition),  compels  his  readers  to  con-
jecture that  he  was  himself  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved;  that  he  was  one  of  the
twelve  disciples  who  had  companied  with  our  Lord  from  his  first  ajipearance  in  Galilee ;
that  he  was  an  eye-witness  of  Christ's  greatest  deeds,  and  a  creditable  reporter  of  his
weightiest  sayings ;  that  he  was  intimately  familiar  with  the  circle  of  our  Lord's  friends ;
and,  in  fact,  that  he  was  no  other  than  the  well-known  younger  son  of  Zebedee  and
Salome.  If,  however,  the  author  were  an  unknown  writer  of  the  second  century,  he
must  have  hazarded  much  by  this  delicate  fabrication.  He  could  neither  have  been
a  disciple  nor  even  a  contemporary  of  Jesus.  All  the  subtle  indications  of  the  presence
of  the  eye-witness  must  have  been  deliberately  forged,  to  give  weight  and  aut^hority  to
his  representation.  He,  whose  entire  portraiture  is  one  which  is  avowedly  designed  to
promote  the  realization  of  truth  and  to  stimulate  a  Divine  love  and  to  nourish  the  life
of  faith,  must  have  been  aware  throughout  that  he  was  romancing  if  not  falsifying  fact,
creating  for  the  sustenance  of  a  Divine  life  a  series  of  narratives,  discourses,  and  dis-
cussions which  he  Ijnew  were  being  originated  by  his  own  fertile  imagination,  and
nothing  more.  This  is  so  harsh  and  unworthy  an  exhibition  of  mala  fides  without
apparent  motive,  that  it  becomes  very  difficult  to  ascribe  it  to  the  author  of  this
wonderful  biography.  The  enormous  contrast  between  this  work  and  that  of  the  apo-
cryphal Gospels  and  Acts  forbids  our  accepting  the  hypothesis  unless  under  the  pressure
of  cogent  arguments  which  demonstrate  the  non-authenticity  of  the  narrative  (see  Stanley
Leathes,  'Witness  of  St.  John  to  Christ,'  Boyle  Lecture  for  1870).  .

Delfft  ('Grundziige  der  Entwickelungs-Geschichte  der  Religion  darzestellt,'  pp.  266,
etc. ;  1883)  has  propounded  an  ingenious  theory, that  "the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved"  may
have  been  one  of  the  unnamed  disciples  who  belonged  to  the  upper  classes  of  Jerusalem,
an  intimate  friend  of  Nicodemus  and  Joseph,  who  penetrated  the  secret  and  secured  the
affection  of  Jesus,  but  was  not  one  of  the  twelve.  Delfft  supposes  that  he  was  the  host
of  our  Lord  in  Jerusalem,  and  peculiarly  qualified  to  deal  with  the  events  and  discourses
there  taking  place;  not  the  John  of  the  synoptists  or  of  the  Apocalypse,  but  a  veritable
friend  and  biographer,  whose  name  was  probably  John — a  circumstance  which  led  to
mistaken  identification  with  the  son  of  Zebedee.  This  hypothesis,  Professor  Delfft
thinks,  would  save  the  historicity  of  the  narrative,  and  ride  clear  of  the  difficulties
which  the  supposed  differences  in  the  character  of  the  John  of  the  synoptists,  the  John
of  tradition,  and  the  John  of  the  Apocalypse  have  created.  The  only  need  of  the  hypo-
thesis, however,  turns  on  the  reality  of  those  supposed  difficuMes.  The  formidable
objection  to  it  is  that  there  is  no  trace  whatever  of  so  immense  a  force  as  such  a  man
would  have  been,  in  the  early  history  of  the  New  Testament,  the  Pauline  Epistles,  or
the  ecclesiastical  tradition.

We  must  on  all  grounds  examine  the  arguments  which  are  supposed  to  invalidate  the
assumption  made  by  the  writer.     They  are  twofold.     They  are  external  and  Internal.

(1)  They  consist  of  the  indications  which  other  literature  is  supposed  to  supply  of  the
character  and  life  of  the  presumed  author,  and  which  is  said  to  be  profoundly  different
from  the  spirit  and  character  of  one  who  calls  himself  "the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."

(2)  They  draw  a  series  of  contrasts  between  the  contents  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  and
those  of  the  synoptists,  which  are  sufficiently  plausible  to  arrest  attention  and  provoke
inquiry.  Can  the  author  be  referring  to  the  personages  and  to  the  events  described  in
the  synoptic  narrative?  and  can  the  "Jesus"  of  Matthew  be  identical  with  the  "Jesus"
of  the  Fourth  Gospel  ?

5.  A  comparison  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  with  the  hints  given  in
OTHER  mteeatuub  of  the  character  of  John  the  son  of  Zebedee.

(1)  The  "John  "  of  the  synoptists  must  be  compared  with  the  author  of  the  Fourth
Oospel.  If  we  take  the  synoptic  Gospels  as  our  only  authorities,  we  should  conclude
that  a  man,  by  name  Zebedaios  (Mark  i.  19,  20),  with  his  wife  Salome,  had  two  sons,
James  and  John ;  that  they  were  the  associates  of  two  others,  Simon  and  Andrew,  in  •
fishing  trade  upon  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth;  and  that  their  home  was  at  the  town  of
Bethsaida,  not  far  from  Capernaum  (of.  Mark  i.  29  ;  Luke  v.  10).

That  the  name  "Salome"  was  that  of  his  mother  is  gathered  from  Matt.  ixriL  66


M  INTRODtOTlON  TO


and  Mark  xv.  40,  where  the  women  who  hovered  round  the  cross  of  Jesus  are  enume-
rated, and  where  the  name  "Salome"  takes  the  place  in  Mark  which  "  the  mother  of
Zebedee's  children  "  occupies  in  Matthew's  Gospel.  Zebedee  is  not  described  as  a  poor
man,  but  as  possessed  of  boats,  fishing  tackle,  and  hired  day  labourers  (Mark  i.  20).
Moreover,  Salome  (Luke  viii.  3 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  55)  is  probably  amongst  the  group  of
women  who  followed  Jesus  on  some  of  his  journeyings,  and  who  ministered  to  him  and
to  the  twelve  of  their  substance.  The  whole  of  this  representation  is  remarkably  con-
firmed by  the  strong  reason  which  the  exegesis  of  ch.  xix,  (see  Exposition)  supplies
that  Salome  was  the  sister  of  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  was  closely  related  to  the  Lord.
We  know  that  considerable  profit  accrued  from  the  trade  of  fishing,  and  there  was  a
large  sale  at  Jerusalem  of  the  fish  taken  in  the  Sea  of  Galilee  for  transport  thither  and
consumption  during  the  principal  feasts.  Every  Israelite,  says  'Baba  Kama'  (fol.  80. 2,
referred  to  by  Caspari,  '  Chron.  Introduction  to  Life  of  Christ,'  Eng.  trans.,  p.  142),  had
a  right  to  engage  in  the  fishery  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  and  leaders  in  the  trade  would
certainly  be  present  in  Jerusalem  rhore  frequently  than  others  (cf.  Godet,  vol.  i.  31 ;
Lucke, '  Komm.,'  p.  2).  The  mother  of  James  and  John  was  a  zealous  and  enthusiastic
follower  of  her  Lord,  and  in  Matt.  xx.  20  she  preferred  a  request,  in  which  we  dare  not
say  that  the  two  brothers  did  not  sj'npathize,  viz.  that  they  might  sit  on  the  right  and
left  of  the  King  when  he  should  come  in  his  kingdom.  It  must  be  admitted  that  this
revealed  certain  carnal,  earthly  views  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  was  expressive  of  the
fierce  and  eager  patriotism  of  the  times.  The  near  relationship  of  Salome,  James,^  and
John  to  the  Lord  may  have  greatly  stimulated  the  desire  on  her  part.  That  she  should
have  entertained  ideas  of  a  temporal  triumph  is  no  more  than  the  mother  of  Jesus  herself
indicated  on  more  than  one  occasion.  But  if  so,  we  learn  that  she  was  at  once  rebuked,
and  they  were  shown  that  the  conditions  of  such  honour  were  readiness  to  drink  the
cup  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  the  Son  of  man.  They  who  knew  not  at  this
moment  "what  they  asked,"  learned  at  once  a  lesson  which  must  have  taught  them
(long  before  the  Fourth  Gospel  could  have  been  written)  that  which  Jesus  regarded  as
the  first  place  in  his  kingdom.  Moreover,  the  moment  wiien  Salome  presented  this
request  was  immediately  after  Christ's  most  solemn  announcement  of  his  approaching
death.  The  rebuke  which  he  administered  to  the  angry  spirit  of  the  remaining  ten
disciples,  and  his  lesson  on  the  royalty  of  service,  breathes  the  deepest  spirit  of  the
symbolic  act  which  so  soon  took  place,  i.e.  if  ch.  xiii.  1,  etc.,  be  an  antlientio  narrative.
A  woman  who  could  have  acted  as  Salome  did  must  from  the  first  have  exercised  a
powerful  influence  on  her  sons,  and  we  see  that  they  were,  in  accordance  with  Matthew,
Mark,  Luke,  and  Acts,  reckoned  in  the  very  first  rank  and  innermost  circle  of  the
twelve  ajMstles  (Matt.  x.  2  ;  Luke  vi.  4  ;  Mark  iii.  7  ;  Acts  i.  13).  "  Peter,  James,
and  John"  were  the  favoured  three  who  were  admitted  to  the  death-chamber  in  the
house  of  Jairus  (Mark  v^  37 ;  Luke  viii.  51),  as  witnesses  of  this  great  sign  of  his  power
over  death.  The  same  three  were  taken  by  the  Lord  into  the  cloud  of  his  glory  on  the
Mountain  of  Transfl-uration  (Matt.  xvii.  1 ;  Luke  ix.  28  ;  Mark  ix.  2),  and  thus  they
received  an  overwhelming  evi''ence  of  the  majesty  of  Christ  and  his  relation  to  the
unseen  world  and  the  heavenly  Fdther.  They  are  selected,  with  Andrew,  to  hear  the
prophecy  of  the  last  tilings  concerning  Jerusalem  and  the  kingdom  (Mark  xiii.  3),  and
to  accompany  the  Lo'd  into  the  mystery  of  his  deep  agony  and  bloody  sweat  in  the
garden  of  Gethsemane  (Matt.  xxvi.  37).  So  far  there  is  nothing  incompatible  with  a
word  written  by  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  though  we  may  reasonably  wonder
why  he  should  have  omitted  these  events  from  his  narrative.  But  there  are  hints  of
character  recorded  in  the  synoptic  narrative  which  are  more  difficult  to  reconcile  with
the  spirit  of  him  whom  Jesus  loved.

Jesus  gave,  according  to  Mark's  Gospel,  a  name  to  the  two  brethren  of  peculiar
force.  He  called  them  "  Boanerges,"  i.e.  "Sons  of  Thunder"  (Mark  iii.  17), probably  in
reference  to  the  zeal,  intensity,  and  fervour  of  their  character,  as  displayed  on  sundry
occasions.  The  enthusiasm  which  led  them  to  seek  by  baptism  into  death  their  place
at  the  right  hand  of  power  may  be  one  illustration  of  the  name  asi-igned  to  them ;  the
eloquence  and  fervour  of  their  speech  has  little  historic  fact  to  sustain  it,  nor  is  the
supposition  sufficiently  specific.  There  must  have  been  something  in  the  character  of
James  the  brother  of  John  which  made  his  cruel  martyrdom  by  Herod  Agrippa  pleas-
ing to  the  Jews  (Acts  xiii.  2);  and  it  is  possible  that  he,  as  the  elder  of  ^he  two  brothers,


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  Wl

may  have  been  the  more  prominent  of  the  two  in  the  request  made  by  Salome,  and  on
other  occasions  in  which  we  see  a  repressed  passion,  at  times,  storming  forth  fixim  the
two  brethren.  But  John  himself  is  described  (Mark  ix.  38,  etc. ;  Luke  is.  49,  etc.)  as
saying  to  our  Lord,  as  though  in  sympathy  with  the  solemn  and  tender  words  which
Jesus  had  just  uttered, "  Master,  we  saw  a  certain  one  casting  out  demons  in  thy  Name;
and  we  forbade  him,  because  he  followelh  not  [thee]  with  us."  The  fact  may  have  been
put  with  a  desire  for  iustruotion,  with  a  possible,  nay,  even  probable,  suspicion,  that  the
course  taken  was  open  to  reproof,  and  we  hear  that  he  received  the  memorable  reply,
"  Forbid  him  not ;  for  he  who  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  side."  "  No  one  who  will
exercise  power  or  work  a  miracle  (5vm)uv)  in  my  Name,  will  be  able  shortly  [straight-
way] to  speak  evil  of  me."  The  proceeding  was  simply  the  obverse  of  the  passionate
love  John  felt  for  his  Master — a  manifestation  which  was  not  altogether  absent  Irom  his
heart  and  life,  even  in  his  Jatest  days.  If  the  Second  and  Thiid  Epistles  uf  John  are
rightly  attributed  to  him  (2  Epist.  10 ;  3  Epist.  9 — 11),  tlien  the  same  kind  of  burning
indignation  manifests  itself  against  those  who  are  disloyal  to  the  Spirit  and  truth  of
Christ.  In  the  case  of  Diotrephes,  we  see  thut  the  aged  apostle's  wrath  flames  out
against  the  very  thing  for  which  he  had  received,  so  many  years  before,  the  rebuke  of
his  Lord ;  but  there  is  the  tone  of  the  Son  of  Thunder  in  the  remonstrance.

Another  remarkable  illustration  of  the  name  which  our  Lord  bestowed  upon  John  is  given
in  Luke  ix.  54,  55,  where  the  two  brothers  are  roused  into  indignation  by  the  refubal  of
the  Samaritans  to  receive  his  Master.  "  Master,"  say  James  and  John,  "  wiliest  thou
that  we  call  fire  to  descend  from  heaven  to  consume  them  ?  And  Jesus  rebuked  them."
The  interesting  addition  to  the  text  of  Luke  found  in  a  few  manuscripts,  and  supposed  to
be  quoted  from  some  traditional  source,  is  on  the  authority  of  all  the  principal  uncials  and
some  sixty  cursives,  omitted  by  the  modern  editors.  Here,  again,  James  is  mentioned
first,  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  was  the  speaker,  and  the  two  brethren  are  made  to  feel  the
weight  of  their  Lord's  displeasure.  Yet  even  here  there  is  nothing  incompatible  with
the  stormy  burst  of  thunder  which  is  attributed  by  tradition  to  the  apostle  of  love  in
his  treatment  of  Cerinthus.  If  John  were  the  veritable  recorder  of  the  ministry  of
Christ  among  the  hated  Samaritans  (ch.  iv.),  it  is  easy  to  imagine  the  sudden  rise  of
wrath  which  linked  his  soul  with  the  Elijah-ministry  of  his  first  teacher,  and  that  the
enthusiastic  attachment  of  soul  to  his  Master's  cause  should  have  outrun  discretion,
when  he  became  the  witness  of  the  tribal  hatred  of  the  Samaritans.  Nothing  can  be
lets  true,  even  judging  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  itself  and  the  First  Epistle,  than  the
popular  representation  of  the  apostle's  character,  which  attributes  to  him  a  spurious  and
effeminate  softness,  or  a  love  which  had  no  power  to  condemn  in  severe  and  burning
and  even  thunderous  word  that  disloyalty  and  lack  of  appreciation  of  his  Lord  with
which  he  was  confronted.  So  abundantly  does  the  Fourth  Gospel  set  itself  to  unfold
the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  and  his  work,  that  our  eyes  are  dazzled  by  the  light,
and  are  not  sufficiently  alive  to  the  dark  shadows  and  terrible  denunciations  with
which  the  Gospel  positively  abounds.  In  no  portion  of  the  New  Testament  is  so
formidable  a  representation  made  of  the  wrath  ot  God  against  sin,  or  so  severe  a  con-
demnation of  the  hatred  of  the  world  against  Christ  and  his  Church  (Stanley  Leathes*
'Witness  of  St.  John  to  Christ,'  lect.  v.).  The  conlrast  btweeen  light  and  darkness
is  one  of  the  themes  of  the  prologue.  In  the  language  (ch.  iii.  18, 19)  of  our  Lord  to
Nioodemus,  the  awful  judgment  devolving  upon  unbelief  is  set  forth  ;  and  (ch.  iii.  36)
either  John  the  Baptist,  or  the  apostle  as  one  of  his  earliest  disciples,  describes  "  the
wrath  of  God  abiding"  on  the  unbeliever.  Only  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  (v.  29)  do  we
read  of  "  the  resurrection  of  condemnation ; "  and  we  find  the  traitor  characterized  as
"  a  devil "  (ch.  vi.  70).  It  is  the  Fourth  Gospel  which  reports  Christ's  own  words,
"  Te  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not  find  me  :  and  where  I  am,  ye  cannot  come"  (ch.  vii.
34) ;  and  which  represents  our  Lord  saying,  "  Ye  are  from  beneath  •  1  am  from  above  "
(ch.  viii.  23) ;  "  If  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  youi  sins  "  (ch.  viiL  24) ;
"  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil "  (ch.  viii.  44) ;  "  For  judgment  I  am  come  into  this
world,"  etc.  (ch.  ix.  39).  The  remarkable  passage  of  the  writer's  own  comment  (ch.
xii.  37 — 43);  in  language  of  flaming  forcefulness,  denounces  the  unbelief  of  the  people.
Even  in  the  valedictory  discourse  there  is  most  terrible  denunciation  of  the  causelesn
hatred  of  the  world  (ch.xv.  25;  xvi.  1 — 3),  and  the  intercessory  prayer  records  the
awful  description  of  the  traitor  as  "  'he  son  of  |  eriiition"  (ch.  xvii,  12).


Wii  INTEODUCTION  TO

This  considerable  list  of  testimonies  to  the  spirit  of  the  writer,  to  the  suppressed
passion  of  stormy  wrath  which  burned  within  him,  is  more  than  enough  to  show  that
the  "John"  of  the  synoptists  is  not  in  the  smallest  degree  incompatible  with  the
character  of  the  author  of  this  Fourth  Gospel;  while  the  obvious  intimacy  with  our
Lord  that  he  shared  with  Peter  and  James  does  not  contradict  the  term  which  he
modestly  attributed  to  himself.  The  intensity  of  John's  nature  was,  doubtless,  one  of
the  occasions  and  ministrants  of  the  Divine  love  to  him,  nor  is  there  in  the  lofty  con-
cepiion  he  formed  of  our  Lord  an  inconsiderable  explanation  of  the  occasional  outbursts
of  his  wrath.  If  he  even  then  believed  in  the  incarnation  of  the  eternal  life  and  light
and  love  in  his  Master,  if  he  was  beginning  to  realize  more  deeply  than  the  rest,  the
awful  grandeur  of  the  Personality  of  Jesus,  if  he  found  himself  loving  his  Lord  with
passionate  devotion, — we  need  not  be  surprised  that  he  should  resent  every  indication  of
treachery  or  disloyalty.  At  tliis  early  period  he  had  not  learned  all  the  lessons  of  the
compnssionate  tenderness  and  infinite  sympathy  of  Jesus  with  sorrow  and  death,  nor
all  the  superabundance  and  superfluity  of  love  which  he  lavished  on  different  classes,
so  that  he  might  easily  have  fallen  into  the  venial  error  which  was  not,  as  we  have
seen,  incompatible  with  the  spirit  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Nay,  the
Gospel,  by  making  it  appear  that  the  Lord  had  shown  signs  of  special  patience  and
kindness  towards  the  Samaritans  (ch.  iv.),  really  explains  why,  at  another  and  later
period,  the  author  should  have  fancied  he  did  well  to  be  angry,  and  should  have
desiderated  the  power  of  the  Elijah-like  ministry  of  his  first  teacher,  and  been  ready  to
call  down  fire  upon  the  Samaritan  village.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  village  '
refused  to  receive  Christ  at  a  moment  when,  in  a  condescension  which  to  a  Jew  was
simply  superhuman,  the  Christ  was  willing  to  overlook  their  national  estrangeinent,  and
to  ofi'er  to  them  the  blessings  of  his  kingdom.  Verily  this  trait  of  personal  character  has
been  griatly  exaggerated,  if  it  be  made  a  reason  for  rejecting  a  conclusion  abundantly
confirmed  by  other  reasons,  that  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  was  the  son  of  Zebedee.

There  are  iif  other  solitary  references  to  the  Apostle  John  in  the  synoptic  narrative,
and  by  themselves  they  are  ralher  explained  than  contradicted  by  the  supposition  of
the  authenticity  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.

(2)  Tlie  "  John  "  of  the  Ads  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Qalatians,  com-
pared with  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Oospel.  Those  who  dispute  the  authenticity  of
the  Fourth  Gospel  maintain  that,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  John  occupied  a  position
in  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  and  among  Jewish  Christians  which,  while  compatible
with  the  authorship  of  the  Apocalypse,  contrasts  forcibly  with  the  spiritual  conception
of  the  kingdom  of  God  which  pervades  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Let  us  give  this  objection
all  possible  force,  and  even  emphasize  everything  that  these  documents  contain.

(a)  We  learn,  then,  from  Acts  i.  13  that  John  was  tarrying  at  Jerusalem,  and  was  a
witness  of  the  Ascensicin ;  that,  with  the  mother  and  brethren  of  the  Lord,  who  now
fully  believed  in  Christ's  superhuman  and  sublime  claims,  and  with  the  rest  of  the
eleven,  he  continued  in  prayer  and  supplication,  in  generous  mutual  love,  and  in  holy
waiting  for  "  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  which,  said  Jesus,  "  ye  have  heard  of  me  " —
waiting  for  "  the  power  of  the  Holy  S|irit,"  which  should  come  upon  them,  and  make
them  witnesses  of  Christ,  not  only  in  Judaja  and  Samaria,  but  to  the  end  of  the  world.
So  (ar  from  this  representation  being  incompatible  with  the  personality  and  presumed
knowledge  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  we  think  that  the  valedictory  discourse
of  Christ,  as  preserved  by  John,  is  Hie  very  best  explanation  that  can  be  offeied  of  these
strange  words.  The  *' promise  of  the  Fatlier,"  the  "coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  the
"return  of  the  Lord,"  the  greater  works,  and  the  world-witness  to  Christ,  are  the  great
themes  of  that  discourse.  Moreover,  the  very  presence  of  the  mother  and  brethren  of
Jesus  in  the  chamber  where  the  eleven  met  for  worship  is  best  explained  by  the  state-
ment of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  that  John  took  the  widowed  and  bereaved  mother  eii  rAtSio.

(b)  John  took  part  in  the  election  of  Matthias,  as  one  of  the  eleven,  and  in  this
contravenes  no  representation  which  he  subsequently  unconsciously  makes  of  his  own
personality.  The  disciples  appealed  to  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord  for  decision  in  a
matter  of  profound  interest  to  them  all  (cf.  here  ch.  xiv.  12 — 14).

(c)  The  entire  proceedings  of  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  in  which  John,  without  special
mention  of  his  name,  took  Jiart,  constitute  one  long  fulfilment  of  expectations  which
had  been  excited  by  the  words  of  Jnsns  before  he  suffered.     The  whole  spirit  of  that


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  Hx

representation  is  tbat  tliese  are  soma  of  the  greater  works  whicli  the  apostles  were
beginning  to  perform  (ch.  v.  20),  because  the  Lord  is  exalted  to  tlje  glory  which  he  had
with  the  Father  before  the  world  was  (ch.  xvii.  5 ;  xvi.  7).  The  Holy  Spirit  is  giveo
because  Jesus  is  glorifluJ  (ch.  vii.  39).  Peter,  the  intimate  friend  of  John,  is  the
spokesman,  but  his  words  are  a  remarkable  comment  on  the  last  words  of  the  Lord  as
renorted  in  the  Fourth  G<i6pel.  The  references  which  Peter  made  to  the  prophecies
of  Joel  and  of  David  do  but  confirm,  by  quotations  from  the  Scripture,  the  great  cjcle
of  thought  so  prominent  in  oh.  xii. — xvii.,  viz.  of  triumph  through  death  and  over
death  which  is  thus  become  the  element  of  the  glory  of  the  Christ,  the  travail-pang  of
death  issuing  in  a  new  joy  and  an  eternal  crown,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Snirit,  the  bcstow-
ment  of  the  free  gift  of  tlie  Spirit  on  whomsoever  the  Lord  God  should  call.  These  phrasos
strikingly  clothe  in  new  words  the  iivay  er  andihouglit  of  Jesus, "  Thine  they  were,  and  thou
gavest  them  me,"  and  "  Wliosocver  hath  see:]  and  learned  of  the  Father,  cometh  unto  me."

(d)  John  is  mentioned  liy  name  as  accompanying  Peter  to  the  temple  (Acts  iii.  I).  The
whole  tenor  of  the  discourse  of  Peter,  who  is  again  the  spokesman,  is  in  deep  harmony
with  the  extraordinary  teaching  that  both  he  and  Jnhn  had  received  on  the  night  of
the  Passion  (cf.  vers.  15,  IG) ;  and  the  conclusion  of  the  entire  transaction  after  Peter
and  John  had  been  arrested  and  released  is  "  They  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  spake  the  word  of  God  fiera  ira^^ijir/os."  We  readily  grant  that  Peter  is  intent  on
impressing  the  Sanhedrin,  priests,  and  populace  with  the  true  Messianic  dignity  of  the
Lord,  notwithstanding  his  death  ;  but  John,  if  he  he  the  anthor  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,
was  none  the  less  impressed  with  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  the  closing  scenes  of
our  Lord's  life  (ch.  xii.  38,  etc. ;  xiii.  18 ;  xix.  24, 36,  37),  and  in  ch,  xx.  31  he  expressly
says  that  "  these  things  are  written,  thut  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the
Son  of  God ;  and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in  his  Name."  The  language  of  Peter
follows  the  awful  events  of  the  Crucifixion  and  the  luminous  interpreting  fact  of  the
Eesuvrection,  and  is  concerned  to  show  their  hearing  on  the  world  of  Judaism  and  on
the  heart  of  unbelief.  In  the  Gospel,  written,  moreover,  years  afterwards,  when  the
exaltation  of  the  Lord  hal  by  the  events  recorded  in  the  Acts  become  a  grand
commonplace  of  Christian  belief,  the  author  reproduced  the  spiritual  promises  and  hopes
which  the  Lord  had  kindled  within  them  by  his  valedictory  discourse.

(e)  Wherever  the  twelve  apostles  are  spoken  of  in  the  Acts,  we  may  suppose  the
Apostle  John  present,  though  we  catch  no  word  and  hear  no  sp'  ech  of  him.  He  is,  as
in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  a  silent  presence.  He  allows  Peter  to  S[ieak  for  him.  The  San-
hedrin take  knowledge  of  the  two  men,  that  they  had  been  "  with  Jesus."  Possibly  a
tone  of  Peter's  voice,  a  flash  in  his  companion's  eye,  a  word  of  one,  a  look  of  the  other,
a  common  spirit  in  them  both,  provoked  the  comparison.  They  may,  moreover,  have
been  remembered  and  recognized  as  having  been  "with  Jesus"  on  the  night  of  the
Passion  and  the  trial — a  fact  which  is  only  known  to  us  from  John's  own  account  of  the
transactions.  In  the  eighth  cliapter  of  the  Acts,  Peter  and  John  went  down  to  Samaria,
to  endorse  with  their  authority  the  proclamation  which  the  deacon  Philip  bad  made  to
the  Samaritans  ;  and  to  be  the  means  of  communicating  those  special  gifts  of  the  Holy
Ghost  which  had  been  the  earliest  witness  to  the  presence  of  the  risen  and  gloritied
Lord  in  his  Church,  and  "  there  was  great  jny  in  the  city."  Few  things  throw  more
light  upon  that  joy,  and  the  rapid  success  of  Philip's  ministry,  than  the  memory  of  the
visit  of  the  Lord  to  Samaria,  of  which  the  Fourth  Gospel  retains  the  record.  The
manner  in  which  Peter  rebuked  Simon  the  sorcerer  is  evidently  characteristic  of  him  ;
and  the  silent  co-operation  of  John  is  another  trait  of  that  character  which  was  bold  in
thought,  but  which  did  not  hurry  into  prominence  or  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard.

(/)  When  St.  Paul  paid  his  first  visit  to  Jerusalem  after  his  conversion,  John  was
not  present  (Gal.  i,  19)  there,  and  therefore  cannot  be  accused  of  taking  part  in  any  of
the  natural  hesitancy  which  some  of  the  apostles  felt  with  reference  to  the  reality  of
Saul's  conversion ;  but  when  afterwards,  Paul,  Barnabas,  Titus,  and  others  went  up  from
Antioch  to  Jerusalem,  to  discuss  the  teims  of  Gentile  communion,  though  (Acts  x  v.)  much
discussion  is  reported,  and  though  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord  and  Simon  Peter  are
described  as  setting  forth  in  a  liberal  spirit  the  new  law  of  the  covenant,  and  as  finally
proposing  a  compromise  to  the  Gentiles  who  had  believed  through  grace,  exonerating
them  from  the  bondage  of  Jewish  customs,  John  is  not  mentioned.  Again,  in  charac-
teristic fashion,  he  retires  behind  the  other  apostles,  though  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  9),  ig


INTRODUCTION  TO


referring  to  the  same  circumstances,  designates  "James,  Cephas,  and  John,"  as  those  "who
seemed  to  be  pillars  "  of  the  Church :  and  St.  I'aul  speaks  of  their  giving  the  ri^ht  hands
of  fellowship  lo  himself  for  an  apostolate  to  the  Gentiles.  The  essence  of  the  Tiibingen
hypothesis  is  tliat  Paul  wrung  a  dubious  and  halting  assent  to  his  universalism  from
the  pillar-apostles,  and  that,  by  the  force  of  his  character  and  the  brilliancy  of  his
success  among  the  Gentiles,  he  compelled  a  temporary  truce,  which  was  afterwards
broken.  But  there  is  quite  enough  in  the  synoptic  narrative  to  show  that  our  Lord
had  already  laid  tlie  foundations  of  the  spiritual  Church,  and  had  uttered  principles
which  would  destroy  the  Levitical  Law  as  a  condition  of  life.  Take  e.g.  Matt,  iv,
18 — 20  and  Mark  vii.  18 — ^20,  where  Christ  had  declared  that  the  heart  is  the  source  of
defilement,  not  the  neglect  of  ceremonial  traditions.  Take  also  Mark  ii.  28,  where  he
claimed  to  be  "  Lord  of  the  sabbath  "  (cf.  Matt.  xii.  8).  There  was  latent  in  the  cus-
tumary  preaching  of  the  twelve  apostles  what  would  entirely  justify  Paul's  emancipa-
tion of  the  Gentile  Church  from  the  Mosaic  yoke  of  ceremony,  and  explain  Paul's
willingness  to  submit  the  matter  to  the  arbitrament  of  the  Jerusalem  apostles.  After
their  wise  decision,  John  again  quietly  drops  out  of  sight.  When  Peter  is  afterwards
to  be  blamed  and  withstood  at  Antiooh,  it  was  because  some  had  come  thither
from  James,  who  had  prompted  the  severance,  and  John  does  not  seem  to  have  done
or  said  anything  inconsistent  with  the  large  libeiality  and  spirituality  of  the  first
apostolic  decision.  "Even  Barnabas,"  Peter,  and  James  were  carried  away,  at  least
for  the  moment,  by  Pharisaic  exclusiveness ;  but  there  is  not  an  atom  of  proof  that
John  was  so  swept  into  the  current.  And  this  is  the  last  external  indication  of  any  kind
that  these  writings  of  the  New  Testament  supply  touching  the  personality  of  the
son  of  Zebedee — verily  a  shadowy  foundation  for  any  specific  indication  of  character.
It  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  say  that  the  son  of  Zebedee  may  not  be  identified  with
the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  so  far  as  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  uncon-
sciously delineated  his  own  portraiture.  If  the  antagonism  between  Paul  and  the  Jeru-
salem apostles  be  pressed  hypothetically  far  beyond  what  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians
warrants,  and  is  introduced  as  an  explanation  of  a  multiplicity  of  small  details  in  the
other  Epistles;  if  the  unwarrantable  inference  he  drawn  that  the  false  apostles  of  the
Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  are  the  Jerusalem  apostles  or  their  immediate  repre-
sentatives, and  the  Ebionitic  antagonism  to  Paul,  evinced  in  the  pseudo-Clementine
literature,  be  the  historical  fact,  and  must  be  traced  back  to  the  original  relations
between  them  ; — then  a  multitude  of  other  consequences  follow.  Then  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  the  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Philippians  must  be  also  relin-
qtiished,  and  the  Gospel  of  Marcion  and  the  Clementine  literature  must  be  substituted
for  them.  Then  the  Epistle  of  James  must  be  regarded  as  a  late  and  antagonistic
document  in  reply  to  the  "  vain  man  "  Paul,  and  the  wide  views  and  Pauline  spirit  of
the  First  Epistle  of  Peter,  like  the  Gospel  of  John,  must  be  interpreted  as  late  forgeries
in  the  interests  of  comprehension  and  peace.

(3)  The  author  of  the  three  Epistles  which  hear  traditionally  the  name  of  John,
compared  with  the  author  of  the  Oospel.  The  evidence  of  antiquity  iu  favour  of  the
identity  of  authorship  of  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle,  and  also  separately  in  attesta-
tion of  the  Johannine  authorship  of  the  Epistle,  is  sufficient  and  abundant.  This
matter  need  not  be  here  developed  at  length.  It  is  necessary  to  recall  the  facts  that :
(a)  The  Muratorian  Fragment  on  the  Canon  makes  special  mention  of  the  First  Epistle
as  an  appendix  to  the  Gospel,  and  then  refers  to  "  two  Epistles  "  further  on.  (6)  That
the  apostolic  Fathers  quote  it.  Polycarp  refers  to  1  John  iv.  3  in  his  '  Epistle  to  Phil.,'
c.  vii.  and  iv.  9 ;  ibid.,  c.  viii. ;  '  The  Epistle  to  Diognetus '  refers  to  or  quotea,  in  ch.
X.,  1  John  iv.  9  and  1  John  i.  1.  More  important  than  these  proofs  of  its  exist-
ence is  (c)  the  quotation  by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  39)  of  the  testimony  of  Papias,
"  who  used  passages  from  the  First  Epistle  of  John "  (see  ante).  The  celebrated
quotation  from  Polycarp  (c.  vii.)  has  been  regarded  of  such  immense  weight  in  the
argument,  that  some  of  the  opponents  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  have
sought  to  minimize  its  importance  by  endeavouring  either  to  invalidate  the  authen-
ticity of  the  epistle  of  Polycarp,  or  to  represent  the  unknown  author  m  the  Epistle
sa  quoting  from  Polycarp,  instead  of  the  reverse  (see  '  Supernatural  Beligion,'  vol.  ii.).
The  sentence  is,  nSs  yap  Si  iv  /lii  inoXoy^  'Iriaovy  Xpiarhy  iv  irapid  i\ri\v84vai,  hjiTlxpiirris
eartv.    This  is  a  striking  reference  to  the  Epistle  of  John.     Subsequently,  Tert  4lUap


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  U

('  Ad  Prax.,'  c.  15 ;  '  Adv.  Maro.,'  iii.  8 ;  and  in  other  places),  Irenteus  ('  Adv.  Hasr.'  lii.
16),  Clemens  Alex.,  and  Origen  repeatedly  cite  it  as  the  work  of  the  Apostle  John,  m
also  Cyprian  ('  Ep.,'  28).

The  opposition  to  the  universal  conviction  of  the  Church  commenced  with  Joseph
Scaliger,  who  doubted  the  canonical  value  of  the  Epistle.  Bretschneider  and  Paulus,
who  defended  the  common  origin  of  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle,  yet  referred  both  to
the  Presbyter  John,  of  whose  shadowy  existence  see  above  (pp.  xxxii.,  xxxiii.).  The  later
writers  of  the  Tiibingen  school,  who  would  find  their  whole  attempt  to  reconstruct  the
New  Testament  and  to  account  for  the  origin  of  Christianity  disappear,  if  they  admitted
the  genuineness  of  either  worlj,  account  differently  for  the  relation  of  the  two  docu-
ments to  one  another.  Some  have  admitted  the  identity  of  authorship;  but  others,
lilie  Hilc;eafeld  and  Dr.  Davidson,  have  laid  great  stress  on  the  deviations  or  discre-
pancies between  tlie  Gospel  and  the  Epistle.  Prom  the  difference  of  style,  and  the  pre-
sumed divergence  of  doctrinal  view,  they  have  endeavoured  to  obviate  the  powerful
argument  which  the  identity  of  authorship  supplies  to  the  genuineness  of  the  Fourth
Gospel.  The  character  of  the  writer  as  evinced  in  the  tone  of  this  Epistle,  his  refer-
ence to  "antichrists"  and  to  the  "coming  of  the  Lord,"  the  strong  antithesis  he
institutes  between  "light"  and  " darkness,"  " the  Father"  and  "the  world,"  form  a
valuable  link  of  connection  between  the  writer  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  John  of
the  synoptists  and  the  Acts.  The  verbal  coincidences  between  the  Gospel  and  the  First
Epistle  are  very  numerous :  ch.  xvi.  24  with  1  John  i.  4 ;  ch.  xv.  18  with  1  John  iii.
13 ;  ch.  viii.  34,  etc.,  with  1  John  iii.  8 ;  ch.  i.  18  with  1  John  iv.  12.  In  the  last
quotation,  and  many  others,  the  writer  of  the  prologue  and  of  the  Epistle  uses  identical
language.

It  is  admitted  that  the  two  documents  move  along  the  same  general  lines,  and  are
concerned  with  the  same  class  of  expressions — "  darkness  and  light,"  "  knowing  and
not  knowing  God  or  Christ,"  "  having  sin,"  "  laying  down  life  for  others,"  "  taking
away  sin  "  (1  John  iii.  5  ;  ch.  i.  29) ;  references  to  the  Paraclete  (1  John  ii.  1 ;  oh.  xiv.
16),  to  "  the  only  begotten  Son "  (1  John  iv.  9 ;  ch.  i.  14,  18 ;  iii.  16, 18),  and  to
"  mutual  love  as  the  commandment  of  Christ "  (1  John  iii.  11,  16, 18 ;  ch.  xiii.  34 ;
XV.  12,  17).  The  flow  of  the  sentences  corresponds  to  that  of  the  prologue,  and
reflects  the  words  of  Jesus.

Dr.  Lias,  in  his '  Doctrinal  System  of  John,'  has  evinced  with  remarkable  ability  the
correspondence  between  the  use  which  St.  Paul  had  made  of  the  teaching  of  Christ
preserved  by  tradition  and  recorded  afterwards  by  John,  and  the  doctrinal  use  which
this  writer  has  made  in  this  Epistle  of  thoughts  and  words  first  uttered  by  the  Divine
Lord.  In  the  ideas  as  Christ  uttered  them  we  have  the  truth  in  its  simplest  and  most
elementary  form ;  in  Paul's  Epistles  and  John's  Epistles  we  have  the  same  thought  in
more  direct  application  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Church  and  the  new  currents  of
thought  which  had  begun  to  agitate  it.  Paul  has  elaborated  these  teachings  of  Christ
into  long  arguments,  which  go  back  to  authoritative  and  well-understood  principles  and
facts,  and  which  find  no  such  natural  interpretation  as  that  which  is  supplied  by  the
sententious  teaching  which  John  has  preserved  for  us ;  e.q.  the  New  Testament  Epistles
do  all  of  them  build  upon  and  elaborate  the  antagonism  between  "  the  flesh  "  and  "  the
Spirit,"  as  though  it  were  a  settled  conclusion  based  upon  a  mutually  understood
principle.  Take  Gal.  iv.  29;  v.  16 — 22;  Bom.  vii. ;  and  viii.  1,  5 — 17,  which  all  reflect
the  teaching  of  Christ  subsequently  made  public  in  oh.  iii.  and  vi.  In  1  John  ii.  16
the  iriBv/ila  r^s  (rapxis  is  spoken  of  as  iic  toS  K6ff/iov,  and  the  phrase  compresses  much
of  the  Pauline  teaching  into  a  sentence  (cf.  Dr.  Pope's  '  Preface '  to  Haupt's  '  Disserta-
tion on  the  First  Epistle  of  John,'  Bng.  trans.).

But  objection  has  been  taken  to  the  identity  of  authorship  on  grounds  which,  when
stated,  have  a  tendency  to  refute  themselves.

(a)  Thus  it  is  said  that  a  grave  difference  reveals  itself  between  the  eschatological
ideas  of  the  Gospel  and  Epistle;  that  in  the  latter  the  irapovaia  is  anticipated  (as  it  is  in
the  Paulino  Epistles),  and  that  a  "  day  of  judgment "  looms  in  the  immediate  future,
but  that  in  the  Gospel  the  judgment  is  regarded  as  already  past,  and  Christ's  "second
coming"  is  resolved  in  to  a  spiritual  mission  to  I  he  cliscii'les,aiid  that  Josuswill  come  again,
only  in  the  power  of  the  Paraclete;  further,  according;  to  the  Gospel,  the  future  and
presentare  alike  comprehended  in  the  one  idea  of  "eternal  life."  But  we  have  to  remember,


IxB  INTEODUOTION  TO


on  the  one  hand,  that,  in  the  Gospel,  our  Lord  does  speak  of  a  last  day  and  of  a  day  ol
judgment,  when  he  would  personally  judge  the  world  (see  ch.  v.  28,  29 ;  vi.  39,  40,  44,
54).  And  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  while  he  confirms  this  expectation,  declares  thai
those  who  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  have  "eternal  life,"  and  that  "those  that  have  the
Son  of  God  have  life"  (1  John  v.  13).  In  ii.  2H  he  assures  believers  of  their  boldness  and
freedom  from  shame  at  the  approaching  paroMsia.  The  Gospel  simply  records  Christ's
words  as  he  uttered  them,  and  the  Epistle  exhibits  the  effect  upon  two  generations  of
Christiaus  of  the  whole  of  Christ's  teaching  as  given  in  the  synoptic  and  Johannine
Gospels.

(6)  Dr.  Davidson  says  that  the  Gospel  knows  nothing  of  "antichrist,"  because,  accord-
ing to  its  "  genius,"  "  the  prince  of  this  world  is  cast  out "  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  whi  le
"the  Epistle  speaks  or  many  antichrists."  This  surely  is  in  obvious  harmony  with
the  simple  facts  of  the  case  for  which  the  Gospel  had  prepared  the  way.  The  antagonism
of  darkness  to  the  Logos  (ch.  i.  3),  and  the  frequent  forewarning  against  calamities,
hatred,  and  misunderstanding  from  the  world,  abound  in  the  valedictory  discourse  (ch.
XV.  18,  etc. ;  xvi.  1 — 4).

(c)  The  doctrine  of  the  Paraclete,  say  opponents,  is  differently  conceived  in  the  two.
"  Indeed,  the  Spirit  is  never  called  '  the  Paraclete '  in  the  Epistle.  Christ  himself  is  so
termed  (1  John  ii.  1)."  "  In  the  Epistle  (the  Spirit)  is  less  closely  identified  with  Christ.
He  vntnesses  and  is  truth  .  .  .  but  is  not  identified  witk  Christ.  He  is  the  anointing
which  believers  receive  from  the  Holy  One,"  etc.  But  the  reference  to  Christ  as  the
Paraclete  is  in  such  subtle  harmony  with  Christ's  proinise  of  "another  Paraclete"  who
should  abide  with'them  for  ever,  that  this  is  one  ot  the  remarkable  signs  of  identity  of
authorship ;  while  in  ch.  xv.  26  the  Spirit's  work  is  described  as  "  a  witnessing "
concerning  Christ.  On  the  other  hand,  1  John  iii.  24,  the  nveiiia  which  he  (Christ)
has  given  to  us  is  proof  that  he  Chiist  Jesus  abideth  in  us;  and  the  xp^"'/*"  "■'^^  toS
07(011  (1  John  ii.  20,  27)  corresponds  very  closely  with  the  teaching  which  the  Church
had  received  from  the  words  of  Jesus  with  reference  to  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit
and  his  power  of  leading  disciples  into  all  truth.

(i)  It  is  said,  "  High  as  the  epithets  (attributed  to  Christ  in  the  Epistle)  are,  they
imply  a  conception  of  his  Persun  inferior  to  those  used  in  the  Gospel."  They  are  slightly
different,  we  admit ;  but  let  1  John  i.  1 — 3  be  read,  t  ^v  iJt'  &picrjs,  etc.,  where  the  Sun
is  spoken  of  in  close  relation  to  the  Father  (see  Haupt  on  this  passage) ;  also  1  John  ii.
14,  where  the  i  A6yos  toC  0eoS  h  ifiiv  fidve,  correponds  very  closely  with  Christ's  own
promise,  /levciv,  with  his  disciples;  1  John  ii.  23, "  He  that  denieth  the  Son  hath  not  the
Father ; "  to  say  nothing  of  1  John  v.  7,  8.  'The  eternal  Word  of  life  incarnate,  the
Son  of  God  who  had  been  manifested  and  come  in  the  flesh  to  destroy  the  works  of  the
devil,  the  Son,  the  gnat  exhibition  ot  Divine  and  eternal  love,  fills  the  whole  thought
of  the  writer,  and  carries  into  practical  form  the  sublime  aphorisms  of  Christ  him-^elf,
while  it  presupposes  throughout  the  personal  dignity  of  the  Son  of  G^.  Let  it  be
remembered  that  the  Gospel  (with  the  exception  of  the  prologue)  does  not  with  abso-
lute certainty  refer  to  the  personal  JfOgns,  but  has  substituted  for  it  "the  Son;"  and
the  final  word  ol'  Divine  inspiration  in  this  Epistle  leaves  it  beyond  all  doubt  that  the
summation  of  apostolic  doctrine  is  this — "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  that  is  in  his
Son  Jesus  Christ.     This  is  the  veritable  God,  and  eternal  life."

(e)  Another  argument  is  derived  from  the  strongly  anti-docetic  spirit  of  the  Episile
(which  is  readily  conceded),  as  contra'<ted  with  "  the  almost  docetic  character  of  the
Gospel."  Here,  says  Dr.  Davidson,  "  the  Aii7os  in  some  respects  resembled  an  £eon."
This  scarcely  harmonizes  with  the  previous  objection.  But  not  one  ot  the  Gospels  iail
such  emphasis  on  the  essential  humanity  of  Christ  as  does  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  e.^,
his  presence  at  the  wedding-feast ;  his  w  eariness  with  his  journey  ;  his  participation  in
food,  even  after  his  resurrection;  his  anointing  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man  with  spittle;
his  weeping  and  groaning  at  the  giave  of  Lazarus.  His  human  heart  and  relatiok-
ships  are  all  insisted  on.  Thul  Christ's  bodily  organization  was  unique  belirags  to  each
of  the  evangelic  narratives,  and  not  more  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  than  to  St.  Luke's.
His  essential  Personality  is  in  the  Son  of  God  himself.

(/)  Baur  and  Davidson  urge  a  different  accei  tation  of  the  two  references  to  "  blaoii
■nd  water  "  in  the  Gospel  and  l^pistle,  saying  that  in  ch.  xix.  34  symbolic  reference
is  made  to  the  atoning  efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ,  while  in  1  John  v.  6  reference  la


THE  OOSPBL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  WU

made  to  the  two  sacraments,  and  is  a  less  spiritual  interpretation.  "  If  the  one  passage
designedly  refers  to  the  other,  the  fact  of  their  different  acceptations  implies  different
writers."  This  is  a  most  entirely  gratuitous  interpretation  of  hnih  passages  (Huther).
If  there  were  any  syjiibolical  meaning  in  the  portent  of  the  Gospel,  the  evangelist  does
not  emphasize  it,  but  makes  use  of  it  as  proof  of  the  veritable  death  of  Christ ;  aad,
on  the  other  hand,  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  does  not  refer,  in  the  water  and  blood
wherewith  Christ  came,  to  the  sacraments.  If  "  bread  "  instead  of  or  with  "  blood  "  had
been  mentioned,  this  suggestion  would  have  been  more  plausible.  As  it  stands,  it  has
reference  to  the  blood  of  his  atonement  which  cleanses  from  all  sins,  and  the  water  of  his
Spirit  (the  xp'<''/««)i  the  washing  of  regeneration,  an'1  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which
has  no  reference  whatever  to  the  "  blood  and  water "  of  the  gospel  narrative.  Further-
more, the  reference  to  blood  and  water  did  not  (ch.  xix.  34),  however,  accompany
Christ's  coming  so  much  as  his  going.  To  impress  upon  these  two  passages  meanings
that  are  by  no  means  obvious,  and  are  certainly  not  expressed  by  either  writer ;  to  insist,
moreover,  that  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  embodied  in  veiled  form  a  sacramental  reference
to  an  event  recorded  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  this  for  the  sake  of  instituting  a  con-
trast between  them, — does  not  appear  reasonable.

(^)  Hilgenfeld  urges  that  the  Epistle  stands  in  more  intimate  relationship  with  the
Old  Testament  Law  than  the  Gospel  does  ;  but  his  entire  argument  turns  on  the  defini-
tion of  "  sin  "  given  in  1  John  iii.  4,  where  it  is  equated  with  am/ita,  or  lawlessness.
It  is,  however,  on  the  contrary,  certain  that  the  writer  never  uses  or  makes  obvious
reference  to  vS/xos,  while  the  Gospel  does  show  the  writer's  acquaintance  with  it  and
reverence  for  it  (ch.  i.  17  ;  vii.  19,  23).

(h)  Dr.  Davidson  insists  that  the  idea  of  redemption  expressed  in  the  Epistle  cor-
responds with  the  doctrine  of  the  Epistlo  to  the  Hebrews  rather  than  with  that  of  the
Fourth  Gospel ;  that  whereas  the  latter  speaks  of  Jesus  "  taking  away  sin,"  and
"  giving  his  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world,"  the  Epistle  speaks  uf  his  "  blood  cleansing
from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7),  and  that  he  is  the  t\a(rij.6s  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world
(1  John  ii.  2;  iv.  10).  Lut  it  be  remembered  that  the  Now  Testament  writers  at
different  times  use  different  phrases  for  the  atoning  quality  of  Olirist's  work.  The
same  argument  might  show  that  because  St.  Paul  speaks  of  Christ  being  set  forth  as
iXaffT'fipioy,  in  Rom.  iii.  25,  and  states  that  Christ  was  made  xardpa  for  us,  in  Gal.  iii.
10,  13,  he  could  not  have  written  these  two  Epistles,  which  are  nevertheless  universally
admitted  to  be  his,  even  by  impugners  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  St.  John,  when  writing
the  Gospel,  had  the  synoptic  narrative  before  him,  and,  while  penning  this  Epistle,  all
the  Epistles  of  Paul  and  Peter,  and  it  may  be  that  to  the  Hebrews  was  before  him,
and  he  adds  those  final  touches  which  blend  the  Pnuline  doctrine  of  tKaaiUs  and
\irpoy  with  that  of  the  Gospel  of  love  and  of  sacrificial  :iU(i  vicarious  death.

(%)  The  distinction  between  "venial"  and  "deadly"  sins  is  urged  by  many  as  a
proof  that  the  Epistle  was  produced  in  post-apostolic  times.  The  "  sin  unto  death,"  it
is  said,  cannot  be  the  unpardonable  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  because  it  is  not  a  single
act  as  that  is — a  point  on  which,  however,  the  ablest,  critics  and  theologians  differ.
Baur  finds  the  explanation  of  the  two  classes  of  sin  in  the  Montmistic  doctrine  of  the
second  century,  and  in  Tertullifin's  enumeration  of  mortal  sins.  Even  Hilgenfeld
opposed  this  interpretation  of  the  difficult  passage  1  John  v.  16.  But  the  most
saiisfiictory  explanation  is  that  John  clearly  saw  that  there  was  a  kind  of  apostasy
from  Christ  and  life  which  precluded  hope  of  amendment,  which  shut  out  the  possibility
of  repentance,  and  concerning  which  the  Christian  could  not  pray  for  pardon  as  in
harmony  with  the  will  of  God.  This  view  ol  the  irremissibility  of  some  forms  of  sin  is
more  than  once  hinted  in  the  Gospel  (iii.  36 ;  viii.  34 ;  ix.  39).  There  is  no  bint  of  the
later  ecclesiastical  doctrine  of  "  venial  and  deadly  sins."

The  loose  ch  urges  against  the  Epistle,  that  it  is  weaker  in  sentiment,  more  monotonous
in  style,  more  charged  with  unnecessary  repetitions,  can  only  be  met  by  detailed
exegesis.  The  teaching  of  the  apostle  is  undoubtedly  far  less  wonderful  and  original
than  the  sayings  of  Jesus  recorded  by  him  in  the  Gospel,  and  it  partakes  of  the  didactic
and  theologic  characteristics  uf  une  who  sought  to  put  into  words  of  speculative  and
practical  bearing  the  inferences  wliich  his  lower  inspiration  drew  from  the  remembered
words  of  the  Master.  But  all  the  essential  truths  concerning  God  and  man  and  the
Feison  of  Christ  and  the  means  of  redemption  are  repeated.


\xlr  INTBODUCTION  TO


Surely  the  endeavour  to  separate  the  authorship  of  the  First  Epistle  from  tlmt  ol
the  Fourth  Gospel  breaks  down  at  every  point.  The  Epistle  is  in  all  probahility  an
appendix  to  the  Gospel,  written  at  a  still  more  advanced  age  than  was  the  greater  docnment.
It  has  thrown  the  light  of  the  life  of  Christ  upou  the  society  which  was  emerging  from
the  ruins  of  the  entire  Jewish  system.  It  commends  the  love  of  God ;  it  opens  the
prospect  of  eternal  life  and  personal  resemblance  to  the  glorified  Lord.  It  brings  the
teaching  of  the  night  of  the  Passion  from  the  upper  chamber,  where  all  was  strange
expectancy,  into  the  experience  of  believers  in  the  accomplished  promises  of  God;  and  it
does  so  with  certain  striking  revelations  of  personal  character  which  help  the  identifica-
tion of  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  with  the  son  of  Zebedee  and  the  Son  of  Thunder
This  is  conspicuous  if  the  following  passages  be  considered  :  oh.  i,  10 ;  ii.  4,  5 — 11,  16,
18,  19,  22;  iii.  4,  6,  8,  12,  15  ;  iv,  3 ;  v.  10,  16,  21.  In  these  verses  the  spirit  which
was  ready  to  call  fire  from  heaven  upon  the  unbelieving  Samaritans,  and  which  forebade
the  miracle-worker  to  proceed  because  he  followed  not  the  apostles,  is  undeniably
present ;  while  in  every  verse  of  the  Epistle  there  breathes  the  spirit  of  close  Intimacy
with  Jesus,  and  a  most  vivid  appreciation -of  the  last  and  noblest  manifestation  of  the
eternal  love.

Holtzmann,  'Einleitung'  (1885),  p.  463,  etc.,  though  referring  to  the  points  of  difierence
between  the  teaching  of  the  two  documents,  admits  the  identity  of  authorship ;  but
seems  undecided  as  to  their  relative  priority.

This  leads  us  to  the  Second  and  Third  EpitUe$  of  John,  to  far  as  they  reveal  the
character  of  their  author.

There  is  by  no  means  so  general  an  assent  either  to  the  apostolic  origin  of  these
Epistles  or  even  to  their  canonicity,  and  many  advocates  of  the  Jobannine  authorship
of  the  Fourth  Gospel  are  not  prepared  to  admit  that  they  proceeded  from  the  author
either  of  the  Gospel  or  the  Piist  Epistle.  The  brevity  of  these  Epistles  may  accoimt  for
their  absence  in  the  Peschito  Syriac,  and  the  silence  of  the  apostolic  Fathers, — yet  on
the  other  hand,  Ephrem  Syrus  quotes  them ;  and  their  private  character  may  bare
kept  them  from  general  circulation  as  sacred  writings, — ^yet  so  early  as  the  date  of
Clemens  Alexandrinus  that  Father  writes,  "  The  Second  Epistle  of  John,  which
is  written  to  virgins,  is  very  simple ;  it  was  indeed  addressed  to  a  certain  Babylonian
lady  called  Electa?"  In  Strom,  ii.  p.  264  he  speaks  of  "the  greater  Epistle,"
showing  that  he  knew  of  two.  Ver.  11  is  quoted  by  Irenseus  ('^dv.  Haer.,'  i.  16.  3) :
"  John,  the  disciple  of  the  Lord,  pronounced  their  condemnation,  having  counselled  them
.that  salutation  should  not  be  uttered  by  you  to  them,"  etc.;  further  he  quotes  vers.  7
and  8  as  part  of  the  First  Epistle.  So  that  the  Second  Epistle  was  known  and
regarded  as  the  Apostle  John's  composition  towards  the  close  of  the  second  century  by
leading  Fathers  in  Alexandria  and  Gaul.  Origen  did  not  speak  positively  of  the
apostolic  origin  of  the  Second  and  Third  Epistles.  He  says  (Busebius, '  Hist.  Eccl.,'
vi.  25)  that  "all  do  not  admit  that  they  are  his  very  own  (yvtiaious)."  His  pupil,
Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  quoted  both  the  Second  and  Third  Epistles  as  written  by
John,  in  proof  that  John  could  not  be  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  (Eusebius,  '  Hist.
Eccl.,'  vii.  25).

Eusebius  himself  speaks  of  the  Second  and  Third  Epistles  as  "  named  after  John,
whether  that  of  the  evangelist  or  of  some  other  person  of  the  like  name  "  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'
iii.  25).  Thus  he  reckoned  them  among  the  antilegomena  somewhat  doubtfully.  The
Muratorian  Canon  leaves  it  doubtful  whether  the  writer  meant  the  Second  and  Third,  or
the  First  and  Second  Epistles,  as  part  of  his  canon  of  orthodox  Scripture.  They  were
rejected  by  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia.  Theodoret  does  not  mention  them.  After  Euse-
bius their  canonicity  is  unquestioned,  though  their  apostolic  origin  is  still  open  to  doubt.
Jerome  (in  his '  De  Viris  ]llus.,'«.'y. '  Papias,'  18),  referringto  the  fragment  of  Fapias  (pre-
served by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  39),  in  which  John  the  elder  and  Aristion  are  spoken
of  as  fuariTti  of  Christ,  recounts  the  tradition,  held  by  Some,  that  the  Second  and  Third
Epistles  were  the  work  of  the  presbyter,  not  of  the  apostle,  and  in  o.  ix.,  ibid.,  in  the
remarks  concerning  John  the  apostle,  Jerome  refers  again  to  the  same  tradition,  and
says  that  the  sepulchre  of  the  presbyter  as  well  as  that  of  John  the  apostle  were
shown  in  his  day  at  Ephesus.     Still,  he  adds,  "  Some  think  that  the  two  {memoria]

>  This  is  found  in  the  *  Adumbrationes  in  Epis.  Joannis  ii.,'  p.  1011.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


IXY


iupposed  memorials  were  of  the  one  and  same  John  the  apostle,''  indicating  an
obscurity  among  the  guides  in  the  city  as  to  the  true  resting-place  of  John  the
apostle.  But  Jerome  had  not  finally  concluded  in  favour  of  this  mythical  John  the
presbyter,  for  he  enumerates  seven  Catholic  Epistles  of  James,  Peter,  J  hn,  and  Juilas
('  Epist.  ii.  ad  Paulinum ').  In  referring  (p.  xxxiii.)  to  the  fragment  of  Papias  preserved
by  Eusebius,  we  have  seen  how  much  reason  there  is  for  doubt  as  to  the  interpretation
which  Eusebius  put  upon  this  passage  of  Papias,  and  also  the  very  small  and  shadowy
cviilince  that  exists  for  the  tradition  that  there  was  any  ve: Stable  individual  aiisweriii*
to  the  misunderstood  suggestion  of  Papias.  Of  late  years  lUggenbach  ('  Leben  Josu,'
French  trans.,  pp.  59,  60),  Zahn  ('Studien  u.  Kritiken,'  p.  662:  1866),  Dr.  Milligan
(Journal  of  Bibl.  Literature),  Dr.  Farrar  (JSxpositor,  November,  1881,  and '  Early  Y^  ars
of  Christianity,'  vol.  ii.),  have  thrown  the  gravest  doubts  upon  his  personality.  Never-
theless, Ebrard,  in  his '  Commentary  and  Inti  oduction  to  the  Epistles  of  John,'  has  power-
fully defended  his  coexistence  with  St.  John  in  Ephesus,  and  has  referred  to  the  presbyter
the  composition  of  the  Second  and  Third  Epistles.  He  has  dune  this  on  the  following
grounds :  (a)  that  i  itpeaffirfpos  was  a  title  which  John  would  not  have  assumed  to  the
disregard  of  the  other  presbyters  of  the  Church;  (i)  that  the  Presbyier  John  might
have  done  so  simply  with  the  view  of  discriminating  himself  from  the  grand  personality
of  the  aged  and  venerable  apostle;  (c)  that  Diotrephes  would  not  have  been  likely  to
have  prated  with  malicious  words  against  the  last  of  the  apostles,  though  he  might
against  a  secondary  and  less  dignified  person.

A  large  number  of  distinguished  critics,  while  holding  to  the  existence  of  the
Presbyter  John,  see  little  or  nothing  in  this  argument.  Thus  Huther,  Godet,  Ewald,
Liioke,  Diisterdieck,  Holtzmann,  Bishop  Alexander  (' Speaker's  Commentary'),  maintain
that  the  two  brief  Epistles  are  from  the  same  hand;  that  the  negative  and  positive
evidence  points  to  the  same  author  as  that  of  the  First  Epistle  and  of  the  Gospel ;  that
there  is  the  same  reticence  or  verbal  silence  in  them  as  to  the  "Church"  as  an
institution,  though  the  idea  pervades  the  several  documents ;  that  the  full  title  "  Lord
Jesus  Christ "  never  occurs  in  any  one  of  them ;  that  there  is  no  definite  reference
in  either  of  them  to  the  sacramental  system  of  the  early  Churah ;  that  the  author  warns
us  in  the  First  Epistle  against  the  danger  (a)  of  denying  the  true  Christ,  the  danger  (ft)
of  failing  in  true  love  to  the  brethren,  the  danger  (c)  of  not  observing  Christ's  com-
mandments; and  finally,  that  the  author  adopts  a  whole  vocabulary  of  expressions
which  are  peculiar  to  the  other  Johannine  writings.  Thus  abridging  Bishop  Alexander's
note—


tUnaTus,


3  Efutuu


GOSFBL.


1  Efisilc


'A\ri$ela,    five     times

(vers.  1 — t)
'EyvcaKires  rijy  liKiiBfiay

(ver.  1)
nepiTTOTco'  ,(vers.  4,  6,

twice)
'Ayiirri ...  iyroK'ti  (ver,  6)
'AvTlxpuTTOs  (ver.  7)
Xapa  .  .  .  nfirKripuiifini

(ver.  12)


Vers.  3, 4, 8  (twice),
12


Vers.  3, 4


Continuously

viii.  82

viii.  14,  eto.;  xi.  9;

xiL  35
Continuously

XV.  11 ;  xvi.  24,  eto.


Very  frequently

ii21

L6,7;  U.  6  (twice),  U

v.  3

ii.  18,  22;  iv.S

L4


(a)  In  the  allegation  that  John  would  not  have  called  himself  "  the  presbyter,"  we  ars
natiirally  reminded  that  St.  Peter  (1  Epist.  v.  1)  calls  himself  a  <ruiiTTpe<r$iTfpos,  and
that  the  word  must  have  had  in  this  place  a  technical  meaning.  The  modest  manner
in  which  James,  Peter,  and  Jude,  as  well  as  the  author  of  these  Epistles  and  the
Apocalypse,  describe  their  own  functions  or  official  position,  undoubtedly  contrasts
itself  with  the  repeated  insistence  on  the  position  of  apostle  which  characterizes  the
Epistles  of  Paul.  The  age  and  solitary  dignity  of  St.  John  would  find  abundant
embodiment  ia  the  use  of  this  term,  so  well  known  and  apprehended  throughout  the
Greek  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  If  it  be  John,  he  simply  adopted  here,  as  elsewhere,  the
least  assuming  of  the  dignities  which  belonged  to  him — ^the  governor,  referee,  teacher,

MBS.  /


]xA  INTRODUCTION  TO


or  guide,  who  might  on  this  basis  have  felt  that  there  would  naturally  unfold  itself
the  ofiBce  of  a  bishop,  or  angel,  or  apostle,  as  the  case  might  demand,  Luthardt
('  St.  John  the  Author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,'  p.  132)  criticizes  very  successfully  Eusebius's
inferences  from  the  fragment  of  Papias,  and  shows  that  not  only  does  this  passage  give
the  title  of  elder  to  the  apostles,  but  that  Irenajus  calls  Polycarp  fiandpios  koI  airoaroKmhs
■npetrfiircpos,  and,  writing  to  Soter,  Bishop  of  Rome,  speaks  of  his  predecessors  as  oi
vph  irov  vpeirBirfpot.  Let  US  also  add  that  Papias  explicitly  calls  Andrew,  Peter,  John,
Philip,  and  others  "  elders,"  from  the  report  of  whose  conversation  he  derived  so  much
information.  (6)  The  allegation  that  the  Presbyter  John,  if  there  was  such  a
personage,  may  also  have  used  such  a  designation,  is  certainly  possible,  though  it  is
nothing  more  than  conjecture ;  and  (3)  that  Diotrephes,  who  loved  to  have  the  pre-
eminence, should  have  prated  against  the  apostle  is  only  akin  to  the  treatment  which
the  apostles  were  likely  to  have  received  and  did  receive  from  their  contemporaries.
This  is  too  abundantly  char  from  the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  and  Galatians,  and
from  the  consolations  offered  by  Peter  to  the  victims  of  angry  recrimination.

It  is  more  than  probable  that  Papias  discriminated  the  reports  which  reached  him
second-hand  concerning  the  several  "elders"  whom  he  mentions  byname,  from  the
immense  advantage  which  be  also  found  in  lii<tening  to  the  positive  teaching  of  two
disciples,  the  elder  John  and  Aristion,  who  were  yet  living  in  his  own  time.
Busebius  most  likely  was  in  error  in  inferring  that  Papias  had  spoken  of  two  Johns ;
and  the  conclusion  to  which  we  incline  here  is  that  this  fragment  simply  fastens  upon
the  Apostle  John  himself  the  very  title  which  he  assumed  in  writing  these  leaflets.

What,  then,  do  we  gather  of  the  character  of  their  author?  There  is  the  same
general  limpid  and  easy  concatenation  of  sentences,  each  one  an  aphorism,  which
characterizes  the  other  words  of  the  apostle  in  the  prologue  and  epilogues  of  the  Gospel
and  First  Epistle.  The  Epistles  breathe  the  same  atmosphere  of  love,  the  same
chivalrous  regard  for  the  truth,  the  same  loyalty  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  willingness
to  denounce  the  spirit  of  antichrist  and  error.  With  no  honeyed  words,  but  in  terrible
earnest,  he  preaches  the  sanctity  of  truth  and  the  certainty  of  Divine  revelation,  and
refuses  even  the  rights  of  hospitality  to  one  who  comes  (Ipxfrai)  summoning  the  house
of  God  in  the  name  of  antichrist,  with  alien  and  unchristian  doctrine.  The  language
thus  addressed  to  Kyria  (2  John)  and  to  Oaius  with  reference  to  Diotrephes  is  not
regarded,  even  by  Ebrard,  as  opposed  to  the  character  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth
Gospel,  and,  together  with  the  similar  outspoken  loyalty  to  Christ  seen  in  the  First
Epistle,  reveals  another  but  very  significant  indication  of  the  character  of  the  son  of
Zebedee,  as  vaguely  hinted  at  iu  the  synoptic  Gospels  (see  pp.  Iv. — Iviii.).

The  two  shorter  Epistles  appear  to  us  a  singularly  interesting  link  of  relation  between
the  author  of  the  Gospel  and  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse — between  thfr  "  disciple
whom  Jesus  loved"  and  the  John  of  the  synoptists.

(4)  A  comparison  between  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Ooepet  and  the  author  of  thi
Apocalypse.  This  great  question  is  intimately  inwoven  with  that  of  the  authorship
ol  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  superficial  contrast  between  these  two  documents  is  go
great  that  from  early  times,  and  on  internal  grounds,  the  apostolic  authorship  of  the
Apocalypse  has  been  disputed,  and  though  external  testimony  is  of  a  powerful  and
impressive  kind,  yet,  from  a  variety  of  reasons,  it  was  referred  to  a  different  author.
Eusebius,  from  his  own  anti-chiliasm,  Dionysius  of  Alexandria  (a.d.  247),  <rom  his
dislike  to  its  material  symbolism,  and  from  sundry  other  critical  grounds,  disputed  its
apostolic  authorship.  Numerous  modem  critics — Ewald,  Credner,  De  Wette,  Liicke,
Neander,  Diisterdieck — ^who  have  defended  the  Johannine  origin  of  the  Gospel,  have
done  so  by  repudiating  the  apostolicity  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  they  have  rid  themselvi  .s
from  some  of  the  gravest  perplexities  in  the  argument  for  the  former  by  exaggerating
the  contrasts,  both  in  language,  style,  and  matter,  between  the  Gospel  and  the  Revela°
tion.  The  Presbyter  John  has  been  again  and  ag  lin  summoned  from  the  differently
interpreted  passage  of  Papias  to  take  the  place  uf  the  apostle,  and  lo  aocuunt  for  a
certain  deficiency  of  exlcrnal  testimony  to  its  early  adndssion  into  the  New  Testament
canon ;  while  a  certain  unknown  John  has  been  the  resort  of  others.    ^

On  the  other  side,  a  considerable  number  of  those  who  dispute  the  Johannine  author-
ship of  the  Fourth  Gospel — Baur,  Schwegler,  Hilgenfeld,  Zeller,  Davidson — do  so  with
the  aid  of  a  strong  conviction  of  the  apostolic  and  Johannine  authorship  of  the  Apooa-


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  IxtS

lypse.  With  some  extreme  writerSj  the  Apocalypse  is  the  only  certainly  authentic
document  of  the  New  Testament,  and  it  is  mane  use  of  to  demolish  the  genuineness  of
the  Fourth  Gospel.  It  would  seem  with  many  to  be  an  entirely  accepted  principle
that  one  and  the  same  mind  could  not  at  any  interval  of  time,  and  granting  any
diversity  of  conditions,  have  produced  what  is  regarded  as  the  tremendous  allegoric
manifesto  of  the  kingtom  ot  fJod  against  the  world-powers,  and  what  is  believed  to  be
the  sacred,  lender,  myttic,  theological  romance  called  the  Fourth  Gispel.  This  polemic
has  been  Hugmented-  in  intensity,  and  furtlier  complicated  with  the  purpose,  and  still
more  with  the  date,  of  the  Apocalyptic  vision.

These  pages  must  not  be  occupied  with  any  attempt  to  determine  the  date  of  the
Apocalynse,  which  will  be  amply  discussed  in  its  proper  place.     The  arguments  for  the
early  and  later  dates  are  alike  strong,  though  very  diverse  and  independent  of  each
other.     It  will  be  admitted  on  all  sides  that  the  exiernal  evidence  for  the  later  date  is
far  stronger  than  that  for  the  earlier,  and  that  the  bulk  of  the  evidence  for  the  early
date  is,  on  the  other  hand,  strictly  speaking,  derived  from  purely  internal  considera-
tions, based  on  the  supposition  that  Jerusalem  must  be  still  standing  when  the  visions
were  seen,  and  that  certain  obscure  allusions  to  B'iman  emperors,  and  the  interpieta-
sion  of  the  beast  and  his  number,  as  well  as  the  "  false  pro|ihet,"  have  one  particular
ippllcation.    This  is  a  question  of  pure  exegesis,  and  will  not  here  be  discussed  ;  but
t  is  impossible  to  say  that  the  question  is  now  finally  decided.    The  complicated
reasoning  on  both  sides  may  be  seen  in  Davidson,  Moses  Stuart,  Eenan,  Farrar,  on  the
ine  side ;  and  Hengstenberg,  Elliott,  Liicke,  etc.,  on  the  other.     It  must  be  admitted
that  the  earlier  date  reduces  the  difficulty  of  believing  that  the  author  of  the  Apoca-
lypse could,  in  the  course  of  a  quarter  of  a  century,  have  passed  into  a  different  phase  of
mind  and  manner  of  expression ;  that  he  who  in  his  more  fiery  youth  or  early  manhood
saw  the  visions  and  vials,  and  heard  the  trumpets  and  the  thunders,  of  the  A.pocalypse,
might,  after  many  strange  experiences,  and  long  pondering  the  essence  of  these  revela-
tions, have,  in  his  mellow  age,  succeeded  in  recording  his  earlier  reminiscences,  and  in
a  style  too  of  Greek  diction  far  more  free  from  Hebraisms  and  Judaic  allusions  than  that
of  the  Apocalypse,  which  reflected  the  influence  upon  him  of  a  long  residence  in  Ephesus
where  much  purer  Greek  than  that  of  his  youth  had  become  a  second  nature  to  him.
The  style,  the  artistic  touch,  the  musical  taste,  the  handwriting  of  a  man  of  fifty,  will
often  materially  differ  from  those  which  have  become  natural  to  him  when  between
eighty  and  ninety  years  of  age.     However  great  the  contrast  between  the  styles  and
diction  of  two  compositions,  an  interval  of  forty  years  in  the  life  of  an  author,  passed
under  new  conditions,  and  a  profoundly  different  purpose  in  view,  will  almost  account
for  any  amount  of  change.    Let  the  early  and  latest  productions  of  Thomas  Carlyle  be
compared,  and  the  diversity  is  unspeakably  great,  although  there  may  yet  remain  in
loth  subtle  marks  of  identity,  akin  to  those  which  link  the  two  Jobannine  buciks.
Milton's  'Comus'  and  'Paradise  Regained,'  Dr.  Watts's  'Lyric  on  the  Giving  of  the
Law '  and  his  '  Moral  Songs,'  Burke's  '  Essay  on  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful '  and  his
'Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution  'or  his  'Speech  at  Bristol,'  present  remarkable
coatrasts  of  contour,  of  vocabulary,  of  sentence-structure,  and  the  like.

But  it  is  far  from  certain  that  differences  of  the  kind  referred  to  are  more  due  to
lapse  of  time  than  to  utter  diversity  of  mental  conditions.  Style,'vocabulary,  dialectic
tone,  arc  easily  adopted,  are  veritably  changed,  by  a  mind  that  deliberaiely  puts  itself
upon  an  entirely  different  platform,  and  voluntarily  adopts  a  fresh  outlook;  e.g.
Wordsworth  cherished  and  exercised  two  entirely  different  styles  of  expression,  and,
though  a  certain  sameness  of  m  innerism  may  have  linked  them  together  and  may  be
revealed  in  both  styles,  the  contrast  is  very  pronounced.  His  peculiarity  is  that  he,  by
turns,  adopted  both  styles  throughout  his  life.  The  very  essence  of  dramatic  power  lies
in  the  faculty  of  looking  with  different  eyes  at  the  same  group  of  ideas,  and  speaking  with
different  tongues  concerning  them.  The  New  Testament  offers  remarkable  iBustration
of  the  same  kind  of  variety,  though  the  opponents  of  the  authenticity  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  will  not  admit  the  justness  of  the  illustration.  Every  one  concedes  great
difference  in  the  style  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  and  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy,
yet  the  evidence  for  their  common  authorship  grows  with  every  year  of  study  and
meditation,  and  it  is  based,  not  so  much  upon  a  period  of  time  that  elapsed  between
them,  M  on  the  totally  dUfeient  ^tate  of  mind  in  which  the  apostle  was  when  ha


IxrUI  INTRODUOTION  TO


publicly  and  vigorouBly  assailed  some  erring  and  apostate  Churches,  and  that  in  which
he  privately  and  lovingly  advised  a  young  friend  with  reference  to  his  religious  and
ministerial  difficulties.

So  it  may  be  easily  conceded  that  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the  beloved  disciple
pondered  the  sublime  memories  of  the  life  of  tte  Lord  Jesus  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,
differed  absolutely  from  that  in  which  the  same  apostle,  wrapped  in  the  cloud  of  a
sacred  imagination,  and  inspired  of  God,  gazed  on  the  ineffable  mysteries  of  the  unseen
world,  and  strove  to  put  into  symbolic  language  that  which  passed  all  understanding
and  all  speech.    The  prophet  and  the  historian  have  two  distinct  groups  of  character-
istics which  do  not  clash ;  but  the  same  man  may,  and  often  does,  bear  the  weight  and
responsibilities  of  both.    Memory  differs  from  fancy,  but  the  same  thinker  may  blend
them  both  with  their  appropriate  phraseology,  and  may  exercise  them  alternately.    In
the  Gospel  is  given  to  us  the  profoundly  reflective  record  and  arrangement  of  the
human  and  earthly  manifestation  of  the  eternal  Word,  his  conflict  with  the  world,  his
glorification  in  death,  and  bis  triumph  over  it  in  the  Divine  power  that  was  his  intrinsic
and  everlasting  possession.     In  the  Apocalypse  he  reveals  the  dominion  and  triumph
of  the  satae  Word  of  Gtod  when  delivered  from  temporal  conditions,  and  through  the
picturesque  symbolism  common  to  the  seers  of  invisible  things.    Dr.  Davidson  does
not  think  that  this  will  account  for  the  disregard  of  the  rules  of  Greek  syntax,  and  the
use  of  barbaric  dialect,  and  urges  that  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  other  prophets  were  not  so
lifted  out  of  their  ordinary  habits  of  expression  and  thought  in  their  visions  as  to  con-
stitute two  Hebrew  styles.     But,  as  we  shall  see,  the  Apocalypse  reveals  abundant
proof  of  the  richness  even  of  a  classic  vocabulary,  and  that  we  have  not  the  same  oppor-
tunity of  contrasting  two  prophetic  styles,  notwithstanding  what  has  been  done  by  a
certain  school  of  criticism  to  disintegrate  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  Zechariah.    So,
then,  whichever  view  may  be  taken  of  the  date  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  contrasts  of
style  are  not  so  great  as  to  destroy  the  identity  of  authorship.     The  hypothesis  of  an
interval  of  many  years  between  them  may  make  the  problem  easier  of  solution.     The
hypothesis  of  the  twofold  state  of  mind  may  also  account  for  a  nearer  juxtaposition  in
time.     The  entire  phenomena  of   prophetic  vision  and  ecstasy  will  account  for  iiie
adoption  of  the  dinlect  more  familiar  in  earlier  years,  when  phrases  were  minted  in  the
vocabulary  of  Palestine,  and  enriched  by  the  abundant  prophetic  and  apocryphal
literature  which  circulated  among  the  people.

Let  us  proceed,  then,  (a)  to  adduce  the  evidence  for  the  Johannine  authorship  of  the
ApoccHypst,  in  entire  independence  of  the  question  either  of  the  date  of  its  publica-
tion, or  the  supposed  incompatibility  of  this  document  with  that  of  the  Fourth  Gospel ;
(5)  to  indicate  the  points  of  agreement,  and  divergence  of  style,  teaching,  and  method
of  the  two  works.

(a)  The  internal  evidence.  This  is  allowed  on  many  sides,  and  by  strong  opponents
of  the  authenticity  of  the  Gospel,  to  be  satisfactory  and  impressive,  although  it  assumes
•  somewhat  apologetic  character.

(i.)  The  writer  calls  himself  by  the  name  of  John  (^laivims  or  'luav^s,  equivalent
to  ]V}'v^,  either  "Jehovah  is  merciful,"  or  "the  grace  of  Jehovah."  The  name  is
transliterated  by  the  LXX.,  'lon'ti,  2  Kings  xxv.  23,  a  name  which  appears  in  the  New
Testament,  in  some  manuscripts,  for  the  'iwimris  of  other  manuscripts).  This  in  itself
might  be  a  stumbling-block  from  the  reticence  with  reference  to  las  own  name  which
the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  preserves  throughout  the  Gospel  and  Epistles.  He
calls  himself  a  "servant,"  a  "bond-slave,"  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  perfectly
compatible  with  his  modest  assumptions  and  self-obliteration.  St.  Paul  (Bom.  i.  1 ;
Gal.  i.  10;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  I)  thus  designates  himself,  though,  when  occasion  arises,
he  can  and  docs  lay  great  emphasis  upon  his  apostolic  commission.  In  addressing  the
Churches  in  Asia,  "  John  "  speaks  of  himself  (Rev.  i.  9)  as  "  your  brother  "  and  "your
companion  {truyKotyavhs  h  t?  exl^u),"  the  latter  term  being  adopted  by  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.
ii.  23;  Phil.  i.  7),  while  the  former  repeatedly  occurs  in  Paul's  Epistles,  and  the  idea
pervades  the  Gospels.  He  calls  himself  "  a  prophet,"  and  classes  himself  among  "  the
prophets"  (Eev.  xxii.  9;.  see  also  x.  7)  of  the  New  Testament — ^a  term  which  is
repeatedly  used  in  close  association  with  apostles;  the  two  circles  of  connotation
overlapping  one  another ; — all  apostles  may  not  have  been  propliets,  nor  all  prophets
apostles,  but  some  apostles  were  prophets.     The  objection  is  taken  by  some  to  the  &ct


THB  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  bix

that  he  would  not  have  spoken  of  "the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb,"  if  he  had
considered  himself  to  have  been  one  of  the  number  (Rev.  xviii.  20 ;  xxi.  14).  The
Apostle  Paul,  however,  does  speak  of  "  the  apostles  "  in  the  third  person  (1  Oor.  xii.  28 ;
Bph.  ui.  6,  in  which  latter  passage  he  uses  the  very  image  which  the  apocalyptist
treats  more  pictorially).  Seeing  that  even  the  synoptic  Grospels  record  Christ's  own
declaration  that  his  kingdom  and  Church  as  an  edifice  was  built  upon  the  irh-pa  of
Peter,  and  upon  his  solemn  confession  (Matt.  ivi.  18),  there  is  no  greater  difficulty  in
the  fact  that  John  should  refer  to  the  ajjostolio  foundations  of  the  new  Jerusalem.

(ii.)  The  writer  declares  himself  to  he  one  "  who  bare  witness  to  the  Logos  of  God,
and  to  the  testimony  qf  Jesus  Christ."  This  phrase,  if  it  does  not  positively  identify
him  with  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  puts  him  in  the  nearest  circle  of  the  Lord's
disciples;  and  this  cannot  apply  to  any  other  John  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament.
Neither  the  "  John  "  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  viz. "  the  Baptist,"  nor  "  John  Mark  "  (Acts
xii.  12),  nor  the  John,  or  "  Jonas,"  the  father  of  Peter  (Bevised  Version  text  of  John  i.  43
and  xxi.  15),  nor  tlie  John  who  was  one  of  the  Sadducsean  party  (Acts  iv.  6),  could  by  any
possibility  have  been  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse.  Nevertheless,  the  "  John  "  was  a
well-known  personage  standing  in  close  relationship  to  the  Churches  of  Asia,  and
representing  himself  as  intimately  acquainted  with  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord.  In
Acts  xii.  2  "  James  the  brother  of  John  "  is  referred  to,  and  the  synoptic  narrative
leaves  no  option  as  to  the  fact  that  this  John  was  the  son  of  Zebedee.

(iii.)  The  great  similarity  between  the  John  of  the  synoptists,  of  the  Acts,  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  and  the  John  of  the  Apocalypse,  has  been  a  standing  argument
with  the  opponents  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  We  have  already  shown  that,  so  far  as
these  features  of  character  are  supposed  to  indicate  a  fiery,  impulsive,  revengeful,
ambitious  spirit,  they  have  been  grossly  exaggerated.  It  will  readily  be  conceded  that
they  dc  reveal  a  Jewish,  rather  than  a  spiritual,  conception  of  the  Messiah,  at  that
particular  stage  in  the  apostle's  history ;  but  one  perfectly  compatible  also  with  the
severe  side  of  his  character,  which  is  far  from  being  concealed  in  the  narratives  and
portraitures  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  They  reveal  the  training  which  may  account  for
the  visions  of  wrath  and  justice  which  the  Jewish  and  heathen  enemies  of  the  Lamb
of  God  will  have  ultimately  meted  out  to  them.  But  the  entire  structure  and  purpose
of  the  Gospel  of  John  are  so  strangely  similar  and  parallel  to  the  structure  and
significance  of  the  Apocalypse,  that  that  Gospel,  as  well  as  the  synoptic  Gospels,  becomes
a  tetrachordon  of  evidence  to  the  authenticity  of  the  Apocalypse.  This  will,  however,
require,  and  receive  a  little  later,  more  careful  attention.  Apart  from  the  Fourth
Gospel,  the  internal  evidence  for  the  apostolicity  of  the  Eevelation  cannot  be  said  to  be
so  copious  or  important  as  its  opponents  assume.  It  is  readily  accepted  by  many
critics  of  the  Tiibingen  school,  though  similar  arguments  for  the  Fourth  Gospel  are
summarily  rejected.

(iv.)  The  writer  declares  that  he  was  in  "  the  island  of  Patmos,  by  reason  of  the  Logos
of  God,  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ "  (Rev.  i.  9).  The  external  evidence  that  John
the  son  of  Zebedee  did  suffer  exile  in  that  island  is  conclusive.  It  is  to  the  following
effect : —

Jerome  ('  Do  Viris  Illust.,*  c.  19) :  "  In  his  fourteenth  year,  Domitian  having
instigated  a  second  persecution  after  Nero,  John,  the  apostle  whom  Jesus  loved,  was
exiled  to  the  island  Patmos,  and  wrote  the  Apocalypse."  And  Irenaeus  (quoted  by
Busebius, '  Hist.  Bccl.,'  v.  8)  says,  "  John  beheld  the  vision,  almost  in  our  generation,
towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Domitian."  A  statement  as  bearing  on  the  date  is
elsewhere  repeated  by  Irenaeus  ('  Haer.,'  ii.  22.  5) ;  and  Busebius  adds  the  remark, "  Joh»,
at  once  apostle  and  evangelist,  as  is  reported,  while  still  continuing  in  life,  was  con-
demted  to  dwell  in  the  island  of.  Patmos,  on  account  of  the  testimony  which  he  bore
to  the  Divine  Word."  Corresponding  references  to  the  same  fact  occur  in  Clemens
Alex,  and  in  Origen  (quoted  by  Eusebius),  and  in  his  commentary  on  Matthew  he  cites
Rev.  i.  9  in  proof  of  the  fact  of  John's  virtual  martyrdom.

Hippolytus  ('  De  Christo  et  Antichr.,'  c.  36),  referring  to  the  Apocalypse  of  John,
says  of  its  author,  "  who,  when  on  the  isle  of  Patmos,  saw  the  apocalypse."

The  preface  to  the  later  Syriao  Version,  given  in  Walton's  Polyglott,  runs  thus ;
"  The  revelation  which  was  given  by  God  to  the  Evangelist  John,  on  the  island  U
Patmos,  on  which  ho  was  cast  by  Nero  Csesar."


Ixx  INTRODUCTION  TO


These  Tariou8  references  are,  it  must  be  admitted,  made  by  those  who  accepted  tha
apoitolio  origin  of  the  Eevelation,  and  had  the  document  before  them  which  gave  them
the  infonnation ;  still,  the  statement  is  variously  made,  and  appears  to  rest  on  other
"report"  as  welL  Such  confirmation  is -valuable  as  external  evidence  to  one  striking
touch  of  local  colouring,  though  the  date  of  the  exile  is  differently  conceived  by  the
authorities.  The  fitness  of  the  place,  as  providing  much  of  the  scenery  of  the  migiity
drama  which  followed,  is  brilliantly  expanded  by  Dean  Stanley, '  Sermons  in  the  East'
(1862).

(v.)  The  relation  of  John  to  the  Churches  of  Asia  is  another  of  those  internal  marks
"of  authenticity  of  great  weight.  Eev.  i. — iii.  show  that  the  author  stood  towards
them  in  the  position  of  guide,  patron,  censor,  and  as  superior  to  their  chief  minister  or
"angel."  This  position  could  not  have  been  assumed  during  the  period  of  Paul's
ministry,  or  that  of  Timothy.  The  tone  differs  from  that  assumed  by  Paul  in  his  First
Epistle  to  Timothy ;  nor  does  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesiaas  or  Colossians  give  any  hint
of  the  state  of  things  revealed  in  references  to  the  Churches  of  proconsular  Asia.  More-
over, till  a  period  coincident  with  Pavd'g  ministry  at  Ephesus,  John  was  a  "  pillar  "  of
the  Church  in  Jerusalem.  Ecclesiastical  tradition  is  largely  concerned  with  such  a
residence  of  John  in  Ephesus  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Some  critics,  whose
entire  theory  of  the  New  Testament  canon  turns  upon  the  early  date  of  the  Apocalypse,
endeavour  to  repudiate  or  refute  the  historical  character  of  John's  residence  in  Asia;
but  the  evidence  is  so  varied  in  favour  of  this  residence  at  Ephesus,  at  a  later  rattier
than  an  earlier  period,  that  it  will  not  be  overthrown,  and  consequently  we  have  here
a  very  powerful  corroboration  of  the  obvious  implications  of  the  documents  themselves.

Thus  Polycrates,  a  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  a  contemporary  of  Irenaaus,  in  his  letter  to
Victor  of  Home,  as  quoted  by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  v.  24)  in  a  passage  which  links
together  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Cktspel  and  Apocalypse,  as  follows,  says,  "  Moreover,
John,  he  who  leaned  on  the  Lord's  bosom  (oh.  xiii.  25),  who  came  to  be  a  priest,  who
wore  the  WTa\oi'  [the  golden  frontlet],  and  a  witness  and  teacher,  he  has  fallen  asleep
in  Ephesus."  This  is  rejected  by  some  as  fantastic  and  untrustworthy,  but  it  cannot
be  denied  that  these  two  more  ancient  documents  are  thus  connected,  and  that  St.  John's
residence  and  death  in  Ephesus  were  referred  to  by  one  who  lived  where  the  traditions
of  his  life  and  work  must  have  been  vivid.

Clemens  Alex,  says  ('  Quis  Dives  Salv.,'  c.  42),  "  When  the  tyrant  was  dead  [in  all
probability  meaning  Domitian],  he  departed  from  the  island  Patmos  to  Ephesus."

IrensBus  ('  Adv.  Hser.,'  ii.  22.  5 ;  iii.  1.  1)  declares  that  "  John,  the  Lord's  disciple,  he
that  leaned  on  his  bosom,  published  the  Gospel  at  Ephesus  during  bis  abode  in  Asia."

Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  23)  quotes,  on  the  authority  of  Clemens  Alex.,  the
interesting  passage  in  which  St.  John  is  represented,  in  his  old  age,  seeking  and
reclaiming  the  young  robber,  and  in  this  connection  adds,  "  The  Apostle  and  Evangelist
John  organized  the  Churches  that  were  in  Asia  when  he  returned  from  his  exile  in  the
island  after  the  death  of  Domitian  "  (cf.  ibid.,  iii.  1,  18,  31).

Justin  Martyr,  in  '  Dial,  cum  Trypho,'  c.  81,  describing  an  interview  which  took  place
on  Ephesus,  refers  by  name  to  the  "  Apocalypse  "  as  the  work  of  "  a  certain  man  John,
one  of  the  apostles  of  Christ,"  and  speaks  of  his  ministry  and  teaching  as  taking  place
"  Ttap'  fiiuv,  among  us."

Apollonius  (Eusebius, '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  v,  18),  a  writer  against  Montanism  in  the  second
century,  says  that  "John  wrote  the  Apocalypse,  and  that  he  is  said  to  have  raised  a
dead  man  to  life  by  Divine  power,  in  Ephesus."

Jerome  ('  De  Viris  111.,'  c.  9)  says  that  "  John  was  buried  in  Ephesus."

A  statement  made  at  the  Council  of  Ephesus,  that  "  the  Virgin  Mary  accompanied
John  to  Ephesus,  and  that  he  died  and  was  buried  there,"  was  first  mentioned  bv
Bpiphanius  ('  Hrer.,'  78.  11).

Dr.  Davidson  says,  "  The  place  where  he  wrote  was  Asia  Minor,  probably  Ephesu»
itself,  to  which  he  had  returned  from  Patmos."

These  testimonies  are  adduced  as  powerfully  corroborating  the  statement  of  the
Apocalypse  itself,  that  it  was  produced  by  one  who  stood  in  intimate  relations  with  the
Churches  of  proconsular  Asia.  This  internal  evidence  is  conclusive  when  thus  backed
up  by  a  tradition  so  widely  diffused.

Eeim  ('Jesus  von  Nazara,'  Eng.  trans.,  vol.  i.  pp.  143,  207^  while  accepting  Um


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  Ixxi

•tatements  of  Irenasus  and  others,  which  bring  the  Fourth  Gospel  into  the  reign  of
Trajan,  holds  that  the  John  who  wrote  iioth  it  and  the  Apocalypse  was  not  the  son  of
Zebetleo,  but  the  presbyter.  He  charges  the  mistake  on  Irenseus,  from  whom,  as  he
thinks,  other  writers  derived  it.  His  position  is  that  John  never  was  at  Ephesus  at  all ;
that  Papias  cannot  be  made  to  say  that  he  had  any  knowledge  of  the  anostles ;  and  that
the  John  of  whom  he  and  Polycarp  were  the  "  hearers  "  was  the  "  presbyter ; "  that  the
low  position  in  which  John,  as  an  apostle,  is  placed  in  Papias'  list  of  disciples  shows
that  he  had  no  more  to  do  with  Asia  Minor  than  Matthew,  and  that  Papias  derived  his
information  second-hand.

Now,  there  is  a  distinct  contrast  in  Papias's  language  between  what  the  "  elders,"
including  John,  said,  and  what  the  elder  John  and  Aristion  say.  It  does  not  positively
declare  that  he  had  personal  intercourse  with  either  the  first  or  thi-  second  group,  and
the  most  probable  interpretation  is  that  the  two  last  mentioned  were  still  living  when
he  wrote.  It  does  not  follow,  because  a  young  man  has  seen  and  conversed  on  certain
occasions  with  an  eminent  living  statesman  or  prelate,  that  he  should  not  also  have
taken  the  opportunity  of  making  further  inquiries  about  them.  See  Bishop  Lightfoot's
(fiontemporary  Beview,  vol,  xxv.,  zzvi.)  explanation  of  the  order  in  which  the  apostles
are  mentioned  in  the  fragment  of  Papias  (a  remark  in  which  Dr.  A.  Roberts  had
anticipated  him,  'Discussions  of  the  Gospels') — an  order  which  curiously  corresponds
with  the  order  in  which  they  occur  in  John's  Gospel.  The  stiitetnents  of  Irenreus  are
too  clear,  detailed,  and  vivid  to  justify  the  supposition  that  Polycarp  had  so  utterly
blundered  and  misled  him  (see  Charteris,  •  Oanonicity,'  §  vi.  p.  xlvi.).

(/3)  The  external  evidence  for  the  apostolic  authorship  is  abundant  and  irresistible.

*,*  This  evidence  is  important  to  our  general  argument,  for  the  authenticity  of  the
Apocalypse  is,  in  our  opinion,  a  powerful  corroboration  of  the  apostoiicity  of  the  Fourth
Gospel.

The  '  Shepherd '  of  Bermas,  written  probably  about  a.d.  142,  during  the  occupation
of  the  bishopric  of  Eome  by  his  brother  Pius,  does  not  cite  the  Apocalypse  by  name,  but
the  numberless  similarities  of  expression  lead  competent  critics  to  believe  that  he  must
have  been  familiar  with  it.  Thus  '  Vis.,'  ii.  2.  7,  "  Blessed  are  ye  as  many  as  patiently
endure  the  great  affliction  that  is  coming  upon  you  "  (cf.  llev.  vii.  14).  'I'he  reference
to  "the  book  of  life,"  in  which  some  names  are  written  and  others  blotted  out  ('Vis.,'
L  3.  2  ;  '  Sim.,'  ix.  24.  4),  may  be  explained  by  familiarity  with  Exod.  xxxii.  32 ;  Dan.
xii.  1 ;  but  more  probably  by  acquaintance  with  Rev.  iii.  5 ;  xiii.  8 ;  xx.  12 ;  and
Hermas  speaks  of  an  altar  before  Gnd's  throne  where  prayers  are  presented  ('  Mand.,'
I.  3.  2 ;  cf.  Rev.  viii.  3).  The  Church  is  a  woman  ('  Via.,'  ii.  4.  1 ;  cf.  Rev.  xiL  1) ;  and
many  other  more  obscure  allusions.

The  earliest  testimony  that  we  possess  comes  to  us  in  a  second-hand  and  roundabout
fashion.  Towards  the  close  of  the  fifth  century,  Andreas,  Bishop  of  Csesarea,  in  Gap-
padocia,  wrote  a  commentary  on  the  Revelation ;  and  in  the  prolegomena,  which  Arethas,
hissuccessor  in  the  episcopate,  wrote  (one  based  on  the  work  of  his  predecessor),  he  claims
in  favour  of  its  inspired  character  (Oeoirve^o-rou)  the  authority  of  Gregory  of  Nazianzus
and  Cyril,  and  to  these  he  adds  the  opinion  of  still  earlier  witnesses,  Papias,  Irenasus,
Methodius,  and  Hippolytus,  who  testified  to  its  being  4fioir£o-Tou,  i.e.  worthy  of  confi-
dence. If  this  was  really  the  opinion  of  Papias,  it  is  a  very  powerful  confirmation  of  its
authenticity.  The  reason  which  gives  it  so  much  weight  is  that  Andn^as  and  Arethas
both  appear  to  have  had  Papias's  entire  work  belore  them,  and  to  have  referred  to  Papias's
quotation  of  Rev.  xii.  7,  with  the  remark  of  Paiiias,  Els  oiSlv  auviPi)  Te^tur^aai  tJjj'  rajii'
cunav,  introduced  thus :  "  This  also  is  the  tradition  of  the  Fathers,  and  of  Papias,  the
successor  (SiiJSoxos)  of  the  Evangelist  John,  whose  Apocalypse  is  lying  before  me."

Now,  the  fragments  of  Papias  that  have  been  preserved  by  Eusebius  do  not  mention
the  Apocalypse.  This  is  remarkable,  because  Eusebius  does  not  cite  testimonies  as
a  rule  to  books  that  have  been  universally  received,  but  rather  the  opinions  of  the
ancient  writers  concerning  those  which  were  doubtful ;  and  he  was,  moreover,  himself
disposed  to  undervalue  the  Apocalypse.  His  strong  objection  to  chiliasm,  or  milleuarian
notions,  gave  him  a  prejudice  against  Papias  as  well  as  the  Apocalypse;  yet  he  doe»
charge  Papias  with  retailing  the  hope  of  a  corporeal  reign  of  Christ  on  earth,  which  is  to
last  a  thousand  years  after  the  resurrection,  without  referring  to  the  origin  ot  the  hope.
There  ia  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  "  narratives  of  the  Lord's  oracles"  did  contain  what


Ixxll  INTBODUOTION  TO


Aretlias  said  they  did.  Byen  the  author  of  '  Supernatural  Religion'  considers  this  a
valid  proof  of  the  opinions  of  Fapias.

Though  Irenwus  (•  Hser.,'  t.  33,  34)  refers  to  Papias  as  "  a  hearer  of  John,"  together
with  Polycarp,  Busebius,  in  his  comment  on  the  passage,  considers  that  he  only
received  his  intelligence  concerning  John  the  apostle  through  the  medium  of  John
the  presbyter.  Critics  have  subsequently  made  this  shadowy  individual  to  be  the
source  of  all  the  information  on  which  Papias  prided  himself.  Some  have  argued,  more-
over, that  John  the  presbyter  was  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  (Liicke),  while  Keim
has  boldly  endeavoured  to  father  upon  the  same  personage  the  authorship  of  the  Gospel.

But  Eusebiua,  as  we  have  seen  (see  p.  xxxii.,  note),  has  elsewhere  quoted  testimonie*
('  Chron.,'  i.)  from  Irenseus  that  Papias  was  a  hearer  of  the  Apostle  John,  as  well  as  of
Polycarp,  and  also  that  Polycavp  and  himself  suffered  martyrdom  in  the  same  perse-
cution. This  can  be  made  closely  to  approximate  the  year  a.d.  155 ;  and  proves  that
this  man,  who  lived  to  a  great  age,  must  have  been  during  many  years  a  contemporary
of  John,  who  is  said  repeatedly  by  Irenwus  to  have  lived  to  the  days  of  Trajan  (a.d.
96 — 117).  Therefore,  whether  John  the  presbyter  be  or  be  not  identical  with  John  the
apostle,  Papias  must  be  allowed  to  have  been  the  hearer  of  the  latter,  and  a  positive
admission  on  his  part  that  the  Apocalypse  was  @(irvev(rTos  and  iJniirio-Toi,  is  highly  sig-
nificant. This  is  more  inlpressive  when  it  is  remembered  that  he  was  Bishop  tj  Hiera-
polis,  in  the  close  neigb  bourhood  of  Laodicea.

,  Melito  of  Sardis  (about  a.d.  169),  another  of  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia,  is  reported
by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.'  Eccl.,'  iv.  26)  and  by  Jerome  ('  De  Viris  111.,'  c.  24)  to  have  written
"  one  book  concerning  the  devil,  and  one  concerning  the  Apocalypse  of  John."

Justin  Martyr's  testimony  is  remarkably  explicit.  In  the  '  Dial,  cum  Trypho,'  c.  81,
written  about  a.d.  146,  Justin  expressly  mentions  byname  the  Apocalypse  as  "written
by  a  certain  man  named  John,  one  of  the  apostles  of  Christ."  The  quotation  he  gives
is  unmistakable  reference  to  the  millennium  of  the  Revelation.  This  is  the  more
weighty,  because  Justin  never  elsewhere  alludes  by  name  to  any  writer  of  the  New
Testament.  "  We  conclude,"  says  Dr.  Davidson, "  that  before  the  middle  of  the  seoacd
century,  the  opinion  that  John  the  presbyter  was  the  writer  had  not  originated."

Apollonius,  Bishop  or  Presbyter  of  Ephesus  (Eusebius,  '  Hist.  Eccl.,'  v.  18),  who
wrote  between  a.d.  170  and  180,  not  only  afQrms  John's  residence  in  Ephesus,  but  that
John  was  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse.

The  Letter  of  the  Churches  of  Lyons  and  Vienne,  as  preserved  by  Eusebius  ('  Hist.
Eccl.,'  V.  1),  quotes  from  the  Apocalypse  as  4  ypoHii  giving  it  consequently  a  character
of  the  highest  authority  and  value.

Theophilus  of  Antioch  (a.d.  168),  in  'Ad  Autol.,'  IL  28,  refers  to  the  Apocalypse  of
John  as  a  book  recognized  in  Antioch,  and  quotes  Rev,  xiL  3.

Irenaeus  of  Lyons  (who  wrote  his  great  work  a.d.  177 — 199),  whose  testimony  to
John's  Gospel,  and  whose  letter  to  Florinus,  wherein  he  declares  that  he  remembered
Polycarp,  have  been  already  cited  (p.  xx.)-— Irenseus  was  the  successor  of  the  aged
martyr  Pothinus,  and  was  thus,  by  another  link,  related  to  the  group  of  followers  who
knew  the  Apostle  John,  and  was  hjpiself  not  only  acquainted  with  the  Apocalypse,  but
compared  different  copies  of  it,  amcommented  on  the  difference  of  readings  as  to  "  the
number  of  the  beast,"  preferring  666  to  616,  because  it  had  in  its  favour  the  testimony
(tm;'  Kar'  i^iv  riy  'ladvvjiv  kapaKiTav)  "  of  those  who  had  seen  John  face  to  face."  This
is  preserved  in  the  Greek  of  Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  v.  8)  and  in  the  Latin  translation
C  Adv.  Hjer.,'  v.  30.  1).  The  very  numerous  quotations  and  references  by  Irenasus  to
the  book  as  the  work  of  the  Apostle  John,  the  beloved  disciple,  leave  no  doubt  as  to  his
impression  of  the  authorship.  In  '  Adv.  Hajr.,'  iv.  20.  11  he  introduces  a  long  passage
from  Rev.  i.  12,  etc.,  with  "  Johannes  Domini  disoipulus  in  Apocalypsi  .  .  .  inquit,"
and  in  lib.  v,  26.  1  this  phrase  is  repeated  when  he  quotes  Rev.  xvii.  12,  etc.  (of.  also
lib.  V.  30.  1).

The  Mwatorian  Canon  does  without  doubt  admit  its  apostolic  authorship ;  "  Joannes
enim  in  Apocalypsi  licet  septem  ecclesiis  scribat,  tamen  omnibus  dicit."  "  Apocalypses
etiam  Joannis,  et  Petri,  tantum  recipimus,  quam  quidem  ex  nostris  legi  in  ecclesia
nolunt."    Here  the  author  of  the  fragment  discriminates  between  the  two  Apocalypses.

The  canon  of  the  Old  Latin  Version  of  the  New  Testament  contained  the  Apocalypse ;
and  Tertullian,  who  used  it,  quotes  almost  eveiy  chapter  of  the  book  (see  especially


TEE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDma  TO  ST.  JOHN.  haiii

'  De  PraiBorip.  Hser.,'  33,  where  he  cites  Rev.  iL  20 ; '  Adv,  Maro.,'  ill.  14,  where  h«  eites
Rev.  L  16,  as  the  word  of  the  Apostle  John  in  the  Apocalypse).

For  our  present  purpose  it  is  not  necessary  to  proceed  further  than  to  my  that
Clemens  Alex,  ('  Strom.,'  iii. ;  '  Psed.,'  ii.  12 ;  vi.  13)  and  Origen  ('  Comm.  on  Matthew
and  John'),  notwithstanding  the  latter's  opposition  to  millenarianism,  admitted  its
authenticity ;  that  Hippolytus  (a.d.  200)  quoted  it  by  name  ('  Ref.  Omn.  Hjer,,'  vii.  24),
and  is  said,  in  the  inscription  on  his  statue,  to  have  written  a  work  upon  it :  that  Metho-
dius and  Cyril  of  Alexandria  use  it,  and  Bphrem  Syrus  (though  the  Peschito  Syriac
translation  did  not  coutain  the  book)  quotes  from  it  as  from  any  other  part  of  the  New
Testament,  and  from  a  later  Syriac  translation  existing  in  his  day.

We  are  not,  however,  without  adverse  or  negative  testimonies  from  very  high
antiquity  to  its  apostolic  authorship.  These  are,  however,  of  such  a  kind  as  to  resemble,
and  did  in  fact  initiate,  the  subjective  criticism  to  which  the  book  has  been  submitted
in  modem  times.

(i.)  Thus  Eusebius  (•  Hist.  Bed.,'  iii,  28)  informs  us  that  Caius,  a  presbyter  of  Rome,
who  lived  about  the  time  of  Irenseus,  seems  to  refer  the  book  to  "  Cerinthus,  who,
through  apocalypses  written  as  if  by  a  great  apostle  speaking  falsely,  brings  in  tales  of
marvels  shown  to  him  as  if  by  angels,  affirming  that  after  the  resurrection  comes  an
earthly  kingdom  of  Christ,"  etc.  But  it  may  be  reasonably  argued  that  Caius  does  not
necessarily  refer  to  John's  Apocalypse  at  all,  and  we  learn  from  other  sources  (Theod.,
'De  Hser.  Fabulis,'  ii.  3)  that  Cerinthus  did  produce  supposed  revelations  of  the  -future
carnal  pleasures  of  a  coming  millennium.  It  is  by  no  means  probable  that  Caius  did
make  this  charge  against  the  book.  Alfurd,  Davidson,  and  many  others  accept  this
early  blunder.  Hug,  "Westcott,  and  Dr.  Lee  think  that  on  close  inquiry  the  supposed
innuendo  of  Caius  (a  strong  ante-Montanist)  is  non-existent.

(ii.)  The  sect  of  the  Alogi  were  the  strenuous  opponents  of  the  Gospel  and  of  the
Apocalypse,  together  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Aoros,  and  w^re  opposed  to  the  Mon-
tauism  and  chiliasm  which  prevailed  at  the  close  of  the  century.  The  reasons  they
urged  were  purely  doctrirfal,  or  based  upon  proved  historical  blunders.  The  Marcionites
in  the  same  way,  from  doctrinal  prepossessions,  refused  to  recognize  either  the  Gospels
of  Mark  or  Matthew  or  any  of  the  writings  of  John.  There  is  no  value  in  such
negative  evidence  to  the  existence  of  the  Apocalypse.  The  non-appearance  of  the
Apocalypse  in  the  '  Canon  of  Marcion '  is  no  argument  at  aU  against  its  apostolicity ;
but  there  is  one  writer  of  far  more  formidable  character,  who,  in  a  long  argument,
endeavours  to  disprove  its  authenticity,  though  he  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  discard  the
book.

(iii.)  Dionysius  qf  Alexandria,  a  pupil  of  Origen,  and  a  firm  believer  in  the  allegorical
method  of  interpreting  Scripture,  was  a  vehement  opponent  of  a  literal  millennium,  and,
to  strengthen  his  antagonism,  endeavoured  to  show  that  no  apostle  could  have  written
the  Apocalypse.  His  arguments  have  been  preserved,  and  are  cited  at  great  length  by
Eusebius  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  vii.  24,  25).  Thc^y  cover  much  of  the  ground  which  modern
critiLism  occupies  in  endeavouring  to  separate  from  the  Apocalypse  the  Fourth  Gospel,
in  whose  apostolic  authority  he  entirely  believed.  He  disagieed  with  those  who  set  it
aside ;  he  deduced  no  arguments  from  antiquity ;  he  did  not  refer  to  the  deficiency  of
extt  rnal  evidence ;  he  did  not  reject  it  as  the  work  of  Cerinthus ;  nor  did  he  object
to  it  on  the  ground  taken  by  the  Alogi,  because  it  might  have  deep  meanings  which
he  cabnot  fathom,  and  because  it  probably  is  the  work  of  some  holy  and  inspired
writer;  but  he  argued  with  acuteness  that  it  could  not  be  John  the  apostle  and  the
son  of  Zebedee,  because  (a)  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  gives  his  name,  whereas  the.
author  of  the  Gospel  aud  the  First  Epistle  is  silent  about  his  name,  and  in  the  Second
and  Third  Epistles  simply  calls  himself  "  the  elder."  (6)  He  argued  that  there  were
many  "Johns,"  but  that  ihis  writer  does  not  make  manifest  which;  he  does  not  call  him-
self either  "  the  brother  of  James  "  or  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  He  urged  that
"  .lobji  Mark  "could  not  have  been  the  author,  because  he  refused  to  join  in  the  Asian
ministry  of  Paul  (that,  by  the  way,  is  a  very  poor  argument) ;  but  he  added  very  doubt-
fully, "  I  think  there  was  another  of  these  Johns  in  Asia ;  and  they  aay  that  there  are
two  tombs  in  Ephesus,  aud  that  each  of  them  is  said  to  be  that  of  a  John."  This  is  the
solitary  reason  he  gives  for  some  unknown  John  being  the  author.

Dionysius,  comparing  the  Gospel  of  John  with  the  Epistles,  shows  how  the  prologue


IxxlT  INTRODUCTION  TO


corresponds  with  the  opening  words  of  the  Epistles,  and  he  enumerates  tenns,  themei,
and  ideas  common  to  them  botli ;  but  he  presses  the  point  that  the  Apocalypse  differs
from  them  both  in  its  syntax,  style,  and  solecisms  of  expression,  adding  that  while  the
phrases,  "light,"  "life,"  "grace,"  "joy,"  etc.,  occur  in  the  other  works,  they  do  not
appear  in  this.

Now,  BusebiuB  supplements  the  speculation  of  Dionysius,  and  resuscitates  from  one
of  "  the  two  tombs  "  in  Ephesus  "  the  Presbyter  John,"  supposed  to  be  referred  to  by
Papias,  and  as  answering  to  the  unknown  John  wliom  Dionysius  hoped  to  find.
Eusebius  leaves  the  matter  in  a  vag;ue  and  uncertain  condition.  He  classes  the  book
among  the  Homologoumena  ('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  25),  but  shows  that  his  doubts  turn  largely
on  purely  internal  and  doctrinal  grounds,  and  that  it  was  open  to  grave  qufstion
whether  it  was  written  by  the  presbyter  (ibid.,  iii.  39).  The  general  evidence  of  anti-
quity is  therefore  various  and  peculiarly  strong  in  its  affirmations  that  the  author  of  the
Apocalypse  was  John  the  apostle.  A  lew  wiiters,  on  one  subjective  ground  or  another,
doubt  and  hesitate ;  but,  after  all,  if  it  were  not  for  the  supposed  discrepancy  between
the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  Apocalypse,  not  one  shadow  of  doubt  would  rest  upon  its
authenticity.

Kirchhofer  says, 'Quellensamralung'  (see  Charteris  on  '  Canonicity ; '  J.J.  Taylor,
•The  Fourth  Gospel,'  p.  41),  "Hardly  one  book  of  the  New  Testament  has  such  a  circle
of  historical  testimonies  marked  by  name  on  its  behalfi"

Many  writers  have  assumed  that  the  conclusion  at  which  we  have  arrived  touching
the  authorship  of  the  Apocalypse  is  a  powerful  argument  against  the  Johannine  origin
of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  they  have  emphasized  to  the  utmost  the  marks  of  difference
between  these  two  documents.  Indeed,  there  is  every  kind  of  hypothesis  held  in  order
to  explain  the  phenomena  of  the  case.

(i.)  There  are  those  who  refuse,  with  Keim,  to  admit  the  apostolic  origin  of  either  the
one  or  the  other,  disputing  the  resilience  of  Pt.  John  in  Asia,  and  laying  the  blame  of
the  tradition  so  widely  diffused  on  the  shoulders  of  Irenjens,  who  confounded,  as  Keim
sujiposes,  the  two  Johns.

(ii.)  There  are  those  who,  like  Llicke,  Ewa'd,  Liitzelberger,  Diisterdieck,  De  Wette,
and  Neander, regard  the  authorship  of  the  Gospel  to  be  certainly  esta'iUshed,  and  partly
on  that  very  ground,  echoing  the  early  scepticism  of  Dionysius,  assign  the  Apocalypse
to  some  other  John,  either  "the  presbyter,"  or  "John  Mark,"  or  some  unknown
"  John  the  divine,  or  theologian."

(iii.)  Bretschneider  and  the  Tubingen  criticism,  reprpsentrd  by  Baur  and  Zeller,
gravitated  to  the  strong  assertion  of  the  npostolio  origin  of  the  Apocalypse,  its  early
date,  the  residence  of  its  author  in  Ephssus,  ai:d  other  iiientifications  of  "  John  "  with
the  fiery,  impetuous,  Jewish-Christian  apostle.  This  apocalyptic  form  is  supposed  to
reflect  the  first  and  earliest  form  of  Christian  teaching.  Volkmai-  went  further,  and
pressed  the  violently  anti- Pauline  theology  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  pointed,  with  Penan,
to  the  supposed  proof  that  the  writer,  whoever  he  was,  may  have  been  endeavouring  to
denounce  Paul  and  his  work  in  the  Churches  of  Asia  under  the  pseudonym  of  "Balaam."
Whether  he  were  John  the  apostle  or  not, Volkmar  holds  that  he  endeavoured  to  shelter
himself  under  the  name  and  shadow  of  one  of  the  original  apostles.

These  conclusions  of  the  most  modern  reconstructive  criticism  have  called  areat
attention  to  the  internal  evidence  either  of  the  identity  or  irreconcilable  divergence  of
the  two  documents.  If  the  purpose,  spirit,  ideas,  phraseology,  and  diction  are  veritably
oppo-cd,  then  the  proof  of  the  apostolic  authors  liip,  which  we  think  is  more  than
sufficient,  may  have  the  effect  of  weakening  the  evidence  already  accumulated  for  the
Johannine  origin  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  very  nume-
rous and  subtle  links  of  connection  and  resemblance  between  these  documents ;  if  \  he
use  of  rare  words  and  forms  of  expression  in  both,  together  with  a  praoiioaliy  identical
Christology  and  a  corresponding  structure,  can  be  clearly  established ;  if  the  o(iposiiioiis
of  style  turn  out  to  be  balanced  by  a  still  larger  number  of  interesting  corres]inndem;i^ ;
if  the  supposed  solecisms  can  be  accounted  for  on  rational  grounds,  and  easy  parallels
found  for  them  in  classical  Greek;  if  there.be  fundamental  conceptions  of  the  i'eraon
and  kingdom  of  Clirist  which  are  in  both  actually  identical  and  also  peculiar  to
these  writings;  if  the  conviction  is  forced  upon  the  mind  that  they  must  have  pro>
needed  from  the  same  pen ; — then  it  is  obvious  that  the  apostolic  origin  of  the  Apoca


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  Ixxv

lypse  is  one  of  the  strongest  arguments  for  the  Johannine  authorihvp  of  the  Fourth
Gospel.

The  internal  and  external  evidence  already  adduced  for  the  former  compels  ua,
therefore,  to  examine  the  grounds  of  the  supposed  incompatibility  of  the  single  author-
ship. In  drawing  attention  to  the  supposed  differences  or  real  differences  of  style,  it  is
incumbent  upon  us  to  remember  that  the  Gospel  is  a  religious  biography,  the  Apoca-
lypse the  record  of  a  series  of  marvellous  visions;  that  the  Gospel  is  written  in  concise
thoiigh  limpid  prose,  and  the  Apocalypse  is  in  structure  and  arrangement  poetical;
that  the  Gospel  betrays,  without  quoting  it,  a  close  acquaintance  with  the  synoptic
narrative,  and  the  Apocalypse  a  very  intimate  knowledge  of  the  prophets  Isaiah,
Ezekicl,  and  Daniel,  and  the  Psalms,  but  without  once  referring  to  them ;  that  the
Gospel  is  framed  on  the  lines  of  the  reflective  and  argumentative  history,  and  that  the
Revelation  proceeds  on  the  lines  of  the  apocalyptic  litcratare  which  prevailed.  Liicke,
M  ses  Stuart,  Dr.  S.  Davidson  (in  each  of  his  '  Introductions  to  the  New  Testament '),
Dr.  William  Lee  (in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary '),  have  each  presented,  in  very  abundant
fashion,  long  lists  of  discrepancies,  some  of  the  most  striking  and  important  of  which
must  be  passed  under  review.     We  therefore  proceed  to  notice —

(5)  The  phenomena  of  divergence  and  resemblance  between  the  two  documents.  («)
The  grammatical  and  lexical  differences.  (3)  The  grammatical  and  lexical  resem-
blances. (7)  The  structure  of  the  two  books.  (S)  The  theological  divergences  and
resemblances.

(a)  ITie  grammatical  and  lexical  differences,  (i.)  It  is  stated  that  the  Gospel  is
remarkably  free  from  Hebraisms,  but  that  the  Apocalypse  is  charged  with  them ;  that
the  first  is  written  in  a  fair  approximation  to  classical  Greek,  whereas  the  latter
reveals  everywhere  a  strong  Hebraistic  or  Aramaic  colouring.  Winer  says  that  these
Hebraisms  are,  throughout  the  New  Testament,  more  conspicuous  in  the  different  and
enlarged  sense  of  words  than  in  grammatical  relations  of  words,  although  the  most
obvious  illustrations  are  found  in  the  substitution  of  the  simple  ko(  as  representative  of
the  Hebrew  copulative  (j)  vau,  in  place  of  the  numerous  particles  and  conjunctioffi
with  which  classical  Greek  abounds ;  also  of  &s  as  possibly  representing  the  Hebrew
prefix  5,  or  ]3.  The  discourses  of  our  Lord  and  the  visions  of  the  seer  would  certainly
further  such  a  contrast  in  the  construction  of  the  Greek  sentences.  Tet  it  must  be
remembered  that  in  the  Gospel,  where  intense  feeling  seems  to  make  each  utterance  a
separate  heart-throb  (ch.  xv.,  xvil.),  and  each  change  in  the  scene  and  each  successive
event  a  separate  thing  of  great  and  unparalleled  interest,  as  in  ch.  xx.,  the  evangelist
dispenses  with  particles,  and  moves  on  from  step  to  step  without  their  aid.  It  is  said
that  John  uses  irdprore  and  xeSTroTe  and  xaBds  in  the  Gospel,  but  that  they  are  not
found  in  the  Apocalypse;  but  the  use  of  the  first  two  of  these  common  words  occurs
very  rarely  in  the  New  Testament,  and  their  absence  proves  nothing,  while  the
absence  of  naeis  in  the  Apocalypse  is  no  proof  of  Hebraism,  because  the  particle
occurs  in  portions  of  the  New  Testament  that  are  specially  Hebraistic.

It  is  certain  that  the  Apocalypse  uses  Hebrew  words  like  "Abaddon"  (Rev.  ix.  11),
"  Amen,"  "  Hallelujah  "  (Rev.  xix.  1, 3, 4, 6) ;  but  then  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the
Gospel  alone  in  the  New  Testament  also  makes  use  of  the  "Amen,  amen,"  when
calling  special  attention  to  the  words  which  follow;  and  records  the  Jewish  burst  of
praise,  'titrawi  (ch.  xii.  13),  and  in  ch.  i.  41  and  iv.  25  is  the  one  writing  which  translite-
rates into  Greek  the  Hebrew  Mco-irfctj  (explained  by  the  writer  as  equal  to  Xpurrds) ;  gives
the  Hebrew  form  of  the  tribunal  before  which  Christ  was  brought  as  TaPPaOi  (see
ch.  xix.  13);  and,  together  with  Matthew  and  Mark,  speaks  of  To\yoBi  (ch.  xix.  17);
and  refers  to  the  fuivm  (ch.  vi.  31)  as  in  Rev.  ii.  17 ;  records  the  Galilsean  form,  paP$ovrt,
in  oh.  XX.  16 ;  and  in  a  whole  group  of  passages,  after  giving  the  Hebrew  or  Aramaic
form,  furnishes  the  translation  into  Greek,  It  is  impossible  to  overlook,  in  the  Apoca-
lyiise,  the  Hebrew  root  of  many  of  the  representations;  e.g.  the  imagery  of  the  temple
furnishes  tlie  scenery  of  ch.  i. — ^iii.,  "the  seven  golden  lamps,"  "the  hidden  manna,"
and  "the  new  name  on  the  white  stone."  The  history  of  Israel,  moreover,  gives
meaning  to  the  reference  to  the  "  Root  and  Offspring  of  David,"  also  to  the  quotation
from  Ps.  ii.,  references  to  the  "  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,"  to  the  "  twelve  tribes
of  Israel,"  and  to  "  the  new  Jerusalem  coming  down  out  of  heaven."

But  this  peculiarity  is  equally  conspicuous  in  the  Gospel.     We  have  (p.  xlvi.)


laM  INTRODTJOTION  TO


eiidpavoured  to  show  that  none  but  a  Hebrew,  a  Palestinian  Jew,  conid  hare  written
the  Gospel,  so  that  the  presence  of  Hebrew  ideas  in  the  Apocalypse  creates  a  bond  of
union  between  the  two  documents  rather  than  the  reverse.  Let  the  following  points
be. noticed  :  yeinrdai  Bavirov,  in  ch.  viii.  52,  and  •■ij/ieio  koI  repara,  ch.  iv.  48;  e<tipayt(etr
in  the  sense  of  ratilying  and  approving  (ch.  iii.  33);  S  apxaf  rod  K6trfio»  (ch.  xii.  31;
xvi.  11,  etc.).  The  Apocalypse  commences  with  a  Christophany,  corresponding  with
the  theophanic's  of  Isa.  vi.  and  Ezek.  i.  and  x.,  and  proceeds  throughout  its  visions  to
vindicate  the  stupendous  claims  of  the  Lord  who  liveth  and  was  dead,  until  the  final
victory  of  the  Lamb  is  consummated  in  a  purified  city,  of  which  the  Lord  Almighty
and  the  Lamb  are  the  Temple  and  tlie  Light.  But  the  Gospel  begins  in  eternity,  and
maizes  the  eternal  (Aiyos)  "  Word"  the  sublime  background  for  all  the  manifestation  in
the  flesh.  Among  the  earliest  claims  which  the  Gospel  makes  for  the  incarnate  God  is
tliis — he  is  the  Lamb  of  God  taking  away  sin,  the  link  between  heaven  and  earth,
the  Bridegroom  of  the  Church  ;  One  greater  than  the  temple,  he  promises  to  erect  an
eternal  temple  should  the  first  be  destroyed.  The  Lamb  of  the  Apocalypse,  through
endless  conflict  with  evil,  first  from  the  Jews,  then  from  the  world,  then  from  the
centralized  world-power,  passes  to  his  "Hallelajah,"and  wipes  away  tears  from  off  all
faces.  In  the  Gospel,  the  great  powers  elsewhere  seen  in  Apocalyptic  vision  come
iace  to  face  with  tlie  historic  Christ;  through  warfare  and  death  he  gains  a  real
victory  over  priest  and  procurator,  betrayer  and  murderer,  and  proceeds  to  wipe  away
tears  from  off  all  faces,  to  conquer  death  and  Hades,  and  to  confer  an  eternal  life.
The  Hebraism  of  both  documents  is  conspicuous,  but  that  of  the  one  is  not  more
abundant  than  is  that  of  the  other.  While  the  Gospel  opens  the  kingdom  of  God  to
all  believers,  and  speaks  of  "the  other  sheep,"  and  the  time  when  "neither  in
Gerizjm  nor  yet  in  Jerusalem  shall  men  worship  the  Father,"  the  same  grand
universalism  pervades  the  Apocalypse,  which  sees  the  s^reat  multitude  gathered  out  of
every  kindred,  and  nation,  and  people,  and  tongue,  which  no  man  can  number,  and
admits  all  the  {^dpri)  nations  into  the  eternal  light  of  the  new  and  heavenly  Jerusalem.
This  Judaism,  or  Hebraism,  in  the  two  documents  finds  such  a  strong  and  coincident
expression,  that,  so  far  from  separating  the  authorship,  it  does  much  to  establish  identity
of  origin.

(ii.)  The  following  grammatical  peculiarities  of  the  Apocalypse  deserve  close
observation.

(a)  Cases  of  false  opposition.  Some  of  the  most  obvious  ones  are  deiived  from  onr
not  perceiving  that  the  clause  thus  charged  is  a  parenthetical  one.  Rev.  i.  5,  'Airh  'itjo-oB
Xpiarov,  S  iiiprvs,  etc., ''  From  Jesus  Christ,  wl;o  is  the  faithful  Witness."  In  the  previous
verse  a  false  regimen  is  said  to  be  signal  evidence  that  the  apocalyptist  defied  all  gram-
matical rules:  'Att^  i  Siy  koI  S  ^v  koX  S  Ipxi/ieyos,  This  cannot  prove  that  the  writer  does
not  know  the  syntax  of  the  preposition  mth,  seeing  that  thirty  places  occur  in  which
he  uses  it  with  perfect  correctness.  The  explanation  of  tlie  peculiarity  is  that  he  is,  in
this  place,  merely  translating  the  iucommunicable  name  of  "Jehovah"  into  Greek,  and
regarding  the  phrase  as  one  indeclinable  noun.  The  i;  \4youiTa  of  Rev.  ii.  L'O,  which  is  the
text  preferred  by  the  R.T.,  is  clearly  a  relative  clause,  the  nominative  [ireferred  in  virtue
of  the  finite  verbs  which  follow.  Similiar  peculiarities  are  found  in  Plato's  '  Euthrypho,'
p.  32  (see  Winer,  671,  Eng.  trans.) ;  see  also  Rev.  v.  11,  etc.,  where  the  construction  is
peculiar  in  a  like  respect.  But  so  far  from  its  being  impo.ssilile  Greek,  examples  are
given  from  Plato,  Thucydides,  Achilles  Tat.,  and  others.

There  are  curious  combinations  of  nominatives  and  accusatives  in  Rev.  iv.  2 — 4;
xiv.  14;  vii.  9;  following  elSovKol  ISoiJ;  but  there  is  this  peculiarity,  that  the  nomina-
tives follow  the  Itoi,  and  the  accusatives  come  more  under  the  power  ol  the  preceding
ettoy.  The  (Rev.  viii.  8, 9)  t4  ^x""'''''  •('"X'^Si  introduced  to  discriminate  xrlirfiaTa, "  which
have  life,"  from  those  which  have  it  not,  becomes  a  parenthetical  sentence  (cf.  here
Jas.  iii.  8).

Anomalies  of  gender  and  number  are  to  be  explained  by  the  strong  poetic  tempera-
jaent  which  tends  to  give  masculine  or  feminine  characteristics  to  the  neuter  noun.
Rev.  ii.  27,  wliere  (Bvii  are  referred  to  as  atirois;  bnt  precisely  the  same  thins;  is  seen
in  Matt,  xxviii.  19;  Gal.  iv.  19;  iyS/iara  are  referred  to  as  ijiof  in  Rev.  xix.  14,
rrpaTeiftaTa  are  iyStSviityot.  The  peculiarity  is  by  no  means  solecistio;  it  is  found
in  the  Gospel  and  in  numerous  Greek  writers.    Tlie  critics  have  enumerated  sundry


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  kxvU

solitary  peculiarities  of  the  Apocalypse,  whioli  are  good  enough  Greek,  which  prove*
nothing  as  to  the  non-identity  of  the  authorship  with  the  Fourth  Gospel.  All  Paul's
Epistles  contain  numerous  Swof  Keyliitna.

(b)  PecuUmr  use  of  words.  Bwald  urged  that  John  used  compound  words  in  Us
Gospel,  but  that  they  are  not  used  in  the  Apocalypse.  Moses  Stuart  (p.  321)  enume-
rates twenty-six  compound  verbs  which  occur  in  toth  books — twenty  or  more  peculiar
to  the  Apocalypse,  and  ten  or  twelve  to  the  Gospel  and  Epistle.  Objectors  have  pressed
the  fact  that  "  such  favourite  words  of  the  fourth  evatfgelist  as  Bedo/ua  and  9eap4a>  are
displaced,  and  that  we  find  in  the  Apocalypse  opia  and  fiKha."  The  statement  is  mis-
leading. Wherever  John  uses  eeio/iai  in  the  Gospel,  he  means  by  it  a  steady  and
continuous  contemplation — a  verbal  idea  singularly  inappropriate  to  the  visions  of  the
seer.  Moreover,  both  the  Gospel  and  the  Apocalypse  each  make  use  of  ffKeira  sixteen
times.    The  elSoy,  so  often  used  in  the  Apocalypse,  frequently  occurs  in  the  Gospel.

Luoke  speaks  of  the  absence  from  the  Apocalypse  of  the  "genitive  absolute,"  a
syntactical  form  common  to  the  Gospel.  This  is  partially  true ;  but  Eev.  xvii.  8  can
hardly  be  explained  on  another  principle,  and  let  it  be  noticed  that  though  there  are
fifteen  cases  of  this  construction  in  the  Gospel,  there  are  none  in  the  Epistle.

Much  emphasis  has  been'laid  on  the  absence  of  certain  words  which  are  especially
prominent  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  such  as  Koaiios,  ^as,  hkotIo,  and  fa))  ai<ivios  used  in  a
moral  sense.  The  nature  of  the  two  compositions  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  partial
truth  of  this  statement ;  but  <l>ws  does  occur  in  Eev.  xviii.  23 ;  xxi.  23,  24 ;  xxii.  5 ;  and
fai  oMcioj,  which  is  used  by  all  New  Testament  writers,  is  in  John's  Gospel  inter-
changed with  (ail  without  the  adjective;  and  (aii  does  occur  in  the  Apocalypse  sixteen
times.

The  presence  of  words  in  the  Apocalypse  not  found  in  the  Gospel  has  also  been  urged.
One  of  those  which  are  especially  pressed  is  oi'/couAt/w;.  This  word  occurs  in  Matthew
onaj  in  Luke's  writings,  eight  times;  in  Hebrews,  twice;  and  three  times  only  in  the
Apocalypse — as  often,  in  fact,  as  the  word  k^/ios  occurs,  the  absence  of  which  is  com-
mented on.  We  find  that  imvTOKpiTap  occurs  nine  times  in  association  with  Kipiot
®e6s.  The  term  is  used  also  by  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  vi.  18),  and  in  certain  of  St.  Paul's
writings  we  find  pecuhar  expressions  for  the  Deity,  not  occurring  elsewhere  (1  Tim.
i.  17).

Other  peculiarities  of  grammar  and  lexical  usage  may  be  easily  cited.  These  are  the
most  impressive,  and  they  amount,  in  themselves,  to  a  very  feeble  proof  of  diversity  of
authorsMp.  In  some  instances,  as  we  have  seen,  the  conclusion  is  in  favour  of  identity
rather  than  divergence.    We  will  now  proceed.

(/3)  The  grammatical  and  lexical  resemblances  observable  in  the  two  documents.  One
great  idea  is  expressed  by  the  noun  /ioprvpla  and  the  verb  naprvpeo),  in  the  sense  of  public
testimony  concerning  the  Lord  Christ — public  profession  of  belief  in  him.  This  is  one  of
the  key-words  of  the  Gospel,  where  the  verb  occurs  thirty-seven  times,  and  in  the  Epistles
twelve  times;  moreover,  the  noun  is  used  twenty  times  in  the  Gospel  and  Epistles.
They  are  sparingly  used  in  other  books— once  in  Matthew,  eight  or  nine  times  in  all  the
Pauline  Epistles,  more  frequently  in  Acts  (twelve  times)  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
but  in  a  different  sense,  while  in  the  Apocalypse  we  find  the  verb  used  in  the  same  sense
four  times  and  the  noun  nine  times.  NikSi',  in  the  sense  of  overcoming  the  evil  of  the
world,  occurs  in  very  remarkable  force  in  ch.  xvi.  33,  and  six  times  in  the  Epistle,  and,
in  precisely  the  same  sense,  seventeen  times  in  the  Apocalypse.  No  New  Testament
writer  except  the  author  of  the  Gospel  and  the  Apocalypse  uses  the  word  S\j/is  in  the  sense
of  human  visage,  or  in  any  sense  (ch.  vii.  24 ;  xi.  44 ;  Rev.  L  16).  TnpeTi/  Thy  \6yor
is  a  phrase  peculiar  to  the  author  of  the  Gospel,  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse.  It  occurs
seven  times  in  the  Gospel,  once  in  the  Epistles,  and  four  times  In  the  Apocalypse ;  rripeiv
rhs  ivToxdf  occurs  twice  in  the  Gospel,  five  times  in  the  Epistle,  and  twice  in  the
Apocalypse,  and  only  once  beside  in  all  the  New  Testament.  The  tabernacling  (o-Ki/KoSy)
of  the  Logos  with  men  is  found  in  ch.  i.  14,  and  the  same  idea  is  given  in  the  same
word  in  Eev.  vii.  15;  xii.  12;  xiii.  6;  xxi.  3;  and  nowhere  else.  The  word  <r<i>drTeif
occurs  in  1  John  iii.  12,  and  seven  times  in  the  Apocalypse;  veparaTelp  luri  rtvot
(ch.  vL  fi6 ;  Eev.  iiL  4).  The  use  of  aippaylC^iv,  in  the  sense  of  confirming,  is  seen  in
ch.  iii.  33  and  Eev.  vii.  'E/Spaio-W  is  found  three  times  in  the  Gospel,  twice  in  the
Apocalypse,  and  nowhere  else.     AaXeTc  /iereJ  nvos  occurs  three  times  in  the  Gospel,  six


Ixxrffll  INTEODUCTION  TO


times  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  only  once  beside  In  the  New  Testament.  Uid(eip  occurs
eight  times  in  the  Gospel,  once  in  the  Apocalypse  (in  the  unusual  sense  of  taking  an
animal),  and  only  three  times  in  all  the  New  Testament  beside.  Kipte  trh  oTSas  occur?
three  times  in  ch.  xxi.  and  in  'Rev.  vii.  14.  While  certain  common  words  like  lurd'
yota,  yhvya,  never  occur  in  any  of  the  Johamiine  writings,  (parlCa,  S6^a,  ipalva,  frequently
occur  in  all  three.  n/o-Tu,  a  word  occurring  some  three  hundred  and  forty  times  in  the
New  Testament,  is  absent  from  the  Gospel,  and  nearly  absent  from  the  Epistles  md
Apocalypse,  only  occurring  five  times  in  all.  The  most  striking  phrases  and  lorms  of
thought-imagery  are  common  to  the  Gospel  and  Apocalypse ;  e.g.  the  idea  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  as  "a  Lamb,"  in  ch.  i.  29  (under  the  form  &nvis),  and  in  the  Apocalvpse
it  occurs  twenty-five  times  under  the  form  ipy/o*.  The  representation  of  the  Christ
as  Bridegroom  of  the  Church  (ch.  iii.  29)  reappears  in  Rev.  xix.  7;  xxi.  2.  The
"  water  of  life  "  is  an  idea  that  occurs  twice  in  the  Gospel  and  twice  in  the  Apocalypse.
The  frequent  use  of  nera  toOth  should  b«  noted  (oh.  iii.  22 ;  v.  1,  14 ;  vi.  1 :  vii.  1 ;
xix.  38 ;  xxi.  1;  Eev.  iv.  1 ;  vii.  1  (T.E.),  9 ;  xv.  5 ;  xviii.  1 ;  xix.  1 ;  xx.  3).  The  most
remarkable  identity  of  phrase  (however  it  may  be  accounted  for)  is  in  the  Greek  trans-
lation of  Zech.  xii.  10,  where  npjj  is  rendered  in  oh.  xix.  34— -i37  (see  note)  by  i^ex^-
KTijo-oi'  rather  than  avff  Sv  Karoipx^o'm^o  of  the  LXX.  The  same  translation,  as  well  as
the  same  citation,  occurs  again  in  Eev.  i.  7.  The  other  Greek  translations  and  Justin
Martyr  followed  the  same  text,  but  they  were  prepared  after  St.  John.  The  only
explanation  is  that  the  writers  of  the  two  passages  were  deeply  impressed  with  the
piercing  of  the  side  of  Jesus,  its  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  they  translated  Zechariah's
text  in  the  same  way,  and  in  this  differed  from  the  LXX.

These  peculiarities  of  diction,  and  similarities,  might  be  greatly  argumented,  as  may
be  seen  in  Liicke,  Moses  Stuart,  Davidson,  and  i)r.  Lee.  They  leave  upon  our  minds  a
powerful  impression  that  whosoever  wrote  the  one  book  liad,  undoubtedly,  much  to  do
irith  the  other  also.  The  supposed  discrepancies  of  diction  are  much  reduced  on  close
examination,  and  the  correspondences  are  more  striking  than  the  discrepancies.  One
method  of  refuting  or  evading  the  force  of  these  similarities  is  to  suppose  that  the  author
of  the  Gospel  in  post-apostolic  times  was  acquainted  with  the  Apocalypse  and  purposely
adopted  them.  The  necessity  for  such  a  refutation  goes  far  towards  a  repudiation  of  the
argument  based  upon  the  dissimilarity.

(7)  The  structure  of  the  two  hooks.  So  far  as  the  style  and  structure  are  concerned,
prima  facie,  the  contrast  is  obvious.  In  the  Gospel  we  have  the  simple,  apparently
artless,  and  even  grammatico-structureless  composition.  A  winning  fluency  pervades
it,  and  the  reader  blends  without  effort  the  events  with  the  consequent  discourses.
Moreover,  as  some  of  these  commence  in  mediis  rebus,  and  close  in  the  midst  of  a  con-
versation without  dramatic  introduction  or  end,  an  incautious  reader  might  suspect
an  utter  absence  of  plan  or  arrangement.  Apparently  no  effort  is  made  to  produce
•n  impression  upon  the  reader.  Utterances  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  transcendent
importance,  are  not  infrequently  recorded  without  comment,  and  even  the  effect  upon
their  first  hearers  is  conveyed  with  surpassing  reticence.  Very  few  signs  occur  of
great  or  vivid  imagination  on  the  part  of  the  writer ;  and  no  bursts  of  eloquence,  no
dazzling  scenes  corresponding  with  the  synoptic  narrative  of  the  Transfiguration,  are '
recorded.  No  attempt  is  made  to  aggravate  the  tragedy  of  the  Passion ;  a  studied
omission  of  certain  memorable  scenes,  which  might  have  been  dressed  in  apocalyptic
splendour,  occurs  to  all  students.  But,  on  the  other  hanH,  the  Eevelation  of  St.  John
is  so  arranged  as  to  form  a  series  of  connected  visions,  with  growing  intensity  of
suggestion,  and  climacteric  force  of  grouping.  After  the  opening  vision,  seven  letters
are  addressed  to  the  seven  Churches  by  the  living  Lord.  Then  follows  the  gorgeous
rision  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  book  with  the  seven  seals.  The  opening  of  six  of
these  seals  is  followed  by  a  prophetic  symbol ;  but  before  the  seventh  is  opened  a  sub-
ordinate act  is  introduced.  The /owr  angels  who  have  power  to  injure  land  and  sea
are  arrested  by  "  another  angel,"  who  would  secure  the  safety  of  twelve  thousand  from
each  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  and  after  this  the  seer  beholds  an  innumerable
company  of  every  age,  kingdom,  nation,  who  stand  before  the  Lamb,  and  sing  a  new
song.  Then,  when  the  seventh  seal  is  opened,  fresh  delay  intervenes,  for  that  action
Involves  the  delivery  of  tmmpet-voices  by  seven  angels.  The  first  four  trumppt-blasts,
like  the  efftct  of  the  opening  of  the  first  four  seals,  produce  certain  specified  results.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.  kxk

Tba  fifth  trumpet  is  followed  by  three  snccessiTe  woes,  which  are  described  in  great
detail.  The  sixth  and  seventh  trumpets  declare,  after  numerous  preparations  and  con-
flicts, that  the  kingdom  of  the  world  has  begun  to  be  the  eternal  kingdom  of  God  and
his  Christ,  and  that  the  time  for  judging  the  dead  has  come.  Then  t^e  temple  of  God.
is  seen,  and  numerous  episodes  follow,  amongst  them  the  visions  of  the  dragon  and  of
the  great  fiijpfoi',  with  (R.T.)  ten  horns  and  seven  heads,  and  ten  crowns  upon  the  horns.
Then  the  second  great  Buiplov,  ascending  from  the  earth,  has  the  horns  of  a  "  lamb,"  and  is
a  false  prophet.  The  power  of  this  "  beast "  and  "  false  prophet "  prevail  for  a  while,  when
several  consoling  visions  follow,  bearing  on  the  blessedness  of  the  dead  and  the  harvest
of  the  world.  This  is  again  followed  by  seven  last  plagues,  which  are  to  succeed  the
outpouring  of  the  seven  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God  ;  the  first  four  again  are  dis-
criminated from  the  last  three  vials,  and  throughout,  the  pouring  out  of  the  vials  corre-
sponds with  the  sounding  of  the  previous  trumpets.  The  effects  produced  on  Euphrates,
and  on  the  fortunes  of  the  beast,  are  enlarged  and  associated  with  the  great  whore  Babylon,
who  sits  upon  the  beast  in  gorgeous  apparel.  The  fall  of  Babylon  is  described  in
awful  and  dramatic  form.  The  war  made  by  Babylon  upon  the  Lamb  leads  to  her
doom  ;  but,  before  this  occurs,  the  people  of  God  are  commanded  to  go  forth  of  her.
After  the  disappearance  of  Babylon,  the  Logos  of  God,  a  Conqueror  in  heaven,  with  his
glorious  army  of  the  saved,  overthrows  all  his  enemies,  and  he  "  lives  and  reigns  a
thousand  years,"  during  which  "  the  souls  of  the  martyrs  live  again."  After  a  while
Satan  is  let  loose  for  a  season ;  then  is  revealed  the  world-power  in  its  force,  and  the  great
battle  takes  place  between  the  two  powers,  ending  in  the  destruction  and  torment  of
the  devil,  the  beast,  and  the  false  prophet,  to  all  eternity.  Meanwhile  the  new
Jerusalem,  the  holy  city,  comes  down  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for
her  husband,  and  all  is  made  new.  These  sublime  descriptions  have  been  for  eighteen
hundred  years  the  symbolism  and  material  to  which  the  eye  of  the  (Church  has  turned
for  its  anticipations  of  the  final  blessedness  of  the  redeemed  from  among  men.

This  elaborate  structure;  this  subtle  and  complicated  imagery;  this  repeated  suspense
of  veritable  crisis,  the  cyclical  nature  of  visions,  conflicts,  and  victories,  the  reappear-
ance and  reutterance  of  the  ideas  which  have  been  first  of  all  presented  in  less  detail ;
this  passing  from  heaven  through  earth  to  heaven  again,  with  episodes  of  superlative
magnificence  and  measured  grandeur,  which  receive  further  exposition  as  the  mighty
drama  unfolds  itself; — all  this  suggests,  at  first  perusal,  a  mode  of  treatment  simgularly
unlike  the  structure,  method,  and  style  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Yet  it  must  be  at  the
same  time  granted  that  there  are  some  resemblances  of  a  very  remarkable  kind  which
may  modify  the  impression  of  great  dissimilarity.  E.g.  the  structure  of  the  Gospel  is
not  a  merely  spontaneous  unfolding  of  events  taken  at  random.  The  numbers  seven,
three,  and  ten  play  almost  as  marvellous  a  part  in  the  Gospel  as  in  the  Revelation.

Seven  great  miracles  are  vrrought  by  our  Lord  before  his  Passion;  and  after  his  resur-
rection three  specially  recorded  appearances  to  his  apostles,  the  last  accompanied  by  a
Rijjnificant  miracle.  These  are  related  with  ever-gathering  suggestiveness.  (i.)  First
of  all  he  asserts  his  victory  over  the  material  of  nature,  and  exhibits  his  prerogatives  of
creation,  (ii.)  This  is  followed  by  his  healing  of  the  nobleman's  son,  and  his  power
over  the  widespread  sorrow  which  comes  from  the  poisonous  alien  force  of  fever
taking  possession  of  humanity,  (iii.)  Then  in  his  miracle  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda  he
indicates  his  power  to  restore  lacking  force  and  energy  to  the  impotent,  (iv.)  This  \&
tollowed  by  the  miraculous  supply  of  food  to  the  starving  multitude,  or  his  capacity  to
satisfy  all  the  genuine  desires  of  humanity,  (v.)  His  superiority  to  the  forces,  as  well
as  his  mastery  of  the  matter,  of  the  universe,  in  walking  upon  and  hushing  the  stormy
sea.  (vi.)  In  his  healing  of  the  man  bom  blind,  he  met  the  radical  defect  of  human
natare,  and  opened  a  new  world  to  the  unseeing  eye.  (vii.)  And  in  the  raising  of  Lazarus,
he  demonstrated  his  power  to  encounter  and  overcome  the  last  great  enemy  of  the
human  race.  This  comprehensive  enumeration  of  the  great  power  of  Jesus,  which,
with  augmenting  interest,  pursues  its  powerful  argument  through  the  mystical  septenary
series,  gives  one  point  of  structural  relation  with  the  Apocalypse.  Furthermore,  a  suspense
which  throughout  delays  the  crisis  and  postpones  the  victory  of  Christ,  in  the  Apo-
calypse, until  the  city  of  God  comes  down  out  of  heaven,  appears  in  the  Gospel.  Thus
the  "hour"  of  the  Lord's  highest  manifestation,  not  of  world-wide  victory,  but  supreme
self-devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  world,  to  humanity  as  such,  pervades  the  GospeL


Ixxx  INTRODUCTION  TO


[t  ia  almost  always  suggested  as  near,  but  is  not  yet  come.  Thus  before  the  first
miracle  (ch.  ii.  4)  the  Lord  tells  his  mother  she  must  wait  for  the  full  satisfaction  he
will  eventually  give  to  human  need.  In  ch.  iv.  21,  23  he  foretells  the  approach  of  an
hour  of  transcendent  interest  to  the  true  worshipper ;  and  in  ch.  v.  25,  28  he  waits  and
causes  his  hearers  to  wait  for  the  full  manifestation  of  his  judgment  and  power.  In  ch.
vii.  30  and  ch.  viii.  20  twice  the  Lord  escapes  from  the  malice  which  was  bursting  for
expression,  because  his  "  hour  was  not  yet  come."  In  ch.  xii.  27  this  hour  of  his  sacri-
fice seems  to  have  been  reached,  and  yet  there  is  the  wondrous  delay  of  the  valedictory
discourse,  in  which  the  supreme  Teacher  and  Victim,  in  larger  sweep  of  thought  and
infinitely  bolder  utterance  than  does  the  Socrates  of  the  '  Ph^do,'  discourses  of  "  the
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  Arising  to  go  from  the  upper  chamber  to  the  garden,
once  more  he  lifts  liis  voice  with  prophttio  ardour  and  unfathomable  depth  of  thought,
and  concludes  with  words  which  are  of  inimitable  force,  revealing  his  love,  his  satisfac-
tion with  the  faith  of  the  eleven,  and  his  renewed  prediction  of  sorrow,  calamity,  and
desertion.  The  seal  is  loosed,  the  trumpet  has  sounded,  the  vial  is  poured,  and  yet
before  the  great  woes  are  uttered  and  the  tragedy  begins  there  comes  the  interlude  of
the  interctssory  prayer.  The  same  mysterious  accumulation  of  climacteric  sorrows
reaches  its  highest  expression  when  he  lays  down  his  life  that  he  may  take  it  again.
Much  of  the  same  kind  of  overlapping  of  interest  pervades  every  step  taken  until  we
reach  the  confession  of  Thomas.

The  Gospel  is  composed,  as  the  Bevelation  is,  upon  a  Bomewhat  similar  plan.  In  both
we  have(i.)  proloj>ue;  (ii.)  introductory  ministry,  giving  specimens  of  all  his  powers  and
functions ;  (iii.)  active  conflict  with  the  world  of  Judaism,  and  all  the  power  of  the  prince
of  this  world;  (iv.)  creation  of  the  inner  sanctuary,  where  love  and  communion  can  go
on  undisturbed  between  liim.self  and  his  own  disciples,  and  then  between  him  and  them
united  and  the  eternal  Father ;  (v.)  the  great  representative  of  the  world-power  really
baffled  and  overcome  by  the  blood  he  was  by  his  own  mingled  passions  forced  on  to
shed;  (vi.)  the  uplifting  of  the  veil  which  hides  the  eternal  world,  in  the  revelations  of
the  glorifie  i  Lord ;  (vii.)  epilogue,  revealing  the  triumph  of  his  rule  to  the  end  of  the  world.
'1  here  is  the  most  complicated  structure  involved  in  the  selection  of  the  materials  and
their  arrangement.  The  epilogue  points  back  to  the  prologue,  and  epilogue  and  prologue
are  illustrated  by  the  interven  ng  chapters.  The  Fourth  Gospel  is  not  an  invertebrate  and
chance  collection  of  works  and  words.  Every  event  recorded  is  to  some  extent  prepared
for  in  the  prologue  and  complemented  in  the  epilogue;  e.g.  on  behalf  of  the  Logos  the
creative  power  is  claimed.  The  evangelist's  ideas  on  this  subject  are  affirmed  by  the
miracle  on  the  water  and  on  thj  Sea  of  Galilee.  Tlij  Logos  is  asserted  to  be  the  origin
of  "  life,"  and  we  find  that  the  body  of  the  narrative  leads  continually  to  the  demon-
stration that  Christ  is  the  Life-giver,  and  that  he  will  and  does  rise  from  the  dead.
He  is  "  the  Light,"  and  with  what  care  does  the  Gospel  .-ecord  the  proof  that  Christ
claims  to  be  "  the  Light  of  the  world"!  The  prologue  reveals  the  activity  of  the  Logos
in  the  old  creation  and  in  the  theocracy ;  the  light  shined  in  the  darkness,  and  the
darkness  compreherided  it  not.  This  is  confirmed  by  a  succession  of  dealings  on  his  part
with  the  temple,  with  the  Sanhedrin,  with  the  chosen  teachers  of  the  people,  with  Samari-
tan claims,  with  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees,  with  pseudo-historical  prejudices,  with  legal
quibbles,  with  sabbatic  pride,  with  misapprehended  revelation,  and  the  like.  The
philosopheme  of  ch.  i.  14  is,  without  doubt,  the  theme  of  every  chapter,  though  it  is
never  once  quoted.  It  rises  over  the  Gospel  just  as  the  great  vision  of  him  that  liveth
and  was  dead  dominates  the  Apocalypse.  To  the  specific  details  of  the  structure  of
the  Gospel  it  is  not  necessary  in  this  place  to  refer  more  minutely  (see  plan  of  the
Gospel,  sect.  X.).  It  is  sufiici3ntly  patent  to  make  the  structural  character  of  the  Apoca-
lypse no  bar  to  community  of  origin.  Nay,  more,  the  two  documents  are  In  the  matter
of  structure  so  closely  allied  as  to  lead  many  competent  critics  to  hold  that  the  two
books  must  have  proceeded  from  the  same  pen.

(J)  TTie  theology  of  the  Apocalypse,  so  far  as  it  bears  upon,  the  authorship  of  the
Fourth  Oospel.  Even  Baur  and  Volkmar  admit  a  certain  correspondence  in  the  type
of  doctrine  to  be  found  in  the  two  books,  and,  differences  of  style  or  method  of  presenta-
tion being  allowed,  cannot  maintain  that  they  spring  from  a  different  root.  The  more
the  matter  is  weighed  the  more  abundant  becomes  the  evidence  of  similarity.  Indeed,
there  are  no  two  books  of  the  New  Testament  which  are  more  closely  allied  in  their


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  8T.  JOHN.  Ixxxt

fundamental  ideas  of  the  Godhead,  of  the  rank  in  the  universe  of  the  Son  of  God,  of
the  Personality  of  the  Spirit,  of  the  ground  and  method  of  redemption,  and  the  transceu-
dently  important  and  signiticant  teaching  with  reference  to  obedience  and  submission
of  man  to  the  commandments  and  will  of  the  Supreme.  Greater  difference  is  percep-
tible with  reference  to  the  parousia,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  last  things;  and  yet  even
here  the  advocates  of  the  early  date  of  the  Apocalypse*  who  believe  that  the  fall  of
Jerusalem,  with  all  its  tremendous  consequences  to  the  Church  of  God,  largely  fill  up
the  Apocalypse  and  are  symbolically  portrayed  in  its  visions,  are  ready  to  admit  that
the  Gospel  is  but  a  sublimated  Apocalypse.  Without  looking  for  or  finding,  however,
any  later  stage  of  Johannine  doctrine,  as  Ritzschl  and  Weiss  and  Sears  ('  Heart  of
Christ')  have  done,  Gebhart  undertakes  to  prove,  "by  a  comparison  of  their  teaching,
that  what  Strauss  calls  '  the  notorious,  fantastical  Judaizing-Zelotic '  author  of  the
Apocalypse,  and  the  lauded  final  reconciler  of  all  the  contrarieties  of  the  first  and  of
half  the  second  centuries — the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel — are  one  and  the  same
apostolic  personality."

We  must  remember  that  ithe  conditions  under  which  truth  was  apprehended  by  the
author  of  each  book  were  profoundly  different.  In  the  one  case  a  writer  professing  to
be  an  eye-witness  is  reflecting  on  the  past;  in  the  other  he  is  anticipating  the  future.
In  the  one  book  we  have  the  historical  realization  of  One  who  was  believed  to  be  God
manifest  in  the  flesh — a  human  being,  who  laid  down  his  life  that  be  might  take  H
again,  who  passes  through  the  stages  of  trial,  suffering,  and  death,  to  the  occupation  of
a  position  in  two  worlds,  at  home  and  yet  capable  of  exercising  supremacy  in  both ;  in
the  other  book  the  writer  surveys  the  future,  and  realizes  the  conflict  of  this  Divine
Personality  with  evil  in  all  its  forms  of  manifestation.  In  the  one  book  the  writer  is
FBflective,  utters  large  and  comprehensive  truths  in  a  form  approaching  the  dogmatic
and  propositional.  In  the  other  the  same  truths  are  represented  in  glowing  imagery  and
brilliant  picture.  In  the  one  book  he  writes  "in  the  understanding,"  with  the  view  of
rationalizing  and  soothing  the  thoughts  of  men  with  great  realities  and  the  material  of
faith.  In  the  other  he  writes  "  in  the  Spirit,"  with  the  imagery  of  the  Hebrew  prophet.
Paul  may  have  had  similar'  visions,  but  he  could  not  utter  them ;  John  was  able  to
make  his  readers  feel  what  he  felt,  and  see  what  he  saw,  and  hear  what  he  heard,  and
handle  what  he  handled,  when  he  was  caught  up  into  Paradise — into  the  highest
heaven.  Just  as  a  biographer  with  penetrative',  insight,  he  was  able  to  seize  and  record
more  than  any  other  apostle  the  open  secrets  of  the  heart  of  Jesus,  so  that  same  man,
when  permitted  to  see  into  the  present  glory  of  the  Divine  Lord,  was  also  qualified  to
see  more  and  say  more  than  any  other  apocalyptic  writer  of  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven.

This  position,  however,  the  reader  can  only  decide  for  himself;  and  illustration  and
comparison  are  necessary  under  some  of  the  principal  groups  and  classes  of  doctrine.

(i.)  Let  us  commence  with  some  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  these  books  with
reference  to  the  Oodhead.

(a)  One  of  the  most  conspicuous  ideas  of  the  Gospel  it  that  Ood  is  a  Spirit  (ch.  iv.
24);  and  the  teaching  with  which  this  is  associated  is  that  the  old  local  sanctuaries  will
pass  away,  that  spiritual  and  true  worship  will  be  universal,  alike  the  explanation  of  the
past  dealings  and  the  prophecy  of  the  future  dealings  of  God  with  men.  How  does  this
same  truth  appear  iu  the  Apocalypse  ?  In  the  repeated  and  continuous  assurance  that
true  believers  are  the  veritable  priesthood  (Rev.  i.  6 ;  v.  10)  ;  that  the  faithful  are  per-
sonally as  sacred  in  themselves  as  pillars  in  the  temple  (Bev.  iii.  12);  that  "  prayers  of
saints  "  are  the  "  incense  "  that  perfumes  it  (Rev.  v.  8 ;  viii.  3) ;  that  the  new  Jeru-
salem builds  itself  down  out  of  heaven,  including  within  its  walls  the  world  itself;  that
its  door  is  "open;"that  the  gates  are  never  closed,  and  the  "seven  spirits"  (or  sevenfold
spiritual  energy  of  God  himself)  go  forth  into  the  whole  earth ;  and  that  the  nations  of
the  saved  walk  in  the  light  of  it.  Moreover,  the  Lord  God  and  the  Lamb  are  the
temple  thereof.

(b)  God  is  "  life,"  "  love,*  and  "  light."  These  are  the  persistent  ideas  of  the  Gospel
and  Epistle.  "  Life  "  (ch.  i.  4 ;  v.  26 ;  vi.  57 ;  1  John  v.  20,  "This  is  the  true  Otoi,
and  eternal  life").    "  Love  '  (ch.  iii.  16 ;  1  John  iv.  8, 16).   "  Light "  (ch.  L  4 ;  1  John  L

■  See  Gebhart, '  Doctrine  of  the  Apocalypse,'  Eny .  tnuu.,  pp.  309 — iii.


luiM  INTEODUOTION  TO


6).  These  statements  are  not  categoricaTly  made  in  the  Apocalypse ;  but  how  steadily
are  they  taughtl  The  very  phrase,  "living  God,"  is  found  in  Rev.  vii.  2  (cf.  xv.  7;
iv.  9, 10;  X.  6).  God  is  the  Life-giver,  and  "he  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever."  He  is
the  Light  of  the  city  of  God,  its  Sun,  its  Glory.  Because  of  his  presence  "  there  is  no
night  there,"  and  "  because  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light."  The  love  of  God  to  his
own  servants,  to  those  who  are  saved,  is  reiterated  throughout  the  visions  in  every
kind  of  representation ;  even  when  the  prophet  is  detailing  the  severity  of  the  Divine
judgments,  he  is  represented  as  the  Father  of  the  Lamb;  and  the  numerous  references
to  his  anger  and  wrath  are  always  the  manifestation  of  such  emotions  towards  the
enemies,  persecutors  of  his  Church.  No  passages  in  the  entire  Scripture  are  more
radiant  than  those  which  portray  the  love  ot  God  to  his  own  children  (Rev.  vii.  2,  3,
15—17  ;  xii.  3,  4,  6,  7).

(c)  Whereas  the  First  Epistle  (i.  9)  declares  Gnd  to  be  "  faithful  and  just,"  in  ch.  xvii.
11,  25  our  Lord  addresses  God  as  "the  holy  and  righteous  Father."  The  Apoca-
lypse reiterates  the  same  idea,  not  only  with  its  "  thrice-holy  cry  "  (Rev.  iv.  8),  but
in  most  abundant  phrase  in  Rev.  xv.  3 ;  ivi.  5,  7 ;  xxi.  5.  Similar  comparisons  may
be  made  in  proof  of  the  common  doctrine  concerning  the  wisdom  and  truthfulness  of  God.

(d)  The  internal  relntions  of  the  Godhead  are  more  abundantly  set  furth  in  the
Gospel  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  Scripture.  It  is  there  that  the  "  Logos "  is
spoken  of  as  personally  present  wiih  and  one  with  God ;  that  the  "  Only  Begotten  of
the  Father"  is  represented  as  being  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  as  having  a  "glory
with  the  Father  before  the  world  was."  The  self-conscious  and  God-com-cious  Chdst
speaks  of  himself  as  having  "  come  down  from  heaven,"  as  being  "  in  heaven  "  while
yet  on  earth,'  and  he  admits  a  degree  of  reverence,  homage,  and  praise  which  apostles
and  prophets  and  angels  of  God  are  studiously  represetted  as  disclaiming  for  themselves.
Let  these  and  other  passages  be  compared  with  1  John  i.  1 — 4,  where  the  Christ  is  called
"  the  Word  of  life,"  and  "  that  eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  has  been
manifested  unto  us,"  and  the  high  and  probable  ascription  to  Jesus  Christ  of  the  great
title,  "  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  Life."  There  is,  on  the  other  hand,  no  book  of
the  New  Testament  which  so  emphatically  adopts  this  great  term  in  its  fulness,  viz.
"the  Logos  of  God,"  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Rev.  lix.  13).  Nor  can  we  doubt  that
"  the  Word  of  God  "  to  which  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  bore  record  (i.  2)  is  the
same  grand  theme  which  identifies  its  author  with  the  author  of  the  Gospel  and  First
Epistle  (see  also  Rev.  i.  9  ;  cf.  vi.  9 ;  xx.  4).  There  are  passages  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews  which  closely  approach,  but  are  by  no  means  so  explicit  (Heb.  iv.  12 — 14 ;  see
also  1  Cor.  X.  9,  taken  in  connection  which  Philo's  reference  of  the  object  of  this  temp-
tation as  the  \Byos).

There  is  much  to  lead  to  the  same  conclusion,  because  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom
the  author  of  the  Gospel  identifies  with  the  AoroS  2APE  TENOMENOS,  the  author  of  the
Apocalypse  calls  the  'O  AOroS  TOT  ©EOT  (Hev.  xix.  13).  Jesus  Christ,  moreover,  is
placed  by  the  latter  as  one  of  tlie  integral  elements  whose  relations  with  each  other  con-
stitute the  Godhead  (Rev.  i.  4 — 8),  and  he  receives  at  his  hands  the  highest  designations
that  human  language  could  frame  to  denote  his  superlative  dignity.  He  is  "Alpha
and  Omega,"  the  "  Beginning  and  the  End,"  "  the  Holy  and  True,"  "  the  Amen,"  "  he
that  is  alive  for  evermore,"  "  the  'Apxh  of  the  creation  of  God,"  i.e.  "  the  Primal  Source
of  the  creation."

The  evangelist  in  numerous  places  represents  our  Lord  as  claiming  for  the  Divine
Personality  manifested  in  his  humanity  as  the  Sou,  the  Son  of  God,  precisely  the  same
honours  and  functions  as  those  of  the  Father  (ch.  v.  17 — 26 ;  viii.  19  ;  x.  15  ;  xvii.  1  •
cf.  1  John  ii.  23).  In  the  same  way  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  represents  the  Lamb
of  God  as  receiving  identical  ascriptions  of  praise  with  those  ot  God  himself,  or  of  him
who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever  (Rev.  vi.  16 ;  xii.  10 ;  xiv.  4  ;  xxi.  22  ;  v.  13  ;  vii.  10).
It  is  worthy  of  much  attention  that  the  writer  of  the  Gospel  records  the  great  words
"  I  and  the  Father  are  one,"  and  that  "  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they
honour  the  Father ; "  and  the  writer  of  the  Apocalypse  represents  angels  and  men
•like  p»ying  this  supreme  homage  (Rev.  iv.  8 — 11 ;  cf.  v.  12,  13)  to  the  Father  and  tm
the  Lamb.

•  Titongh  doubt  is  thrown  upon  this  text  by  some  modem  editors  (see  Exposition,  A.  W.1


THK  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  IxxxHi


S  Further  peculiarities,  bearing  on  the  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  are  found
th  Gbspel  and  Apocalypse.

(1)  Important  ideas,  touching  the  intimate  blending  of  the  human  life  with  the
heavenly  gloiy  of  the  Lord,  occur  in  both  documents.  The  consciouauesti  of  Ciirist  is
revealed  in  the  Gospel,  that  though  in  the  flesh  (seeing  he  had  come  from  Gud),  he
was  "going  to  God;"  that  he  had  "come  forth  from  the  Father,  and  was  going  to  the
Father."  His  death  was  to  be  the  highest  manifestation  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  is
followed  by  such  a  radical  change,  that  resurrection  and  ascension  are  spoken  of  as  one
grand  datum  of  the  eternal  life  which  was  in  him.  The  Son  of  man  will  ascend  to
where  he.  was  before.  Mary  of  Magdala  is  not  to  touch  him  with  mere  human  hands.
In  bis  ascension  he  will  stand  in  such  spiritual  relations  with  his  people  that  they
shall  touch  him  by  other  faculties  than  those  of  physical  sense.  The  "descending"
and  "  ascending  "  in  oh.  iii.  13 ;  vi.  62 ;  viii.  14,  are  the  two  great  moments  of  the  entire
manifestation,  between  which  the  life  is  lived  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  these  terms
entirely  applicable  to  the  manner  of  his  coming  into  and  leaving  the  world.  How
wonderfully  does  the  Apocalypse  dwell  in  the  same  region  of  thought!  In  Bev.  xiL
1—6  the  man-child  is  to  rule  all  nations  with  the  rod,  and  is  caught  up  to  Grod  upon
his  throne.

(2)  Eeferences  to  the  accompaniments  of  his  death.  The  Fourth  Gospel  refers  to
the  piercing  of  Jesus  by  the  Boman's  spear.  This  is  treated  both  in  the  Gospel  and
Apocalypse  as  fulfilment  of  Zechariah's  prophecy.  There  is  no  other  New  Testament
reference  to  the  prophecy  (cf.  ch.  xix.  32 — 37  with  Bev.  i.  7).  In  like  manner,  the
entire  representation  of  the  career  of  the  two  witnesses,  and  the  joy  of  the  world  at  their
death  (Bev.  xi.  9),  corresponds  with  the  joy  of  the  world  at  the  Lord's  death  (ch.  xvi.
20) ;  and  the  three  days  and  a  half  of  the  two  witnesses  correspond  with  the  three  days
of  the  resurrection  of  the  spiritual  temple  in  ch.  ii.  18 — 20.  A  whole  group  of
phrases  descriptive  of  the  resurrection  and  subsequent  activity  of  the  witnesses,  their
ascension,  etc.  (Bev.  xi.  12),  corresponds  with  those  used  by  the  evangelist  to  describe  the
death,  resurrection-activity,  and  uplifting  of  Jesus ;  while  the  substance  of  the  Apocar
lyptic  vision  is  irradiated  by  the  Divine  presence  of  him  who  is  alive,  but  "  became
dead,"  and  "  is  alive  for  evermore."

(3)  The  identification  of  the  Logos  with  the  Messiah.  The  evangelist  and  apoca-
lyptist  both  found  their  notions  of  the  Christ  rationalized  by  the  Old  Testament
doctrine  of  the  Logos.  The  Gospel  never  loses  sight  of  the  fact  that  he  who  was  in
the  beginning  with  God  (his  life,  light,  and  energy)  was  not  only  the  Son  of  God,  but
the  Hebrew  Messiah ;  and  in  ch.  xx.  31  the  evangelist,  pointing  back  to  the  doctrine
of  the  prologue,  shows  that  this  was  his  reason  for  writing  the  Gospel.  Throughout
the  latter  we  find  the  characteristics  of  both  Messiah  and  Logos  continually  attributed
to  Jesus.  The  words  of 'Jesus  reflect  throughout  this  double  consciousness,  and  John's
report  of  them  cannot  be  unhistorical.  The  same  kind  of  remark  is  not  infrequently
found  in  the  synoptics.  These  great  utterances  go  far  beyond  the  current  Messianic
idea,  which  was  corrected  and  ennobled  by  them.  Thus  Nathanael,  John  the  Baptist,
and  some  of  the  most  intimate  circle  of  our  Lord's  friends,  such  as  Philip,  Martha,  and
John  himself,  were  conscious  of  this  sublime  blending  of  two  thoughts,  far  enough
apart  in  popular  faith.  Now,  the  evangelist  notices  that  the  Christ  had  his  foothold  on
the  earth,  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah,  of  the  seed  of  David  (ch.  vii.  42  and  notes),  and
answers  to  certain  noble  expectations  of  a  prophet  (ch.  iv,  19,129,  44)  who  would  teach
them  all  things,  solving  difficult  problems.  In  all  these  wonderful  respects  the  Apoca-
lypse is  most  explicit.  "Jesus  Christ"  occurs  at  the  beginning  and  ending  of  the
Apocalypse,  as  in  ch.  L  17  and  xxii.  21,  and  frequently  in  the, First  Epistle.  The  Lion
of  the  tribe  of  Judah  opens  the  book  fastened  with  the  seven  seals  (Rev.  v.  5 ;  xxiL  16).
Jesus  describes  himself  as  "  Son  of  God  "  (Eev.il.  18),  having  been  so  styled  eight  times
in  the  Gospel.  Throughout  both  documents,  the  Divine-human  Personality,  Jesus
Christ,  receives  the  predicates  and  activities  of  both  Messiah  and  Logos.

(4)  One  extraordinary  peculiarity  wherewith,  in  the  highest  majesty  of  his  self-
dependent  Divinity,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  spoke  of  his  inferior  rank  to  the  Father.
This  has  often  been  a  crux  to  theologians  in  dealing  with  the  Fourth  GospeL  Through-
out it  the  Lord  speaks  of  God  as  "  my  Father ; "  and  even  in  ch.  xx.  17,  "  My  God  " —
ta  expression  wmch  throws  light  upon  such  expressions  as,  "My  Father  b  greater  than


IxixlT  INTKODTJCTION  TO


I ; "  "  I  do  always  those  things  which  please  him,"  etc.  Now,  these  remarkahle  words
correspond  with  the  opening  words  of  Eev.  L  1,  and  with  the  use  in  Bev,  iii.  12  of  the
words,  "  My  God,"  thrice  repeated.  These  two  hooks  combine  the  boldest  utterances
touching  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  with  a  recognition  of  the  subordination  of  the  Son,
and  of  the  Person  of  the  Lord  in  respect  of  his  eternal  derivation  and  his  humiliation
in  the  flesh.

Great  prerogatives  are  assigned  to  the  Messiah-Logos  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  the  great
central  Personality  of  the  Apocalypse,  which  correspond  in  a  remarkable  way.  Thus
Christ  claims  the  judgment  of  the  world,  because  he  is  "  Son  of  man,"  and  ''the  Son  "
(ch.  V.  30).  In  Bev.  xix.  2,  11  the  judgment  of  the  world  is  attributed  to  him.
Compare  the  two-edged  sword  going  out  of  his  mouth,  with  the  power  of  judgment
claimed  (ch.  v.  22 — 27 ;  xii.  48).  Jesus,  as  Christ,  knew  what  was  in  man ;  so  in
Eev.  ii.  23,  "  he  searcheth  the  hearts  and  reins."  The  feeding  of  the  flock,  etc.,  in
Bev.  vii.  17  is  imaged  in  the  parable  of  the  good  Shepherd  (ch.  x. ;  cf.  ch.  iv.  10 —
14).  We  cannot  expect  to  find  in  the  Gospel,  recording  the  earthly  humiliation  of  the
eternal  Logos,  which  was  his  highest  glory,  the  peculiar  functions  of  the  triumphant
Christ,  who  has  become  indeed  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,"  "  the  Lamb  in  the
midst  of  the  throne ; "  but  we  may  expect  to  find  that  the  way  is  prepared  for  this
great  glory — for  the  reassumption  in  and  with  his  humanity  of  "  the  glory  he  had  with
the  Father  before  all  worlds"  (when,  as  St.  Paul  expressed  it,  Christ  Jesus  received  the
Name  which  is  above  every  name,  Phil.  ii.  10).  So,  on  the  other  hand,  while  we  do
not  expect  to  find  in  the  Apocalyptic  visions  the  signs  of  that  humiliation,  we  do  find
him  revealing  a  wondrous  union  with  our  humanity,  we  do  find  the  recognition  of  his
atoning  death,  of  the  blood  which  he  shed,  and  mention  made  of  his  resurrection  and
ascension,  and  of  the  sympathy  he  felt  for  his  own.  Because  he  has  been  "  slain  "
(an  idea  involving  and  not. concealing  the  whole  of  his  humiliation),  he  receives  the
acclamations  of  the  universe.

(f)  The  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  Gospel  we  read  that  the  Holy  Spirit
abode  on  Christ  (ch.  i.  32),  was  given  to  him  without  measure  (ch.  iii.  34),  constituted
the  grace  of  God  which  the  Christ  would  use,  just  as  the  Baptist  used  the  element  of
water  (ch.  i.  33,  34).  Christ  anticipates  the  bestowment  of  the  multiform  powers  of
the  Spirit  after  he  should  have  been  glorified  (ch.  vii.  39).  He  is  spoken  of  as  the
Giver,  the  Other  Advocate  (Paraclete),  which  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  he  would  send
to  his  disciples,  and  whom  the  Father  would  send  in  his  Name.  In  this  most  gracious
eff'usion,  it  would  be  found  not  only  that  he  would  return  himsdf  to  his  broken-hearted
disciples,  but  that  the  Father  himself  would  also  come  and  take  up  his  abode  with  them
and  in  them.  I'his  extraordinary  series  of  statements  is  wonderfully  confirmed  in  the
history  of  the  Church  and  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul ;  but  in  the  visions  of  the  seer
we  discover  the  relation  of  the  glorified  Christ  to  the  Spirit  throughout  the  history  of
ihe  Church  and  to  the  end  of  time.  Accordingly,  we  find  "  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  "
(Eev.  i.  4 ;  iii.  1 ;  iv.  5 ;  v.  6)  represented,  as  in  the  prophecies  of  Zeohariah,  as  the
sevenfold,  i.e.  the  perfect,  expression  of  the  effluence  of  all  the  energies  of  the  Holy
Spirit  of  God.  They  appear  under  different  imagery,  described  as  "  seven  lamps  "  and
"  seven  eyes."  This  sevenfold  energy  is  clearly  spoken  of  as  "  the  Spirit "  (Eev.  ii.  7).
The  "  seven  and  one"  are  blended,  as  in  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah,  with  those  "  eyes
of  the  Lord  which  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth."  This  representation  is
preserved  when  the  prophet  is  speaking  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  Divine  Personality
and  independence  (Eev.  i.  4)  ;  but  we  do  not  fail  to  observe  that  he  represents  Christ
as  "  having  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  "  (Eev.  iii.  1 ;  v.  6),  just  as  in  the  Gospel  he
sends  forth  the  Comforter.  Thus  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  is  his  energy.  "  The  testi-
mony of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy  "  (Eev.  xix.  10).  As  the  language  of  Christ
in  the  Gospel  shows  "  the  Paraclete  to  be  the  Spirit  of  truth,  who  will  lead  to  all  truth,"
and  declares,  "  He  shall  take  of  mine,  and  show  it  to  you,"  so  when  the  prophet  is  "  in
the  Spirit,"  he  sees  the  sublime,  commanding,  regulative  vision  of  the  entire  Apoca-
lypse. The  Spirit  speaks  in  the  lips  of  Jesus  Christ,  through  his  servant  John,  to  the
Churches  (Eev.  iL,  iii.).  As  Kostlin,  quoted  by  Gehhart,  p.  133,  says,  "  The  exalted
Christ  continually  sends  forth  from  himself  the  Spirit,  and  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  to
the  earth  is  an  effective  looking  down  upon  it  on  the  part  of  Christ,  a  streaming  forth
of  his  light."


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  Ixixy

(g)  The  ministry  <JF  the  angels  is  part  of  the  machinery  of  the  Apocalypse  (see  Moses
Stuart, '  Angclology ').  This  needs  no  proof,  but  it  is  not  absent  from  the  Q-ospel  (ek.
L  51 ;  xii.  29  ;  cf.  xx.  12, 13,  where  angels  are  described  as  facts  of  Mary  Magdalent'i
experience).

(h)  The  dsemonology  of  the  two  books  is  closely  allied.  In  all  these  writings
SulPoKot  occurs  (ch.  viii.  44 ;  Bev.  ii.  10 ;  1  John  iii.  8).  SarSx  occurs  in  Bev.  it.  9
and  ch.  xiii.  27.  And  frequent  references  to  "the  prince  of  this  world,"  in  the
Gospel,  are  balanced  by  the  expectation  that  Satan  is  the  great  anti-logos,  who  will
deceive  the  whole  world.  He  is  in  both  Gospel  and  Apocalypse  credited  with  being
"the  father  of  lies,"  the  embodiment  of  the  evil  principle  who  "sinneth  from  the
beginning."  "  For  this  cause  was  the  Son  of  God  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy
the  works  of  the  devil."

(i)  The  doctrine  of  man  and  of  his  condition  apart  from  Divine  grace.  In  the
Gospel  we  find  a  twofold  humanity — those  who  are  of  God,  who  are  the  Father's  before
they  were  given  to  Christ,  those  who  have  learned  of  the  Father  and  have  come  to
him,  those  who  are  "  of  the  truth  "  and  hear  his  voice,  those  who  come  to  the  light
and  are  drawn  by  the  Father ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  represented  as
"  darkness,"  as  "  children  of  the  devil,"  those  who  will  not  receive  him.  Tte  ungodly,
unregenerate  mankind  are  often  called  "  the  world,^  "  loving  darkness  rather  than
light ; "  their  greatest  condemnation  is  that  those  who  hate  Christ  do  so  because  he
tells  them  "  the  truth,"  and  apart  from  the-  gift  of  eternal  life  in  himself  they  will
"perish."  They  will  "die  in  tlieir  sins."  This  great  contrast  does  also  pervade  the
Apocalypse.  The  condition  of  the  unsaved  is  clearly  one  of  darkness,  from  the  great
emphasis  laid  upon  light.  Apart  from  the  gifts  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  man's  true  know-
ledge of  himself  ought  to  show  him  "  that  he  is  poor,  and  miserable,  and  blind,  and
wretched  "  (Eev.  iii.  17,  18).  Union  to  Christ,  redemption  by  his  grace,  is  that  alone
which  saves  either  the  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  of  the  true  Isiael,  or  any  indi-
vidual of  the  multitudinous  company  of  all  lands,  from  the  perdition  awaiting  them
at  the  hands  of  the  four  mighty  angels  (Rev.  vii.).

(j)  The  state  of  redemption  or  -deliverance  is  described  in  the  Gospel  as  "  life,''  as
"having  eternal  life  in.  Christ,"  as  being  "united  with  Christ,"  "rejoicing  in  his
companionship  and  abiding  presence,"  finding  satisfaction  in  him  from  the  "thirst"
and  the  "  htmger  "  of  the  soul,  and  as  being  "  washed  "  from  all  defilement  by  him.
It  is  a  state  of  willing  "  obedience,"  "  keeping  the  commandments  "  of  God, "  doing  the
will  of  the  Father,"  "  bringing  forth  fruit,"  loving  Christ  supremely,  and  sent  forth  into
the  world  to  do  there  what  he  would  do  if  in  their  place,  and  "  overcoming  the  world."
Now,  the  Apocalypse  uses  the  same  ideas  in  the  imagery  of  poetry.  Christ  comes  in
to  sup  with  those  who  have  opened  the  door  to  hini.  In  Eev.  i.  3 ;  ii.  26  ;  iii.  8,  20 ;  xii.
17 ;  xvi.  15,  adopting  even  the  phraseology  of  the  Gospel  (rripelr  tH  yeypa/iiieya,  riv
\iyov.  Til  ivToXdi).  The  idea  of  willing,  gracious  obedience  is  described,  and,  moreover,
Christ  satisfies  the  great  cravings  of  "hunger "and  "thirst"  (Eev.  vii.  16;  xxi.  6;
xxii.  17)  in  the  saved.

(k)  The  work  of  Christ,  the  objective  work  done  by  Christ,  to  save  men.  In  the
Gospel  and  Epistles  this  is  described  as  victory  over  the  devil  (see  1  John  iii  8,  20 ;  cf.
Eev.  xii.  5).  He  is  also  represented  as  "the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin
of  the  world  "  (ch.  i.  29),  while  the  reference  to  the  Paschal  lamb  can  hardly  be  con-
cealed (ch.  xix.  14,  36).  Now,  the  grand  image  of  the  Apocalypse,  by  which  the
Lord  is  represented  as  securing  the  homage  of  the  saved,  is  as  "the  Lamb  that  was
slain"  (Eev.  v.  9, 10 ;  xiv.  3,  4).  We  do  not  find  "  the  slain  Lamb"  spoken  of  in  the
Gospel,  but  we  find  the  virtue  of  his  cruel  death,  the  flesh  which  he  would  give  for  the
life  of  the  world,  referred  to  in  oh.  vi.  51 ;  1  John  ii.  2 ;  iv.  10 ;  iii.  5,  16.  There
is  abundant  reference  to  the  sacrificial  significance  of  his  death  (cf.  ch.  xi.  51,  52).
In  1  John  i.  7  we  read  that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin ;"  and  in
Eev.  vii.  14  that  the  saints  "  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the
blood  of  the  Lamb ; "  and  in  Eev.  xxii.  14  the  true  text  reads  those  "  that  wash  their
robes,"  pointing  back  to  vii.  14  (cf.  also  Eev.  i.  5 ;  xiii.  8).

(1)  The  great  prophecy  of  the  last  things,  as  described  by  the  synoptic  Gospels,  had
its  first  typical  fulfilment  in  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  This  teaching  of  our  Lord  is
practically  contained  in  the  first  portion  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  iti  presence  here  nu^


IxxxTl  INTEODUCTION  TO


be  part  of  the  reason  which  induced  the  evangelist  to  omit  it  from  the  Oospel,  the  full
tone  and  key-note  of  which  is  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
But  just  as  that  return  of  the  Lord,  his  continual  return,  is  the  theme  of  the  valedictory
discourse,  and  as  his  coming  to  judgment  is  also  afSrmed  in  ch.  v.  28,  29,  so  the  con-
tinuous return,  prefacing,  heralding  the  final  manifestation  of  his  might  and  glory,  is
the  grand  theme  of  the  Apocalypse.  In  full  anticipation  of  which  he  says,  "  Even  so,
come.  Lord  Jesus."    Thus  the  Gospel  and  Apocalypse  end  on  the  same  key-note.

These  various  points  of  coincidence  in  theological  view  and  tone  may  be  indefinitely
augmented.  See  the  development  of  the  doctrine  in  botli  writings  touching  "  tlie
gospel,"  "  the  call  to  repentance,"  "  the  future  of  Israel,"  "  the  judgment,"  "  the  resur-
rection of  believers,"  "  the  final  state,"  amply  discussed  in  Gebhart's  •  Theology  of  the
Apocilypse.*

We  have  now  endeavoured  to  show,  by  comparison  of  the  grammatical,  lexical,
structural,  and  theoloo;ical  peculiarities  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  of  the  Apocalypse,  that
there  is  a  high  probability  that  they  were  written  by  the  same  pen.  Seeing,  then,  that
the  external  evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  the  Apocalypse  is  exceptionally  strong,  and
that  the  internal  evidence  is  remarkably  convincing,  it  cannot  be  concealed  that  the
apostolic  authorship  of  the  Apocalypse  is  a  powerful  argument  in  favour  of  the  Johannirie
authorship  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.

We  may,  therefore,  claim  to  have  shown  that  the  synoptic  "  John,"  the  author  of  the
general  Epistles,  and  the  "John"  of  the  Apocalypse,  though  exhibiting  some  features
of  difference  from  each  other,  and  from  the  character  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,
do  not  so  diverge  from  each  other,  eithei  in  spirit,  style,  or  teaching,  as  to  make  the
hypothesis  of  their  identity  at  all  incredible.  But  a  far  more  formidable  problem
presents  itself  as  soon  as  we  examine  tlie  subject-matter  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The
following  questions  arise — Is  the  record  of  the  Lord's  life  and  teaching  here  preserved
an  historical  document  ?  Can  we  trust  to  its  historical  details  ?  Is  it  indubitably  the
record  of  an  eye-witness  ?  Are  its  discrepancies  (in  various  respects)  with  the  previously
existing  narratives  of  such  a  character  as  to  invalidate  its  testimony  ?.  Is  the  portraiture
of  Christ  consistent  with  any  of  the  ordinary  qualities  of  a  biography  ?  Are  the
details  of  this  Gospel  so  peculiar  that,  if  credible  witness  to  facts,  they  pulverize  or
evaporate  the  older  records  ?  Are  the  omissions  so  remarkable,  and  the  scenes,  times,
and  style  of  our  Lord's  discourses  so  unique,  that  the  narrative  really  presents  another
Jesus,  fundamentally  different  from  him  with  whom  Matthew,  Msrk,  and  Luke  have
made  us  familiar  ?  Are  the  omissions  by  the  synoptists  of  certain  remarkable  events
recorded  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  so  amazing  that  the  only  satisfactory  explanation  is  that
the  synoptics  must  have  been  in  ignorance  of  the  fact  (e.jr.  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus),
and  is  there  a  justifiable  suspicion  thrown  upon  the  trustworthiness  of  the  narrative  ?
Are  there  traces  in  it  of  a  date  later  than  even  the  latest  that  can  be  attributed  to  the
life  of  St.  John  ?

If  these  questions  be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  then  the  external  and  internal
evidences  need  the  most  careful  scrutiny.  There  is  no  longer  any  question  that  learned
men  and  illustrious  scholars  have  endeavoured  to  shake  their  credit,  and  have  demanded
an  amount  of  evidence  in  this  particular  case  which  can  be  dispensed  with  in  less  vital
controversies.

If  an  honest  and  true  eye-witness,  such  an  individual  as  John  the  son  of  Zebedee,
whose  character  sheds  a  glow  upon  the  first  century,  could  not  have  written  such  a
work  as  this  Gospel,  as  a  record  of  facts,  as  a  chronicle  and  reproduction  of  the  words
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  then  some  other  hypothesis  consistent  with  indubitable  facts  must
be  hazarded  to  account  for  a  work  of  such  amazing  significance  and  mysterious
grandeur.     These  have  not  been  wanting,  and  may  be  divided  into  two  groups.

(1)  One  group  consists  of  those  who  cannot  gainsay  or  resist  the  evidence  of  the
Identity  of  the  author  of  the  Gospel  and  Apocalypse,  and  do  not  dispute  the  position
that  John  was  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  They,  like  Gtbhart,  Kenan,  Sohenkel,
and  Matthew  Arnold-,  affirm  that  we  have  no  better  external  evidence  for  the  existence
of  the  synoptic  Gospels  and  Epistles  of  Paul  than  we  have  for  that  of  the  Gospel  of
John.  They  press  back  decade  after  decade  in  the  second  century,  and  find  that  it  is
ihe  extraTkgknc«  of  byperoriticism  to  doubt  the  very  early  use  and  recognition  by


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.  bxxra

^-  -'-^  ^ . __^

the  Churcli,  by  heretics  and  apologists,  commentators  and  copyists,  and  by  other  well
known  writers,  of  this  celebrated  document.  They  even  admit  that  it  may  have  been
produced  at  a  date  when  the  son  of  Zebedee  was  still  living,  and  under  his  influence
and  sanction,  and  even  by  his  pen ;  hut  they  regard  it  as  a  doctrinal  and  theological
treatise  in  the  form  of  a  narrative,  as  a  story  expressive  of  ideas  which  had  become
current  in  the  Church  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  century,  aa  a  Christological
romance,  as  a  philosopheme  in  the  form  of  a  Gospel,  making  sparing  use  of  any  known
or  accredited  traditions,  deliberately  clothing  in  the  form  of  supposed  fact  current  ideag
of  the  Pounder  of  the  new  faith,  but  not  intended  even  by  the  author,  whether  John
or  another,  to  be  taken  seriously.  Acquainted  with  the  synoptic  Gospels,  and  not
intending  to  supersede  them  or  clash'  with  them,  the  writer  is  supposed  to  have  used
and  modified  their  materials  to  suit  his  argument.  Entering  deeply  into  the  spirit  of
the  new  religion,  and  compvehending  in  one  expression  the  opposing  interests  and
tendencies  of  the  early  Church,  the  author  ha  supposed  to  have  promoted  its  harmony,
and  originated  some  of  the  most  valuable  propositions  out  of  which  iti  doctrinal
development  subsequently  sprang ;  but  did  not  think  or  intend  to  convey  the  idea  of
the  objective  reality  or  historical  validity  of  the  events  or  the  discourses  themselves,
any  more  than  he  meant  to  intimate  that  the  angels,  and  dragon,  and  great  whore,
and  grisly  combatants,  and  golden  city  of  the  Apocalypse,  were  objective  facts.  That
since  Hermas,  the  authors  of  the  '  Clementine  Recognitions,'  of  the  Books  of  Henoch
or  Judith,  of  the  'Divina  Commedia,'  or  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress,'  or  the  'Paradise
Lost,'  put  Into  serai-narrative  style  the  ideas  which  filled  their  minds  at  a  particular
period,  so  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  expounded  his  theory  of  faith  and  love
along  the  lines  with  which  we  are  so  familiar.

(2)  A  second  group  of  critics  and  reproducers  of  the  '  Origines  du  Christianisme'  have
gone  much  further  than  this.  They  have  endeavoured  to  dispute  every  early  reference
to  its  known  use  and  recognition,  and  to  find  in  it  many  traces  of  a  date  later  than  is
compatible  with  its  apostolic  authorship.  They  have  credited  it  with  doceiic  and  other
Gnostic  speculations  of  the  second  century.  They  have  discerned  in  it  a  powerful
anti-Jewish  prejudice,  and  an  endeavour  to  lower  the  claims  of  that  part  of  the  Church
which  regarded  Peter  as  the  chiefest  of  the  apostles  and  the  Church  of  Eome  as  the
centre  of  apostolicity,  by  giving  greater  prominence  to  the  Apostle  John.  They  have
urged  that  it  nevertheless  endeavoured  to  blend  Pauline  with  Petrine  doctrine,  and
promote  the  amalgamation  of  the  two  tendencies  in  the  Church  which  had  been  aggra-
vated by  the  John  of  the  Apocalypse ;  that  it  was  a  theological  forgery  rather  than  a
pious  romance ;  that  it  was  Gnostic  in  its  origin,  but  misunderstood  by  those  who
defended  Gnostic  philosophy.  Some  have  urged  that,  Alexandrine  rather  than  Pales-
tinian in  its  tendencies,  it  reveals  the  spirit  and  method  of  Philo  rather  than  Jesus,  and
even  if  it  records  a  few  genuine  traditions  of  the  great  Master,  it  sets  itself  to  under-
mine and  break  up  the  Jewish-Christian  position,  and,  especially  in  the  Paschal  con-
troversy, to  put  the  Eastern  Church  in  the  wrong,  by  carefully  making  it  appear  that
the  Lord  did  not  keep  the  Jewish  Passover.  Further  (say  they),  by  representing  the
Crucifixion  as  synchronous  with  the  hour  when  the  national  ceremonial  was  being
solemnized,  the  writer  intimated  that  the  Passover  feast  was  terminated  and  that  Jesus
himself  was  the  Paschal  Lamb  of  Christians.  The  entire  theory  turns  upon  and  is
mixed  up  with  the  speculations  of  the  school  of  Tiibingen  with  reference  to  the  con-
dition of  the  Church  in  the  second  century,  and  different  authors  deviate  firom  each
other  in  a  marvellous  degree  as  to  the  details  of  their  reconstruction.  The  theory  of
Baur  and  his  followers  varies  in  different  hands,  according  as  they  attribute  to  the
writer  this  or  that  theological  tendency,  and  are  forced  by  the  exigencies  of  external
evidence  to  assign  an  earlier  or  later  date  to  the  composition.

We  will  deal  first  of  all  with  the  objections  based  on  the  discrepancies  between  the
synoptic  narrative  and  the  Johannine,  and  then  with  other  characteristics  of  the  won-
derful narrative.  We  shall  afterwards  be  in  a  position  to  treat  some  of  the  numeroui
hjfjotheaM  whidi  have  been  started  to  account  ifor  the  Huts  which  are  before  ua.


IxxxTlU  INTBODUCTION  TO


Vm.  Thk  Genebaii  Belatioh  between  the  Stkoptio  Gospels  amd  thm

FoiTBTH  Gospel.

A.  General  statement  of  discrepancies.

On  passing  from  the  atmosphere  of  the  synoptics,  with  their  indubitable  platform
Jewish  rites  and  Galilajan  villages ;  with  their  genealogical  details  and  birth-stories,  wit
the  Messianic  idea  of  one  bom  in  Bethlehem  of  the  seed  of  David ;  with  their  portrai-
tures of  the  leading  heroes  of  the  apostolic  band,  of  the  mother  of  the  Lord,  of  the
high  priest  Caiaplias,  and  of  John  the  Baptist ;  and,  above  all,  with  a  portion  also  of
their  representation  of  the  Man  of  sorrows,  and  the  gradual  and  partial  exhibition  of
the  Divine  nature  of  the  Lord ; — on  passing  from  all  this  to  the  Fourth  Gospel,  we  are
conscious,  and  must  admit,  that  we  have  been  transferred  to  a  new  scene,  and  breathe
a  di£ferent  air.  We  are  at  once  confronted  with  great  generalizations  touching  the
power  and  nature,  the  order  and  significance,  of  Divine  manifestations.  Much  is  made
of  the  ministry  and  testimonies  of  John  the  Baptist ;  but  at  first  he  is  rather  treated  as
a  typical  representative  of  the  prophetic  order  than  as  the  historic  and  well-known  son
of  Zacharias  the  priest.  His  definite  testimony  is,  moreover,  resumed  at  the  very  point
where  it  is  laid  down  by  Matthew  and  Luke ;  and,  in  fact,  when  he  has  passed  through
the  experiences  detailed  in  the  synoptics,  and  is  fnce  to  face  with  One  whom  he  has  recog-
nized publicly  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  as  one  competent  to  baptizfl  with  the  Holy  Ghost.

We  are  made  acquainted  with  several  of  the  disciples,  Andrew,  Philip,  Thomas,
Judas  (not  Iscariot),  Nathanael,  Lazarus,  and  Nicodemus,  of  whom  we  hear  nothing  but
the  names  elsewhere ;  of  Nathanael,  Nicodemus,  Lazarus,  not  even  the  names.  The
principal  scenes  of  the  biography  are  laid  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  instead  of
in  Galilee.  Our  Lord  appears  to  have  made  repeated  journeys  to  the  metropolis,  and
to  have  <  xcited  from  the  first  queiulous  antagonism,  if  not  open  persecution.  The  time
during  which  the  ministry  of  Jesus  has  axtended  has  lengthened  out  from  one  year  to
more  than  two,  if  not  three.  A  succession  of  feasts  are  mentioned,  notably  t'-ree  Pass-
overs, if  not /our,  are  referred  to,  whereas  the  synoptic  narrative  does  not  jjositively
make  mention  of  any  Passover  except  that  at  which  our  Lord  was  crucified.  Extra-
ordinary events  like  the  temptation,  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  the  Transfiguration,
the  death  of  the  Baptist,  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  agony  in  the  garden,
the  scenes  before  the  Sanhedrin,  are  omitted,  and  a  number  of  other  events  are
mentioned  concerning  which  the  synoptists  are  silent,  such  as  the  two  miracles  in  Cana,
and  three  great  miracles  in  Jerusalem.  Two  events  might  seem  to  have  been  inverted
in  their  place.  The  synoptists  represent  a  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  as  the  apparent
occasion  of  the  call  of  four  apostles.  These, same  apostles  are  favoured  with  a  miracu-
lous draught  of  fishes  after  the  Eesurrection ;  but  in  this  Gospel  they  are  represented  as
being  called  in  the  first  instance  by  the  simple  summons  of  the  Master.  On  the  other
hand,  a  cleansing  of  the  temple,  which  the  synoptists  place  at  the  close  of  our  Lord's
life,  the  Fourth  Gospel  places  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  Jerusalem  ministry.
The  synoptists  appear  to  imply  that  our  Lord  celebrated  the  Paschal  supper  on  its  legal
day — the  night  before  he  suffered^whereas  all  the  prima  facie  suggestions  of  the
Fourth  Gospel  imply  that,  though  an  important  meal  preceded  the  Passion,  the  Jews
kept  their  Passover  on  the  very  day  or  evening  of  the  Crucifixion.  Moreover,  whereas
Luke  and  the  appendix  to  Mark  speak  of  a  visible  ascension  to  heaven,  the  fourth
evangelist  closes  the  Gospel  with  the  special  promises  and  injunctions  to  Peter  and  the
belovi4  disciple.  These  discrepancies  of  time,  period,  place,  and  subject-matter  are  by
no  means  the  most  serious.  We  readily  admit  that  a  different  tone  characterizes  the
teaching  of  the  Lord  in  the  two  groups  of  discourses.  The  great  subject-matter  of  the
discourses  of  Jesus  in  the  synoptists  is  the  kingdom  of  Uod  and  his  righteousness,
the  personal  conditions  of  approval  and  acceptance  ^ith  God,  the  relation  of  the  new
teaching  to  the  old  Law,  the  principles  of  disoipleship,  the  future  development  of  the
kingdom,  the  last  things  of  the  theocracy,  tlie  judgment  of  the  great  day ;  the  leading
themes  of  our  Lord's  discourses  and  dialogues  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  concern  the  new
birth,  the  revelation  of  the  Divino  love,  the  spirituality  of  true  worship,  the  eternal
principles  on  which  the  law  of  the  saobath  turns,  the  Divine  claims  of  Christ's  own  Per-
iionality,  his  .pre-existtnce,  the  personal  incarnation  of  the  Eternal  Sou  of  Ood,  hit


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  boudx

astounding  assumptions  of  being  the  Light,  the  Life,  the  Bread,  the  Salvation,  of  the
world.  He  speaks  of  intimate,  organic,  eternal  identification  of  disciples  with  himself,
eSfected  by  spiritual  processes,  and  of  the  grace  of  the  Comforter  as  abundantly  satis-
fying all  the  needs  of  the  soul  and  of  humanity.  He  declares  that  the  Comforter
would  prove  to  be  none  other  than  the  Spirit,  which  he  who  was  one  with  the  Father
would  Send  for  the  conviction  of  the  world  and  the  consammation  of  the  Church.  The
manner  of  the  Lord  Jesus  does  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  very  different  in  the  two
narratives ;  e.g.  we  hear  nothing  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  of  mothers  bringing  their  little
ones,  or  of  any  sacred  contact  of  the  Master  with  little  children.  They  do  not  even
shout  "  Hosanna  1 "  in  tlie  triumphal  entry — which  event  is  one  of  the  points  of  connec-
tion with  the  synoptics — although  the  disciples  themselves  are  treated  as  tlie  "little
children"  of  his  love.  The  parabolic  method  of  instruction  seems  almost  entirely
dropped.  The  inimitable  apologues,  which  never  once  degenerate  into  fables,  and  never
once  go  out  of  the  region  of  the  purely  natural  and  human,  are  absent  from  the  Fourth
Gospel;  or,  at  least,  only  appear  in  the  form  of  symbolic  terms  and  phrases,  or  mount
into  pure,  lofty,  and  self-interpreting  allegoi'y.

It  is  said  by  some,  with  perhaps  pardongj^le  exaggeration,  that  while  in  the  synoptic
narrative  the  character  of  Christ  ripens,  the  tragedy  comes  on  gradually,  and  the
conflict  between  the  claims  of  Jesus  and  the  wishes  of  the  people  is  delayed  tiU  the
final  catastrophe,  and  that  a  period  of  great  and  perilous  popularity  is  followed  by
rejection,  misunderstanding,  and  violent  reaction;  yet  in  the  Johannine  Gospel  the
criticism,  the  repudiation  by  "  the  Jews,"  is  obvious  from  the  first,  that  the  mysterious
and  Divine  Personajre  steps  fully  aureoled  out  upon  the  scene,  that  he  is  as  complete
a  Messiah,  an  embodied  revealed  Son  of  God,  in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan  as  in  the  vale-
dictory discourse,  as  much  so  with  the  woman  of  Samaria  as  with  the  adoring  disciples
after  his  resurrection.

The  synoptic  Gospels  move  along  three  different,  yet  broadly  consentient,  lines,  and
events  and  sayings  are  arranged,  so  far  as  order  is  concerned,  without  clear  purpose  on
the  part  of  their  narrators.  The  distinct  unity  of  authorship  is  in  their  case  open  to
much  analysis  and  criticism ;  yet  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  a  work  of  consummate  art,  and
constitutes  an  organized  and  marvellous  unity.  It  is  conceded  that  the  whole  of  it  has
issued  from  one  mind,  and  that  a  constructive  force  and  powerful  argument  are  evinced
in  the  composition ;  that  it  reveals  the  workmanship  of  an  accomplished  thinker ;  that  it
is  in  no  sense  a  growth,  but  a  distinct,  powerful,  and  beautiful  creation.  The  style  of  the
composition  is  far  less  Hebraic  than  that  of  the  three  Gospels,  and  the  words  attributed
to  our  Lord  are  in  a  different  style  from  those  elsewhere  by  multifarious  tradition
assigned  to  him,  and  correspond  with  the  style  of  the  evangelist  himself  as  evinced  in
his  own  First  Epistle.  This  argument  is  rendered  more  telling  by  the  assumption  that
all  the  characters,  John  the  Baptist,  Martha,  and  even  Caiaphas  and  Pilate,  use  the
same  vocabulary.

In  this  very  concession  another  is  involved,  viz.  that  a  subjective  element  is  more
conspicuous  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  than  in  either  of  the  synoptists.  The  writer  on
several  occasions  introduces  his  own  reflections  inproprid  persond;  and  is,  by  those  who
admit  the  historicity  of  his  narrative,  supposed  to  have  even  interwoven  them  into  his
record  of  the  discourses  of  the  Lord.

Admitting  that  these  prima  facie  discordances  exist,  we  will  submit  them  to
examination,  with  the  view  of  determining  whether  the  Johannine  and  synoptist  narri-
tives  do  in  any  way  exclude  one  another,  or  whether,  assuming  the  trustworthiness  of
the  latter,  they  proclaim  the  unhistorioal  character  of  the  former.

1.  2%e  scene  of  our  Lord's  ministry.  The  synoptic  nanatives,  after  describing  the
baptism  and  temptation  in  the  wilderness  of  Judsea,  pass  at  once  to  the  Galilaean
ministry,  and,  so  far  as  Matthew  and  Mark  are  concerned,  do  not  bring  our  Lord  to
Jerusalem  until  the  last  Passover,  in  the  midst  of  which  he  suffered.  The  most  impres-
sive appearance  after  the  Resurrection  is  also  in  a  mountain  of  Galilee,  appointed  as
a  rendezvous.

"  John,"  on  the  other  hand,  brings  our  Lord  to  Jerusalem  before  the  Baptist  was
cast  into  prison  (ch.  ii. — iii.  24;  iv.  1 — 3).  In  the  last  passage  Jesus  is  said  to  have
"  departed  again  into  Galilee,"  so  that  the  evangelist,  when  alive  to  the  fact  that  be
irss  describing  a  visit  to  Galilee,  syuohronizing  with  the  first  ministry  there  of  current


x«  DJTEODUCTION  TO


tradition,  points  in  the  word  "again  "to  the  first  departure  from  Judaea  to  6alile«
■which  he  had  himself  described,  but  of  which  the  synoptists  said  nothing.  In  ch.  v,
Jesus  visits  Jerusalem  at  a  feast,  and  there  discusses  the  law  of  the  sabbath,  and  juati-
fies,  by  the  loftiest  claims,  his  right  to  work  cures  on  that  day.  In  ch.  vi.  4  we  read
that  the  Jews'  Passover  was  at  hand,  which  Jesus,  however,  did  not  attend.  He
"  walked  in  Galilee,  because  the  Jews  sought  to  kill  Mm."  This  was  certainly  one  year,
and  possibly  two  years,  after  the  Passover  mentioned  in  ch.  ii.  23.  In  ch.  vii.  2,  at  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  our  Lord  does  visit  Jerusalem  (ver.  10),  and  in  the  temple,  and  on
the  Mount  of  Olives  (ch.  viii.  1),  he  taught  and  remonstrated  with  the  people,  and  was
exposed  to  their  bitter  and  increasing  hostility.  On  two  occasions  he  escaped  from  their
malice,  and  retired  "  beyond  Jordan,"  to  a  place  "  where  John  at  first  baptized."  In  ch.
li.  he  came  once  more  to  Bethany  in  close  proximity  to  Jerusalem ;  we  are  not  told  that
he  entered  it,  but  retired  to  a  place  called  Ephraim,  where  he  awaited  the  last  caravan
advance  to  Jerusalem,  so  abundantly  described  by  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.

The  question  arises — Are  the  synoptists  silent  concerning  this  lapse  of  time  and  con-
cerning the  scene  of  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  anterior  to  the  last  week  of  his  life  ?
Are  there  any  considerations  which  tend  to  throw  light  upon  the  discrepancy  without
impugning  the  veracity  of  the  fourth  evangelist?  Two  suppositions  are  possible;
either  (1)  the  latter,  without  any  authority,  and  contrary  to  widespread  tradition,
invented  these  imaginary  visits  to  Jerusalem ;  or  (2)  he  remembered  them,  and,  being
eye-witness  of  the  events,  recorded  them  for  tlie  benefit  of  the  Church.  The  first  sup-
position is  untenable,  if  he  were  what  he  undoubtedly  wished  his  readers  to  believe,
the  most  intimate  friend,  associate,  and  disciple  of  the  Lord.  In  favour  of  the  second
supposition  we  ought  to  take  into  account  that  that  disciple  says  that  he  had  a  home
in  Jerusalem,  and  was  personally  known  to  the  high  priest  (ch.  zviii.  15 ;  xix.  27 ;
XI.  10).

Caspari's  valuable  suggestion*  throws  light  on  the  narrative  from  beginning  to  end.
John  the  fisherman  may  have  been  in  the  habit  of  going  or  sending  to  Jerusalem
fish  from  the  lake,  at  the  periods  of  the  great  feasts,  when  there  must  have  been
enormous  demands  for  food.  It  does  not  appear,  therefore,  at  all  unlikely  that  Jesus,
with  some  of  his  disciples,  did  take  the  journeys  to  Jerusalem  mentioned  by  John ;
and  that,  whosoever  else  accompanied  him,  John  did  so,  and  thus  became  his  host  as
well  as  biographer,  the  auditor  of  his  mightiest  words,  the  witness  of  his  greatest
miracles.  It  is,  however,  an  error  to  suppose  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  has  expanded  the
brief  report  into  a  lengthened  biography.  Like  the  earlier  evangelists,  the  writer  con-
fines himself  to  the  record  of  a  few  solitary  days,  hinting,  just  as  they  do,  the  passage  of
time,  and  the  occurrence  of  numerous  events  which  produce  a  deep  impression,  but  of
which  no  details  are  given.  Thus  long  periods  of  time  are  referred  to  without  any  particu-
lars. Take  the  abrupt  reference  to  the  Feasts  of  the  Passover  already  mentioned ;  notice
the  abiding  in  Judsea  (ch.  iii.  22),  the  walking  in  Galilee  (ch.  vii.  1),  the  abiding  in  the
wilderness  and  the  town  of  Epliraim  (ch.  x;.  40  and  xi.  64).  Again,  numerous  signs
are  said  to  have  been  wrought,  and  teachings  uttered,  of  which  no  special  enumeration
or  further  account  is  given  (ch.  ii.  23;  iii.  2;  vi.  2  ;  vii.  3,  31 ;  x.  32 ;  xi.  47) ;  besides
the  summary  generalizations  of  ch.  xx.  30  and  xxi.  25.  If  both  synoptists  and  John  are
alike  fragmentary  in  their  recital,  what  difiiculty  is  there  in  supposing  that,  after  the
first  records  had  been  made,  among  the  numerous  and  omitted  signs  and  places  of  dis-
course, one  who  had  special  opportunities  should  have  made  a  further  selection  ?

Is  the  synoptic  narrative,  however,  so  absolutely  silent  about  our  Lord's  visits  to
Jerusalem  ?  Certainly  not.  The  true  text  of  Luke  iv.  44  (approved  by  Westcott  and
Hort,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  and  placed  in  margin  of  TregeUes  and  Revised  Version),
has  Ei'j  T&s  avyayayhs  rTJs  'lovSulas,  "  He  was  preaching  in  the  synagogues  of  Judaea."
This  is  a  note  of  time  and  place  which  would  correspond  with  the  first  or  second  visit
to  Jerusalem  mentioned  in  John.  Again,  the  indication  of  great  animosity  among  the
Galilaean  Pharisees,  and  one  stirred  up  by  emissaries  from  Jerusalem  (Luke  t.  17),
touching  the  law  of  the  sabbath  and  Christ's  claim  to  forgive  sins,  an  hostility  which
pervades  the  records  of  Matt.  xii.  and  parallel  passages,  derives  a  great  access  of  light  when
the  conversations  recorded  in  ch.  v.  are  borne  in  mind  or  are  presupposed.    Further,

'  Chronological  Introduction  to  the  Life  of  Christ,'  p,  112.


THB  GOSPEL  ACCORDHTG  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xd

Matt,  xxiii.  37  records  (as  Luke  does  in  his  Bummary  of  the  Journey  towards  Jerusalem,
Luke  xiii.  23, 31—34)  the  remarkable  apostrophe,  "  O  Jerusalem,"  etc. !  In  each  of  these
passages  we  have  the  startling  phrase,  noriKis  ii64\ri<ra  iiriavvayayttv  rk  rdicva  trov;
"  How  often  did  I  wish  to  gather  thy  children  together  1 "  etc. — ^words  which  could  not
he  applicable  to  the  synoptic  naiTative  as  a  complete  account  of  the  facts  of  the  case
Not  until  we  read  of  the  several  visits  to  Jerusalem,  with  the  same  uniform  result  ol
rejection,  do  we  understand  the  "  ye  would  not."  Moreover  (as  has  often  been  observed),
in  Luke  x.  38,  etc.,  in  that  portion  of  the  Third  Gospel  in  which  many  otherwise
unknown  but  most  invaluable  teachings  of  Jesus  are  preserved,  "  a  certain  village,  the
home  of  Martha  and  Mary,"  is  described,  and  an  interview  is  referred  to  in  which  the
characteristics  of  the  Martha  and  Mary  of  ch.  xi.  are  singularly  photogiaphed.  This
"  certain  village "  can  hardly  be  any  other  than  the  Bethany  where  they  lived  and
where  Lazarus  died.  The  narrative  in  John  presumes  on  long  acquaintance  and
frequent  visits  already  paid,  and  the  visit  recorded  in  Luke  may  without  difficulty
correspond  with  the  visit  of  Jesus  described  in  ch.  vii. — x.  The  synoptic  account  of
the  advance  of  Jesus  to  Jerusalem  implies 'familiarity  with  the  place,  acquaintance  on
the  part  of  "the  certain  man"  with  the  Lord  (Matt.  xxvi.  18).  A  similar  conclusion
may  be  drawn  from  Christ's  message  to  the  owners  of  the  colt  (Matt.  xxi.  2,  etc.).

The  public  proclamation  of  his  Messiahship  and  the  declaration  of  his  supreme
claims  on  the  homage  and  obedience  of  the  people,  if  they  were  restricted  to  what  the
synoptic  narratives  appear  to  involve,  must  have  been  excessively  abrupt.  Time  was
not  left  for  any  impression  to  have  been  made,  or  for  the  final  decision  to  be  arrived  at,
before  the  Lord  pronounced  his  condemnation  of  the  theocracy  and  retired.  Part  of
the  ungenerous  implication  more  or  less  involved  in  the  representations  of  Eenan,
Mr.  Francis  Wm.  Newman,  author  of  '  Philo-Christus,'  and  others,  that  Jesus  rushed
suicidally  on  his  fate,  by  hastily  and  impetuously  assuming  the  bitter  hostility  of  the
hierarchy,  and  then  assailing  it,  is  produced  by  ignoring  the  representations  of  the
Fourth  Gospel  as  unhistorical.  Previous  visits  to  Jerusalem,  and  a  longer  period  of
ministry  than  can  he  made  out  from  the  synoptic  Gospels,  are  required  to  render  what
they  tell  us  self-consistent  and  explicable.

2.  ITie  length  ofottr  Lord's  ministry.  While  admitting  the  primd  facie  discordance
to  which  reference  has  been  made,  it  is  worthy  of  special  consideration  that  positively
no  single  hint  in  the  chronological  records  of  Luke  iii.  1  prevents  our  Lord's  ministry
from  extending  over  four,  six,  or  even  eight  years.  Pontius  Pilate  was  not  recalled  till
A.D.  36,  and  Caiaphas  held  his  ofBoe  until  that  date.  The  fourteenth  year  of  Tiberius
Csesar  (however  interpreted)  is  only  the  terminus  a  quo,  and  settles  nothing.  Though
efforts  have  been  made  by  some  chronologists  (Browne's  '  Ordo  Sasculorum')  to  compress
the  chronology  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  within  the  limits  of  a  year,  this  can  only  be
done  by  unwarrantably  expunging  ch.  vi.  3  from  the  text,  and  by  bringing  all  the
visits  of  Jesus  to  Jerusalem  (including  the  first  Passover,  the  unnamed  feast,  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles,  the  Feast  of  Dedication,  and  the  last  Passover)  within  the  compass  of  a
single  year  (see  notes).  The  reduction  of  the  ministry  of  the  Son  of  man  within  the
compass  of  twelve  months  enormously  agsravates  the  historical  difficulties  of  the
synoptic  narrative.  The  period  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  taken  at  the  longest  possible
interpretation  of  the  allusions  in  the  Foui  th  Gospel,  is  so  brief  as  to  create,  as  it  stands,
one  of  the  historical  puzzles  of  human  literature.  No  one  can  resist  the  impression  of
ihe  supernatural  rapidity  with  which  Christ  completed  his  ministry,  or  fail  to  contrast
it  with  the  prolonged  and  varied  labours  of  Paul  and  John,  with  the  ministry  of  Ezra,
Hosea,  or  Isaiah,  with  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  with  the  legislative  career  ■  f
Moses.  The  contrast,  again,  of  our  Lord's  ministry  with  the  period  during  which
Socrates  continued  his  cross-questioning  of  the  youth,  and  of  the  sophists  and  states-
men of  Athens,  is  equally  remarkable.  Let  the  numerous  and  abundant  opportunities
which  the  great  founders  of  religious  institutions  enjoyed  for  impressing  their  person-
ality, and  enforcing-  their  teaching  upon  their  contemporaries,  be  compared  with  the
brevity  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  Take,  e.g.,  the  careers  of  Buddha,  Confucius,  and
Mohammed.  If,  however,  the  ministry  of  Christ  were  confined  to  one  short  year,  and
this  diversified  by  several  visits  on  foot  from  Jerusalem  to  Galilee,  from  Tyre  and
Sidon  to  Banias  and  Persea,  the  rapidity  becomes  so  intense  as  to  savour  of  the  unhis-
toric  altogether.    The  records,  therefore,  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  which  provide  a  more


xcB  INTRODUOnON  TO


abundant  and  far  mora  probable  chronological  basis  for  the  beneficent  ministry  of  the
Lord,  greatly  strengthsn  by  their  apparent  discrepancy  with  the  synoptists  the  his-
toricity of  the  latter.  We  have  also  already  seen  that  they  are  not  absolutely  silent
concerning  a  Jerusalem  ministry.

3.  The  day  of  our  Lwd's  death.  There  are  grave  difficulties  in  th»  endeavour  to
harmonize  the  twofold  chronology  of  the  day  of  the  Last  Sui)per  and  of  the  Cruci-
fixion. In  Matt.  xxvi.  17 ;  Mark  xiv.  12 ;  and  Luke  xxii.  7,  we  gather  that  onr  Lord
celebrated  the  Paschal  meal  with  his  disciples.  The  natural  interpretation  of  such
phrases  as,  "  on  the  first  day  of  unleavened  bread  "(to  which  Luke  adds,  "when  the
Passover  must  be  killed,"  and  Mark,  "when  they  kill  the  Passover"),  suggests  tliat
no  extraordinary  deviation  from  the  legal  enactment  as  to  the  day  took  place  on  the
occasion.  "The  first  day  of  unleavened  bread"  legally  began  on  the  evening  of  the
14th  of  Niaan  or  Abib,  after  the  Paschal  meal  was  eaten,  i.e.  after  sunset  of  the  14th
(Exod.  xii.  18,  19 ;  xxiii.  15),  the  days  being  reckoned  from  sunset  to  sunset.  It  was
not  the  universal  custom  to  abstain  from  leaven  on  that  day,  but  the  14th  day,  being
80  closely  associated  in  its  earlier  hours  with  the  solemn  ceremony  of  the  evening,  was
often  thus  hallowed,  because  "  between  the  evenings  "  of  that  day — between  three  and
six — the  Passover  was  prepared,  the  lamb  was  slain  in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  and  the
other  elements  of  the  feast  were  brought  together  for  the  purpose.  So  the  whole  of
the  14th  day  (see  Josephus, '  Bell.  Jud.,'  v.  3.  1)  was  often  regarded  as  the  first  day  of
unleavened  bread.  We  find  also  ('  Ant.,'  ii.  15. 1)  that  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread
is  said  to  last  eight  days.  At  this  Paschal  supper  Judas  was  pointed  out  as  the
traitor,  and,  acooidmg  to  all  the  synoptists,  the  Lord's  Supper  was  instituted.  Now,
there  can  scarcely  be  any  doubt  that  the  supper,  or  evening  meal,  described  in  John's
Gospel  is  identical  with  this  Supper;  otherwise,  on  two  distinct  occasions  Peter  must
have  obtained  an  indication  of  the  person  of  the  traitor.  Moreover,  in  John's  Gospel,
M  well  as  the  synoptists,  the  night  of  the  Supper  was  also  the  night  of  the  tetrayal.
It  must,  however,  be  observed  that  John  prefaces  his  account  with  the  statement  that
the  "supper"  at  which  this  indication  of  Judas's  treachery -took  place  was  "he/ore  the
Feast  of  the  Passovei' "  (ch.  xiii.  1).

Further,  this  statement  in  John  ii  coupled  with  a  variety  of  expressions  which
imply  that  the  Passover  of  the  Jews  was  kept  on  the  following  day.  Thus  such  an
implication  is  found  in  ch.  xiii.  29,  where  "  the  feast "  is  spoken  of  as  still  impending,
and  Judas  is  supposed  to  have  received  a  command  to  purchase  what  was  needed  and
give  something  to  the  poor,  and  he  went  out,  as  the  disciples  thought,  to  fulfil  the
commission.  At  all  events,  we  learn  that,  on  the  night  of  the  Supper,  he  did  chaffer
and  agree  with  priests,  and  arranged  his  guard  of  temple  servants  to  apprehend  his
Lord.  Now,  legally  speaking,  this  would  have  been  a  violation  of  the  Law  according  to
all  fom:  accounts,  because  the  15th  day,  commencing  with  the  evening  of  the  14th,  was
a  holy  day.  Contradictory  passages  are  brought  from  the  Jewish  writers,  from  the
Mishnah  and  the  Talmudists,  to  illustrate  the  degree  of  sanctity  with  which  the
15th  day  of  Nisan  was  regarded.  Thus  Tholuck  shows  from  Mishnah  ('  Sohabbatli,'
c.  23.  1)  that  a  species  of  purchase  could  be  made  on  the  sabbath,  and  (o.  1.  1)  that
gifts  could  be  made  to  the  poor  on  "the  sabbath;"  while  Godet  and  Schiirer  quote
from  Talmudists  ('Beyah,'  v.  2),  "Every  action  which  is  reprehensible  on  the  sabbath
day  is  equally  so  on  a  festival  day,  such  as  to  hold  a  nieetina  of  a  court "  Cof.  Josenhus.
'Ant.'xiii.  8.  4;  'Bell.  Jud.,'iv.  2.  3).  ^

But  further  (ch.  xviii.  28),  the  Jews,  we  are  told,  would  not  enter  the  house  of  a
heatheUj  lest  they  should  be  polluted,  but  that  they  might  "  eat  the  Passover."  The
natural  interpretation  of  this  is  that  the  Paschal  meal  had  not  yet  been  celebrated  by
the  priests  and  people,  and  the  suggestion  is  then  made  that,  while  Jesus  was  hangintr
on  the  cross,  the  Paschal  lambs  were  being  slain  by  thousands  in  the  temple,  and  that
the  people  were  generally  preparing  to  eat  the  Passover.  In  addition  to  tbis  (ch.  xix
14,  31,  42),  the  evening  of  the  Crucifixion  was  spoken  of  as  the  iropoo-icfu^  of  the  Pass-
over, and  that  the  holy  day  following  the  Paschal  meal,  by  reason  of  its  coinciding
with  the  ordinary  weekly  sabbath,  was  therefore  spoken  of  as  a  "  great  day."

If  these  passages  from  the  fourfold  narrative  are  allowed  to  stand  in  their  most
obvious  prinA  facie  sense,  it  is  clear  that  a  grave  apparent  contradiction  occurs  on
which  the  opponenti  «f  the  authenticity  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  have  not  failed  to'lay


THB  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xciil

powerful  stress.  They  have  endeavoured  to  found  upon  it,  in  part,  an  argument  that
the  author  of  the  Fourth  Grospel,  in  his  resolve  to  give  a  theological  bias  to  his
narrative  and  to  identify  Jesus  with  the  Paschal  Lamb  of  the  new  covenant,  deliberately
set  at  nought  the  widespread  tradition  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion  having  taken  place  on
the  great  day  of  convocation.  Such  a  course  is  thought  utterly  incompatible  with
Johannine  authorship ;  inasmuch  as  we  are  told,  in  the  synoptic  narrative,  that  Peter
and  John  assisted  in  preparing  the  Paschal  meal  on  the  night  before  the  Crucifixion.
Moreover,  they  have  aruued,  from  the  tradition  preserved  by  Busebius, '  Hist.  Bccl.,'
V.  24,  that  Pulycrates,  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  had  appealed  to  the  authority  and  practice
of  the  Apostle  John  as  having  "  observed  the  Uth  day,  according  to  the  Gospel."  It
'  has  been  assumed  that  John  followed  a  custom  which  is  directly  repudiated  by  the
Gospel  attributed  to  him,  and  therefore  some  have  urged  he  could  not  have  been  the
writer,  but  that  another  and  much  later  author  had  had  the  audacity  to  make  these
changes,  induced  by  a  settled  anti-Jewish  theological  bias.  Moreover,  every  attempt
at  harmonizing  the  narratives  has  been  often  contemptuously  resisted  as  the  work  of
presumptuous  apologists,  who  are  unable  to  appreciate  the  higher  criticism.

Let  ua  inquire  what  the  quarto-deciman  practice  was  to  which,  according  to  Polycrates
and  others,  the  apostle  gave  his  sanction.  "  The  Churches  of  all  Asia,"  says  Eusebius
('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  V.  23),  "  guided  by  a  very  ancient  tradition,  thought  they  ought  to  observe
the  14th  day  of  the  moon  at  the  season  of  the  Feast  of  the  Saviour's  Passover"
(a-aniplBv,  not  aanTipiai  i  it  is  important  to  notice  this,  because  the  Tubingen  critics
endeavour  to  identify  this  with  the  celebration  of  the  commemoration  of  the  Lord's
Supper,  by  translating  it  "at  the  festival  of  the  Passover  of  salvation");  "being  the
day  on  which  the  Jews  were  commanded  to  slay  the  lamb;  holding  that  it  was  fitting
to  terminate  the  days  of  fasting  on  that  day,  on  whatsoever  day  of  the  week  it  might
occur."  The  Sicilian  '  Pasch.  Chron.,'  quoting  Apollinarius  of  Hierapolis  and  Clemens
of  Alexandria,  strongly  and  explicitly  identify  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  with  the  slaying
of  the  Paschal  lamb,  and  declare  emphatically  that  our  Lord  was  crucified  on  the  14th
day  of  the  month.  If  the  Tlibingen  hypothesis  be  correct,  the  early  Jewish  Christians
terminated  their  fast  and  began  thair  festival  on  the  night  preceding  the  day  on  which
they  commemorated  the  Lord's  crucifixion.  This  is  entirely  incredible.  The  "  festival
of  the  Saviour's  Passover"  was  clearly  celebrated  by  them,  whichever  day  of  the  week
it  occurred,  at  a  time  when  the  Jews  were  celebrating  their  Passover,  and  on  the  night
after  the  Passion.

The  idea  conveyed  by  the  above  quotation  was  that  the  celebration  of  the  Passover
of  the  Saviour,  i.e.  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  our  Passover,  in  place  of  the  Paschal  Lamb,
took  place  when  the  Jews  were  commanded  to  slay  the  lamb,  and  was  not  a  mere
commemoration  of  the  institution  of  the  Supper  on  the  previous  evening.

The  repudiation,  however,  of  the  Johanoiiie  authorship  of  the  Gospel  has  been
advocated  on  these  most  insufficient  grounds.  It  seems  to  us  strangely  unsatisfactory
to  insist  on  this  conclusion  so  long  as  any  rational  metliod  can  be  discovered  by
which  the  apparently  contradictory  statements  can  be  reconciled.  The  difficulties  of
doing  this  are  obviously  enhanced  by  the  attempts  which  have  been  made  by  apologists
to  create  a  harmony  by  precisely  opposite  methods.

(1)  Hengstenberg,  Tholuok,  Godwin,  Wieseler,  Edersheim,  Lightfoot,  Lange,  Luthardt,
Lieut.  Conder,  and  M'Clellan  have  all,  with  high  plausibility,  endeavoured  to  explain
every  reference  to  the  impending  Passover  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  as  being  in  harmony
with  the  assertion  of  the  synoptists  that  the  Jewish  Paschal  meal  was  held  on  the  Thurs-
day evening,  and  that  that  evening,  in  fact,  was  none  other  than  the  14-15th  of  Nisan.
They  have  minimized  the  importance  of  the  reference  to  the  outgoing  of  Judas  and  his
supposed  purcliase,  and  by  the  fact  that  the  synoptists  all  describe  transactions  of  that
terrible  night  which  were  all  obviously  contrary  to  the  strict  letter  of  the  Law.  They
have  shown  that  the  rh  iriirxa,  which  the  Jews  were  going  to  eat  on  the  day  of  the
Crucifixion,  was  the  midday  festival,  consisting  of  the  chagigah  and  other  offerings,  which
were  eaten  every  day  of  the  Passover  week,  and  which  were  in  the  Old  Testament  called
"  Passovers  "  (see  Deut.  xvi.  2 ;  2  Chron.  xxxv.  7 — 9).  It  is  said  that  pesach  does  not
mean  the  Paschal  lamb  exclusively  (see  2  Chron.  xxx.  22).  It  is  urged,  further,  that  the
defilement  of  entering  the  PrEetorium  on  a  morning  of  the  15th  of  Nisan  would  last  till
sunset,  and  no  later,  and  so  would  nut  have  interfered  with  th'^ir  eating  the  Paschal


xdT  INTRODUCTION  TO


meal  on  the  evening  of  the  14th,  but  would. have  precluded  their  participation  in  the
chagigah ;  that  the  various  scenes  of  bearing  the  cross  and  of  the  Crucifixion  were  not
impossible  for  Jews  to  have  carried  through  on  the  day  of  holy  convocation,  because
they  might  consider  that  the  apprehension  and  crucifixion  of  Jesus  was  a  kind  of  Divine
service  (eh.  xvi.  2) ;  and,  lastly,  that  the  references  to  the  Trapaaiavii  are  all  limited  to
the  period  of  preparation  of  the  ordinary  solemnity  of  sabbath  observance,  and  meant
nothing  more  than  the  Friday  before  a  sabbath,  that  it  was  a  specially  "  great "  day
because  the  sabbath  fell  in  the  Passover  week.

By  thus  dealing  with  every  reference  to  the  imminence  of  the  Passover  in  the  Fourth
Gospel,  they  have  endeavoured  to  make  the  two  accouuts  entirely  coincident.

(2)  On  the  other  hand,  Bleek,  Gresswell,  Godet,  B.Weiss,  Meyer,  Westcott  and  Mansell
(in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary '),  Pluinmer,  Farrar,  and  Watkins  have  as  strenuously
endeavoured  to  strengthen  all  the  statements  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  urging  thus  that  the
synoptists  themselves  enumerate  numerous  circumstances  which  show  that,  as  Jews, they
could  not  have  really  meant  to  imply  that  the  transactions  of  the  night  of  the  agony
and  the  Crucifixion  day  could  have  been  possible  on  a  holy  day  of  convocation ;  that
Simon  the  Cyrenian  would  not  have  been  coming  into  Jerusalem,  nor  have  been  allowed
to  bear  the  cross  on  that  day;  that  neither  the  women  nor  Joseph  would  have  bought  or
brought  spices  to  the  sepulchre,  nor  would  priests  have  rolled  a  stone  to  the  door  of  the
tomb ;  that  the  entire  proceedings  in  the  court  and  at  Calvary  were  incompatible  with
the  restrictions  of  the  sabbath  and  great  days  of  festival;  that  Philo  expressly  excludes
legal  processes,  SucafeiK,  as  allowable  on  this  day  of  holy  convocation  ('De  Migratione  Ab.,'
i.  150);  that  all  the  supposed  violations  by  Jesus  of  the  sabbath  would  have  been  insig-
nificant by  the  side  of  so  flagrant  a  series  of  deviations  from  sacred  and  traditionary
rule  (Weiss,  iii.  275) ;  that  even  the  synoptic,  narrative  (Matt.  xxvi.  5 ;  Mark  xiv.  2)
shows  that  the  intention  of  the  chief  priests  was  to  destroy  Jesus,  "  not  on  the  feast
day,"  therefore  either  before  or  after  it, — a  similar  intention  was  formed  by  Herod
Agrippa  with  reference  to  the  intended  execution  of  St.  Peter  (Acts  xii.  4);  that  the  term
"preparation"  is  not  restricted  to  the  meaning  of  "Friday,"  but  in  this  particular
connection  receives  a  special  application, — it  is  called  the  preparation  of  the  Passover,
•used  obviously  in  its  broadest  sense  (of.  ch.  ii.  23;  Luke  xxii.  1;  Josephus,  'Ant.,'
xviii.  2.  2) ;  finally,  that  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  speak  of  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the
fiftieth  day  reckoned  from  "the  morrow  after  the  sabbath  of  the  Passover"  (cf.  Lev.  xxiii.
15 ;  Deut.  xvi.  9),  so  that  the  Easter  morning  and  the  Day  of  Pentecost  must  have
fallen  on  the  same  day  of  the  week.  But  in  the  year  of  our  Lord's  death  there  is  no
doubt  that  the  Easter  morning  was  a  first  day  of  the  week,  and  this  circumstance,  com-
bined with  the  universal  tradition  of  the  Church,  shows  that  the  Pentecost  was  also
commemorated  on  a  Sunday.  Consequently,  in  the  year  when  our  Lord  died,  it  becomes
evident  that,  according  to  Luke's  own  narrative,  the  Paschal  lamb  was  slain  on  the
evening  of  the  Crucifixion.

This  mode  of  vindicating  the  apparent  superiority  of  John's  narrative  has  been
adopted  by  some,  who  boldly  aver  that  the  synoptists  each  severally  made  a  serious
mistake  in  saying  or  implying  that  the  Jews  kept  their  Passover  on  the  night  pre-
ceding the  agony,  rather  than  on  the  evening  after  the  Passion,  and  that  the  tradition  of
the  synoptic  narrative  was  corrected  by  St.  John,  one  of  the  apostles,  who  had  special
reasons  for  accuracy  with  reference  to  this  shronological  detail.

There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  conclude  that  the  first  three  evangelists  made  any
mistake  as  to  the  fact  that  our  Lord  did  celebrate  the  Passover  with  his  disciples,
blending  it  with  a  second  feast,  or  calling  special  attention  to  one  momentous  element
of  that  Passover  feast,  and  therein  instituting  the  "  Lord's  Supper,"  and  moreover  that
he  did  so  on  ''  the  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed."

In  order  to  establish  harmony  on  this  hypothesis  with  the  statements  of  the  Fourth
Gospel,  we  must  suppose,  with  Gresswell,  Godet,  Westcott,  and  others,  that  there  was  a
distinct  indication  in  the  synoptists  of  an  anticipation  of  a  whole  day,  so  far  as  Jesus
»nd  his  disciples  were  concerned,  in  the  celebration  of  the  feast  itself.

Thus  the  tone  of  the  message  sent  to  the  certain  individual  (SeiVa)  with  whom  our
Lord  had  made  his  arrangements  for  the  furnishing  and  preparing  of  the  large  upper
chamber,  is  one  of  haste  and  surprise :  "  My  hour  is  come.  I  will  keep  the  Passover  at
thy  house  with  my  disciples."  In  other  words,  "  To-morrow  it  will  be  too  late.  Make
ready  at  once  (o-day."


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


If  the  question  of  the  disciples  was  put  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  then  harmony
with  John's  narrative,  as  understood  by  Christian  writers — from  Clemens  Alex,  and
Chrysostom  to  Lisihtfoot,  Baur,  Strauss,  Westoott,  and  Thoma — is  impossible.  But  it
is  eminently  probable  that  the  question  of  the  disciples  and  the  answer  and  message  of
Jesus  were  all  uttered  on  the  13th  of  Nisan,  a  day  which  was  called  the  pre-preparation
for  the  Passover.  All  the  circumstances  of  the  feast,  the  crowds  of  pilgrims,  the  diffi  -
culty  of  obtaining  accommodation,  would  make  the  preparation  of  room  and  feast  a
longer  process  than  could  be  accomplished  in  one  short  afternoon.

The  difficulty  arises  in  the  expressions  of  the  synoptists :  "  The  first  day  of
unleavened  bread,"  "  the  days  of  unleavened  bread,"  "  the  day  of  unleavened  bread,"
which  are  generally  taken  by  the  opponents  of  John's  narrative  to  mean  the  15th  of
Nisan,  commencing  on  the  evening  of  the  14th;  but  it  was  on  the  evening  of  the  13th
(i.e.  the  beginning  of  the  14th),  at  candlelight,  that  the  first  thorough  search  was  made
for  the  presence  of  leaven,  and  that  people  went  forth  to  draw  fresh  water  for  making
their  unleavened  bread.  Hence  our  Lord  hastens  his  proceedings  on  the  very  night  on
which  the  message  was  sent ;  i.e.  on  the  Jewish  commencement  of  the  first  real  day  of
unleavened  bread,  he  gathers  the  twelve  in  the  upper  chamber,  in  the  real  beginning  of
the  day  on  which  he  was  to  suffer,  and  towards  the  close  of  which  day  the  PaschaL
lambs  would  be  slain  by  the  people  generally.  That  his  lamb  should  have  been  slain
in  the  temple  was  not  a  part  of  the  original  enactment  concerning  the  Paschal  meal,
and  on  this,  as  on  other  occasions,  our  Lord  reverted  to  the  original  arrangement.
Further,  the  expression,  "  when  they  killed  the  Passover  "  (Mark  xiv.  12),  would  be
perfectly  accurate  if  reference  were  made  to  the  last  hours  of  the  18th,  in  which,  accord-
ing to  the  Jewish  reckoning,  the  14th  day  was  already  begun.

Between  these  two  methods  of  effecting  reconciliation  of  the  Johannine  and  synoptic
narratives,  opinions  have  varied  since  the  days  of  Chrysostom.  Both  appear  plausible,
and  it  cannot  he  said  that  the  question  is  finally  decided.  One  thing  is  certain,  that
the  two  narratives  are  not  hopelessly  at  variance,  and  therefore  the  frequent  assurances
on  this  head  from  opponents  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  fall  to  the  ground.

Let  it  be  observed  that  the  entire  statement  of  the  synoptic  narrative  turns  upon  the
few  words  on  which  we  have  just  commented,  while  the  Johannine  references  are
numerous  and  varied,  though  not  positively  decisive  as  to  the  day.

The  preponderance  of  evidence  seems  to  me  decidedly  in  favour  of  the  Johannine
Ruggestiods  and  presuppositions,  and  a  close  examination  of  the  synoptic  narrative
itself  shows  it  to  be  in  close  agreement  with  the  Johannine,  and  the  later  Paschal  con-
troversies are  in  harmony  with  the  conclusion.

Further  confirmations  of  the  Johannine  chronology  may  be  found

(1)  In  the  language  of  St.  Paul,  who  says,  "Christ  our  Passover  was  sacrificed  for  us,"
showing  that  it  was  not  left  for  St.  John,  still  less  for  an  unknown  writer  in  the  second
century,  to  have  formulated  the  idea  of  the  close  connection  between  the  death  of  the
Lord  and  the  slaying  of  the  Paschal  lamb.

(2)  The  Talmud  explicitly  confirms  the  accuracy  of  John's  statements.  Mishnah
'  Sanh. : '  "  Jesus  was  suspended  on  the  evening  of  the  Passover  "  (Veerev  h'appesach'),
which  is  undoubtedly  the  afternoon  of  the  14th  of  Nisan,  not  the  15th.

(3)  Though  the  preparation  of  the  Paschal  lamb  is  spoken  of  by  the  synoptists  (Mark
xiv.  12 — 16),  yet  the  peculiarities  of  the  Passover  feast  are  not  referred  to;  e.g.  the  bitter
herbs,  the  charoseth,  the  prolix  ritual,  the  recital  of  the  Great  Hallel,  the  four  or  five
cups  of  wine.  The  wine  and  bread  portion  of  the  Last  Supper  was  expressly  regarded  as
an  appendix  to  the  Supper  itself  (1  Cor.  xi.  25),  and  not,  in  accordance  with  the  tradi-
tional ritual,  a  part  of  the  supper  itself  (Weiss).

(4)  The  simple  supposition  that  a  custom  prevailed  among  the  Jews  of  spreading  the
allowable  opportunity  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Paschal  lamb  over  a  larger  portion  of  time,
in  consequence  of  the  great  crowd  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time,  would  really  cover  every
diflSoulty,  if  we  add  to  it  that  our  Lord,  "desiring  to  eat  the  Passover  wi'th  his  disciples
before  he  suffered,"  had  chosen  to  select  such  portions  of  the  ritual  and  such  hour  of
the  day  as  best  suited  his  dread  foreknowledge  of  the  immediate  future  (see  further
discussion  in  notes  on  ch.  xiii.  1,  29  ;  xviii.  28  ;  xix.  14,  31).

4.  The  omissions  of  tlie  synoptists.  The  silence  of  the  synoptists  touching  some  of
the  most  conspicuous  events  of  our  Lord's  life,  as  recorded  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  k


xcTl  INTRODUCTION  TO


extremely  perplexing  on  any  hypothesis,  such  e.g.  as  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus,  the
discourses  in  the  temple,  the  valedictory  discourse,  and  the  intercessory  prayer.  They
do  severally  report  much  interesting  instruction  which  had  already  been  recorded  by
one  or  other  of  their  number :  why  should  they,  then,  omit  the  discourses  of  the  Lord,
which,  in  common  with  the  younger  son  of  Zebedee,  either  they  had  heard,  or  with
which  their  intbrmants  must  have  been  as  familiar  as  he?  No  answer  which  will
remove  all  difficulty  can  be  given  to  these  questions.  Still,  the  following  i«marks  are
worthy  of  consideration.

(1)  Each  of  the  evangelists  records  some  words  and  actions  of  our  Lord  which  are
peculiar  to  himself.  Even  St.  Mark  is  alone  in  preserving  the  miracle  on  the  blind
man  at  Bethsaida  (viii.  22 — 26),  and  the  singularly  suggestive  demand  of  our  Lord  for
"  the  little  ship,"  which  might  secure  his  safe  departure  from  the  threatening  crowd
(iii.  9,  10).  Mark  alone  records  the  impressive  parable  concerning  "  the  seed  growing
secretly  "  (iv.  26 — 29).  "  The  condensed  form  of  the  great  parables  of  the  last  things,
as  given  at  length  in  Matt,  xxv.,  recorded  by  Mark  in  xiii.  34,  corresponds
with  a  host  of  minute  touches  in  every  narrative  which  materially  facilitate  and
augment  our  apprehension  of  the  events  which  occurred.  Again,  Matthew  alone  pre-
serves whole  groups  of  special  instructions  and  events ;  e.g.  the  visit  of  the  Wise
Men,  the  flight  to  Egypt  (ii.),  large  portions  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount  (v. — vii.),
of  the  apostolic  commission  in  x.,  together  with  numerous  sayings  in  Matt,  iriii.,  xx.,
xxi.  28,  etc. ;  xxiii.  and  xxv.  Luke,  again,  alone  among  the  four  evangelists,  records
the  particulars  of  the  birth  at  Bethlehem,  the  visit  to  Jerusalem  when  Jesus  was  twelve
years  of  age,  and  the  miracle  which  determined  the  final  call  of  Simon  Peter  and  the
two  sons  of  Zebedee  (v.  1 — 11).  Luke  alone  gives  the  occasions  when  our  Lord
repeated  the  great  teaching  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  under  conditions  of  which
Matthew  says  nothing.  The  most  memorable  of  aU  is  the  repetition  of  the  substance
of  the  Lord's  Prayer  (Luke  xi.  2 — i).  Luke  alone  preserves  the  thrilling  narrative  of
the  raising  of  the  son  of  the  widow  of  Nain  (vii.  11 — 17),  and  the  action  of  our  Lord
with  reference  to  the  woman  that  was  a  sinner  (vii.  36 — 50).  He  also  alone  enumerates
the  names  of  the  women  who  ministered  to  Jesus  (viii.  1 — 3).  He  takes  special
account  of  an  evangelistic  mission  of  seventy  chosen  disciples — a  peculiarity  of  our
Loid's  ministry  of  immense  significance,  and  which  the  other  three  Gospels,  the  Acts,
and  Epistles  entirely  ignore.  This  ministry  of  the  seventy  was  followed  by  a  visit  of
Christ  to  the  various  places  where  they  had  prepared  the  way  for  his  approach,  as  well
as  an  extended  tour  of  our  Lord  preparatory  to  his  final  manifestation  of  himself
in  Jerusalem  (Luke  ix.  51 — 56 ;  x.  1 — 16,;  x.  17 — 24).  Luke  preserves  the  wonderful
parable  .of  the  good  Samaritan  (x.  25 — 37),  the  visit  to  Bethany  (x.  38 — 42),  numerous
instructions  and  parables  in  xi.,  xii.,  and  pre-eminently  xiv.,  xt.,  xvi.,  including  the
most  impressive  of  all  the  parables.  The  healing  of  ten  lepers  (xvii.  12 — 19),  with
the  special  benediction  on  the  grateful  Samaritan.  Luke  preserves  the  parable  of  the
"  unjust  judge,"  and  of  the  "  Pharisee  and  publican  "  (xviii.  1 — 14).  In  addition  to  the
"  prodigal  son,"  the  "  rich  man  and  Lazarus,"  he  gives  the  story  of  Zacchaeus  (xix.
1 — 10),  the  appearance  of  Jesus  before  Herod  (xxiii.  6 — 12),  the  manifestation  of  him-
self on  the  evening  of  Easter  Day  to  the  disciples  on  their  journey  to  Emmaus,  and  the
account  of  the  Ascension.  These  peculiarities  of  Luke  are  accompanied  by  other  narra-
tives, in  which  he  preserves  likewise  woids  and  actions  of  our  Lord  with  which  we  are
familiar  from  the  other  evangelists.  The  paragraphs  of  various  length  in  the  Fourth
Gospel,  containing  matter  peculiar  to  John,  are  reckoned  as  ninety-six ;  but  the  para-
graphs containing  matter  peculiar  to  Luke  in  his  Gospel  are  no  fewer  than  ssventy-two ;
and  those  peculiar  to  Matthew  not  fewer  than  sixty-two  1  A  fair  inference  is  that
Matthew,  Luke,  and  John  each  adopted  a  similar  principle  of  selection  from  a  vast  store
of  material,  and  that  the  peculiarities  of  John  are  not  more  striking  or  idiosyncratic  than
those  of  Luke  or  Matthew.  If  the  originalities  of  Luke  receive  our  credit  as  having
a  basis  of  positive  knowledge,  then  d  fortiori  we  have  a  right  to  assume  that  the
originalities  of  John  have  a  still  more  trustworthy  basis.

It  may  be  said  that  the  imposing  miracle  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus  exercised  too
striking  an  effect  on  the  state  of  feeling  in  the  capital  to  suffer  excision  from  any
narrative  of  the  last  tragedy.  This  argument  proves  too  much,  for,  on  the  same
principle,  Matthew,  of  all  the  evangelists,  ought  not  to  have  omitted  the  reception  o(


THK  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xc*a

the  chief  of  the  publicans — an  act  which  must  have  exasperated  the  prejudices  of  many
of  Christ'g  followers,  and  contributed  to  the  bitterness  of  the  Pharisaic  party;  nor  ought
Luke  to  have  omitted  the  miracle  which  Matthew  records  (xii.  22,  etc.)  as  the  basis  of
the  very  solemn  discourse  the  points  of  which  are  preserved  in  Luke  xi.  17 — 23.

(2)  The  omissions  of  the  synoptista,  when  contrasted  with  each  other,  are  a  very  notice-
able  and  remarkable  feature  in  their  narrative.  Matthew  and  Mark  omitted  the  visit
to  Jerusalem  when  our  Lord  was  twelve  years  of  age.  Luke  and  Mark  omitted  the
journey  into  Egypt.  Mark  and  Luke  omitted  the  special  injunctions  to  the  twelve
disciples,  and  the  great  parables  of  the  coming  to  judgment.  Matthew  and  Mark
omitted  the  raising  of  the  widow's  son,  and  the  parables  of  the  prodigal  son,  of  Dives
and  Lazarus,  and  numerous  other  teachings ;  nor  can  we  satisfactorily  account  for
omissions  which,  if  they  had  been  supplemented  from  the  other  narratives,  would  not
have  detracted  from  the  apparent  motive  on  which  the  several  narratives  were  compiled.
Ergo  the  omissions  by  the  synoptists  of  matters  found  only  in  John's  Gospel,  and  the
omission  by  John  of  matters  found  only  in  Matthew's  or  Luke's  Gospel,  ought  to  be  no
bar  to  our  accepting  the  peculiarities  of  John's  Gospel.

These  omissions  of  the  synoptists  may  be  traced  in  some  degree  to  the  ruling
principle  directing  the  composition  of  their  narratives.  Matthew's  obvious  purpose  is
to  show  the  fulfilment  by  Jesus  of  the  true  Messianic  conception.  He  is  much  con-
cerned to  prove  that  the  Lord  was  the  theocratic  King :  why  should  he  then  develop
the  course  of  hierarchic  antagonism  to  the  Christ  from  the  beginning  ?  The  miracle  on
the  blind  man  and  on  the  dead  Lazarus,  though  producing  ulterior  effects  on  the
population  of  Jerusalem,  favourable  and  adverse,  were  not  fundamentally  more  remark-
able than  many  other  of  Christ's  miracles  of  power  and  mercy.  To  us,  from  the  special
detail  by  which  they  are  environed,  they  acquire  a  more  emphatic  interest.  The
memories  of  the  twelve  (followed  mainly  by  the  marvellous  tax-gatherer)  were  so  sur-
charged with  a  sense  of  the  supernatural  power  of  Jesus,  that  these  events  were  grouped
rather  than  isolated.  John  had  from  peculiar  circumstances  been  more  behind  the  scenes,
and  saw  how  certain  special  miracles  had  wrought  unfavourably  upon  the  governing
religious  authority,  and  he  set  himself  to  unravel  the  animosity  of  this  same  authority,
to  vindicate  the  fundamental  ideas,  that  the  Logos  incarnate  had  come  to  his  own,  and
that  his  own  received  him  not.  Luke,  in  his  intention  to  set  forth  the  perfect  humanity
of  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  clothes  him  with  the  highest  and  most  famous  characteristics
from  the  first.  He  was  not  one  of  the  twelve,  and  therefore  was  neither  at  Bethany
nor  "  Ephraim,"  but  the  great  and  wonderful  narrative  of  Nain,  coming,  as  we  may
suppose,  under  his  own  observation  or  cognizance,  revealed  the  intense  humanity  of
Christ  even  more  than  the  restoration  of  Lazarus,  and,  having  told  it  in  a  way  which  had
melted  hearts,  he  left  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  for  others.  Davidson  Qih.  cit.,  ii.  363,
364)  says  the  miracle  took  place,  according  to  the  Fourth  Gospel,  "  only  a  few  days
before  the  triumphal  entry."  The  narratives  of  the  synoptists  exclude  it ;  but  this  seems
in  forgetfulness  of  cb.  xi.  54,  which  implies  a  retirement  of  Jesus  before  the  final  entry
(see  notes).  A  consideration  of  importance  has  often  been  used  to  justify  the  omission.
Prudential  motives  may  have  preserved  the  incognito  when  the  synoptic  narrative  took
shape,  which  would  hare  ceased  to  operate  long  before  John  undertook  his  great  task.

The  coincidences  of  the  three  synoptists  with  one  another  are  undoubtedly  more
numerous  than  their  coincidences  with  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  furmer  are  so  abundant
that  they  need  not  be  cited.  If  they  were  confined  to  the  synoptists,  and  if  the  entire
platform  was  deserted  by  the  Fourth  Gospel,  the  conclusion  would  militate  against  the
historicity  of  the  Gospel  of  John ;  but  there  are  special  and  numerous  points  in  which
John's  Gospel  coincides  with  the  synoptic  narrative.
B.  The  coincidences  of  the  synoptic  and  Fourth  Oospels.

The  points  of  divergence  have  naturally  created  much  inquiry,  but  the  points  of
coincidence  and  identity  between  the  synoptists  and  John  are  still  more  remarkable,
and  deserve  special  attention.  We  will  consider  them  under  three  main  divisions :  (1)
broad  facts  of  the  history;  (2)  the  incidental  allusions  of  John  to  matters  of  fact
which  we  know  of  from  the  synoptists,  but  which  he  has  himself  nowhere  affirmed  or
announced;  (3)  subtle  peculiarities  of  manner  of  style  and  of  vocabulary,  which  pro-
claim the  fundamental  unity  of  the  theme  and  subject-matter.  We  will  then  deal  with
specific  objections.

jomt.  A


xcTlU  INTRODUCTION  TO


1.  The  facts.  The  synoptists  and  John  agree  in  admitting  that  Jesus  was  bom  in
Bethlehem  (comp.  ch.  vii.  42  with  Lulte  ii.  and  Matt,  ii.),  though  this  is  disputed.  Still,
it  appears  to  us  perfectly  clear  that  the  evangelist  records  the  supposed  objection  to  the
non-Bethlehem  origin  of  Jesus,  which  had  been  refuted  by  the  widely  circulated  detaili
of  the  birth.  It  is  true  that  he  does  not  reply  to  the  insinuation  that  Jesus  was  born  in
Bethlehem  with  the  well-known  historic  fact,  but  he  knows  that  his  readers  will  have
the  answer  ready  to  turn  the  taunt  into  a  victorious  proof  of  his  Messiahship  (Dr.
Salmon, '  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,'  has  admirably  argued  this  point).  They
agree  in  asserting  that  his  early  home  was  Nazareth  (ch.  i.  46 ;  cf.  Matt.  ii.  2.3 ;  Luke
ii.  51);  that  he  left  Nazareth,  and  treated  Capernaum  as  his  later  residence  and  "city"
(comp.  ch.  ii.  12  and  vi.  17,  24  with  Matt.  ix.  1;  'Luke  vii.  1;  iv.  31;  Mark  ii.  1).
The  four  Gospels  agree  in  recognizing  John  the  Baptist  as  the  great  precursor  of  the
Christ.  And  the  Fourth  Gospel,  as  well  as  the  first  and  second,  refer  to  "  the  voice
crying  in  the  wilderness.  Prepare  j'e  the  way  of  the  Lord,"  as  being  fulfilled  in  the  early
ministry  of  the  Baptist.  The  specialty  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  that  these  words  and  this
reference  to  Isaiah  are  therein  attributed  to  the  Baptist  himself.  The  synoptists  coin-
cide in  telling  us  that  John  introduced  the  Messiah  to  the  people,  and  refer  to  the  cir-
cumstances and  accompaniments  of  his  baptism  of  Jesus,  the  opening  of  heaven,  ths
voice  from  the  excellent  glory.  The  Fourth  Gospel  adds  certain  traits  which  had  been
omitted  by  the  synoptists,  such  as  the  place  of  the  first  baptisn  al  ministry  of  the  fore-
runner, viz.  "  Bethany  beyond  Jordan,"  and  inserts  the  fact  that  the  Holy  Spirit  not
only  descended  but  ahode  on  the  Lord  (ch.  i.  32).

True,  there  is  a  striking  discrepancy.  In  the  Fourth  Gospel  we  find  the  Baptist
making  use  of  the  remarkable  words,  "  I  knew  him  not,  but  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize
with  water  said.  Upon  whomsoever  thou  shalt  see  the  Holy  Spirit  descend  and  rest,
the  same  is  he  that  baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  Thus  it  would  seem  that  John
came  to  know  the  Lord  by  the  marvels  attending  the  baptism.  Yet  Matthew  tells  us
that,  when  Jesus  came  to  the  baptism,  John  said,  "  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,
and  comest  thou  to  me  ?  "  This,  it  is  alleged,  amounts  to  an  admission  of  knowledge,
which  the  Fourth  Gospel  represents  John  as  positively  disclaiming  until  after  the
baptism.  The  word  "knowledge  "  is  a  relative  one.  There  may  have  been  quite  know-
ledge enough  to  induce  John  to  shrink  from  baptizing  one  of  such  lofty  character  and
known  antecedents  as  those  which  prevailed  in  the  family  circles  of  Mary  and  Elisabeth ;
but  John  received  such  overwhelming  conviction  of  the  Divine  commission  and  sacred
self-revelation  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  he  could  with  all  propriety  have  said,  notwith-
standing his  hesitation  at  the  baptism,  "  I  knew  him  not "  (see  notes  on  ch.  i,  33).  The
Fourth  Gospel  takes  up  the  ministry  of  John  just  where  the  synoptists  close  their  frac-
mentary  comment.  It  is  not  without  special  interest  that  in  "  the  swanlike  song"  of
the  Baptist  (ch.  iii.  29),  he  uses  a  metaphor  derived  from  the  entire  conception  of  "  the
Bridegroom  "  and  the  "  friend  of  the  Bridegroom,"  to  which,  as  we  see  in  the  synoptists'
account  of  our  Lord's  reply  to  the  disciples  of  John  on  the  subject  of  fasting,  he  reverted
when  defending  his  own  disciples  from  the  charge  of  undue  freedom  and  joyfulness
(Mark  ii.  18 — 20  and  parallels).   This  undesigned  coincidence  is  singularly  instructive.

The  brethren  of  Jesus,  the  mother,  and  Joseph  as  the  father  of  Jesus,  are  all  referred
to  by  the  fourth  evangelist  (see  ch.  ii.  1 — 12;  vi.42;  vii.  3;  xix.  25).  If  John  had
entirely  ignored  the  existence  of  father,  mother,  and  brethren.  It  would  have  been  in
harmony  with  the  supposed  docetic  tendency  of  this  Gospel ;  but  he,  who  describes
the  birth  of  Jesus  as  the  coming  into  the  world  of  the  true  Light,  and  of  his  bein"
born  of  the  Spirit,  lays  emphasis  on  the  non-belief  of  the  brothers  (ch.  vii.  5),  and  the
mystery  of  Jesus  being  called  the  Son  of  Joseph  (ch.  i.  45  and  vi.  42),  for  which  he
offers  no  explanation.  There  is  remarkable  undesigned  coincidence  here  with  those
references  to  Joseph  in  the  synoptists,  and  to  the  plot  which  the  Pharisees  laid,  with  the
assistance  of  the  brothers,  to  take  Jesus  by  force  as  one  "  beside  himself"  (Mark  iii.  21 ;

ol  wafi'  aJrou  are  clearly  identifiable  with  the  "  mother  and  brethren  "  of  vers.  31 35).

Pew  features  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  in  the  synoptists,  are  more  certain  than  the  fact
that  Jesus  chose  twelve  disciples  to  be  "  with  him,"  and  to  perpetuate  his  work.  Now,
John  never  describes  the  call  of  the  twelve  disciples,  and,  indeed,  makes  it  clear  that  he
was  not  always  accompanied  by  the  twelve;  and  yet,  in  ch.  vi.  67,  the  S^Sexa  are
s|pecially  mentioned,  and  they  are  hmted  as  twelve  in  ver.  13  (see  also  ch.  xx.  24).


THE  aOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  xcix


Two  celebrated  signs  of  the  Lord's  supernatural  power  are  recorded,  not  only  by  John,
but  by  the  synoptists,  viz.  Christ's  feeding  the  five  thousand  and  walking  on  the  sea
(oh.  vi.  1 — 21).  There  are  several  additional  traits  thrown  in,  but  the  four  records
refer,  without  question,  to  the  same  fact,  and  the  excitement  produced  by  the  first  of
these  miracles  is  signalized  by  each  of  the  narratives.

The  anointing  of  the  Lord  at  Bethany  is  described  by  Matthew  (xxvi.)  and  Mark
(xiv.).  John  clearly  refers  to  the  same  event,  and  adds  certain  very  noticeable  features.
The  date  is  fixed  "six  days  before  the  Passover,"  the  woman's  name  is  given  as  "Mary,"
whose  personal  obligations  to  the  honoured  Guest  are  explained  by  reference  to  hei
brother  Lazarus,  whom  our  Lord  had  recalled  from  the  tomb.  The  objection  to  her
enthusiastic  love  is  made  to  be  the  special  suggestion  of  Judas  (ch.  xii.  4—6).

The  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem  from  Bethany  is  recorded  with  characteristic
features  by  the  synoptists  and  John.  The  incidents  and  converse  of  the  Last  Supper
are  conceived  from  a  fresh  standpoint,  and  whereas  the  synoptists  describe  a  Paschal
feast,  John  calls  it  simply  a  Seartrov;  while  the  earlier  evangelists  give  the  institution
of  the  Eucharist,  John  describes  at  length  the  washing  of  the  feet,  and  records  sacra-
mental ideas  of  the  valedictory  discourse.  Yet  they  are  all  four  agreed  on  the  discovery
and  exit  of  Judas,  and  there  are  several  matters  introduced  into  the  discourse  which
are  illuminated  by  comparison  with  those  conversations  "  by  the  way,"  which  Luke
expressly  records  (see  notes,  ch.  xiii.  31 — 38).

The  trial-scenes,  the  denials  of  the  Lord  by  Peter,  the  character  and  conduct  of
Pilate,  the  mention  of  Barabbas,  the  title  "  King  of  the  Jews,"  the  presence  of  the
women  at  the  cross,  the  method  of  the  death,  and  the  fact  and  place  of  the  burial,  as
well  as  the  witnesses  and  chief  incidents  of  the  Besurrection,  correspond  with  the
analogous  details  given  in  the  synoptists,  while  many  points  mentioned  by  John
imply  an  acquaintance  on  his  part  with  matters  referred  to  by  the  synoptists,  and
whicn  would  be  inexplicable  except  on  the  hypothesis  that  John  had  the  synoptic
narrative  before  him.  This  is  very  remarkable  in  the  trial-scenes ;  e.g.  John  (xviii.
30,  35)  makes  it  appear  that  the  Jews  had  formally  condemned  Jesus  in  their
own  court  to  be  guilty  of  death.  The  full  account  of  this  is  only  to  be  found  by
combining  the  narratives  of  Matthew  and  Luke ;  but  John  has  said  nothing  of  this
scene.  Nevertheless,  the  condemnation  by  the  Sanhedrin,  as  given  by  the  synoptists,
is  necessary  in  order  to  explain  John's  narrative.  Many  similar  characteristics  pervade
the  entire  Gospel,  and  deserve  special  consideration.

Our  conclusion  is,  that  though  there  are  great  peculiarities  in  Matthew,  Luke,  and
John  (and  John's  are  scarcely  more  numerous  than  those  of  the  first  or  third  evange-
list), yet  that  the  most  impressive  facts  and  cardinal  events  in  this  marvellous  narrative
are  common  to  all  four  evangelists ;  that  John's  narrative  presupposes  on  the  part  of  his
readers  a  knowledge  of  the  synoptists,  and  throws  in  return  great  light  upon  them,  and
imparts  in  many  crucial  cases  the  additional  fact  which  confers  validity  on  them.

2.  The  coincidental  and  diversified  reference  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  matters  which
are  given  in  detail,  or  differently  specified,  in  the  synoptic  Oospels.  These  references
are  twofold :  (1)  those  which  affect  matters  of  fact  and  date  and  outward  circumstance ;
(2)  those  which  relate  to  the  fundamental  elements  of  the  character  and  teaching  of
our  Lord.

(1)  Among  the  former :  (a)  The  incidental  reference  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  the
vision  and  accompaniments  of  the  baptism  of  Jesus.  This  act  is  not  described,  nor  is
the  vision  set  forth,  but  both  are  involved  in  the  account  given  by  John  the  Baptist,  and
are  recorded  simply  because  they  produced  deep  effect  on  all  the  subsequeut  character
and  ministry  of  the  Baptist.  (6)  The  reference,  in  ch.  iii.  24,  to  the  fact  that  "  John
was  not  yet  cast  into  prison."  This  accounts  for  the  descriptions  given  of  John's  con-
tinued ministry.  There  is  no  other  reference  to  John's  imprisonment,  and  none  to  his
death.  Ch.  v.  35  implies,  by  the  aorist  ^iffeA^o-ore,  that  at  that  period  the  public
ministry  of  John  had  been  terminated.  Why  was  the  statement  of  ch.  iii.  24  intro-
duced ?  We  see  no  other  reason  than  that  the  synoptic  tradition  (Matt.  iv.  12)  had
made  the  close  of  John's  public  ministrations  coincide  with  the  commencement  of
Christ's  Galilsean  ministry;  and  to  show  the  reader  of  Matthew's  statement  that  the
earliest  ministry  in  Judjea  and  Samaria  preceded  the  departure  from  Judjea  into  Galilee.
£c)  The  tls  ri  6pos  of  ch.  vi.  3  suggests  a  well-known  mountain,  best  explained  by  the


INTRODUCTION  TO


frequent  references  to  it  in  the  synoptists.  (rf)  Attention  has  already  been  called  to  the
apparent  acquaintance  with  the  character  and  power  of  the  Lord  displayed  by  Petei
in  his  first  introduction  to  him  as  narrated  in  Luke  v.  6  (of.  ch.  iv.  38  with  Matt.  iv.
18 ;  Mark  i.  16,  29).  These  events  are  all  illaminated,  and  especially  Mark's  chrono-
logy, by  the  fact  of  a  previous  acquaintance  with  Jesus  where  John  at  first  baptized,
(e)  There  are  sundry  and  subtle  indications  in  John's  majestic  description  of  the  night  o!
the  Passion  and  of  the  trial  before  Pilate,  that  the  writer  was  perfectly  familiar  with  the
synoptic  narrative,  and  presupposed  acquaintance  with  its  special  details  in  the  repre-
sentation he  made  of  the  incaruate  love.  The  profoundest  insight  into  the  blended  agony
and  peace  of  the  Saviour's  spirit  is  given  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Oh.  xii.  23 — 36  throws
much  needed  light  on  the  sorrows  of  Gethsemane.  Ch.  xviii.  11,  addressed  to  Petei
and  recorded  by  John,  provides  a  thrilling  reminiscence  of  the  prayer,  recorded  on  the
authority  of  one  or  both  of  them,  in  the  synoptic  narrative.  The  supplementary
theory  will  only  account  for  some  of  the  facts.  Each  of  the  Gospels  presents  some
special  revelation  of  the  wondrous  life  with  strange  breviloquence.  When  these  touches
of  divinely  suggested  portraiture  are  brought  together,  we  find  that  we  are  not  distracted
with  two  or  four  Christs,  but  we  behold  one,  and  one  only.

(2)  There  are  several  striking  and  difficult  omissions  by  John  of  cardinal  and  momen-
tous revelations  of  the  Lord,  which,  if  they  had  left  no  trace  upon  the  Fourth  Gospel,
might  threaten  the  unity  and  identity  of  the  Christ  as  portrayed  therein.  These
omissions  are  mainly  "  the  temptation  of  Christ,"  "  the  transfiguration,"  "  the  institu-
tion of  the  Lord's  Supper,"  "  the  agony  in  the  garden,"  "  the  ascension  of  Christ  to  the
right  hand  of  God.''    A  brief  consideration  of  these  omissions  must  suffice.

1  have  omitted  further  reference  to  the  baptism,  and  proceed  to  the  temptation.

(a)  ne  temptation.  The  temptation  is  described  in  the  synoptic  narrative  as  occurring
immediately  after  the  baptism,  and  before  "John  was  cast  into  prison,"  therefore  in  the
interval  that  elapses  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  between  the  first  testimony  of  the  Baptist  and
the  return  to  Galilee  in  the  close  of  the  fourth  chapter.  The  question  arises — Does
the  fourth  evangelist  reveal  the  presence,  in  the  course  of  his  narrative,  of  the  essential
elements  of  the  typical  temptatiou  ?  It  is  not  necessary  to  insist  on  the  recognition  ia
this  Gospel  of  the  assault  on  Jesus  by  the  prince  of  this  world  (see  ch.  xii.  31 ;  xvi.  1 1),
the  devilish  malice  of  Judas  (ch.  vi.  70),  the  suggestion  made  by  Christ's  brothers  (ch.
vii.  3),  and  the  probable  explanation  of  the  great  abrupt  cry  (ch.  i.  29),  "  Behold  the
Lamb  of  God ! "  but  it  seems  as  though  the  special  group  of  temptations  recorded  in  the
synoptic  narrative  was  neither  unknown  nor  unappreciated  by  the  fourth  evangelist.

The  first  temptation  seizes  on  the  suffering  humanity  of  Jesus,  wlien  he  was  famished
by  forty  days  of  fasting.  "  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,"  as  the  voice  from  heaven  has
proclaimed  thee  to  be,  "  command  that  these  stones  be  made  bread."  Employ  thy
supernatural  power  for  the  miraculous  supply  of  thine  own  need.  'I'hou  art  above  the
ordinary  conditions  of  nature;  therefore  triumph  over  thy  circumstances.  Assert
thyself.  Do  not  demean  thine  oiigin  by  earning  or  begging  thy  daily  bread  1  The
reply  of  Jesus  was,  "  Man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  pro-
ceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  So  far  the  synoptists;  but  John  tells  us  that  one
of  the  earliest  incidents  of  our  Lord's  ministry  brings  the  God-Man  to  a  marriage-feast,
where  the  voice  of  a  loving  temptress  said  to  him,  "  They  have  no  wine."  The  virgin-
mother  longed  that  her  royal  Son  should  show  forth  his  glory  by  expressing  in  imperial
tones  his  claim  to  all  the  riches  of  these  vine-clad  hills.  Our  Lord  resented  this
intrusion  upon  the  choice  of  the  method  or  hour  of  his  self-manifestation;  but  he
did  not  hesitate  in  the  royalty  of  his  love  to  give  to  others,  and  to  do  for  them  what
he  utterly  refrained  from  doing  for  himself  in  his  own  dire  extremity.  None  but  they
who  drew  the  water  knew  that  the  Creator's  hand  had  touched  it.  The  governor  of
the  feast  simply  attested  the  reality  and  excellence  of  the  wine.  The  disciples  believed.
They  had  learned  a  lesson  of  his  power,  but  caught  a  deeper  insight  into  his  heart.
Christ  never  implied  that  he  could  not  or  would  not  turn  stones  into  bread,  or  water
into  wine,  but  declared  that  the  Word  and  the  place  of  his  Father  for  him  were  to  give,
not  to  grasp — to  give  himself  for  the  life  of  the  world;  for  his  flesh  was  meat  indeed,
his  blood  wine  indeed,  for  a  starving  and  perishing  humanity.

A  similar  lesson  is  taught  even  more  vividly  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  GospeL
There  wf  find  him  seated,  weary  in  the  noontide  heat,  by  Jacob's  well  (ver.  6).     Why


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  d

does  he,  who  coiild  transform  water  into  wine  for  others,  not  smite  the  slopes  of  Gerizim,
and  cause  the  running  fountain  to  burst  forth  for  his  relief?  The  fourth  evangelist
records  the  affecting  incident  that,  for  his  own  refreshment  from  the  misery  of  thirst,
the  Son  of  God  asked  an  alien  to  supply  his  need.  "He  saith  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,
Give  me  to  drink."  The  pathos  of  the  position  from  John's  standpoint  is  almost
infinite.  There  is  the  same  physical  exhaustion  as  in  the  narrative  of  the  other  scene
in  the  wilderness.  Divine  energy  is  shown  to  be  latent  in  his  will.  His  personal  needs
are  as  great;  his  self-restraint  as  sublime.  He  is  content  to  suffer,  and  to  cast  himself
on  the  charity  of  a  Samaritan.  This  commandment  had  he  received  of  the  Father.
By  this  Word  of  God  the  Incarnate  Word  doth  live.

Nor  are  the  parallels  to  the  principle  of  his  victory  over  the  devil  completed  here ;
for  after  a  while  the  disciples  return  to  him  from  the  city  Sychar,  with  their  store  of
provisions,  and  "  they  prayed  him,  saying.  Master,  eat ; "  and  his  mysterious  reply
confounded  thend,  "  I  have  meat  to  eat  tbat  ye  know  not  of.  My  meat  is  to  do  the
will  of  him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work."  Thus  the  fourth  evangelist,  in
luminous  fashion,  reports  a  conflict  with  and  a  victory  over  the  same  class  of  temptation
as  that  recorded  in  the  synoptic  Gospels.  "  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save; "
and  "Though  he  was  rich"  beyond  all  imagination,  "yet  for  our  sakes  he  became  poor,
that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be  made  rich "  (2  Cor,  viii.  9).  "  It  was  more
blessed,"  more  God-like,  "  to  give  than  to  receive."

The  second  temptation  of  the  devil  brought  the  Divine  Lord,  either  in  vision  or
reality,  to  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  to  the  spot  whence  the  priest  watched  the  first
gleam  of  sunrise  over  the  Eastern  hills,  in  order  to  give  the  signal  for  the  morning
sacrifice.  He  saw  the  courts  of  the  temple  crowded  with  the  early  worshippers,  and  the
riot  and  clamour  of  the  priests'  bazaar,  and  all  the  busy  multitude  intent  on  ritual  or
on  gain.  "  Cast  thyself  down,"  said  the  tempter — commit  thy  way  to  God,  entrust
thyself  to  the  arms  of  angels,  and  to  the  care  of  thy  Father — "  thou  shalt  not  dash  thy
feet  against  a  stone."

This  was  not  a  covert  plea  for  suicide,  but  a  bid  for  power.  Had  Jesus  yielded  .to
this  temptation,  how  loud  would  have  been  the  shout,  "  Behold,  he  cometh  in  the
clouds  of  heaven ! "  The  temple-throng  would  have  hailed  him  at  once  as  their  Messiah-
King  ;  for  he  would  have  come  "  suddenly  to  his  temple,"  in  a  manner  which  would
have  annihilated  his  enemies  and  inflamed  his  friends  with  theocratic  zeal.  The
language  of  our  Lord  to  this  temptation  of  the  evil  one  was  another  revelation  of  his
filial  reverence  for  God's  holy  providence.  He  protested  against  all  presumptuous
trifling  with  the  promises  of  God.  This  superhuman  method  of  descent  upon  the
wondering  crowd  would  forfeit  all  his  conscious  hold  upon  the  Divine  Word.  True,
it  might  precipitate  a  tumultuous  rebellion  against  the  power  of  Home ;  but  his  own
people  were  suffering ,  from  a  far  more  terrible  bondage  and  a  more  humiliating  yoke.
Signs  and  wonders  like  these  would  quicken  no  conscience,  would  purify  no  heart.
Intent  on  gelf-glory,  he  would  have  had  no  grasp  on  ancient  promise,  and  he  replied,
"  It  is  written,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  He  would  not  trifle  with  the
letter  of  the  revealing  Word.  He  would  not  dazzle  the  eyes  of  the  multitude  in  his  own
interest,  and  call  it  faith.  Presumption  is  not  dependence,  nor  is  vulgar  amazement
at  the  power  he  wielded  the  faith  in  his  claims  which  would  save  a  single  soul  from
its  habitual  distrust  of  God.

Now,  our  Lord  is  represented,  even  in  John's  Gospel,  as  resisting  the  forces  of  nature,
and  holding  them  in  visible  check.  He  walked  upon  the  wave,  but  he  did  this  to
reassure  and  save  his  storm-tossed  followers,  and  to  deepen  their  nascent  faith  in  his
Divine  claims.

The  Lord  was  moved  at  Cana  and  Bethsaida,  as  he  had  been  tempted  In  the  wilder-
ness, to  assume  the  headship  and  mastery  of  the  old  creation.  Should  a  similar  marvel
be  suggested,  simply  to  emancipate  his  own  life  from  the  hard  and  mysterious  limi-
tations which  he  had  voluntarily  assumed  for  our  salvation,  he  would  reject  the
suggestion  with  indignation ;  yet,  if  such  acts  as  these,  by  change  of  circumstances,
could  become  occasions  for  manifesting  the  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,
for  making  known  the  royalty  of  Divine  love  to  men,  he  never  hesitated  to  feed  the
multitudes,  to  hush  the  tempest,  and  to  raise  the  dead.  So  now,  it  would  seem  from
John's  Gospel  that,  though  temptation  to  enter  the  teciple  by  m^ical  means  and  self-


INTRODUCTION  TO


glorying  pride  was  sternly  repudiated,  it  may  have  suggested  another  way  of  "  suddenly
coming  to  that  temple,"  ablaze  with  the  moral  earnestness  of  one  whose  zeal  consumed
him.  The  profanation  of  the  temple-oourts  by  the  huge  market  held  there  for  sacrificial
beasts,  and  also  for  exchanging  foreign  coin  with  the  holy  shekel,  roused  his  prophetic
soul.  He  asserted  the  sanctity  of  the  temple.  He  drove  the  priestly  traflSckers  from
the  sacred  enclosure  with  words  of  menace.  He  provoked  the  hostility  of  the  worldly
hierarchy.  He  encountered  the  first  murmur  of  the  storm  which  gathered  evermore  in
dark  and  angry  clouds,  until  the  temple  of  his  body  was  riven  in  the  lightning  of  the
wrath  which  the  devil's  advocacy  wuuld  have  tempted  him  to  placate  by  magical
compliances,  and  subdue  by  dazzling  symbols  of  his  power.  The  first  cleansing  of  the
temple  is  the  true  and  full  response  to  Satan's  ingenious  suggestion,  "If  thou  be  the
Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down."

The  form  and  meaning  of  the  third  temptation,  as  recorded  in  the  synoptic  Gospels,
derives  much  elucidation  from  the  Johannine  recognition  of  the  second.  "  The  devil
taketh  him  up  into  an  high  mountain,"  to  some  Nebo  or  Gerizim  height,  "whence  he
showed  to  him  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  a  moment  of  time.  And  the  devil  said
unto  him.  To  thee  will  I  give  all  this  authority,  and  the  glory  of  Aem :  for  it  hath
been  delivered  unto  me ;  and  to  whomsoever  I  will  I  give  it."  There  was  too  much
truth  in  this  boast  of  the  spirit  of  evil,  then  hiding  himself  in  the  robes  of  an  angel
of  light.  The  thrones  of  the  world,  from  Nimrod  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  from  the  Pharaohs
to  the  Caesars,  had  been  builded  with  blood,  defended  with  ambition  and  avarice,  and
often  decorously  veiled  by  splendid  achievement.  The  honours  of  the  world-kingdoms
are  won  still  and  retained  by  complicity  with  moral  wrong.  Even  the  scales  of
justice  have  been  loaded.  Antiquity  makes  respectable  what  conscience  condemns.
Those  who  seek  to  win  and  overtop  the  world  have  to  coincide  with  it  and  wink  at  its
evil.  The  prophets  of  the  Lord,  by  uncompromising  front,  have  dashed  themselves
against  the  fortress  of  the  world's  sin,  and  perished  in  the  attempt ;  have  sought  to
revolutionize  the  foundations  of  power  and  the  very  material  of  human  authority,  and
tliey  have  failed.  The  prince  of  this  world  has  been  too  strong  for  them ;  and  the  bad
succession  of  power  passes  on  from  race  to  lace,  and  from  generation  to  generation.
Now,  what  is  the  devil's  proposal  and  "temptation" — a  temptation  which  has  a  side  on
which  the  Son  of  God  could  feel  it  ?  Outspoken,  put  into  burning  words  it  was,  "  All
this  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  worship  me.  All  shall  be  thine  1 "  Who  is  the  giver  ?
The  object  of  momentary  worship  claims  to  be  the  source  of  all  earthly  power.  To
worship  the  devil  as  such  is  too  terrible  a  blasphemy  and  tpo  preposterous  an  absurdity
to  be  a  temptation  to  any  being  in  whom  conscience  is  not  absolutely  seared.  That
the  Holy  One  of  God  should  have  regarded  it  as  a  temptation  shows  that  by  this
worship  was  meant  the  honour  due  to  possession  and  stability  in  human  affairs.  The
temptation  must  have  taken  some  such  shape  as  this:  "Do  not  commence  the  warfare
with  human  disobedience  by  demanding  fundamental  changes  of  the  ultimate  and
deepest  .sources  of  power.  Eecognize  the  authority  and  power  of  the  world  as  it  is.
Utilize  its  follies.  Compromise  with  existing  ideas.  Bear  with  a  temple  that  is
profaned;  do  not  attempt  to  cleanse  it.  Accept  the  priesthood  as  it  stands.  Accede
to  the  dominant  and  exacting  tradition.  Obey  the  sabbatic  law  as  it  has  been  inter-
preted by  eager  legalists.  All  the  powers  of  the  world  from  Caiaphas  to  Tiberius,  all
the  wealth  and  all  the  honours  of  every  state,  will  be  at  thy  disposal  if  thou  wilt
worship  me,  if  thou  wilt  even  allow,  or  partially  recognize,  the  divinity  of  the  world-
power  as  it  stands."  When  translated  into  any  language  in  which  it  is  intelligible,  it
is  but  in  other  words  the  plausible  pantheistic  glorification  of  evil.  Subtle  as  the
temptation  was,  screened  behind  an  effulgence  of  promise,  the  Son  of  God  strips  it  of  all
disguise.  With  courage,  he  calls  the  accuser  of  the  holiest  things  by  his  true  name :
"  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan.  It  is  written.  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and
him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  Any  and  every  admission  on  his  part  of  the  legitimacy
of  expedient  sin  is  resisted.  No  acceptance  of  any  power  but  that  which  is  based  on
righteousness,  and  no  compromise  with  evil,  can  be  tolerated.  Earthly  dignity  nmk
and  kingship  are  not  passports  into  the  kingdom  over  which  he  presided.  Whatever
be  the  issue,  God's  will  must  be  the  supreme  law  of  life.

Such  seems,  in  brief,  to  be  the  lesson  of  the  third  temptation,  regarded  as  the  devil's
masterpiece,  and  made  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  Lord's  mujistry.


THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  elU


The  question  arises — Does  the  Fourth  Gospel  record,  at  this  particular  epoch  of  Christ's

life,  any  corresponding  conflict  with  such  a  view  of  human  a£fairs  as  that  which  the

Divine  Lord  contemplated  and  indignantly  rejected  in  his  third  temptation  ?    («)  The

cleansing  of  the  temple  was  an  emphatic  repudiation  of  any  sacro-sanct  claims  inherent

in  venerable  sin.     (8)  An  incident  is  recorded  which  more  fully  illustrates  the  same

thought.     A  dignified   ecclesiastic  (ch.  iii.)  approached  our  Lord.     He  was  high  in

social  position,  and  of  great  repute.     He  was  a  teacher  of  Israel,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews.

He  came  with  compliment  and  self-importance.     "  We  know,"  said  he,  "  that  thou  art

a  Teacher  come  from  God :  for  no  man  can  do  the  sigos  which  thou  doest,  except  God

be  with  him"  (ch.  iii.  1,  2).     We,  the  Sanhedrin,  are  prepared  (he  implied),  on  our

own  terms,  and  retaining  all  our  high  position  as  the  rulers  and  teachers  of  the  people,

to  admit  your  right,  to  acknowledge  your  mission.    The  startling  reply  of  Jesus  is  in

subtle  and  close  harmony  with  the  reply  made  to  the  devil,  as  given  in  the  synoptic

Gospel;  it  was,  "Except  a  man  be  born  from  above,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."

Utter,  inmost,  radical,  moral  revolution  is  indispensable  to  a  place  in  the  kingdom  of

God.    No  compromise  with  prescriptive  or  traJitional  wrong-doing  is  possible.     A  high

position  in  the  Sanhedrin,  in  the  great  family  of  Annas,  in  the  Pharisaic  order,  or  in

Herod's  or  Pilate's  court,  is  not  of  the  feeblest  importance.     These  things  will  not

expiata  or  justify  a  single  infraction  of  the  eternal  law  of  righteousness.   The  kingdom  of

Messiah  is  not  a  kingdom  of  the  earth,  but  it  consists  exclusively  of  regenerated  men.

Nicodemus  answered,  "  How  caii  these  things  be  ? "    The  devil  vanished  before  the

tremendous  thrust,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou

serve."    (7)  When  our  Lord  was  seated  by  the  well,  some  analogous  problems  were

presented  to  him.  The  woman  said,  "Sir,  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  prophet" — "Decide

for  us  between  the  sacred  nationality  of  Samaria  and  Judiea,  between  the  rival  claims  of

the  sanctuary  of  Gerizim  and  of  Jerusalem.  Determine  the  authority  and  glory  of  each."

Christ  rose  at  once  above  the  controversy  between  these  rival  nationalities,  and  indeed

above  the  clashing  interests  of  all  opposing  states,  in  the  sublime  reply,  "Woman,

believe  me,  the  hour  cometh,  when  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  shall

ye  worship  the  Father."    Kingdoms  of  the  world,  sacred  shrines,  holy  places,  have  no

part  in  Messiah's  kingdom,     "  They  that  worship  the  Father  must  worship  him  in  spirit

and  in  truth."    "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve."

The  simple  coexistence  of  these  two  analogous  streams  of  Divine  self-revelation  is

suggestive.     The  Fourth  Gospel  does  not  "pulverize"  the  synoptic  narrative  on  the

one  hand,  nor  on  the  other  does  that  wonderful  recital  so  stamp  the  life  and  mission

of  the  Lord  as  to  render  the  Johannine  representation  unhistorioal.    On  the  contrary,

the  story  of  Jesus  at  Cana  and  at  Jacob's  well,  the  cleansing  of  the  temple,  and  tlie

thunderclap  which  broke  over  the  night  of  Nicodemus,  run  in,  strange  and  undesigned

harmony  with  the  story  of  the  temptation.     The  Fourth  Gospel  places  in  the  exact

chronological  position  occupied  by  the  temptation  of  Jesus  a  series  of  closely  interlaced

events  which  reproduce  the  temptations  themselves  and  repeat  the  victory.     The

Personality  of  the  Johannine  Christ  is  none  other  than  that  of  the  synoptists.

(6)  The  omission  of  the  Transfiguration.  The  Transfiguration,  as  recorded  in  Matt,
xvii.  and  parallel  passages,  would  have  sustained  the  thesis  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,
would  have  assisted  the  readers  of  it  to  recognize  the  supreme  claims  of  him  over  .
whom  heaven  opened,  with  whom  Moses  and  Elijah  conversed,  and  whose  counte-
nance shone  with  a  brightness  greater  than  the  sun's  at  noonday.  The  voice  from
the  excellent  glory  would  have  uttered  the  most  powerful  comment  on  the  great
theme,  "  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God."  The  assumption  is  that  one  of  the
three  who  were  with  Christ  on  the  holy  mount  wrote  the  Fourth  Gospel.  On
what  principle  did  he  omit  the  narrative?  If  the  insight  that  the  beloved  disciple
obtained  into  the  heart  of  Jesus  gave  him  a  higher  and  larger  conception  of  the  glory
of  the  Lord  than  this  vision  of  his  physical  capacity  and  resources,  we  can  be  satisfied
that  he  held  his  peace  concerning  an  event  so  widely  diffused,  and  one  which,  on
the  hypothesis  of  his  authorship  of  the  Apocalypse,  he  had  far  transcended.  But
the  Gospel  is  saturated  with  the  idea  which  found  expression  on  the  mount  of
Transfiguration.  In  ch.  i.  14,  "  We  saw  his  glory,  the  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten
of  the  Father;"  in  ch.  i.  17  the  grace  and  truth  of  Christ  is  contrasterl  with  the  Law-
giving of  Moses,;  and  the  great  Name  of  the  Lord,  tha^  of  the  only  begotten  Son,  is


Ow  tNTEODtJCTION  TO


the  climax  of  the  prologue.  Moreover,  the  Elijah  of  the  new  covenant  converses  with
his  own  disciples  touching  the  mystery  of  Christ's  sacrificial  death,  the  decease  which
he  would  accomplish  at  Jerusalem  (ch.  i.  29).  Jesus  manifested  his  glory  (riiv  S^Jok  airoS)
at  Cana  (ch.  ii.  11 ;  xii.  41).  Nathanael  was  promised  the  vision  of  the  opening  of
heaven  over  the  Son  of  man  (ch.  i.  51);  and  in  ch.  xii.  28  we  hear  empliatically  of  a  voice
from  heaven,  which  declared  "  that  Heaven  had  glorified  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  and
would  do  so  again."  It  is  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  we  read  of  "  light  and  gl  )ry  "  visible  to
the  spiritual  eye,  and  that  a  revelation  of  the  Father  was  made  to  those  who  apprehended
his  Sonship.  The  prologue  is  rich  in  the  utterance  of  this  thought.  "  The  life  "  that
was  in  the  Logos  was  "  the  light  of  men"  (ch.  i.  4,  note).  The  light  which  before  the
Incarnation  and  ever  since  has  been  shining  into  the  darkness — "  that  light  has  come
into  the  world "  (ch.  i.  9).  Christ's  own  declarations  convey  the  same  thought,  and
assert  the  testing  force  of  such  a  revelation  of  the  archetypal  light  (ch.  iii.  19 — 21).
To  the  same  image  Christ  reverted  on  two  subsequent  occasions.  In  ch.  viiL  12  he
claimed  to  be  "  the  Light  of  the  world ; "  and  in  ch.  ix.  5,  before  he  proceeded  to
illumine  the  dark  eyes  of  the  blind  man,  he  said,  "  Whensoever  I  am  in  the  world,  I
am  the  Light  of  the  world."  In  ch.  xiv.  21  he  claimed  that  through  and  to  "love"
the  manifestation  should  be  made.  Nowhere,  certainly,  more  than  in  John's  Grpspel  do
we  learn  that  the  highest  radiance  falls  on  those  who  receive,  adore,  and  love.  John
tells  us  in  his  Epistle  that  "he  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not."  Consequently,  the
evangelist  learned  throughout  his  career,  and  from  an  early  introduction  to  Christ,  that
the  highest  glory  and  most  vivid  illumination  were  matters  of  spiritual  sympathy  and
the  revelations  of  love.  The  mountain  of  Transfiguration,  though  it  conveyed  the
same  ideas  to  him  along  the  old  theophanic  lines,  yet  sank,  after  the  lapse  of  years,  into
comparative  oblivion  for  him,  in  comparison  with  the  veritable  illumination  that  love
always  searches  for  and  finds.

Again,  the  account  of  the  Transfiguration  is  the  record  of  the  final  effect  made
by  the  early  Galilsean  ministry  upon  difierent  classes.  The  synoptists  record  the
impression  produced  upon  the  following  groups  successively :  upon  the  brethren  of
Jesus;  upon  his  own  townsfolk;  upon  the  multitudes;  upon  those  diseased;  upon
little  children;  upon  fallen  women;  upon  John  the  Baptist;  upon  Herod  Antipas;
upon  the  Pharisaic  party ;  upon  the  world  of  unseen  and  evil  spirits ;  upon  the
twelve  disciples;  upon  Peter  especially;  and  finally  upon  the  heavenly  world,  and  upon
the  eternal  Father.  The  scene  of  the  Transfiguration  is  a  fitting  climax  to  a  vast
group  of  testimonies.  There  is  no  such  place  prepared  for  it  in  John's  Gospel,  nor  is
it  essential  to  the  completion  of  any  series  of  related  events.  The  highest  truth  taught
in  the  Transfiguration  was  universalized,  and  became  a  sacred  doctrine  in  the  words,
"  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words ;  and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will
come,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."  And  where  Jesus  prays  "  that  the  glory  which
he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was  "  may  encompass  him,  "  and  that  his
own  disciples  may  see  it "  (ch.  xvii.  5,  24).

The  unity  of  the  Christ  of  the  synoptists  and  the  Christ  of  the  fourth  evangelist  ig
apparent  enough.  The  omission  by  the  latter  of  this  event  is  justified  by  his  obvious
enlargement  of  all  the  ideas  of  the  Transfiguration,  viz.  the  inherent  fulness  of  being,
power,  and  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  his  at-homeness  in  heaven ;  the  desire  of
the  Christ  that  by  any  means  and  by  full  revelation  of  himself  his  disciples  should
see  the  essential  Divineness  of  his  life.  Prejudice  has  been  excited  against  the  author
by  this  method  of  his  proof  of  the  greatest  glories  ot  his  Lord ;  but  the  reflection  that
the  disciple  looked  back  through  the  vista  of  years  upon  the  events  and  teachings  of
Christ,  is  more  than  explanation  of  his  choice.  The  doctrine  of  John  render^  the
recorded  foct  of  the  Transfiguration  ccmprehensible.

The  omission  cannot  be  put  down  to  the  unwillingness  of  John  to  deal  with  the
transcendental  revelations  of  Christ.  The  Apocalypse  is  adequate  proof  of  that  for
those  who  believe  that  he  is  its  author ;  but  so  also  is  the  Gospel ;  for  the  latter  is  not
silent  about  the  special  and  unique  functions  and  characteristics  of  the  body  of  the
Lord,  e.g.  his  walking  upon  the  sea ;  the  physical  effect  produced  upon  the  temple
guards  by  his  majestic  glance;  the  obvious  alarm  produced  in  the  mind  of  Pilate  by
his  look  and  word ;  the  miraculous  accompaniments  of  hia  death  in  the  stream  of  blood
and  water  that  issued  from  his  Me.


THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  ct

(c)  The  omission  of  the  institution  of  tlie  LorcPt  Supper.  This  circumstance  is
without  doubt  perplexing,  if  we  are  looking  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  for  a  complete
biography  from  an  apostolic  standpoint.  But  we  must  refer  again  to  the  fragmentary
nature  of  this  Gospel,  which  is  as  conspicuous  as  the  fragmentary  character  of  each  of
the  synoptics.  Now,  when  "John"  wrote  it  the  Church  was  an  organized  institution,
which,  had  passed  through  the  severe  ordeals  of  transplantation  from  Jerusalem  to
Antioch,  to  Corinth,  to  Alexandria,  to  Bphesus,  and  to  Rome.  Throughout  the  Roman
world  the  Holy  Supper  had  a  recognized  place.  The  authentic  Epistles  of  Paul  to
Corinth  show  incontestably  the  grounds  on  which  the  universal  custom  rested.  The
synoptic  Gospels  had  long  since  presented,  with  instructive  Hifferences  and  side-lights,
the  historic  origin  of  the  ceremony ;  and  it  was  therefore  far  more  probable  that  the
apostle  should  have  felt  himself  free  to  set  forth  some  of  its  fundamental  ideas  and  the
deepest  truths  connoted  by  it,  than  that  a  theological  writer  of  the  second  century,
claiming  to  be  an  apostle,  should  have  taken  such  a  course.  Such  a  writer  could  not
be  by  any  possibility  ignorant  of  the  reputed  origin  of  the  well-known  rite ;  nor  would
he  have  dared  to  omit  it.  The  omission,  with  a  reason,  justifies  apostolic  authorship.
Let  it  be  observed  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  records  the  occurrence  of  a  feast  on  the
night  of  the  Passion,  and  one  iti  which  the  Lord, "  having  loved  his  own,  loved  them  to
the  end,"  or  "  manifested  that  love  even  to  the  uttermost."  It  is  in  the  folds  and
clauses  of  this  wonderful  sentence  (ch.  xiii.  1,  2)  that  the  best  place  is  to  be  found  for
the  institution  of  the  Supper.  The  entire  discourse  that  follows  (ch.  xiii. — xvii.)  is
charged  with  the  ideas  involved  in  the  Bucharistic  service.  A  few  of  these  may  be
indicated,  (a)  The  mutual  affection  and  reciprocal  devotion  to  be  cherished  by  the
disciples.  (j8)  The  necessity  or  incumbent  duty  of  these  disciples  to  receive  Christ
himself  into  their  inmost  nature,  to  take  hold  of  him,  and  to  find  in  doing  it  that  they
were  receiving  him  that  sent  him  (ch.  xiii.  20).  (7)  "  The  new  commandment,"
suggested  in  the  anticipated  betrayal  by  the  eon  of  perdition,  and  the  foreseen  denial
by  Peter.  (S)  The  prediction  of  Chiist's  speedy  departure  from  them,  but  his  con-
tinuous work  for  them,  the  promise  of  a  return  after  that  departure,  both  in  a  physical
and  spiritual  fashion  (ch.  xiv.  28 ;  xvi.  17 — 23).  (e)  Above  all,  the  repeated  affirma-
tion of  the  intimate,  mystic.  Divine  union  between  himself  and  his  disciples,  and  even
between  himseU  And  "those  also  who  should  believe  on  him  through  their  [the
apostles']  word."  This  was  to  be  effected  by  his  departure,  followed  by  his  spiritual
return.

Not  only  do  many  of  the  ideas  of  the  Eucharist  thus  find  expression,  but  it  is
obvious  that  in  ch.  vi.  the  mysterious  phraseology  used  in  the  institution  of  the  Supper
had  been  anticipated.  Our  Lord  had  spoken  of  faith  in  himself  under  the  imagery  of
"eating  his  flesh  and  drinking  his  blood."  The  flesh  of  Christ  was  "veritable  food,"
the  blood  of  Christ  "  veritable  drink."  In  other  words,  his  cruel  death,  if  accepted  as
the  climax  of  all  his  work,  would  be  the  life  of  those  who  should  believe  in  it.  Apart
from  such  participation,  no  life  was  possible.  "  He  that  eateth  me,"  said  Christ,  "  even
he  shall  live  because  of  me"  (ch.  vi.  57).  The  first  presentation  of  this  thought,  the
earliest  expression  of  this  intimate  union  with  and  participation  of  Christ,  is  set  forth
under  the  image  of  "  eating  the  Bread  of  life  "  (ch.  vi.  50),  accepting  the  truth  of  the
Divine  commission  and  nature  of  the  Christ,  admitting  the  fact  that  he  came  down
from  heaven,  that  he  came  with  measureless  capacity  and  resources  to  satisfy  the
hunger  and  thirst  of  mankind,  to  give  eternal  life,  and  to  raise  up  the  possessors  of
eternal  life  at  the  last  day  (ch.  vi.  35 — iO).  The  next  stage  is  the  full  apprehension
of  the  Incarnation,  and  that  his  humanity  itself,  being  a  manhood  whose  entrance
into  the  world  was  unique,  had  become  the  accessible  form  of  the  living  Bread,  the
embodiment  of  a  visible  eternal  truth.  The  glory  of  God  was  seen  and  was  offered  to
man  in  his  humanity,  in  his  God-Manhood.  This  idea  naturally  perplexed  some  of  his
followers,  but  it  intensified  the  faith  of  others.  Christ  discriminated  once  more,  and
laid  emphasis,  not  only  on  the  apprehension  of  his  "  fiesh,"  but  also  of  his  "  blood,"  not
only  of  the  blood  which  is  the  life,  but  of  the  shed  blood,  making  it  evident  that  the
death  of  the  Divine  humanity  was  an  integral  part  of  the  mission  from  heaven,  or,  as
we  have  it  in  the  synoptics,  that  he  would  give  his  life  "a  ransom  in  place  ,of  many."
He  declared  that  we  have  to  drink  this  blood,  to  appreciate,  to  accept,  and  to  assimilate
as  spiritual  food,  the  stupendous  idea  of  the  death  of  the  Christ  of  God.     Apart  from


cvl  INTRODUCTION  TO


that,  there  is  no  life  in  us.  This  principle  heing  reiterated  (ch.  vi.  54 — 56),  the  Lord
declares, "  He  that  eateth  me  "  (an  expression  which  enlarges  and  completes  the  previous
statement)  "shall  live  because  of  me."  After  the  expansion  and  interpretation  of  the
original  thought,  he  returns  back  to  it  again ;  "  Tbis  is  the  bread,"  etc.  (ch.  vi  58).
Now,  which  is  the  more  rational  hypothesis  ?  Did  an  unknown  writer  of  the  second
century,  by  this  insertion  of  oh.  vi.  35 — 60,  and  by  subsequent  omission  of  the  institu-
tion of  the  Supper,  intend  to  throw  discredit  upon  the  latter  1  or  did  the  beloved  disciple,
upon  whom  this  wonderful  discourse  made  indelible  impression,  record  the  first  occasion
(by  no  means  the  only  occasion)  when  Jesus  spoke  of  his  Divine  humanity  and  his
cruel  death,  and  of  faith  in  his  Divinity  and  sacrifice  as  the  condition  of  life  ?  and,  having
done  so,  did  the  evangelist  omit  the  record  of  the  well-known  Eucharist  to  show  still
more  fully  what  he  understood  the  Master  to  have  meant  by  eating  the  body  and
drinking  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  ?

The  discourse  in  Capernaum,  and  the  valedictory  discourse  at  Jerusalem,  are  alike
charged  with  the  ideas,  principles,  and  lessons  which  the  constantly  repeated  Eucharist
impressively  symbolizes.  It  may  be  asked  why  should  St.  John  omit  the  symbol,  the
concrete  embodiment  of  spiritual  ideas  with  which  he  was  familiar?  Why  should  St.
John  pass  over  the  origin  of  an  institution  which  is  so  well  adapted  to  conserve  the  most
impressive  lessons  which  he  proves  the  Lord  to  have  given  in  other  forms  ?  In  reply  we
say :  (o)  The  repudiation  of  symbolic  event  was  not  his  universal  custom.  The  concrete
embodiment  and  positive  expression  in  historic  fact  of  the  ideas  of  the  Temptation  are
proof  that  he  did  not  as  a  habit  turn  from  historic  facts  to  spiritual  phenomena,  but
even  reversed  the  process.  (|8)  The  dawning  superstition  which  began  to  enwrap  the
simple  ritual  may  explain  the  reticence  of  the  apostle  with  reference  to  its  origination.
(y)  The  fourth  evangelist  does,  however,  record  illustrations  of  the  symbolic  method.
By  recording  the  washing  the  disciples'  feet  (ch.  xiii.  8),  the  spiritual  significance  of
miracles  on  the  blind  and  dead  (ch.  ix.  39 ;  xi.  25),  the  breathing  on  the  apostles  that
they  might  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  (ch.  xx.  22),  the  author  proved  that  he  was  not  a
bigoted  spiiitualist,  or  indifferent  to  visible  symbols  of  eternal  truth.  Consequently,  the
omission  of  the  well-known  story  of  the  "  institution  "  is  charged  with  high  interpreta-
tive force.

(d)  The  omission  of  the  agony  in  the  garden.  The  silence  of  the  fourth  evangelist
touching  "  the  agony  "  in  the  garden  is  very  noticeable.  There  are,  however,  several
distinct  correspondences  of  time  and  place.  The  writer  (ch.  xviii.  1)  shows  that
he  was  acquainted  with  and  vividly  recalled  both.  He  records  the  fact  of  the  Lord's
crossing  the  stream  of  Kedron  and  reaching  a  garden  (k^ttos  more  accurately  describes
the  scene  than  the  x^pi""  of  Matthew  and  Mark,  or  the  tivos  of  Luke),  which  witnessed
the  cruel  betrayal  of  the  Son  of  maui  Several  impressive  features  are  preserved  by  the
fourth  evangelist.  It  was  "a  -riwos  to  which  Jesus  often  resorted" — a  quiet  resting-
place.  The  party  of  the  Pharisees,  "  with  lanterns  and  torches,"  had  been  seen  by  the
watchful  eye  of  the  evangelist  descending  the  steep  slopes  below  the  eity  walls.  Sundry
notes  of  identity  with  the  synoptic  account  discover  themselves;  e.g.  the  servant  of  the
high  priest  is  referred  to  by  the  synoptists,  but  his  name  is  given  here,  and  the
right  ear  which  he  lost  at  the  hand  of  Simon  Peter  is  also  specified  ;  the  allusion  to
"  twelve  legions  of  angels  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  53)  is  curiously  confirmed  by  the  writer's  state-
ment that  a  x'^'apxos  (ch.  xviii.  12)  was  in  command,  showing  that  a  legion  of  Roman
soldiers  was  ready  to  suppress  a  revolt  should  one  aiiao;  and,  finally,  the  language  of
our  Lord  to  Peter  (ch.  xviii.  11),  "  The  cup  which  my  Father  giveth  me  to  drink,  shnll
I  not  drink  it?"  forcibly  recalls  the  solemn  language  (Matt.  xxvi.  39;  Mark  xiv.  36  •
Luke  xxii.  42),  "  Take  this  cup  from  me:  yet  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Never-
theless, it  is  most  certain  that  the  tone  of  matchless  patience  and  courage,  the  mien  of
ineffable  dignity,  with  which  the  Lord  met  and  rebuked  the  guard,  and  proved  the
Imperial  power  he  could  have  wielded  (if  he  had  chosen)  for  the  utter  discomfiture  of
his  enemies,  form  a  striking  contrast  with  the  scene  which  John  must  have  witnessed
in  the  depth  of  that  olive  shade.  Luke  himself  may  have  even  learned  from  John  the
terrible  transaction  he  recorded  (xxii.  43, 44).  Why,  then,  should  the  evangelist  have
omitted  it?  Why,  in  place  of  the  agonizing,  bleeding  sacrifice,  with  strong  crying  and
tears,  does  he  give  us  an  imperial  potentate,  a  match  for  all  the  devilry  of  Judas  and
all  the  malice  of  the  Pharisees,  and  all  the  power  of  Caisai-  ?     No  hint  of  weakness  oi


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


victoiy  over  Ms  own  feelings,  but  an  appropriate  historic  close  to  the  sublime  inter-
cession of  ch.  xvii.  According  to  Keim,  if  this  account  be  historic,  the  synoptists'
narrative  is  utterly  "pulverized."  Let  two  or  three  remarks  be  allowed  their  fair
weight.  It  is  the  method  of  this  evangelist  to  make  frequent,  nay  perpetual,  gaps  in
his  narrative,  bringing  into  apparent  juxtaposition  events  which  are  separated  not  only
by  hours,  but  by  days  and  months  of  thrilling  interest.  The  hour  and  power  of  dark-
ness did  intervene  between  the  intercession  and  the  betrayal.  When  Jesus  came  forth
from  the  garden,  the  darkest  hour  was  over.  The  "  Thy  will  be  done  "  had  consecrated
Gethsemane  and  humanity  itself.  77ie  moment  for  action  had  arrived,  the  bracing  that
comes  from  the  arrival  of  the  climax  had  supervened.  The  angel  had  strengthened  him.
He  had  been  heard  for  his  godly  fear  (Heb.  v.  7).  Even  the  synoptists  show  that  there
was  no  shrinking,  no  bloody  sweat  now,  but  the  forthcoming  of  miraculous  energy  to
heal  Malchus  (Luke  xxii.  51),  a  willingness  to  rebuke  the  rabble  that  had  come  under
protection  of  the  Eoman  guard,  and  the  utterance  of  words  to  Judas  that  drove  him
to  despair.  The  contrast  between  John  and  the  synoiJtists  is  not  in  the  outward
demeanour  of  Jesus,  which  all  four  evangelists  describe  in  corresponding  though  not  in
identical  phrase,  but  in  the  omission  by  John  and  the  insertion  by  Matthew  and  Luke
of  the  great  victory  which  the  suffering  Lord  had  won  over  the  prince  of  this  world.
Just  as  the  Fourth  Gospel  takes  up  the  ministry  of  the  Baptist  at  the  point  where  the
synoptists  laid  it  down,  and  as  the  writer  omits  long  and  wonderful  scenes  from  the
trial  before  Oaiaphas  which  would  have  sustained  the  general  thesis  of  his  own  Gospel
— omitted  because  the  whole  narrative  had  been  abundantly  illustrated  in  the  current
Gospels — so  now  he  omits  the  awful  record  of  the  inner  life  of  Jesus  given  by  the
synoptists,  and  simply  records  the  manner  of  his  capture  and  its  sublime  accompaniments.
But  the  reason  for  the  omission  must  be  profoundly  different  from  that  attributed  to
the  author  by  the  school  of  Baur.  The  fourth  evangelist  does  not  ignore  the  sorrow
and  weakness  of  the  Lord.  His  appiehension  of  desertion,  his  suffering  from  the
hatred  of  the  world,  his  bitter  sense  of  the  cruelty  of  the  "  son  of  perdition,"  are  seen
(ch.  xvi.  2,  3,  32 ;  xvii.  12 ;  xv.  18,  22—24).  In  ch.  xiv.  30  Christ  admitted  that  the
prince  of  this  world  "  cometh,"  though  he  added,  "  he  hath  nothing  in  me."

In  Christ's  approach  to  the  grave  of  Lazarus  (ch.  xi.  33 — 35)  we  have  one  of  the
most  explicit  revelations  contained  in  the  entire  Gospels  of  how  the  Lord  took  human
sorrow  and  all  the  mystery  of  death  upon  himself,  and  broke  out  into  sighs,  groans,
and  tears.  But,  more  than  all,  the  words  of  Jesus  to  the  Greeks  who  souglit  to  see
him  are  a  veritable  anticipation  of  the  agony  of  the  garden  (oh.  xii.  23 — 33).  His
soul  was  "troubled."  He  was  ready  to  cry,  "  Father,  save  me  from  tliis  hour."  The
sense  of  his  mission  led  him  t(.>  cry,  "  Father,  glorify  thy  Name  1 "  Moreover,  the
entire  Gospel  from  end  to  end  is  written  under  the  shadow  of  the  cross.  One  of  its
chief  notes  is  struck  by  the  Baptist:  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God!"  The  first  "sign"  in
Jerusalem  was  a  prelude  of  the  final  tragedy.  Every  paragraph  reveals  the  darkness
in  angry  conflict  with,  the  light,  while  in  ever-varying  circumstances  the  Lord  pro-
claims that,  however  hard  to  flesh  and  blood,  yet  the  law  of  his  being  was  to  finish  the
work  which  the  Father  had  given  him  to  do  (ch.  iv.  34 ;  v.  30 ;  vi.  38  ;  viii.  29,  38 ;
xvii.  4).  The  "  agony  "  of  the  synoptic  Gospels  is  spread  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  over
the  entire  evangel,  from  the  wilderness  of  Juda;a  to  the  cross  itself,  just  as  the  "  Temp-
tation" is  obviously  diffused  throughout  the  mystery  of  his  incarnation,  and  just  as
the  Transfiguration  aureole  of  the  synoptists  gleams  through  every  cloud,  from  the  glory
he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,  till  he  ascends  in  very  deed  to  his  Father
and  our  Father,  to  his  God  and  our  God.

(e)  The  omission  of  the  visible  ascension  of  the  glorified  body  of  the  Lord  is  a  peculiarity
which  the  Fourth  Gospel  shares  with  the  First  Gospel,  and,  unless  the  closing  appendix
to  Mark's  narrative  be  genuine,  with  the  Second  Gospel  also.  We  owe  this  comforting
and  inspiring  assurance  to  Luke  and  to  Paul.  If  the  identity  of  authorship  of  the  Apo-
calypse and  Fourth  Gespel  may  be  assumed — a  fact  which,  with  all  its  prima  facie  diflS-
culties,  will,  we  believe,  ultimately  prevail — we  see  that  the  apostle  had  given  the  Church
abtmdant  proof,  from  his  own  prophetic  intuition  and  wondrous  vision,  that  Jesus  was
seated  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  wore  still  the  signs  and  proofs  of  his  awful  human
and  earthly  experience.  He  saw  liim  as  King  of  kings,  as  a  Lamb  of  God,  appearing  as
though  he  had  been  slain,  as  one  who  "liveth,  and  was  dead,  and  is  alive  for  evermore."


erlil  INTRODUCTION  TO


The  ApocalTpse,  with  it»  promise  of  the  Lord's  return  in  majesty  to  claim  his  own,  to
judge  the  dead,  small  and  great,  was  the  Johanuine  record  of  the  Ascension.  But  this
18  not  all.  Jesus  is  represented  in  the  Gospel  as  in  the  fulness  of  his  Divine  nature  being
in  heaven,  although  accessible  to  men  on  earth.  He  came  down  from  heaven.  He
commenced  a  manifestation  in  the  flesh — he  who  was  for  evermore  in  heaven  (eh.  iii.  13).
But  more  than  this,  he  forewarned  those  who  doubted  the  possibility  of  eating  his  flesh
aud  drinking  his  blood,  that  the  time  was  coming  when  some  at  least  should  see  him
"  ascend  to  where  he  was  before "  (ch.  vi.  62).  He  told  the  Magdalene  that  he  was
about  to  "ascend  to  the  Father"  (oh.  xx  17),  and,  when  that  was  effected,  she  might
with  the  touch  of  the  Spirit  grasp  and  hold  him  fast.  So  though  the  formal  and  stately
departure  of  his  corporeal  manifestation  is  not  again  recited,  all  the  conditions  on  whicli
it  rests  are  more  abundantly  exhibited  by  John  than  by  either  of  the  synoptist*.  Wa
now  proceed  to  notice —

(3)  Incidental  allusions  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  features  of  Christ's  teaching  and
imagery  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the  synoptists.  These  allusions  reveal  an
identity  of  personage  in  the  sublime  character  they  all  alike  portray.  "  The  bride  and
bridegroom"  in  Matt.  ix.  15,  given  in  special  reference  to  the  questions  raised  by  dis-
ciples of  John  the  Baptist,  is  curiously  consonant  with  John's  language  about  the  bride,
the  bridegroom,  and  friend  of  the  biidegroom  (see  notes,  ch.  iii.  29).  The  reference  to
the  harvest  in  ch.  iv.  35  corresponds  to  the  frequent  employment  of  the  same  imagery
in  Matt.  ix.  37  and  xiii.  30.    The  comparison  of  the  vine  in  ch.  xv.  1  with  Matt.  xxi.  33.

Numerous  sayings  which  are  attributed  to  Jesus  by  the  synoptists  fell  from  his
lips  amid  other  circumstances,  as  Matt.  xiii.  57 ;  Mark  vi.  4 ;  Luke  iv.  24,  where  the
diminished  honour  of  a  prophet  amongst  his  own  people  is  referred  to.  This  finds  a
striking  though  difficult  occasion  on  ch.  iv.  44  (see  notes).  The  remarkable,  para-
doxical saying,  "  He  that  loveth  his  life  loseth  it,"Jetc.  (ch.  xii.  25),  is  repeated  twice  in
Matthew  (x.  39 ;  xvi.  25)  aud  Luke  (xvii.  33).  The  proverbial  utterance  (ch.  xiii.  16),
"The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lonl,"  is  repeated  with  rich  variety  of  illustration  in
Luke  vi.  40  and  Matt.  x.  24.  And  ch.  xiii.  20,  "  He  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  shall
send,  receiveth  me ;  he  that  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that  sent  me,"  must  be  com
pared  with  Matt.  x.  40  and  Luke  x.  16.  The  mode  of  calling  the  impotent  man, "  Rise,
take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk,"  in  ch.  v.  8,  verbally  agrees  with  the  summons  given  to  the
paralytic  in  Mark  ii.  9.  In  ch.  vi.  20,  "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid,"  closely  corresponds
with  Matt.  xiv.  27.  The  idiomatic  expression,  "taste  of  death,"  is  found  ch.  viii.  52  and
Mark  ix.  1.  The  awfnl  announcement  (ch.  xiii.  21),  "One  ofyou  shall  betray  me,"  must
be  compared  with  Matt.  xxvi.  21  and  Mark  xiv.  18.  There  is  curious  correspondence
as  to  the  value  and  quantity  of  bread  required  for  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  (ch.
vi.  7  and  Mark  vi.  37).  The  description  of  believing  union  with  himself  as  "coming  "  to
him  is  common  to  ch.  vi.  37  and  Matt.  xi.  28 ;  and  ch.  vi.  46  should  also  be  compared
with  Matt.  xi.  27.  Our  Lord's  obnoxiousness  to  the  Pharisees  on  the  sabbatic  question
is  expressed  in  much  the  same  form  in  ch.  ix.  16  and  Mutt.  xii.  2.  His  startling  language
about  the  poor,  in  ch.  xii.  8,  is  found  also  in  Matt.  xxvi.  11 ;  the  idiosyncratic  expression,
"  He  that  sent  me,"  in  ch.  xii.  44  and  Luke  ix.  48.  The  promise  that  he  gave,  to  come
again  and  abide  with  his  disciples  (ch.  xiv.  18,  19),  is  grandly  represented  in  Matt,
xxviii.  20.  The  warnings  of  future  distress  to  his  disciples  (ch.  xvi.  1,  2)  should  bo
compared  with  Matt.  x.  17 ;  xiii.  21.  Numerous  correspondences  may  be  also  noticed
between  the  statements  of  John  and  the  synoptists  with  reference  to  the  trial-scenes,
notwithstanding  the  characteristic  differences.  These  allusive  and  varied  harmonies
must  be  added  to  all  the  other  facts  alleged  to  show  that  the  great  Personage  referred
to  in  the  synoptist  and  Fourth  Gospels  is  identical.  They  both  alike  show  that  "  never
man  spake  like  this  man."  (Of.  here  table  by  Godet, '  Gospel,'  vol.  i.  p.  155  ;  Luthardt,
'St.  John  the  Author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,'  pp.  232 — 235.)  The  following  are  important:
In  Matt.  xxvi.  61 ;  xxvii.  40 ;  Mark  xiv.  58 ;  xv.  29,  there  is  distinct  reference  to
words  of  Jesus  whicli  are  to  he  found  only  in  ch.  ii.  19,  "  Destroy  this  temple,"  etc.
The  great  utterance  in  ch.  vi.  35,  "  He  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger,"  etc.
corresponds  with  Matt.  v.  6.  Ch.  xii.  7  most  curiously  corresponds  with  Mark  xiv.  8.
The  bitter  cry  in  ch.  xii.  27  must  be  compared  with  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  and  ch.  xiii.  3
with  Matt.  xi.  27.  The  reference  to  the  cock-crowing  in  ch.  xiii.  38  with  Matt.  xxvi.
34;  Mark  xjy,  30;  Luke  xxii.  34;  and  ch.  xv.  20,  21  with  Matt.  x.  2J,  25;  and  ch."


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  dx

zviiL  11  with  Matt.  zxvi.  29;  and  oh.  xviii.  20  with  Matt.  xzvi.  65 ;  and  ch.  xviiL  37
with  Matt,  zxvii.  11.

(4)  The  sMle  indications  of  identity  of  character  aire  not  leas  wonderful.^  (o)  The
delicate  sensitiveness  of  Christ  to  the  special  and  varied  interests  of  those  with  whom  he
comes  into  contact  meets  us  throughout  the  synoptist  narrative ;  e.g.  in  taking  children
to  his  arms,  just  when  others  would  drive  them  away ;  his  pitying  the  mothers  in  the
approaching  siegs  of  Jerusalem ;  his  touching  the  loathsome  leper ;  the  language  to
the  woman  with  the  issue  of  blood,  "  Daughter,  he  of  good  comfort ; "  his  taking  the
father  and  mother  of  the  maiden  into  the  room  where  he  was  ahout  to  raise  her  from
the  dead,  with  "  Give  her  something  to  eat ; "  the  "  Weep  not "  to  the  widow  of  Nain ;
the  arranging  of  the  five  thousand'in  companies  of  fifty;  the  "Sufier  ye  thus  far"
in  the  healing  of  Malchus ; — are  all  illustrations  that  might  be  multiplied.  But  in  the
Fourth  Gospel  we  have  his  language  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  "  Go,  call  thy  husband  ;  "
his  phrase  to  the  impotent  man,  and  the  woman  taken  in  adultery,  "  Go,  sin  no  more  ; "
the  circumstance  that  he  "found"  the  excommunicated  once-bUnd  beggar  in  the
misery  to  which  he  had  been  brought  by  his  loyalty;  his  coming  to  the  grave  of
Lazarus  with  groans  and  tears  of  sympathy ;  the  "  Loose  him,  and  let  him  go,"  of  the
same  narrative;  the  soothing  of  the  perturbed  spirits  of  the  apostles  with  "It  is  I;  be
not  afraid ; "  his  sympathy  even  with  the  perturbations  of  Filate ;  the  "  Woman,  behold
thy  son,"  uttered  from  the  cross.

(V)  The  tact  of  Jesus,  not  only  in  his  beneficence,  but  in  his  controversial  method,
and  his  self-defence.  In  the  synoptic  Gospels  he  always,  not  only  parried  a  blow,  but
made  it  the  occasion  of  unveiling  some  great  lessons.  Thus,  e.g.,  when  the  Sadducees
wished  to  raise  a  scornful  laugh  ahout  the  future  life,  he  lifted  the  question  into  a
higher  region ;  when  his  disciples  were  accused  of  sabbath-breaking,  he  quoted  Hosea's
"  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice."

The  way  in  which  he  looked  his  reproach  is  repeatedly  referred  to  by  Mark.  The
manner  in  which  he  vindicated  his  own  honour  in  doing  acts  of  kindness  on  the
■abbath  was  extremely  remarkable,  as  he  uniformly  directed  his  malicious  opponents
to  consider  some  great  principle  which  they  might  be  willing  to  ignore,  hut  could  not
gainsay.  In  precisely  the  same  way  he  vindicated  his  claim  to  heal  the  impotent  man
(ch.  V.  17)  by  the  sublime  assertion,'"My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work ;"  i.e.  these
gracious  energies  are  always  going  on.  As  in  Matthew  he  appeals  to  the  profanation
of  the  temple  by  the  priests,  so  he  refers  in  John  to  the  circumcision  of  children  on
the  sabbath  day,  with  a  similar  intent.  So  the  "  look  of  Jesus  "  is  commemorated  in
the  Fourth  Gospel  as  well  as  by  Mark.  "  The  Lord  looked  on  Simon,"  and  gave  him
the  name  of  "  Cephas."  Thg  marvellous  influence  which  his  mere  presence  exerted  on
his  adversaries  is  emphatically  recorded  in  Luke's  account  of  his  reception  at  Nazareth,
but  is  more  than  once  repeated  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  (ch.  vii  44 — 46 ;  viii.  59  ;  x.  31 ;
xviii.  6).    Such  a  characteristic  trait  is  not  a  casual  coincidence.

(c)  The  humans  motives  of  his  miracles  are  abundantly  conspicuous,  not  only  in  the
synoptists,  but  also  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  multiplication  of  the  bread  is  common
to  both,  but  the  transformation  of  the  water  into  wine  and  his  consideration  of  the
villagers'  need  correspond  with  the  care  with  which  he  would  pay  Peter's  tribute  money,
and  with  the  fact  that  he  provided  a  repast  for  his  disciples  after  the  resurrection.
The  length  of  the  sufiering  of  the  infirm  woman  (synoptists)  corresponds  with  that  of
the  impotent  man  (ch,  v.),  as  a  predisposing  cause  of  his  bounty.  The  reason  given
for  his  walking  on  the  sea  in  John  is  allied  to  the  whole  teaching  of  the  synoptists,
"  He  saved  others  ;  himself  he  could  not  save."

(d)  Certain  idiosyncrasies  of  s/yle  which  are  quite  inimitable  proclaim  the  identity  of
the  great  Prophet  and  Teacher.  It  is  true  that  Kenan  and  others  have  professed  to
feel  so  great  a  difference  in  passing  from  the  discourse  in  Matthew,  the  parable  groups
and  the  "  delicious  sentences  "  of  the  synoptic  account,  to  the  controversial  and  sustained
exposition  and  lengthened  arguments  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  that  they  dispute  the
vedsimilitude  of  the  latter.  But  is  the  contrast  of  style  so  great  ?  In  the  sermon  on
the  myont  there  is  the  series  of  contrasts  between  the  Lord's  own  ethical  judgments  and

"  On  this  subject,  see  G.  A.  Chadwiok,  D.D., '  Christ  beariig  'Witnesa  to  Himself,'  to
whom  I  am  here  greatlji  indebted.


ex  INTRODUCTION  TO


that  which  had  been  said  to  them  of  old  time,  followed  by  the  antithesis  between  tha
highest  forms  of  the  Divine  life  and  the  heartless  forms  of  the  Pharisee,  the  publican  and
hypocrite,  and  the  entire  thunder-peal  is  brought  to  its  final  deliverance  in  the  rhetorical
climax.  To  our  thinking,  no  one  discourse  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  so  prolonged  and
sustained  in  argument,  so  unbroken  by  dialogue,  as  Matt.  v. — vii.  Even  the  valedictory
discourse  flows  on  (ch.  xiv.)  in  answer  to  numerous  questions  put  by  Philip,  Thomas,
Judas,  and  Simon  ;  then  is  broken  in  two  by  change  of  scene  and  then  by  address  to
the  Father.  It  may  be  said  that  the  sermon  on  the  mount  is  rather  the  work  of
Matthew  than  of  the  Lord,  a  piecing  together  of  great  utterances.  We  dispute  that
position  ;  but  if  it  be  conceded  for  the  sake  of  argument,  this  contrast  between  the
synoptist  and  Johannine  records  fails.

Our  Lord's  discourses  are  characterized  by  intense  and  vivid  repetition  of  certain
ideas  under  slightly  different  forms.  Thus  the  illustrations  used  in  the  discourse
at  Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  25,  27)  should  be  compared  with  Luke  xi.  31,  32;  xii.  24,  27,
51,  53,  and  with  the  gathering  intensity  of  the  three  parables  of  ch.  xv.  We  do  not
find  the  same  discourses  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  but  we  read  the  evidence  of  the  same
commanding  mind  and  its  fundamental  method.  Take  ch.  iii.  3  and  5  for  the  repeti-
tion of  the  condition  of  admission  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  Notice  the  gathering
intensity  of  meaning  in  the  discourse  in  ch.  vi.  concerning  participation  (i.)  "  in  my
flesh,",  (li.)  "  in  my  flesh  and  blood,"  (iii.)  "  eating  me."  The  impression  of  a  repeated
and  doubled  thought  occurs  in  ch.  x.  7,  9  and  11,  14.  Let  the  construction  of  the
sermon  on  the  mount  be  compared  with  that  of  the  controversial  discourse  in  ch.  v.,
and  the  same  kind  of  intensifying  progress  is  conspicuous.

(«)  The  conduct  of  our  Lord,  as  seen  in  the  treatment  of  his  relatives,  reveals  in  striking
accord  the  fourfold  narrative,  and  the  identity  of  the  John  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  with
that  of  the  synoptists.  In  Luke  ii.  49,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  ['  in  the  affairs
(house)  of  my  Father ']  about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  In  Mark  iii.  21  and  31—35  the
lack  of  true  perception  of  his  claims  on  the  part  of  his  kindred  is  brought  into  contact
with  his  admission  to  closest  intimacy  of  those  that  "  do  the  will  of  my  Father  "  (cf.
Matt.  xii.  50).  The  Fourth  Gospel  also  makes  it  clear  that  the  mother  of  Christ  was
no  longer  competent  to  rule  the  methods  of  his  self-manifestation  (ch.  ii.  4) ;  that  his
brethren  did  not  believe  on  him  (ch.  vii.  6) ;  that  he  entrusted  the  care  of  his  mother
to  his  spiritual  relation  and  beloved  disciple,  rather  than  to  the  brother  James  (ch.  xix.
26,  27).  These  personal. traits  are  most  remarkable  if  there  be  not  a  fundamental
identity  of  subject.

(/)  There  are  further  deep  harmonies  of  illustrative  thought.  In  Matt.  xxi.  37  the  Lord
speaks  of  his  Father  sending  his  Son  to  the  wicked  husbandmen.  In  ch.  viii.  35, 36
the  servants  are  contrasted  with  "  the  Son  that  abideth  for  ever."  "  The  Father's
house  "  is  the  great  climax  of  the  group  of  parables  in  Luke  xv. ;  "  the  Father's  house,"
with  its  "  many  mansions,"  is  the  home  which  (ch.  xiv.  1,  2)  Christ  is  going  to  prepare
for  his  disciples.  In  the  synoptists  we  are  told  that  we  must  become  as  little  children
(Matt,  xviii.  3) ;  in  John  that  we  must  be  "  born  again  "  (ch.  iii.  3 ;  cf.  also  xiii.  33).
The  imagery  of  the  dying  and  expanding  seed,  the  subsequent  growth,  is  frequently
repeated  in  Matt,  xiii.;  but  it  is  also  found  in  ch.  xii.  24.  The  "shepherd"  in
Luke's  parable  brings  home  the  lost  sheep ;  but  in  ch.  x.  2 — 16  our  Lord  speaks  of
himself  as  "the  good  Shepherd."  The  barren  fig  tree  is  to  be  cut  down,  the  fruitless
plant  rooted  up,  in  Luke  xiii.  8  and  Matt.  xv.  13 ;  but  in  ch.  xv.  2  Christ  declares
"  Ev«ry  branch  in  me  which  beareth  not  fruit,  is  taken  away,  and  every  branch  which
beareth  fruit,  he  pruneth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit."  Hostile  critics  have
objected  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  that  it  is  a  continuous  utterance  on  the  part  of  Jesus
concerning  himself,  and  of  his  own  unique  relation  to  the  Father  and  to  the  world  and
of  his  own  functions  and  claims ;  whereas  in  the  earlier  Gospels  the  Lord  was  content  to
deal  with  the  duties  and  prospects  and  characteristics  of  humanity  or  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  is  comparatively  silent  concerning  himself.  Is  this  so  ?  Is  the  contrast
80  great  as  is  often  assumed  ?  We  admit  that  very  early  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  Jesus
assures  Nathanael  that  he  should  "henceforth  find  heaven  opened,  and  see  aneels
ascending  and  descending  on  the  Son  of  man "  (ch.  i.  51) ;  and  in  the  lan<'ua<'e  to
Nicodemus  he  implies  that  he  is  the  Son  given  by  the  Father,  and  is  the  Son" who
came  down  from  heaven;  but  the  great  bm'den  of  that  address  is  that  "regeneration"


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  ok!

ii  indispensable,  that  judgment  is  the  correlative  of  the  offer  of  life,  that  those  that  do
the  truth  come  to  the  light.  Again,  in  ch.  v.,  in  the  great  discourse  to  the  authorities,
he  asserts  a  series  of  claims  based  on  bis  unique  relation  to  the  Father  and  to  the
universe,  and  in  every  possible  variety  of  form  this  example  is  followed  out  in  ch.  Ti.,
vii.,  viii. — x.,  xiii. — xvii.  The  prodigious  and  astonishing  self-consciousness,  the  ego
with  its  most  amazing  memories  and  transcendental  force,  the  realization  even  in
human  experience  and  on  human  lips  of  the  eternal  judgments  and  the  eternal  life,
do  call  repeated  attention  to  the  Messenger.  Yet  from  end  to  end  this  is  ethically
subordinated  to  the  well-being  of  mau  and  the  saving  of  the  world.  Thtis  he  would
give  eternal  life  to  those  who  labour  for  it  (ch.  vi.  27) ;  he  would  quench  human  hunger
and  thirst  (oh.  iv.  10, 14 ;  vi.  32,  50,  57,  58).  It  is  impossible  not  to  see  that  while  he
was  mysteriously  conscious  of  the  most  unique  claims,  and  that  they  were  of  supreme
moment  to  men,  yet  the  end  of  the  self-manifestation  was  the  life,  light,  peace,  love,
liberty,  deliverance,  and  victory  over  the  world,  after  the  fashion  of  his  own  life.  The
reason  for  the  utterance  of  every  claim  and  lofty  prerogative  is  the  benefit  and  the
salvation  of  mankind  (ch.  vii.  17,  24,  38;  viii.  12,  31,  82,  51;  x.  9,  28;  xi.  9,  40;  xii.
25,  35 ;  xiii.  14, 15,  34,  35 ;  xiv,  3, 16, 17,  27 ;  xv,  6,  7, 16,  20,  21 ;  xvi.  1—3,  7—13,
33;  xvii.  17,  26).

It  is  conceded  that  this  is  the  prevailing  tone  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  but  the  question
arises  whether  the  same  features  are  absent  from  the  synoptic  Gospels.  We  ought
never  to  forget  that  we  owe  to  the  synoptists  the  record  of  the  supernatural  birth  of
Jesus.  He  is  conceived  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  power  of  the  Highest,  the  Holy  Spirit,
is  the  occasion  of  his  introduction  into  this  world  (Matt.  i.  18, 20;  Luke  i.  26—38),  ■  One
of  the  most  characteristic  features  of  the  Johannine  teaching,  almost  more  Johannine
than  any  solitary  utterances  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  is  to  be  found  in  Matt.  xi.  25—28,  "  I
thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  didst  hide  these  things  firom
the  wise  and  understanding,  and  didst  reveal  them  unto  babes.  Yea,  Father :  for  so  it
was  well-pleasing  in  thy  sight.  All  things  have  been  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father:
and  no  one  knoweth  the  Son,  save  the  Father ;  neither  doth  any  know  the  Father,  save
the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  willeth  to  reveal  him.  Come  unto  me,  all  ye
that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  And  take  the  parallel
expression  in  Luke  x.  21,  22,  where  the  chief  difference  is  "Jesus  rejoiced  in  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  said."  The  relation  between  the  B'ather,  as  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  and
the  Son  is  unique.  No  human  mind  knows  the  Father  as  he  does;  no  prophet,  no
forerunner,  iio  disciple,  knows  him  as  the  Father  does.  It  is  through  his  own  revelation
of  the  Father  that  any  man  will  ever  know  the  Father.  It  is  by  coming  to  him  for  this
revelation  that  they  will  find  rest  for  their  souls.  Over  this  entire  conception  of  himself
as  the  revealing  Son  Jesus  rejoices  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  representation  culminates
in  the  peculiarly  Johannine  conception  of  "  coming"  to  himself  for  rest  and  life.

The  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke  alike  assert  the  Divine  Paternity  of  Christ.
They  also  record  the  declaration  of  John  the  Baptist,  that  he  who  was  mightier  than
himself  was  about  to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  the  sermon  on  the  mount
Christ  identifies  "  righteousness  "  with  "  himself"  (Matt.  v.  10  and  11).  The  "  I  say
unto  you,"  often  repeated,  lifts  the  Speaker  above  all  other  teachers  (Matt.  vii.  21 — 27).
He  assumes  to  have  the  destinies  of  the  world  in  his  hands,  and  makes  attention  to
or  rejection  of  his  words  the  conditions  of  safety  or  ruin  (see  Matt.  x.  32, 33 ;  xi.  6,
20 — 24),  to  say  nothing;  again  of  vers.  25 — 37,  which  are  charged  with  the  deepest
self-consciousness  (cf.  Matt.  xii.  40 — 42 ;  xvi.  27).  In  Matt.  xvi.  16  Peter's  confession,
"  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,"  is  more  explicit  than  the  language  of
Peter  given  in  ch.  vi.  69,  which  the  R.T.  reads  in  an  altered  and  abridged  form,  "  Thou
art  the  Holy  One  of  God."  We  owe  to  the  three  synoptists  the  stupendous  scene
of  the  Transfiguration  and  the  voice  from  heaven,  the  omission  of  which  in  John's
Gospel  (seeing  this  apostle  was  an  eye-witness  of  his  majesty)  we  have  endeavoured  to
explain  (see  p.  civ).  When  the  hosannas  of  the  children  are  rebuked  by  the  Pharisees,
Christ  declares,  "  If  these  should  be  silent,  the  stones  would  cry  out "  (Luke  xix.  40).
The  synoptist  narratives  all  alike  record  the  fact  that  Jesus  assumes  the  right  to  forgive
line,  and  to  do  so  in  the  presence  of  those  who  entertain  a  rooted  conviction  that  no
one  can  forgive  sins  but  God  only  (Matt.  ix.  3—8 ;  Luke  v.  20 — 24 ;  Mark  ii.  5 — 12  ;
cf.  Luke  viL  48).


cili  mTKODUCTION  TO


The  synoptists  record  the  claim  of  our  Lord  to  be  the  Bridegroom  of  the  true
theocracy,  to  take  the  place  which  Jehovah  does  in  Isaiah,  Hosea,  and  Ezekiel  (see
Matt.  ix.  14, 15,  and  parallels ;  Mark  ii.  19,  20 ;  Luke  v.  34,  etc.).  Moreover,  some  of
his  most  striking  parables,  which  compare  the  kingdom  to  a  marriage  of  the  king's  son
(Matt.  xxii.  1 — 14;  xxv.  1 — 13),  show  in  undisguised  manner  that  his  Person,  his
mission,  his  call,  his  oSer  of  friendship,  constitute  such  a  union  between  heaven  and
earth,  between  God  and  man,  as  was  effected  in  his  incarnation.

The  Gospel  of  Matthew  in  particular  is  explicit  in  representing  our  Lord  as  "  Son  of
man,"  as  coming  in  his  glory  to  "  gather  his  elect  from  the  four  winds,"  etc.  (Matt,
xvi.  27 ;  xxiv.  30,  31),  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead,  and  to  gather  before  his  tribunal
all  nations,  to  determine  as  "  King "  their  eternal  destiny  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — 36).
"Come  unto  me"  is  his  synonym  for  acquittal  from  self-reproach.  "Depart  from
me"  is  the  verdict  of  eternal  doom.  Luke's  Gospel  records  the  triumphant  vindication
of  his  transcendental  and  supreme  claims  to  determine  the  destiny  of  souls,  in  -his
language  to  the  dying  robber  (Luke  xxiii.  39 — 43),  Matthew  gives  the  most  complete
assertion  of  his  claim  to  be  "  the  Son  of  the  living  God,"  and  to  have  "all  power  in
heaven  and  earth  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  63—66 ;  xxviii.  18—20).

Perplexing  and  baffling  as  the  Fourth  Gospel  would  be  without  the  facts  and  testi-
monies of  the  synoptists,  it  seems  to  us  that  the  synoptists  themselves  would  be  equally
difficult  to  understand  without  such  further  testimony  to  the  supreme  claims  of  our
Lord  as  are  found  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  narratives  of  the  synoptists  would  be
more  diEBcult  to  faith  than  they  are  if  we  had  been  left  to  frame  any  hypothesis  we
pleased  as  to  the  manner  of  the  Man  whom  winds  and  seas  obeyed ;  who  asserted  his
purpose  to  judge  mankind ;  who  claimed  to  forgive  sin,  and  to  be  eternally  omnipresent
in  the  subsequent  history  of  his  Church ;  who  assumed  a  place  in  the  very  Godhead
itself,  by  issuing  the  baptismal  formula ;  whom  an°;els  and  devils  worshipped  as  the
Holy  One;  before  whom  wild  beasts  shrank  abashed  (Mark  i.  13);  who  represents
himself  as  occupying  a  higher  place  in  the  theocracy  than  Abraham,  Moses,  David,
Solomon,  or  Elijah,  than  the  temple  or  the  sabbath ;  who  walked  on  the  sea,  healed  the
leper,  and  raised  the  dead ;  who,  after  himself  suffering  the  agony  of  death,  was  once
more  clothed  with  surpassing  majesty  as  the  Personal  Victor  over  death;  who  made
known  in  resiurection  of  life,  and  by  taking  possession  of  an  eternal  throne,  the  new
and  final  idea  of  man's  existence.

If  we  were  discussing  the  veritable  facts  concerning  the  Person  of  our  Lord,  we  might
feel  bound  here  to  meet  the  numerous  attempts  to  belittle  or  reduce  to  ordinary
dimensions  of  humanity  some  or  all  of  these  details ;  but  we  are  not  called  to  do  so
here  and  now.  We  are  replying  to  an  objection  brought  against  the  Fourth  Gospel,
based  on  the  different  tone  of  this  document  in  dealing  with  the  Person  of  our  Lord
from  that  found  in  the  synoptists.  Our  reply  is — all  that  is  peculiar  to  the  Fourth
Gospel  is  found  in  a  germinant  form,  and  moreover  displayed  in  the  miracles,  parables,
discourses,  and  events  of  the  first  three  Gospels.

(6)  The  portraitures  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  There  are  certain  individuals  whose  features
are  sketched  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  but  concerning  whom  the  synoptists  are  silent.
For  instance,  Nathanael's  name  occurs  in  the  first  and  twenty-first  chapters  of  John,
and  a  stroke  or  two  of  vivid  soul-revelation  are  supplied.  There  is,  however,  little
difficulty  in  believing  that  he  is  none  other  than  the  Bartholomew  of  the-  synoptic
account,  "  one  of  the  twelve,"  brought  in  the  lists  of  the  apostles  into  juxtaposition
with  Philip  and  Thomas.  As  such  Nathanael  appears  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The
word  Bar-Tolmai  is  a  mere  patronymic,  and  no  true  name,  and  the  identitication  of
the  names  need  occasion  no  difficulty.

Nicodemus,  a  Jernsalem  magnate,  a  secret  disciple,  and  one  who  is  introduced  three
times  in  the  narrative  (ch.  iii.  1 ;  vii.  50 ;  xix.  39),  is  a  feature  of  Christ's  social  rela-
tions which  is  not  without  difficulty.  There  are,  however,  several  considerations  which
deserve  attention.  The  synoptists  represent  Jesus,  as  the  legitimate  heir  to  the  throne
of  David,  as  on  visiting  terms  with  the  wealthy  Galilean  Pharisees  (Luke  vii.  36),  as  having
a  secret  friend  in  the  person  of  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  (Luke  xxii.  51 ;  cf.  ch.  xix.  38),
and  a  welcome  at  the  house  of"  the  chief  among  the  publicans"  (Luke  xix.  2).  Joanna,  the
wife  of  Chaza,  Herod's  steward,  must  not  be  forgotten  (Luke  viii,  3),  nor  the  reverence
manifested  towards  him  by  the  Roman  centurion  of  Capernaum  (Luke  vii,;  Matt.  viii.).


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  «xiU


Even  taking  the  synoptist  authorities  alone,  we  see  that  events  and  friendships  parallel
and  equivalent  to  those  with  reference  to  Nioodemus  are  not  lacking.  We  have  already
observed  that,  while  the  synoptists  are  not  ignorant  of  the  visits  to  Jerusalem,  they  do
not  lay  themselves  out  for  any  description  or  recital  of  the  conversations  and  miracles
which  took  place  there.  They  naturally  pass  over  Nicodemus,  the  principal  reference
to  whom  occurs  in  a  period  of  our  Lord's  ministry  concerning  which  they  are  perfectly
silent.

The  woman  of  Samaria  comes,  as  to  place  and  time,  into  the  same  category  with
Nicodemus,  and  the  lifelike  portraiture  given  of  her  can  scarcely  be  transcended  by  any
narrative  in  the  New  Testament.  This  kindness  and  sympathy  with  the  Samaritans
is,  however,  the  probable  basis  of  the  interesting  references  to  the  Samaritans  in  Luke's
Gospel  and  the  Acts  (Luke  ix.  52 — 56 ;  x.  33 ;  xvii.  16 ;  Acts  i.  8  ;  viii.  5,  etc.).  We  do
not  disguise  the  difficulty  involved  in  Matt.  x.  5,  but  the  experimental  mission  of  the
twelve  was  obviously  restricted.  They  were  not  to  go  to  cities  of  the  Samaritans,  nor
into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles;  yet  the  synoptists  (all  three)  tell  us  that  he  himself  did
go  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  to  Csesarea  Philippi  and  Decapolis.  Consequently,
the  warning  of  the  twelve,  in  their  first  trial  Journey,  against  the  cities  of  the  Samaritans
may  have  been  equally  compatible  with  what  John  tells  us  about  his  own  visit  to
Samaria.

It  cannot  bo  maintained  that  the  story  of  Lazarus  and  his  sisters  introduces  novel
matter,  as  Luke  has  already  introduced  us  to  "  Martha  and  Mary,"  and  the  representation
he  gave  of  the  contrast  between  them,  of  eager  service  and  quiet  meditation,  is  exqui-
sitely unfolded  in  the  home  of  Bethany  as  portrayed  by  John.  The  moral  features  of
the  two  sisters  correspond  in  a  most  remarkable  way  with  the  characteristics  of  Peter  and
John,  both  alike  loving  and  beloved  of  their  Lord.  Some  critics  have  gone  so  far  as  to
suggest  that  the  Lazarus  of  ch.  xi.  is  a  dramatic  representation  of  the  parable  of  the  rich
man  and  Lazarus.  No  two  sets  of  facts  could  be  much  more  dissimilar,  except  it  he
that  the  language  of  Abraham  ("  If  they  believe  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither
will  they  be  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead  ")  finds  a  kind  of  parallel  in  the
fact  that  the  Lazarus  who  was  raised  from  the  dead  did  not  convince  the  heads  of  the
priesthood  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  But  the  record  of  this  great  event  is  found,  like
the  narrative  of  Nicodemus,  that  of  the  impotent  man,  and  that  of  the  blind  man,  in
the  Jerusalem  ministry.  When  John  takes  his  reader  in  the  sixth  chapter  into  Galilee,
he  at  once  confirms  the  three  synoptists  by  detailing  two  great  miracles  which  they
had  already  described,  but  in  connection  with  discourses  of  immense  impressiveness
which  they  had  failed  to  record.

The  few  characters  to  which  the  fourth  evangelist  makes  excluHve  reference  are  by
no  means  numerous,  nor  are  they  more  important  than  those  which  are  severally  peculiar
to  Matthew  and  Luke.  Thus  Matthew  alone  tells  us  of  "  the  Wise  Men ; "  and  Luke
of  "  the  shepherds,"  of  "  Simeon,"  and  of  "  Anna."  Matthew  and  Mark  tell  us  of  the
"leper;"  and  Luke  only  of  the  "widow  of  Nain."  Matthew,  of  the  mission  of  the
twelve ;  and  Luke,  of  the  mission  of  the  seventy  disciples.  Matthew  draws  with  startling
clearness  the  portraiture  of  Herod  the  Great.  Luke  refers  to  Zacchseus.  To  each
synoptist-evangelist,  therefore,  we  owe  special  characteristics  and  portraits  of  indivi-
duals which  are  scarcely  more  peculiar  or  unique  than  those  which  are  peculiar  to  John.

Other  portraitures  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  correspond  in  a  very  impressive  way  with
those  of  the  synoptic  Gospels.  Where  these  portraitures  differ  in  some  striking  feature,
the  ground  of  the  difference  is  not  far  to  seek.

(a)  The  treatment  of  the  person  of  the  mother  of  our  Lord  provides  one  illustration,
Brevity  and  reticence  characterize  all  that  is  said  in  any  of  these  documents  concerning
the  life  or  death  of  Mary  the  virgin-mother.  A  few  scattered  notices,  all  charged
with  suggestion  which  might  lead  astray,  and  which  have  left  room  for  extraordinary
development  both  legendary  and  dogmatic,  contain  all  that  we  know.  Her  house  and
lineage  as  the  betrothed  and  espoused  wife  of  the  last  heir  of  the  throne  and  family  of
David  are  declared  at  length.  It  is  not  improbable  that  both  the  genealogies  are  those
of  Mary  as  well  as  of  Joseph,  but  this  cannot  be  positively  proved.  The  story  of  the
miraculous  conception  as  given  in  Matthew  is  enriched  with  several  interesting  details
by  Luke,  which  make  evident  Mary's  holy  submission  to  her  mysterious  destiny,  her
purely  Old  Testament  piety  and  anticipations,  and  her  acquaintance  with  the  great  pio-
joss.  i


cxlT  INTRODUCTION  TO


totypes  of  the  earlier  history  of  her  race.  The  visit  of  Elisabeth  to  her,  the  marvellous
accompaniments  of  her  Child's  birth,  the  visit  of  the  shepherds,  the  song  of  the  angels,
and  the  pondering  by  Mary  over  these  mysterious  events,  are  recorded  by  Luke.  The
providential  deliverance  of  the  young  Child  and  his  mother  from  the  jealous  madness
of  Herod  is  preserved  by  Matthew,  while  Luke  adds  the  appearance  in  the  temple  when
Simeon  forewarns  her  that  a  sword  should  pierce  her  own  heart.  We  further  discover
her  maternal  solicitude,  the  obedience  she  claimed  and  received  up  to  a  certain  point
and  no  further.  The  one  incident,  recorded  during  the  thirty  years  implies  on  her  part
(it  may  be)  some  carelessness  aad  failure  of  apprehension  of  the  wondrous  charge
entrusted  to  her.  Sorrowing  and  anxious,  she  and  Joseph  receive  a  word  which,  like  a
sword,  pierced  her.  There  were  depths  in  her  Son's  consciousness  which  she  could  not
fathom,  and  there  was  an  inward  voice  he  heard,  but  which  she  could  not  hear.  A
solitary  event  subsequently  recorded,  and  by  Mark  only  in  its  fulness,  which  shows  that
the  Pharisees  had,  by  a  diabolic  plot  which  they  hatched  to  shut  up  Jesus  as  one  "  beside
himself,"  endeavoured  to  make  the  mother  and  brethren  parties  to  it.  The  way  in
which  Christ  baffled  this  design,  and  even  emancipated  himself  from  the  control  of
mother  and  brethren,  is  highly  significant  (Mark  iii.  20,  30 — 35).

After  this  Mary  appears  to  have  followed  him  on  his  last  visit  to  Jerusalem,  and  to
have  stood  by  him  when  in  his  death-agony.  After  the  Eesurrection  she  is  (in  Luke's
sontinuation  of  his  Gospel)  mentioned  once  only,  and  then  as  being  present  in  the  upper
oliamber.  Not  another  syllable  bearing  upon  her  character  or  even  existence  can  be
found  in  the  New  Testament  or  early  Christian  literature.  Neither  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,
nor  St.  John,  neither  St.  James  nor  St.  Jude  who  may  have  been  her  own  children,
make  the  faintest  reference  to  her.

It  is  open  to  question  whether  she  is  obscurely  referred  to  in  the  Apocalypse  (xii.
1 — 6).  We  dare  not  lift  the  veil,  nor  do  we  appeal  to  the  apocryphal  gospels.  All
that  we  may  reasonably  infer  is  her  self-repression,  her  Old  Testament  standpoint,  her
desire  for  the  honour  of  her  Son,  and  some  doubtfully  placed  measures  taken  for  his
safety.  Her  belief  in  his  resurrection,  and  her  association  after  the  Eesurrection  with
the  twelve  apostles  and  the  brethren.  The  gentle,  holy,  retiring  spirit  hides  itself  in
the  glory  of  her  Son  and  Lord.

The  fourth  evangelist,  who  clearly  speaks  of  himself  as  the  beloved  disciple,  vcho  has
never  once  mentioned  his  own  name  nor  that  of  his  own  mother,  never  breathes  the
name  of  "  Mary,"  and  folds  her  memory  in  the  perfumed  cerements  of  a  holy  charge  he
received  from  his  dying  Lord.  He  states  firmly  that  her  home  was  in  his  house.  He
becomes  her  protector  and  keeper  to  the  end.  Where  that  took  place  he  does  not  say ;
but  the  very  fact  that  he  should  have  received  the  charge  at  the  cross,  confirms  a
statement  made  by  St.  Luke  (Acts  i.  14).  This  visit  to  Jerusalem  was  full  of  interest  to
the  other  and  older  tradition.  The  Fourth  Gospel  simply  shows  how  this  event  brought
its  authfir  into  closest  relation  with  the  blessed  virgin-mother  of  the  Lord.  Yet  with
one  exception  he  adds  nothing  to  what  we  know,  and  with  reverent  silence  he  passes
over  details  already  widely  current  for  a  generation  before  he  wrote  his  Gospel.  Still,
in  mentioning  the  mother  at  all,  ha  clears  himself  from  all  docetic,  Cerinthian,  or  Mar-
cionite  teaching.  The  author,  ly  the  underlying  presupposition  of  the  entire  Gospel,
viz.  that  Jesus  was  "  the  Word  laade  flesh,"  and  by  his  repeated  attempt  to  illustrate
Christ's  consciousness  of  having  "ijome  down  from  heaven,"  and  being  essentially  "the
Son  of  God,"  not  "  born  again,"  but  "  sent  from  God,"  originally  and  fundamentally
"born  of  the  Spirit,"  coincides  with,  if  he  does  not  give  the  deepest  explanation  of  the
immaculate  conception.  It  is  very  startling  that  the  one  thing  he  positively  mentions
is  the  scene  at  Cana,  where  the  Lord  indicated  his  freedom  from  the  maternal  yoke,  his
refusal  to  claim  Messianic  dignity  in  the  manner  indicated  by  her,  and  yet  along  other
lines,  in  answer  to  her  considerate  appeal,  lavishes  love  upon  her  friends,  showing  forth
the  glory  of  his  love  even  more  than  that  of  his  power.

In  ch.  vi,  42,  by  the  phrase,  "  whose  father  and  mother  we  know,"  the  author  of  the
Fourth  Gospel  reveals  the  fact  of  current  belief  in  Christ's  human  parentage,  and  also
of  the  change  of  abode  made  by  the  family  of  Jesus  from  Nazareth  to  Capernaum
(ch.  li.  12).

Such  subtle  harmonies  of  thought  convince  us  that  the  author  was  familiar  with  the
■am*  unique  Feroonage,  and  was  delineating  the  same  character.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxt

(6)  The  synoptic  and  Johannine  portraitures  of  John  the  Baptist  unquestionablT'
differ,  but  the  points  of  divergence  are  conspicuously  due  to  the  circumstance  that  tha
•ynoptists  virtually  close  their  account  of  John  with  the  baptism  of  Jesus.  The  fourth
evangelist  commences  his  account  of  the  "  man  sent  from  Qod  "  after  that  prophet  had
come  into  contact  with  the  Baptizer  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  question  has  often  been
asked  whether  one  who  could  have  delivered  such  a  testimony  concerning  Christ  as
that  which  is  preserved  in  ch.  iii.  27,  etc.,  could,  as  the  synoptists  assert,  have  sent
from  the  prison  the  inquiry, "  Art  thou  the  coming  One,  or  may  we  look  for  another?  "
The  question  has  been  melted  down  into  a  very  moderate  amount  of  anxiety  by  some
apologists,  and  exaggerated  into  irreconcilable  contradiction  by  the  opponents  of  the
Fourth  Gospel.  The  middle  course  is  the  more  rational.  The  full  coming  of  the
Christ  is  so  variously  estimated  by  the  Jewish  schools,  that  some  believed  in  a  twofold
coming — that  of  a  tender  plant  out  of  a  dry  ground,  and  that  of  a  Sun  and  King  of
Eighteousness.  Some  anticipated  a  son  of  woman  and  also  a  Son  of  God,  the  coming
of  a  suffering  aad  also  of  a  triumphant  Messiah.  The  prophecies  were  then  and  are
now  difficult  to  disentangle.  Is  the  holder  of  the  sceptre  the  same  as  the  "  Prophet "
who  should  come  into  the  world?  Is  the  "  David  "  and  the  "  Melchizedek  "  the  same
predicted  manifestation?  Is  there  more  than  one  coming?  is  there  more  than  one  kind
of  revelation?  The  query,  "  Art  thou  he  that  should  come  ?  "  (o  ipxoufvas),  may  have
reasonably  meant,  "  Granting  that  thou  art  the  suffering  '  Lamb  of  God,'  the  Son  of
the  Father,  the  Bridegroom  of  the  Church,  art  thou  the  final  manifestation,  seeing
that  thou  art  continually  withdrawing  from  the  asseveration  of  thy  Messiahship?
Like  myself,  art  thou  only  a  forerunner  of  the  conquering  Prince  who  is  mightier  than
either  of  us?  "  ("  Do  we  look  for  another  ?  ")  This  inquiry  may  have  been  built  on
the  purely  Old  Testament  standpoint  on  which  the  great  forerunner  took  his  stand.
It  was  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  him  to  discard  the  transitional  role  which  he  had
been  commissioned  to  fulfil.  He  would,  like  Judaism  or  Hebraism  itself,  have  never
accomplished  the  work  assigned  to  him,  if  he  had  not  held  to  it  with  a  tenacity  which
was  really  superfluous  after  his  preparatory  work  had  reached  its  climax.  Great  as
the  testimonies  of  John  were,  as  seen  and  recorded  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  yet  Christ
says  (ch.  v.  36),  "I  have  greater  witness  than  that  of  John."  This  subject  is  discussed
in  the  author's  '  John  the  Baptist,'  pp.  419 — 449.

(c)  The  character  of  Simon  Peter  is  marvellously  consistent  as  recorded  in  the
synoptists.  The  "  Peter "  of  Mark  and  Luke  is  a  study  of  courage  and  weakness,  of
generous  impulses  and  eager  self-assertion,  and  of  a  rocklike  energy,  which  nevertheless
shivers  and  is  pulverized  by  the  onset  of  doubt.  From  first  to  last  he  is  ready  to  take
matters  into  his  own  hands  and  criticize  and  even  remonstrate  with  the  Lord,  to  suggest
almost  childlike  proposals  which  the  Lord  was  compelled  to  reject.  He  is  humble
under  rebuke,  and  impulsively  makes  some  fresh  suggestion  equally  wide  of  the  mark.
The  very  earliest  account  of  Simon  strikes  the  key-note  of  the  delineation.  When
amazed  at  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  (Luke  v.  8),  he  cries  impetuously,  "  Depart
from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man."  The  spirit  waS  right,  but  the  expression  of  it  was
directly  adverse  to  the  whole  mystery  of  Divine  love.  On  the  mount  of  Transfigura-
tion (Luke  ix.  33  and  parallels)  he  made  the  vague  suggestion,  "  Let  us  make  three
tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  one  for  Moses,  one  for  Elijah,"  hurrying  to  a  conclusion
utterly  beyond  and  aside  the  display  he  had  just  received  of  the  Lord's  inherent
majesty.  The  "decease  to  be  accomplished"  suggested  to  him  as  yet  no  clear  idea.
When  multitudes  of  the  disciples  walked  no  more  with  their  Master,  and  vague  and
conflicting  rumours  were  passing  between  lip  and  lip,  Simon,  son  of  Jona  (or  John)  gave
utterance  to  a  confession  of  transcendent  importance  upon  which  the  Church  has  been
built,  and  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  will  not  prevail ;  but  when,  upon  the  faith  of
this  Divine  conviction,  Jesus  proceeded  to  explain  the  tragic  issues  of  his  present
mission,  Peter  could  not  count  upon  the  wisdom  or  truth  of  "  the  Son  of  the  living
ttod  "  and  began  to  rebuke  the  very  Christ,  and  to  say  (Matt.  xvi.  22),  "  That  be '  far
from  thee."  Then  Peter  soon  finds  that  his  wisdom  was  not  the  measure  of  the  ways
of  God.  Simon  Peter  must  have  been  by  analogy  the  spokesman  of  the  eleven  who
vere  anxious  to  second  the  wish  of  the  multitudes  to  make  Jesus  by  force  into  their
sing,  and  whom  Jesus  "constrained"  to  get  into  the  boat  and  depart  from  the  scene  of
'hi  groT.t  miracle  (cf.  Mark  vi.  45  with  ch.  vi.  15).    While  the  other  disciples  cried  out


cx*i  INTRODUCTION  TO


for  fear  at  the  apparition  of  7esus  walking  on  the  sea,  Peter,  forerunning  his  Master,
cried  with  most  insufficient  self-knowledge  (Matt.  xiv.  28), "  If  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come
to  thee  upon  the  water , "  the  permission  rather  than  the  command  ii\0e)  led  him  to
demonstrate  that  his  little  faith  was  soon  the  occasion  of  bewildering  doubt.

When  Jesus  warned  all  his  disciples  that  they  would  be  offended  at  him  (Matt,
xxvi.  31—35),  eleven  receive  at  first  the  rebuke  in  humble  silence ;  Peter,  with  habitual
boldness,  virtually  exclaims,  "  Thou  art  not  right  this  time,  0  my  Master.  Though  all
men  should  be  offended  at  thee,  yet  will  I  never  be  offended ;  though  all  men  deny  thee,
though  I  should  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  by  any  means  deny  thee  "  (vers.  33 — 35).  On
the  way  to  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  he  thought  and  suggested  that  two  swords  would
be  of  service  against  the  Roman  guard,  and  in  the  meUe  at  the  entrance  of  the  garden
one  of  the  disciples  (the  synoptists  do  not  say  which  of  them)  drew  a  sword  (Luke
xxii.  50  and  parallels),  and  smote  off  the  ear  of  the  servant  of  the  high  priest,  only  to
receive  the  solemn  rebuke  of  Jesus.  While  other  disciples  fled,  Simon  Peter  followed
to  the  door  of  the  high  priest's  palace  (Luke  xxii.  54),  but,  having  entered  it,  he  could
not  bear,  alas  I  the  first  charge  or  insinuation  that  be  was  one  of  the  disciples  of  the
insulted  and  condemned  Master,  and  he  added  oaths  and  curses  to  his  base  denial
(Mark  xiv.  70,  71).  All  the  synoptists  indicate  that  his  contrition  was  almost  as
sudden  as  his  fall.  After  the  Besurrection  (while  John  stood  trembling  at  the  entrance
of  the  sepulchre),  Peter  (Luke  xxiv.  12)  went  hurriedly  into  it,  to  search  for  the
wounded  corpse  of  the  Master  whom  he  had  so  basely  deserted.

The  Evangelist  Luke  carries  forward  the  story  of  the  Apostle  Peter's  splendid  courage
on  Pentecost,  of  his  ready  insight,  of  his  eagerness  to  be  the  mouthpiece  of  his  fellow-
disciples  (Acts  ii.),  and  then  to  speak  for  John  as  well  as  for  himself  (Acts  liL  and  iv.).
His  prominence  in  the  scenes  with  Ananias  and  Simon  Magus  all  show  the  same
impetuous  energy,  but  the  history  reveals  the  same  curious  blending  of  somewhat  con-
tradictory elements ;  e.g.  Peter's  reply  to  the  heavenly  voice,  "  Rise,  Peter,  slay  and
eat,"  is  eminently  characteristic :  "  Not  so.  Lord ;  for  I  have  never  eaten  anything
common  or  unclean."  His  language  to  the  Sanhedrin,  to  Ananias,  to  Simon  Magus,  to
^neas,  to  Cornelius,  is  curiously  in  harmony  with  all  that  we  know  of  the  noblest
part  of  his  character ;  but  the  energy  with  which  "  Peter  continued  knocking  "  in  the
dead  of  night  at  the  door  of  Mark's  house  was  enough  to  have  brought  the  whole
quaternion  of  soldiers  after  him;  and  his  ready  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  at
Cffisarea  and  at  Jerusalem  in  the  matter  of  the  circumcision  of  Gentile  Christians,  and
of  social  intercourse  with  them,  reflects  the  generous  and  gracious  side  of  his  character,
open  to  new  ideas  and  surrounding  influences.  "  Who  am  I  that  I  should  withstand
God  ?  "  Pacts  are  stronger  than  fictions  and  old  prejudices.  Nevertheless,  St.  Paul's
account  of  Peter's  conduct  at  Antioch  (Gal.  ii.)  draws  in  a  sentence  a  portrait  of  the
same  deeply  marked  character.  "  When  certain  from  James  arrived,  Peter  withdrew
and  separated  himself,  and  refused  to  eat  with  the  Gentiles,  fearing  them  of  the
circumcision."

Even  tradition  tells  us  that  Peter  fled  from  Rome  in  the  midst  of  the  Neronian  per-
secution, and,  seeing  a  vision  of  the  Lord  apparently  making  his  way  towards  the  city,
was  ready  with  his  characteristic  question,  "  Domine,  quo  vadis  ?  "  And  the  last  thing
recorded  of  him  is  equally  so.  He  refused  to  be  crucified  after  the  manner  of  his  Lord,
but  besought  to  be  impaled  with  his  head  downwards.  Such  a  marked  individuality
is  one  of  the  most  striking  notes  of  accuracy.  There  is  nothing  exactly  like  it  in  any
other  portion  of  the  biblical  history.  Does  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  reflect  the
same  general  characteristic  in  his  representation  of  St.  Peter  ?  If  he  had  given  us
another  Peter,  a  mystical  conception,  a  fancy  portrait  to  fill  out  some  theological  theory,
if  he  had  shown  himself  ignorant  of  these  numerously  attested  peculiarities,  the  pressure
of  the  argument  against  the  historicity  of  the  narrative  would  have  been  strong.  But,
on  the  contrary,  the  fourth  evangelist  records  the  earliest  conference  upon  Peter  of  the
name  of  Cephas,  and  a  brief  citation  of  Peter's  great  confession  (ch.  vi.  68 — 70),  "  Thou
art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God ;  we  have  believed  and  we  have  come  to  know
that  thou  art  the  Son  of  the  living  God  [or, '  thou  art  the  Holy  One  of  God*]  ; "  but
when  we  come  to  the  Last  Supper  (ch.  xiii,  6 — 11),  the  composite  nature  of  Peter  is
touched  off  with  a  characteristic  scene.  The  Lord  prepares  to  wash  his  disciples'  feet.  St.
Peter  says,  "  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet,"  and  repeats  it  after  remonstrance ;  butht


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxvu


no  sooner  grasps  the  meaning,  as  he  thinks,  than  he  gives  his  Lord  some  further  sug-
gestions :  "  Not-my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  my  head."  There  is  the  same  hurry
and  impulsiveness,  the  same  blundering  forward  into  rebuke  and  fresh  light.  After
this,  Peter,  irrepressible  as  ever,  suggests  to  the  beloved  disciple  to  inquire  who  was  the
traitor,  and  thus  he  would  again  forestall  his  Lord.  We  have  the  same  shaile  of
character  once  more,  hinted  in  the  eager  inquiry,  "  Whither  goest  thou  ?  "  and  "  Why
cannot  I  follow  thee  now  ?  "  "I  will  lay  down  my  life  for  thy  sake  "  (oh.  xiii.  36 — 38).
The  eager  acts  of  the  night  of  the  Passion  are  preserved  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  they
reveal  the  need,  both  of  reproof  and  miracle,  to  obviate  evil  consequences  (oh.  xviii.  10,
11).  The  unnamed  disciple  who  had  smitten  the  servant  of  the  high  priest  is  declared
by  John  to  be  none  other  than  Simon  Peter.  This  is  given  with  no  intent  to  humble
Peter,  but  rather  to  exalt  his  courage.  The  features  of  the  temptation  and  the  fall  of
Peter  are  abundantly  explained  (ch.  xviii.  15 — 18,  25 — ^27).  The  haste  of  Peter  to  rush
into  the  sepulchre  is  specially  noted  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  the  most  characteristic  of
all  these  scenes  completes  John's  portraiture.  Peter  distinguishes  himself  (ch.  xxi.  7,
etc.)  by  the  special  desire  to  plunge  into  the  sea  to  reach  his  Lord,  and  to  draw  the  net
to  shore.  When  interrogated  by  the  Lord  as  to  the  intensity  of  his  personal  love,
Peter  at  length  shows  impatience  as  well  as  grief  (see  ver.  17).  He  would,  even  in
his  last  word,  give  the  Lord  some  advice  as  to  the  revelations  it  would  be  wise  for  him
to  make.  Such  a  unique  combination  of  tendencies  and  methods  as  are  presented  by
the  New  Testament  generally  must  represent  an  historical  character  of  great  indi-
viduality. The  Fourth  Gospel,  in  all  its  references  to  Peter,  though  for  the  most  part
involving  a  separate  group  of  occurrences,  is  in  minute  and  impressive  harnioDy  with
the  synoptic  and  Pauline  portraiture.  In  no  case  are  these  utterances  and  acts  of  Peter
more  than  silhouettes  of  his  Personality,  but  the  dullest  student  of  analogy  cannot  fail
to  feel  the  identity  of  the  character.  Nor  are  the  Tubingen  writers  or  Renan  altogether
just  when  they  endeavour  to  draw  from  the  references  to  Peter  an  animus  against  him  on
the  part  of  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  On  the  contrary,  these  references  are  more
sympathetic  by  far  than  the  records  of  corresponding  scenes  in  the  synoptic  narrative.

(d)  The  characters  of  Caiaphas  and  Pilate  are  drawn  with  tolerable  clearness  in  the
synoptists,  although  they  scarcely  do  more  than  bring  them  into  the  searching  light
of  the  Divine  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Luke  tells  us  (iii.  1,  2)  that  the  one  was
priest  and  the  other  was  the  Roman  representative  (fiyenoveioyros)  in  Judaa,  and  we
are  reminded  also  by  Luke  of  Pilate's  hatred  of  the  religion  of  the  people  over  whom
he  ruled,  as  well  as  his  cruelty  to  Galilaians  who  had  properly  belonged  to  the  hegemony
of  Herod  Antipas  (Luke  xiii.  1).

Caiaphas  in  the  synoptic  narrative  is  the  president  of  the  court  before  which  Jesus
is  tried,  and  we  discern  his  hatred  of  his  Victim,  his  anxiety  to  secure  even  valueless
testimony  against  Jesus,  rather  than  none  at  all ;  and  to  obtain,  moreover,  a  kind  of
testimony  which  would  not  turn  the  hearts  of  the  excitable  Pharisaic  party  to  take  his
side.  His  eagerness  to  condemn,  to  call  forth  an  answer  which  should,  according  to
his  understanding  and  exposition  of  the  Law  incriminate  Jesus ;  and  the  impetuous
\aste  with  which  he  fastened  a  charge  of  blasphemy  on  the  Lord,  are  among  the  most
tragic  features  of  the  trial.

Caiaphas  knew  that  the  Messiah  was  "  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  "  (Matt.  xxvL  63 ;
Mark  xiv.  61)  and  "  the  Son  of  God."  Yet  the  one  thing  that  in  his  judgment  and
that  of  his  court  was  a  capital  offence  was  the  calm  claim  on  the  part  of  Jesus  to  be  all
that  was  involved  in  this  great  Name.  It  was  the  confession  of  the  Lord  himself  that
constituted  the  gravamen  of  the  charge.  The  charge,  however,  which  the  priests
brought  before  Pilate  was  that  Jesus  was  stirring  up  the  people,  and  foibidding  them
to  pay  tribute  to  Cassar,  and  was  making  himself  a  King  (Luke  xxiii.  2).  Thus
Caiaphas  was  bending  his  own  feigned  loyalty  to  Roman  power  into  the  instrument  of
his  theological  hatred,  into  the  tool  of  his  jealousy  towards  a  spiritual  power  which  he
could  not  rival  and  had  not  the  power  to  extinguish.  So  pertinacious  was  the  priestly
clique,  that  when  Pilate  sent  the  mysterious  Prisoner  to  Herod,  anxious  to  be  rid  of
so  troublesome  a  case,  the  rabble  of  priests  rushed  after  him  to  Herod's  court,  and
"vigorously  accused  him  (eirivas  KaTriyopoSyTes)"  (Luke  xxiii.  11).  The  Barabbas  incident
is  (Mark  xv.  11)  clearly  the  low  and  unscrupulous  scheme  of  the  Caiaphas  party  (•?  *J
i^X'^/ieti  iwiffftvay  rhy  ix>-oy)»


cjtviii  iNTEODtJCTION  TO


Now,  though  the  fourth  evangelist  does  not  describe  the  scene  before  Caiaphas  as  giveii
in  the  synoptists,  he  implies  that  the  court  had  come  to  a  pseudo-decisioD,  and  had  taken
legal  action  (ch.  xviii.  35),  had  "  delivered  "  Jesus  to  the  Roman  power,  that  it  might
execute  the  ecclesiastical  verdict.  Moreover,  there  is  one  remarkable  sentence  in  the
Fourth  Gospel  which  sketches  the  character  of  Caiaphas  with  entire  accuracy.  The
council  of  the  Jews  was  in  great  trepidation  lest  the  Komans  would  come  and  take  away
their  place  and  nation,  their  personal  and  corporate  authority.  Caiaphas  used  their  alarm
to  propound  the  heartless  and  unjust  doctrine :  "  Ye  know  nothing  at  all,  nor  consider
that  it  is  expedient  for  you  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  that  the  whole
nation  perish  not "  (ch.  xi.  49, 50).  Let  them  put  Jesus  to  death  on  a  false  charge,  and
save  themselves.  "  It  was  a  happy  chance  that  they  could  seem  to  vindicate  their
loyalty  while  they  gratified  their  hatred  "  (Westcott,  •  Introd.,'  Ixxii.).  Caiaphas  knew
his  own  mind  thoroughly,  and  carried  it  through  remorselessly.  He  instigated  and
executed  the  tragic  suit.  John  shows  the  spiritual  obtuseness,  the  stone-blindness  and
religious  fanaticism  out  of  which  the  whole  proceeding  sprang.  The  character  of
Caiaphas  becomes  far  more  explicable  from  the  key  to  it  which  is  thus  supplied  by  the
Fourth  Gbspel.

The  portraiture  of  Pilate  himself  is  fully  given  by  the  synoptists  and  the  fourth
evangelist;  and, though  the  portrait  is  drawn  in  different  materials,  yet  it  is  the  same
personage,  and  the  particulars  have  a  lifelike  Ibrce  which  Kenan  and  other  hostile
critics  are  candid  enough  to  admit.     In  both  series  of  events  there  is  the  same  irresolu-
tion and  perplexity,  the  same  desire  to  save  the  life  of  Jesus,  if  he  could  contrive  it
without  injury  to  himself.     There  is  the  same  desire  as  long  as  he  dared  to  worry  and
trample  on  the  people  and  priests  whom  he  bitterly  hated.    Juhn  gives  an  instance
(xviii.  31)  in  which  Pilate  banters  the  leaders  of  the  accusation  with  a  scoffing  permis-
Mon  to  judge  the  Prisoner  by  their  own  Law,  and  draws  out  from  them  their  humiliating
confession  that  they  had  no  legal  or  admitted  right  to  execute  a  man,  nor  did  they
want  to  risk  the  possible  unpopularity  of  such  a  step.     The  synoptists  all  show  that
Pilate  saw  in  a  moment  through  the  hollowness  of  the  charge.     A  humiliated  Victim
of  priestly  malice  could  not,  as  a  Jewish  prince,  occasion  tiid  smallest  danger  to  the
Boman  state,  and  the  mere  silence  of  Jesus  before  such  a  charge  greatly  puzzled  the
governor.    John,  however,  does  more :  he  shows  that  Jesus,  'n  a  private  audience,  had
confessed  that  he  was  King;  but  that  the  words  "king"  and  "kingdom  "  were  used  in
no  secular  or  temporal  sense,  that  he  was  utterly  without  avowed  support,  and  that  he
desired  for  his  subjects  only  those  who  were  loyal  to  heavenly  truth.     Luke  gives  the
characteristic  transmission  of  Jesns  to  the  jurisdiction  of  Herod ;  and  Matthew  gives
the  message  of  Pilate's  wife.     Mark,  with  great  particularity,  details  the  demands  of
the  people  for  a  prisoner's  pardon,  which  Pilate — as  a  drowning  man  clutches  at  a
straw — tried  to  use  for  the  moment  on  behalf  of  Jesus.    We  see  even  from  the  hand-
washing (described  by  Matthew)  that  Pilate's  irresolution  was  partly  due  to  some  sense
of  unseen  powers,  some  spice  of  superstition  in  his  nature,  and  a  Koman  soldier's
unwillingness  to  do  a  base  thing  by  power  of  his  office  as  a  governor.    John  gives  a
more  subtle  key  in  the  certain  spell  which  Christ  had  cast  over  him  by  declaring  that
he  which  had  delivered  the  Heaven-sent  King  to  his  own  secular  court  had  committed
"  the  greater  sin."   Our  Gospel,  however,  as  well  as  the  synoptics,  reveals  the  revolting
weakness  of  the  man,  that  he  should  have  repeatedly  admitted  the  innocence  of  Jesus,
and  yet  have  scourged  him,  and  even  allowed  the  most  cruel  indignities  to  be  offered
to  One  whom  he  knew  to  be  blameless.    He  tried,  indeed,  to  make  capital  in  the  favour
of  Christ  from  the  absolute  contrast  between  the  Jewish  charge  and  the  condition  to
which  "  the  just  Man  "  had  been  reduced.     John  gives  the  truest  explanation  of  the
final  capitulation  of  Pilate,  entirely  characteristic  of  his  nature :  "  If  thou  let  this  man
go,  thou  art  no  friend  to  CEBsar,"  and  "  We  have  no  king  but  Cffisar."     Here  was  an
argument  which  he  could  not  resist.     He  knew  these  rebellious  Jews  were  lying  in
their  teeth  while  they  ostentatiously  descended  to  the  lowest  depths  of  national
apostasy.    He  yielded  to  a  clamour  that  mi^ht  cost  him  his  life  if  he  were  to  disregard
it  any  longer.     Certainly  Christ  died  for  Pilate.    But  quite  in  harmony  with  the
curious  composite  passions  of  the  moment,  the  Fourth  Gospel  emphasizes  Pilate's  words
which  he  meant  to  be  biting  satire :  "Tour  King;"  "your  King."    The  four  Gospels
are  unanimous  in  the  main  terms  of  the  accusation  written  over  the  cross,  "  Emo  of


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


THE  Jews."  It  was  thus  in  all  the  narratives — Matthew  especially  emphasizes  it —
that  we  see  how  Pilate  chuckled  over  the  satire  which  took  the  edge  off  the  pleasure
which  the  priestly  party  found  as  they  gloated  over  their  vile  revenge.  We  have  the
same  Pilate  in  all  four  Gospels,  and  the  materials  in  which  John  perpetuates  his
portrait,  though  differently  chosen,  are  consistent  with  the  synoptic  delineation.  Nay,
additional  light  is  thus  cast  upon  the  entire  transaction,  and  the  historic  outline  of
Pilate's  figure  more  deeply  etched.

C.  Answer  to  some  objections  hased  on  special  discrepancies  hetween  the  synoptists  and
John.

1.  Thus  Holtztnann  ('  Einleitung,'  p.  429,  etc.)  refers  to  the  exaggeration  in  the
supernatural  elements  of  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  e.g.  the  transformation  of  water  into  wine  ;
the  impotent  man  had  been  thirty  years  in  that  state ;  the  blind  man  had  been  blind
from  his  iirth;  and  Lazarus  had  been  dead,  buried,  and  might  have  been  putrid,
before  his  resurrection ;  he  walks  on  the  sea  of  Galilee,  and  is  not  taken  into  the  boat;
the  nobleman's  son  is  healed  from  a  distance.

These  peculiarities  are  more  appareni  thian  real.  The  transformation  of  water  into
wine  finds  its  parallel  in  the  creative  multiplication  of  the  bread.  The  walking  on  the
sea  is  not  more  wonderful  than  the  hushing  of  the  storm ;  while  the  healing  of  leprosy
(the  incurable  disease,  and  type  of  the  consequences  of  sin,  and  the  image  of  death  in
the  Mosaic  ritual),  is  omitted  by  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The  thirty  years  of  the  impotent
man  in  oh.  v.  is  paralleled  by  the  woman  who  had  been  crippled  for  eighteen  years
(Luke  xiii.  11).  The  healing  from  a  distance  in  ch.  iv.  52,  etc.,  finds  its  exact  counter-
part in  Matt.  viii.  5 — 13.  The  gathering  and  growing  significance  of  the  resurrection
of  Lazarus  after  he  had  lain  in  his  grave  is  not  denied ;  but  Luke's  narrative  of  the
young  man  carried  out  to  his  burial  is  more  memorable  and  startling  than  Matthew's
narrative  of  the  resurrection  of  the  maiden  daughter  of  Jairus.  There  is  an  affluenc*
of  material  at  the  disposal  of  the  earliest  tradition  out  of  wliich  this  writer  has  made
judicious  selection,  and  from  obvious  reasons  that  these  particular  events  proved  the
occasion  and  text  of  very  special  and  related  discourse.  It  is  more  than  evident  that
the  Fourth  Gospel,  though  the  latest  of  the  narratives,  is  not  the  most  profuse,  nor
the  most  imposing  in  its  enumeration  of  miracles,  and  is  the  one  Gospel  in  which
supernatural  events  are  regarded  as  constituting  a  lower  kind  of  evidence  than  the
unsustained  words  of  Christ  (ch.  xiv.  11,  12).  In  this  connection,  the  omission  of  the
Transfiguration  and  of  the  great  outbursts  of  healing  power,  which  are  recorded  in  the
synoptic  Gospels,  deserves  special  consideration.  Moreover,  the  miraculous  accompani-
mente  of  events  common  to  the  synoptic  and  Johannine  narrative  are  positively  shorn
in  the  latter  of  some  of  their  supernatural  features ;  e.g.  the  current  report  of  the
baptism  of  Jesus  is  corrected  (see  p.  xcviii.,  and  notes)  by  a  representation  which  places
the  miracle  in  the  consciousness  of  John  the  Baptist.  The  stupendous  portents  attend-
ing the  Crucifixion  are  limited  to  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  the  parting  of  the
garments  and  in  the  piercing  of  the  side  of  Jesus.

2.  The  synoptists  are  said  to  differ  from  the  fourth  evangelist  in  representing  the
continuous  human  development  of  the  plan  of  Jesus,  if  not  of  his  character  and  self-
consciousness.*  Dr.  Davidson  considers  that  very  grave  objections  may  be  taken
to  Schenkel's  method  of  establishing  this  contrariety  to  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The
numerous  writers  (e.g.  Hase,  Eenan)  who  have  repeated  the  same  objection  overstate
the  stages  of  development  as  visible  in  the  first  three  Gospels.  The  Third  Gospel
(Luke  iv.  16 — 30)  sets  forth  that,  at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry,  Jesus,  in  the
synagogue  at  Nazareth,  inaugurated  the  Messianic  kingdom,  and  declared  that  Isa.
Ixi.  was  fulfilled  in  his  own  Person.  Mark  represents  him,  at  the  beginning  of  his
ministry,  as  hailed  by  the  daemoniacs  who  knew  him  as  "  the  Holy  One  of  God,"  as
curing  leprosy  by  his  touch,  and  claiming  the  right  to  forgive  sins.  He  indicates  the
period — one  far  earlier  than  most  harmonists  find  it  convenient  to  place  the  sermon  on
the  mount  (Mark  i.  22) — when  he  must,  according  to  Matt.  v. — vii.,  have  identified  his
own  cause  with  that  of  "  righteousness,"  assumed  a  position  parallel  to  that  of  Moses,
discriminated  himself  from  the  sinful  human  race,  and  declared  that  he  had  the
destinies  of  the  entire  world  in  his  hands.

There  is  not  much  more  room  for  development  after  that  I    Abundant  Indication  it
'  Sobenkel,  *  Character  of  Jesus,'  §  ii. ;  but  thronghout  the  volume  reitenteC


cTx  DrrnoDucTioN  to


supplied  by  the  synoptists  that  Jesus  was,  by  some  of  his  hearers,  more  clearly  appre-
hended as  the  months  rolled  on,  but  at  the  first  he  was  hailed  from  heaven  as  "  the
beloved  Son,  in  whom  the  Father  is  well  pleased."  There  is  scarcely  anything  more
explicit,  more  allied  to  the  crown  of  imperial  majesty,  than  this.  To  get  rid  of  the
force  of  it  the  whole  conception  of  John's  baptism  of  Jesus  has  to  be  explained  away
(see  Sohenkel,  he.  cit.,  pp.  44 — 47,  where  the  testimonies  of  the  Baptist,  as  given  in  the
Fourth  Gospel,  are  but  "  forms  of  later  ideas  ").  The  important  fact  is  that  the  vision
of  John  and  Jesus,  as  given  in  the  synoptic  Gospels,  is  practically  identical  with  the
testimonies  which,  according  to  the  Fourth  Gospel,  many  days  later  were  borne  by
John  the  Baptist  to  Jesus  (ch.  iii.  27,  etc.).

We  are  not  disposed  in  the  least  to  question  that  there  must  have  been  development
in  the  soul  of  Jesus  from  his  childhood  to  his  boyhood,  from  twelve  years  old  to  thirty.
But  Jesus  did  not  wait  for  the  dsemoniacs  or  the  multitude  to  tell  him  that  he  was  the
King  of  the  new  kingdom.  So  great  a  nature  as  his  was  not  governed  by  Hillel  or
Gamaliel,  by  Essene  or  Rabban,  by  Sadducee  or  Pharisee.  The  immense  originality  of
Jesus,  as  at  the  very  first  displayed  in  the  synoptic  narrative,  showed  how  far  his
consciousness  of  mission  and  origin  had  gone,  "  Sonship,  as  an  element  of  Messiah-
ship,  grew  and  deepened  with  time,"  says  Dr.  Davidson.  The  element  of  time,  if  we
take  even  the  longer  chronology  of  John,  is  almost  a  vanishing  factor  in  the  exhibition
of  the  character  of  Jesus.  He  had  reached  his  maturity  when  he  appeared  as  a  candidate
for  John's  baptism.  His  mind  was  made  up  with  reference  to  what  was  involved  in
the  role  of  Messiah,  both  as  a  Son  and  as  a  Sufferer,  as  a  Prophet  and  as  a  King.  He  did
not  wait  for  circumstances  to  reveal  him  to  himself.  But  the  stages  of  some  kind  ol
evolution  and  revelation  of  his  nature,  conditionated,  so  far  as  his  hearers  were  concerned,
by  their  susceptibility  to  his  teaching,  are  not  absent  from  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Thus
compare  the  teaching  bestowed  upon  the  woman  of  Samaria  with  that  to  the  leaders  of
religious  thought  in  Jerusalem  (oh.  v.);  e.g.  compare  the  elementary  ideas  of  the
spirituality  of  "  God  "  and  of  "  worship,"  and  the  power  of  Jesus  to  give  the  water  of
life,  with  the  grounds  on  which,  as  the  Son  of  God,  he  was  able  to  follow  the  leading
and  do  the  will  of  the  Father  in  works  of  mercy.  Add  to  this  the  growing  revelation
of  himself  as  Life,  Light,  and  Love,  from  ch.  v.  to  ch.  xi.  In  this  respect,  also,  compare
the  teaching  bestowed  on  the  different  groups  of  disputants  in  ch.  vii.  and  ch.  viii.
with  the  more  explicit  and  abundant  revelations  of  his  character,  functions,  and  work
as  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  and  his  unity  with  the  Father  (ch.  x.).  Almost  all
shades  of  modern  criticism  admit  the  impressive  change  in  manner  and  teaching
inaugurated  in  ch.  xiii.,  after  he  had  retired  from  the  temple,  and,  with  his  beloved  ones
around  him,  proceeded  to  reveal  the  way  to  the  Father,  the  imminence  of  his  departure,
the  certainty  of  his  mystic  presence,  the  mission  of  the  Comforter,  and  the  oneness  of  his
Church.  So  far  as  progress  is  concerned  in  the  self-revelation  of  the  Lord,  the  records
of  our  Gospel  are  as  explicit  and  marked  as  those  of  the  synoptic  Gospels.  We  are  ready
to  concede  a  different  level  of  instructions  and  a  class  of  teaching  better  adapted  to  indivi-
duals than  to  multitudes,  more  suited  to  the  midnight  auditor,  or  to  the  solitary  waif  at
a  wayside  well,  or  to  the  knots  of  perturbed  ecclesiastics,  or  to  the  family  at  Bethany,
than  to  the  ordinary  synagogue  life  or  the  miscellaneous  crowds  on  the  hills  of  Galilee.

The  synoptic  Gospels,  if  they  are  left  to  tell  their  own  story,  and  are  not  torn  to
pieces  in  order  to  secure  a  chronological  arrangement  in  harmony  with  a  preconceived
theory,  disclose,  as  the  Fourth  Gospel  does,  that  the  mind  of  the  Lord  was  mature  and
made  up  from  the  first,  and  that  the  apparent  progress  is  due  to  the  increasing  sensitive-
ness and  susceptibility  of  the  hearers  of  his  wondrous  words.

3.  The  presence  of  Alexandrine  and  Gnostic  ideas  is  supposed  to  dominate  the
Gospel,  and  thus  to  discriminate  it  from  the  synoptic  narrative  to  the  disadvantage  of
its  genuineness.  In  dealing  with  the  sources  and  language  of  the  Gospel,  with  its
platform  and  antecedents,  we  have  seen  what  ground  there  is  for  accepting  a  certain
method  or  style  of  representation  more  prevalent  in  Ephesus  than  in  Jerusalem,  in
Borne  or  Alexandria  than  in  the  Palestinian  schools,  and  also  the  limitations  to  which
this  explanation  is  submitted,  and  the  indications  of  the  eye-witness  that  strike  through
the  whole  weft  like  silver  threads.  It  is  desirable  in  this  place  merely  to  call  attention
to  the  exaggerations  of  criticism  in  this  behalf.  Attention  has  been  already  called  to
the  presence,  in  Matt.  xL  27,  28,  and  Luke  x.  21,  22,  of  phraseology  which  is  identical


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxii


in  tone  and  suggestion  with  that  which  occurs  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.    This  single
textual  fact  is  sutBcient  to  dispose  of  large  part  of  the  allegation,

It  has  haen  said,  "  Instead  of  saying  that  God  created  the  world,  as  the  synoptists
do^  •  kingdom  of  darkness  exists  from  the  beginning  xmder  the  dominion  of  the  prince
of  this  world.  This  being  is  hostile  to  God;  he  is  the  devil,  Satan,  the  wicked  one.
Because  of  his  essential  opposition  to  God,  he  is  connected  with  matter."  It  is  unfor-
tunate that  no  passage  from  either  of  the  synoptists  is  forthcoming  in  vindication  of
this  contrast.  In  Mark  x.  6  Jesus  speaks  of  the  "making"  of  men  male  and  female
at  the  beginning  of  the  creation  (Jm'  dpxni  Kriircui).  The  connection  and  the  reference  to
Gen.  L  27  show  that  there  is  no  dogmatic  assertion  of  the  creation  out  of  nothing,  even
there.  We  are  told  that  "  all  things  (lyeVsro)  became,  came  into  being,  through  the
Logos."  What  right  has  any  critic  to  say  that  fi  i\i\  ("  matter  ")  is  excluded  from  irivra ;
and  that  the  devil,  because  of  his  opposition  to  God,  is  connected  with  matter  f  "  Dark-
ness "  is  not  referred  to  by  the  author  until  he  has  spoken  of  life,  and  the  Life  which  is
the  Light  of  "men."  The  darkness  is  not  chaotic  or  acosmic,  but  moral,  and  the
antagonism  between  "  light "  and  "  darkness  "  is  not  dualistic  in  the  philosophic  sense.
It  is  no  other  than  a  current  plaoitum  of  the  Old  Testament.  Gen.  L  2 — 5  :  "  darkness  "
is  simply  the  negation  of  light ;  in  Ps.  xviii.  28  it  is  the  symbol  of  sorrow ;  Ps.  xcL  6,
the  physical  region  where  the  unknown  causes  of  evil  dwell  (Ps.  cxii.  4 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  10 ;
and  ct  Luke  i.  79  and  Matt.  vi.  23,  where  it  represents  the  moral  condition  of  those
whose  spiritual  vision  is  bleared  or  blinded).  As  to  the  existence  of  the  devil,  or  Satan,
the  synoptists  have  more  to  say  than  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  it  is  in  Matthew's  and
Luke's  accoimt  of  the  temptation  of  Christ  that  the  relation  of  the  Sid0o\os  to  the
world  is  most  explicitly  asserted.  "  The  wicked  one,"  i  irovripSs,  does  not  in  this  sense
appear  in  John,  unless  ch.  xvii.  15  be  such  a  reference ;  but  if  so,  then  Matt.  v.  37 ;  vi.
13;  xiii.  19;  xiii.  38;  Lukexi.  26,  convey  the  same  idea  more  forcibly.  The  synoptists
describe  the  kingdom  of  Beelzebub  and  Satan  as  set  over  against  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  as  "standing"  because  of  its  inward  organization  and  the  obedience  and  loyalty  of
its  subjects.  The  Gnostics  have  made  far  more  use  of  this  conception  than  they  have
of  the  Johannine  revelations  of  the  father  of  lies.  "  Jesus,"  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,
according  to  Dr.  Davidson,  "  for  this  reason  does  not  pray  for  the  world,  which  is
incapable  of  conversion,  but  for  his  disciples."  Is  this  conceivably  the  meaning  of
John,  who  puts  ch.  iii.  16, 17  into  the  lips  of  the  Lord?  cf.  ch.  i.  29  (John  the
Baptist) ;  iv.  42  (the  Samaritans) ;  vi.  33,  51 ;  viii.  12 ;  xii.  47 ;  xvi.  8 ;  xvii.  21.
"  Not  until  the  prince  of  this  world  is  expelled  from  his  kingdom,  as  the  result  of
Christ's  death,  shall  all  men  be  drawn  into  the  faith  and  fellowship  with  the  Word."
The  assault  delivered  at  the  might  of  Satan  by  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  the  victorious
issue  from  temptation,  and  victory  over  death,  is  one  of  the  great  themes  of  the  New
Testament.  There  is  more  reason  in  a  supposed  Gnostic  origin  of  Luke  x.  17 — 20  than
for  a  solitary  reference  to  the  prince  of  this  world  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  (cf.  Heb.  ii.  14 ;
Ool.  ii.  15).  A  docetic  element  is  attributed  to  the  representation  by  the  Fourth
Gospel  of  the  humanity  and  bodily  life  of  our  Lord.  The  fact  is  that  there  is  no  book
in  the  New  Testament  which  more  explicitly  demonstrates  the  physical  life  and  perfect
humanity  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  father  and  mother  and  brothers  are  spoken  of,  his
weariness  and  thirst,  his  tears,  his  human  affections,  his  dress,  his  food,  his  spittle,
his  touch,  his  flesh  and  blood,  his  bones  and  wounded  side.  He  is  "made  flesh ; "  he
dies ;  his  body  is  embalmed ;  his  garments  are  divided ;  and,  after  his  resurrection,  he
partakes  of  fish  and  bread.  To  say  that  all  this  does  not  alter  the  case,  because  in
ch.  vii.  30 ;  viii.  59 ;  x.  39 ;  and  xviii.  6,  the  docetic  view  is  implied,  is  very  wilful,  seeing
that  these  passages  all  have  actual  and  close  parallels  in  the  synoptic  Gospels.
Hilgenfeld  has  pressed  especially  the  sympathy  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  for  Valentinianism,
and  specially  finds  in  ch.  viii.  43,  44  the  Gnostic  idea  of  the  creation  of  the  devil  by  a
god  of  inferior  rank,  such  as  that  which  the  Ophites  found  in  the  God  of  the  Jews  (see
notes) ;  and  the  reference  to  the  Gnostic  idea  of  "  the  father  of.  the  devil,"  which
appears  to  us  to  be  a  mistranslation,  and  to  introduce  elements  entirely  foreign  to  the
whole  teaching  of  the  Gospel.  The  opposition  between  the  children  of  God  and  the
children  of  the  devil  is  manifest  in  Gospel  and  Epistle,  but  the  distinction  ia  not  based
on  a  primordial  difference  of  essence,  but  on  the  different  act  of  the  will,  which  leaves
the  renponsibility  of  being  in  one  or  the  other  category  with  men.  a/^d  not  either  with


cixil  INTRODUCTION  TO


fate,  God,  or  the  devil  (see  ch.  v.  39,  40,  44,  47 ;  see  Godet's  admirable  diaensBion,
'  Introduction,'  vol.  1. 182,  etc.).

We  are  here  concerned  with  the  relation  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  the  synoptic  three,
and  cannot  do  other  than  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  contents
of  the  synoptic  Gospels  to  invalidate  the  historicity  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  We  shall
now  proceed  to  some  of  the  special  characteristics  of  the  Gospel  which  are  supposed  by
some  critics  to  destroy  its  authenticity  as  the  work  of  the  Apostle  John.

4.  The  style  and  diction  of  the  evangelist.  This  is  said  on  all  hands  to  be  a  good
specimen  of  Hellenistic  Greek,  and  not  to  be  more  Hebraistic  than  other  portions  of  the
New  'festament,  but  rather  less  so ' — a  circumstance  which  is  to  be  easily  accounted
for,  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  apostle's  long  residence  in  a  Greek-speakibg  province,  and
his  familiarity  with  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  in  Patmos,  Ephesus,  and  possibly  Rome.
Those  peculiarities  to  which  some  critics  appeal  as  indicating  contrast  between  the
diction  of  Christ  as  recorded  by  John  and  that  attributed  to  him  by  the  synoptists,  are
extremely  few  and  unimpressive.  The  mere  fact  that  John  should  use  in  his  own
narrative,  or  put  into  the  lips  of  various  interlocutors,  certain  words  and  phrases,  is  nothing
more  than  to  say  that  this,  most  remarkable  author  had  a  moderate  amount  of  individu-
ality— that  he  had  a  certain  style  of  his  own.  Thus  that  he  should  use  such  words  as
iu/Bpcuui, livT\niia,  inoirvvdyoiyos,  $i0p^<rKeiv,y\w<rcr6Koiiov,  SaKpieiv,  SlSv/uis,  iyKolvta,  irtxpitiv,
6i\ien,  epe/ii/ioTtt,  Kfp/iO,  /co\u/ij3^flpo,  fiopoyeviis,  vmriip,  iC^iv,  vpofiariK'ti,  7rpo(ro(Ti)j,  and  many
others  only  resembles  what  may  be  stated  of  almost  every  book  of  the  New  Testament.
The  vocabulary  of  the  evangelist  is  small,  and  the  same  expressions  are  repeated  with
great  frequency.  *<5s  occurs  twenty-three  times ;  Si^a,  SoiiC&rBtu,  forty-two  times ;
f"^,  Cv"'  fiity-two  times ;  lutprvpia,  fiapTvpeiv,  forty-seven  times ;  yivdaKnv,  fifty-five
times ;  K6<riias,  seventy-eight  times ;  truminv,  ninety-eight  times ;  ipyov,  twenty-three
times;  ivofut  and  oAijflefa,  twenty-five  times;  ariii.eiov,  seventeen.  These  words  are
found,  from  their  varied  position  and  context,  to  have  special  connotation,  and  to  grow
in  sigtifioance  as  we  pass  from  the  prologue  to  the  epilogue.  That  we  should  find
fiivroi  six  times,  though  not  used  in  other  Gospels ;  that  oiv  should  be  used  as  a  con-
neetive  particle  far  more  frequently  than  in  the  other  Gospels ;  that  iiiv  should  almost
be  droj.ped  out  of  use;  that  koI  should  be  used  where  we  might  expect  8^;  that  he
should  be  so  often  content  to  bring  opposing  statements  into  simple  juxtaposition,
leaving  the  conclusion  to  be  felt  rather  than  emphasized  by  himself  (ch.  i,  5 ;  xv.  24 ;
iii.  11) ;  that  the  use  of  the  optative  should  be  discarded,  unless  in  ch.  xiii.  24 ;  that
\iyos  should  be  used  in  a  special  sense  in  the  prologue  and  in  the  First  Epistle;  and
that  a  multitude  of  expressions  should  be  found  in  the  Epistles  which  also  occur  in  the
narrative  or  reflective  portions  of  the  Gospel,  all  combine  to  show  that,  apart  from  the
language  put  into  the  lips  of  our  Lord,  there  is  a  discoverable  dogmatic  style  adopted
by  this  writer.  It  is  worthy  of  special  note  that  whereas,  e.g.,  the  term  Aiyoi  is  used
by  the  evangelist  when  speaking  in  his  own  name  (not  only  in  the  prologue,  but  in
1  John  i.  1  and  Tiev.  xix.  13)  of  the  Lord,  yet  John  was  never  tempted  to  put  this
language  into  the  lips  of  Jesus.  Another  expression  common  to  the  prologue  and  First
Kpistle  is  "  to  be  horn  of  God."  There  were  many  occasions  when  it  would  have  been
easy  to  have  justified  the  phrase  by  attributing  it  to  Jesus,  but  the  evangelist  avoids
the  phrase  in  ch.  iii.  and  elsewhere.

The  charge  is  made  that  all  the  interlocutors,  John  the  Baptist  and  Nicodemus,  the
woman  of  Samaria,  the  Jews  ami  Pilate,  alike  speak  the  same  Johannine  dialect,  and
that  this  is  also  identical  with  that  which  is  put  into  the  lips  of  our  Lord.  Consequently
it  is  inferred  that  the  entire  language  of  the  thought  which  has  broken  away  from  the
atmosphere  and  dialect  of  the  synoptists  is  the  invention  of  the  writer.  With  the
phraseology,  the  thought  is  supposed  also  to  be  Johannine,  and  we  are  said  to  be  reading
a  powerful  romance  rather  than  a  carefully  arranged  series  of  biographical  fragments.
Now,  we  are  ready,  nay,  compelled,  to  concede  a  considerable  subjective  element  in  the
delineation.  The  choice  of  one  group  of  discourses,  debates,  events,  and  results,  rather
than  of  another,  is  clearly  the  work  of  the  evangelist.  He  himself  asserts  that  the
materials  at  his  disposal  were  far  more  numerous  than  those  which  he  has  utilized  (ch-
XX.  30).  The  Spirit  that  moved  him  to  this  particular  choice  utilized  the  specialty  of
his  meditative  mind  and  impulsive  love  as  the  means  and  process  of  the  revelation.  W«
'  Winer, '  Grammar  of  New  Testament  Greek '  (Eng.  trans.),  p.  35.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxxlU

must  go  further,  and  say  that  in  no  case  can  we  suppose  that  he  preserved  fotidem
verbis  the  whole  of  the  discourse  or  conversations.  The  interview  with  Nioodemus
lasted  longer  than  five  minutes  ;  the  debate  in  the  fifth  chapter  more  than  ten  minutes;
the  sharp  controversies  of  ch.  vi. — x.  can  only  be  given  in  outline.  Doubtless  the
salient  points  were  preserved  in  each  case,  the  ideas  and  words  that  left  the  deepest
impression  on  the  writer's  memory  were  recited ;  but  the  putting  together  of  the  whole,
the  brilliant  dramatic  scenes  of  chs.  vi. — viii.,  record  the  gist  of  lengthened  and  animated
controversy.  The  sublime  converse  in  the  upper  chamber  must  have  been  curtailed
and  arranged  so  as  to  conserve  the  vital  elements  of  this  unique  teaching.  No  critic
can  escape  from  a  certain  gubjeotive  clement  in  the  representation.  Even  if  we  could
unreservedly  accept  the  theory  of  Hug,  Diodati,  and  Roberts,  that  our  Lord  spake  the
Greek  tongue  in  Galilee,  or  to  Pilate,  or  when  in  presence  of  the  Greeks,  yet  it  is
difficult  to  suppose  that  the  Baptist  spake  Greek,  that  the  conversation  with  Nicodemus
or  in  the  upper  chamber  was  not  carried  on  in  the  familiar  vernacular.  In  the  extent,
therefore,  that  our  Lord  used  Aramaic  at  all,  the  evangelist  must  have  translated  into
his  own  Hellenistic  dialect  the  Aramaic  words.  This  circumstance  is  enough  to  explain
a  large  amount  of  sameness  in  the  Gospel,  even  in  reporting  the  ministry  and  teaching
either  of  John  or  Jesus.  The  synoptic  Gospels  do,  without  much  doubt,  reveal  the
existence  of  an  oral  or  written  Greek  nucleus  from  which,  while  supplementing  it  by
special  details,  their  authors  drew  their  main  material.  Now,  the  writer  of  this  Gospel
acted  independently  of  that  source,  and  drew  more  immediately  upon  his  own  speciid
memories  and  the  ideas  which  he  had  himself  widely  diffused  by  his  preaching  before
he  penned  the  Gospel.  The  question  arises — Is  there  any  distinction  to  be  perceived
between  the  Greek  diction  used  by  John  in  the  composition  of  his  Gospel  and  of  his
Epistles,  and  that  which,  by  some  sure  instinct  of  reverence  and  deep  memory,  he  has
u»jd  when  recording  the  words  and  discourses  of  our  Lord  ?

Numerous  tables  prepared  for  me  by  the  Eev.  William  Henry  Beckett,  of  Stebting,
reveal  some  facts  which  are  worthy  of  special  attention.  I  regret  that  I  have  not
space  to  present  them  in  extenso,  and  hope  that  he  may  be  induced  to  publish  them,
with  the  important  conclusions  deducible  from  them.

List  A,  as  below,  shows  that  more  than  a  hundred  and  forty-five  words  are  put  by
the  evangelist  into  the  lips  of  our  Lord,  but  never  used  by  himself;  of  which  thirty-
eight  are  found  in  the  synoptic  records  of  our  Lord's  words,  and  of  which  fourteen  are
peculiar  to  the  Johannine  writings.

List  B  shows  the  expansion  of  the  same  investigation,  where  the  dominance  of  a
certain  phraseology  in  the  words  of  our  Lord  is  contrasted  with  the  use  of  the  same
language  by  the  evangelist  elsewhere,  in  narrative  portions  and  in  the  Epistles.

List  0  enumerates  the  phrases  which  are  peculiar  to  the  utterances  of  our  Lord  in
the  Fourth  Gospel.  They  are  nine  in  number,  of  which  the  most  remarkable  are  the
reduplicated  'A/t^v,  cJ^^k,  which  occurs  twenty-five  times;  '£7^1  eiVi  six  times;  'Eyi>
elfu  i  ttiirteen  times.

List  D  contains  nearly  five  hundred  words  (a  not  inconsiderable  vocabulary)  which
are  used  by  the  writer  when  pursuing  his  narrative  or  recording  the  words  of  others,
not  our  Lord's,  or  developing  in  hortatory  form  his  own  personal  conceptions  of
doctrine  or  duty.  Of  course,  much  is  necessarily  common  to  the  whole  diction,  but
the  facts  here  adduced  demonstrate  a  distinct  character  in  our  Lord's  speech,  which  did
not  pass  over  into  the  style  of  the  beloved  disciple,  and  a  large  element  of  personal
style  adopted  by  himself,  which,  nevertheless,  he  never  attributed  to  the  Lord.  This,
I  submit,  cannot  be  the  result  of  accident,  and  is  best  explained  by  recognizing  the
existence  of  the  distinct  nucleus  of  historic  and  reported  speech.

List  A. — Words  found  only  in  discourses  and  sayings  attributed  to  our  Lord  hy  St,  John.*


&7iiAAiau,  ch.  V.  36 ;  viii.  56.

hyiiiw,  ch.  X.  36 ;  xvii.  17,  19 ;
used  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,
Matthew  and  Luke,  and  in


Matt,  xxiii.  18, 19  of  the  gold
and  the  gift;  does  not  ocoui
elsewhere  in  the  Gospels.
&ywvl(oii<u,  ch.  xviii.  36.


'  The  letter  J  indicates  that  the  word  is  peculiar  to  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  S,  that  the  word
ii  confined,  in  the  synoptic  Gospels,  to  the  language  of  our  Lord.


exxlr


INTRODUCTION  TO


ieer/u,  oh.  xii.  48.
J.  iAAax^SC)  oh.  z.  1.

h\\o/uu,  ch.  iv.  11.
aWdrpios,  oh.  X.  5.
8  &liTre\os,  ch.  zv.  1,  4,  5.

J.         [dvafidprriTos,   ch.   viii.   7    (of
1  Epist.  i.  8 — 10,  where  the
word  might  have  been  used).]
it^p  =  husband,  oh.  iv.  16,  17,

18.
dvapveonai,  ch.  xiii.   38;  and
dpv4ofiatf  H.T.
8.  AwuTTos,  ch.  XX.  27.

iir6<rTO\os,  ch.  xiii.  16.
iirihfta,  ch.  xvii.  12.
iptffrda,  ch.  xxi.  12,  15
dpvlov,  cb.  xxi.  15.
drind^a,  cb.  viii.  49.

&  Pdirra,  ch.  ziii.  26.

0airi\ela,  ch.  iii.  3, 5 ;  xviii.  36.

$h.aaipTifieUf  ch.  X.  36.

p6aKa,  oh.  xxi.  15, 17.

Ppwiio,  ch.  iv.  34.
a  /3p«(ris,  ch.  iv.  32 ;  vi.  27  (fiir),

55.

8.  yfa>py6s,  ch,  xv.  1,

yviopi(ia,  ch.  xv.   15;  xvii,  26
(6i«).

Sci,  cb.  iii.  7,  14;  iv.  24;  ix.
4;  X.  16;  xii.  34.  This
word  also  occurs  in  ch.  iii,
30  and  iv.  20 ;  but  the  evan-
gelist only  uses  it  in  ch.  iv.  4
and  XX.  9.  May  not  both  these
passages  be  echoes  of  the
words  of  Christ?
J.  SeiKtdw,  ch.  xiv.  27.

S4pa,  ch.  xviii.  23.

5.  Sfvpw,  oh.  xi.  43.

StSaKris,  ch.  vi.  45  (quotatioii)^
t6\os,  oh.  i.  47.
Sapei,  ch,  iv.  10.

6.  Sapeiv,  oh.  xv.  25.

«ISos,  oh.  V.  37.

ixKeyoixai,  ch.  vi.  70;  xiii.  18;

XV.  16  (6j«),  19.
licTiopeioiMt,  oh.  V.  29 ;  xv.  26.
iKTelva,  oh.  xxi.  18.
8b  i\ei8fpos,  ch.  viii.  33,  ascribed

to  our  Lord  by  the  Jews;

viii.  36.
lKeveep6a,  ch.  viii.  32,  36.
l\nl(ai,  ch.  V.  45.
iHTToplov,  ch.  ii.  16.
8  ivTiupiaa/iSi,  ch.  xii.  7.

ivT^Woi^ai,  ch.  xiv.  31 ;  xv.  14,

17  [viii.  5,  by  the  Jews].
i^iyw,  cli.  X.  3.
/.  (}virvl(a!,  eh.  xi.  11.

ivlyfios,  ch.  iii.  12.


S.,  excepting
Lu.  xxii.  33.


S.


S.
S.
J.

a


B.,  excepting
Lu.  i.  42.


i.

a


s.

s.


tiriSlSai/uu,  oh.  xiii.  26:  SlSum,

B.T.
iirovpdytos,  ch.  iii.  12.
iToi/idCai,  oh.  xiv.  2,  3
tTotiios,  ch,  vii.  6.

iuviiia,  oh.  xxi.  18  (bis).
^woirai^O),  oh.  v.  21  (bis);  vi.  63.

6apiT4a,  oh.  xvi.  33 ;  occurs  six
times  in  the  synoptic  Gos-
pel s,  in  each  instance  ascribed
to  our  Lord.

e^pliu,  oh.  iv.  36  (bU),  37,  38.

BepuT/iSs,  ch.  iv.  35  (iis).

Hkv,  oh.  xviii.  11.

flAiil-if,  ch.  xvi.  21,  33.

Bprivea,  ch.  xvL  20.

filial,  ch.  X.  10.

'Japari\lTTi!,  ch.  i.  47.

ttaSaipa,  ch.  XT.  2.

Kaeap6s,  ch.  xiii.  10  (bit),  11;

XV.  3.
Kttia,  oh.  V.  35;  XT,  &
KaKus,  ch.  xviii.  23.
«?»-,  ch.  viii.  14 ;  x.  38 ;  xl  25.
KapTr6s,  ch.  iv.  36 ;  xii.  24 ;  xt.

2,  4,  5,  8,  16.
KaTaPo\ifi,  ch.  xvii.  24.
KaraKpifu),  oh.  viii.  10,  1 1.
KUT-liyopos,   ch.   viii.    10 ;  II T.

omits.
•AfiTTai,  ch.  z.  1 0,
kKtj/m,  ch.  XV.  2,  4,  5,  6.
k6imos,  ch  xii.  24.
K((7ros,  ch.  iv.  38.
Kpareu,  oil.  XX.  23  (bit).
Kpl/ia,  oh.  iz.  39.

Karptta,  oh.  xvi.  2.
Ao^ai,  ch  xiii.  10.
KiKos,  ch.  X.  12  (bit).
XJmi,  oh.  xvi.  e,  20,  21,  22.
\^X'"'s>  oh.  V.  35.


S.,  excepting  /uucdpios,  oh.  xiii.  17;  xx.  29.
Lu.   i.    45;
xi.  27.

iniKfTt,  ch.  V.  14 ;  viii.  11.
H^i  ouK,  oh.  xviii.  11.
•  iuKp6i'  (adv.),  ch.  xiii.  33 ;  zlv.
19 ;  xvi.  16, 17,  18,  19.
UMphs,  ch.  vii.  33 ;  xii.  35.


S.,  excepting
Blk.  XV.  40;
Lu.  xix.  3.


luaBunis,  oh.  x.  12,  13;  R.T.
omits.
8.  ^"^AJove^cBich.  XV.20;  xvi.4,21.

J.  liovi),  ch.  xiv.  2,  23.

S.  vioi,  oh.  xxi.  18.

vofjiii,  oh.  x.  9.

ivpaha,  ch.  XV.  8,


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


S.  45r)yeai,  ch.  xvi.  13.

ivras,  ch.  viii.  36.

hpipav6s,  ch.  xiv.  18.
&  6(pis,  ch.  iii.  14.

■Karpls,  oh.  iv.  44  (?).

xeivdm,  oh.  vi.  35,

w(pur(T6s,  ch.  X.  10.

vipiTf/iyo),  oh.  vii.  22.

nepiToiiii,  ol).  -vii.  22,  23.

iroi/iV,  ob.  X.  2,  11,  12,  14,  16.

wol/ivri,  ch.  X.  16.

■novftaii'a),  ch.  xxi.  16

Tr6irts,  ch.  vi.  55.
S.,  excepting  jroTo/»(>s,  ch.  vii.  38.
Mk.  i.  5.

J.  WTcpor,  ch.  vii.  17.

irtn-lipiov,  ch.  xviii.  11.

rrpoaK6vra,  ch.  xi.  9, 10.
J.  irpoirKvvriTTis,  ch.  iv.  23.

J.  Trpo(T<pdyiov,  oh.  xxi.  5.

B.  irpo<pa<Tis,  ch.  xv.  22.

J  m-epva,  ch.  xiii.  18  (quotation).

irvp,  oh.  XV.  6.

J.  /St'ai,  ch  vii  38  (to  flow).

S.  ffjTos,  ch.  xiL  24.

8.,  excepting  irKoi'SaXffoi,  oh.  vi  61 ;  xvi.  1.
Matt,  iii  12;
Luke  iii  17.


S.
8.


S.
J.


8.
8.

8.


trKopiri(w,  ch.  X.  12 ;  xvi  82.

ffirelpu,  oh.  iv.  36,  37.
o-ukS,  ch.  i  48,  50.
ffuTTipta,  ch.  iv.  22.

Tcpcu,  ch.  iv.  48.
TfTpd/iiivov,  ch.  Iv.  35.
tIkto),  ch.  xvi.  21.
Tj/utJo),  ch.  V.  23  (four  times);

viii.  49 ;  xii.  26.
Tt/ii),  oh.  iv.  44  (?).
rpis,  oh.  xiii.  38.
Tpi&yu>,  ch.  vi  54,  56,  57,  58;

xiii.  18.


XV.  20.
{nrddeiyfia,  oh.  xiii.  15.
^o/iiv^ffKu,  oh.  xiv.  26.
Varepov,  ch.  xiii.  36.
S.,  excepting  i\l/6a),  ch.  iii.  14 ;  viii.  28 ;  xii
Ln.  i.  52.  32.

(jiiiya,  oh.  X.  5,  12,  13;  B.T.

omits.

Xelpuy,  oh.  V.  14.

J.  x"^^"-!  <'^-  vi^-  ^''■

Xopriim,  ch.  vi.  26.

S.,  excepting  Xxmep,  ch.  v.  21,  26.
Lu.xviiill.

Some  grammatical  peculiarities  must  pass  under  review.  The  peculiarities  of
grammatical  expression  adopted  by  the  Fourth  Gospel  are  not  numerous ;  e.g.  he  places
the  article  before  oipavov  where  the  other  evangelists  omit  it  (except  ch.  i.  32).  He  uses
the  present  tense  for  an  apparent  future,  when  that  future  is  represented  as  being
as  good  as  present  (ch.  xiv.  3)  ;  so  ch.  iv.  21 ;  xvi.  2  (epxernt  Spa  Sre) — but  of.  Matt.
xvii.  11 — and  ch.  xii  26 ;  xiv.  3 ;  xvii.  24,  with  Swob  el/jX  kyd,  which  may  mean,  "  where
I  shall  most  surely  be,"  or,  "where  I  am  even  now  at  home"  (Winer,  loc.  cit.,  p.  332).
And,  again,  where  the  action  seems  on  the  point  of  realization  (ch.  x.  32 ;  xiii  6,  27 ;
xvi  17  ;  xvii.  11 ;  xxi.  3)  ;  but  similar  usage  is  found  in  1  Cor.  xii.  31 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 ;
Eom.  XV.  25.   John's  notion  of  CaA)  almost  requires  the  present  tense  (ch.  iii.  36 ;  v.  26).

Notwithstanding  the  urgency  with  which  Winer  maintains  the  telic  force  of  'Iva
throughout  the  New  Testament,  in  many  places  where  Xva  can  and  must  be  limited  to
a  simple  apposition,  or  to  what  Canon  Evans  felicitously  terms  "  a  contemplated
■esult,"  yet  Winer  enumerates  the  passages  in  John's  writings  where  it  cannot  mean
more  than  what  might  be  expressed  by  an  infinitive  clause,  as  ch.  xv.  8;  xvii.  3;  xv.
13;  1  John  iv.  17 ;  3  John  4  (see  also  notes  on  oh.  viii.  56).  And  though  Winer  with
difficulty  renounces  the  telic  force  of  tva  (1  John  iii.  11 ;  ch.  vi.  40 ;  xii.  23 ;  xiii.  1 ;
xvi.  2,  32),  he  says  a  Greek  writer  would  have  perhaps  used  Sxm  So^aa6itvai  instead  of
Xva  So^da-Bii  (see  Winer's  treatment  of  Xrai  in  pp.  575,  576).  The  use  of  W  in  this
weakened  sense  shows  the  sense  of  a  Divine  aim  pervading  all  the  ordinary  nexus  of
human  refetions.

Not  only  John  but  Paul  used  certain  prepositions  (e.g.  Iv)  in  a  mode  unknown  to
Greek  writers,  but  adapted  to  express  Christian  ideas,  which  were  originally  expressed
.for  the  apostles  in  specific  force  given  to  Aramaic  prepositions.  One  characteristic
feature  of  the  grammatical  style  of  the  evangelist  is  the  occurrence  of  repeated  asyn-
deta — the  breaking  up  of  sentences  which  might  otherwise  be  woven  into  a  context  by
cfne,  or  \iya  out^,  or  aireKplen  aury  (see  numerous  examples  in  ch.  ii,  iii,  and  iv.).  Some
of  these  short  sentences,  like  "  Jesus  wept "  (ch.  xi.  35) ;  "  Now  Barabbas  was  a  robber  "
(ch.  xviii.  40) ;  '•  And  it  was  night "  (ch.  xiii.  30) ;  "  Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,"  etc.  (ch.
xi  5) ; — reveal  a  suppressed  fire  which  flashed  at  times  through  the  apparent  monotony
of  the  style.


CMvl  INTRODUCTION  TO


These  various  peouljaritieg  simply  show  that  the  ■writer's  mind  was  familiarized  with
the  forms  of  later  Greek  construction,  and  open  some  glimpses  into  the  simplicity  and
intensity  of  his  nature,  his  receptivity  to  a  succession  of  thoughts  and  facts  which  one
by  one  left  their  impression  on  his  mind.  They  are  not  of  such  a  character  as  to
separate  the  writer  from  his  colleagues,  or  to  remove  him  to  another  century.  They
reveal  his  idiosyncrasies,  which  have  their  parallels  in  Paul  and  Luke.  Some  of  them
are  unknown  to  the  classical  Greek,  while  the  repetition  of  the  same  idea  in  a  positive
and  negative  form,  and  the  play  of  ideas  produced  by  setting  the  ."same  term  in  an  ever-
ascending  and  climacteric  series  of  relations,  are  the  demonstrable  consequences  of  a
Hebrew  training.  Thus  ch.  xvi.  21,  the  image  of  the  travailing  woman,  may  be  com-
pared with  Isa.  xxi.  3  and  Hos.  xiii.  13  ;  that  of  "  living  water"  (ch.  iv.  10)  with  Isa.
xli.  18.  Ewald  justly  says,  "  In  respect  of  the  spirit  which  animates  it,  no  language
can  be  more  purely  Hebraic  than  that  of  our  author."  In  respect  of  mere  slavish
imitations  of  Hebrew  syntax,  or  Talmudio  form,  Benan  is  right  in  saying  that  there  is
no  symptom  of  either.  Luthardt  remarks  and  proves  that  "there  is  a  Hebrew  soul
in  the  Greek  language  of  the  evangelist."  Keim  has  eloquently  asserted  the  same  idea.
The  style  is  no  barrier  whatever  to  the  theory  suggested  by  the  entire  external  and
internal  evidence,  that  the  beloved  disciple  was  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.

6.  The  character  of  the  discourses  contained  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Notwithstand-
ing the  abundant  proof  thus  summoned  from  the  Fourth  and  synoptic  Gospels  of
general  identity  of  the  signal  portraitures,  including  that  of  the  Lord  himself,  and  also
of  special  and  subtle  hints  of  the  moral  nature  of  Jesus,  and  his  mental  habitude ;  and
though  we  have  pointed  out  very  numerous  touches  of  positive  agreement  and  same-
ness of  utterance  between  our  two  sources,  and  that  in  the  limited  vocabulary  placed  by
John  into  the  lips  of  the  Lord  there  are  not  fewer  than  forty  words  or  terms  also
attributed  by  the  synoptists  to  him ; — yet  the  lengthened  discourses  in  ch.  iii.,  v.,  vi.,
I.,  xiii.,  xiv. — xvi.,  xvii.,  do  unquestionably  introduce  the  reader  of  them  into  a  new
atmosphere.  We  do  not  altogether  miss  the  spirit  or  even  the  actuality  of  parabolic
speech,  as  witness  especially  ch.  x.  and  xv.,  yet  the  contrast  is  very  marked  between
the  parables  of  the  kingdom,  in  Matt.  xiii.  and  parallels,  and  the  semi-parables  and
semi-allegorical  representations  of  the  closing  discourses  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  The
form  of  the  discourses  differs  almost  as  much  from  the  general  form  of  the  synoptic
discourses  as  the  '  Dialogues '  of  Plato  do  from  'the '  Memorabilia '  of  Xenophon,  That
well-known  difference  of  form  includes  also  a  profound  difference  of  subject-matter  and
of  definite  teaching ;  yet  no  one  presumes  to  deny  that  Xenophon  and  Plato  were  alike
disciples  of  Socrates.  We  need  both,  and  the  '  Comedies '  of  Aristophanes  also,  to  draw
our  portraiture  of  the  historical  Socrates,  and  to  form  a  sound  opinion  of  the  authentic
teaching  of  the  great  philosopher.  The  case  of  Socrates  and  his  followers  is  an  extreme
one,  because  there  is  hardly  anything  in  common,  either  as  to  teaching  or  framework,
in  the  three  representations  to  which  we  have  referred,  whereas  in  the  four  Gospels,
with  their  characteristic  differences,  there  are,  as  we  have  seen,  subtle  resemblances  of
a  unique  kind,  which  bridge  the  chasm  between  them,  and  blend  the  divergences  into
a  wonderful  unity.  It  is  so  often  said  that  a  later  disciple  placed  his  own  theology  and
soteriology  into  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  so  sought  and  secured  a  wide  diffusion  for  his
persooal  opinions,  that  some  investigation  of  the  alleged  charge  must  be  here  made.

The  ingenious  and  fantastic  treatment  of  the  great  discourses  by  Albreoht  Thoma,
as  well  as  the  allegations  of  Keim,  remove  any  necessity,  even  the  faintest,  for  travelling
on  into  the  second  century  for  the  material  or  spirit  of  the  Christology.  According  to
Thoma,  abundant  antecedents  are  found  in  the  synoptic  narrative,  in  the  Pauline
Epistles  (even  the  universally  accredited  Epistles  to  the  Romans,  Corinthians,  and
Galatians),  and  in  the  speculations  of  the  Alexandrines,  the  LXX.,  and  the  Old  Testa-
ment, for  every  shade  of  doctrine,  every  form  of  narrative.  The  author  (whosoever  he
was)  may,  therefore,  have  produced  this  Gospel,  so  far  as  all  necessary  antecedence  goes,
in  the  closing  decade  of  the  first  century.  He  does  but  work  out  in  a  narrative  the
material  and  ideas  which  were  widely  circulated,  and  formed  the  basis  of  Christian
communities  between  a.d.  60  and  70.  The  question  then  passes  from  an  inquiry  into
the  chronological  conditions,  into  the  psychological  possibility  of  onr  Lord  having  been
the  real  Author  of  the  ideas  about  himself  which  are  attributed  to  him  by  the  Fourth
OospeL


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  exxTil

There  appears  to  us  scarcely  an  idea  or  utterance  for  which  some  basis  might
not  be  found  in  the  utterances  of  the  synoptists,  or  in  the  obvious  and  intense  con-
victions of  the  Apostle  Paul  and  those  to  whom  he  wrote.  The  point  really  raised  is —
Are  these  ideas  presented  to  us  in  their  primitive  form  as  they  veritably  fell  from  the
lips  of  Jesus?  or  have  they  been  fashioned  by  the  apostle,  who  mentally  assimilated
them,  and  new-wrought  them  out  of  the  synoptic  narrative  and  the  current  theology  of
the  earliest  Church  ?  Such  questions  need  not  have  arisen  out  of  rrfalice  prepense}
There  must  be,  there  is,  a  subtle  aroma  investing,  alike  both  narrative  and  discourse,
which  suggests  a  strongly  subjective  element  in  the  arrangement  of  the  material,  and
in  the  full-orbed  splendour  with  which  ideas,  which  undoubtedly  existed  when  Paul
wrote  his  Epistles,  appear  to  have  flashed  from  the  consciousness  of  Jesus,  and  to  have
takea  a  sharply  defined  shape  in  his  words.  Criticism  under  the  teaching  of  evolution,
or  the  law  of  continuity,  may  be  compelled  to  admit  the  prevalence  of  the  ideas,  but
it  cannot  rest  content  with  the  obvious  explanation  of  their  origin  which  the  Gospel
suggests.  Consequently,  it  is  supposed  the  author,  rather  than  the  Christ,  originated
the  form  of  the  great  discourses.

The  following  remarks  are  offered.  (1)  A  large  portion  of  the  synoptic  narrative  is
equally  charged  with  a  God-consciousness  on  the  part  of  Jesus  which  is  absolutely
unique.  In  many  cases,  as  we  have  seen,  the  language  of  the  synoptists  approaches  that
of  the  Johannine  Gospel,  and  his  personal  assumptions  are  equally  dogmatic  and
august.  (2)  The  fourth  evangelist  presupposes  and  supplements  the  earlier  Gospels,
not  feeling  called  upon  to  review  and  recite  the  anthropological  and  ethical  teachings
of  Galilee,  but  to  dwell  on  those  utterances  of  the  Lord  which  revealed  (theologically)
the  eternal  basis  on  which"  the  worship  of  his  holy  Name  was  justified.  (3)  "  The
synoptists,  in  the  history  as  in  the  doctrine  of  Jesus,  present  the  concrete  phenomenon
in  time ;  John  presents  the  eternity  that  has  appeared  in  time.  The  synoptists  do  not
deny  the  transcendental,  and  even  allow  it  to  be  conjectured  that  infinite  contents
dwell  in  the  concrete  phenomenon ;  but  they  take  their  point  of  view  on  the  side  of
the  phenomenon,  John  does  not  deny,  but  lays  emphatic  stress  upon,  the  fact  that  the
'  eternal  life '  entered  historic  actuality,  and  became  a  phenomenon  striking  the  senses,
that  '  the  Word  became  flesh ; '  but  ho  takes  his  point  of  view  on  the  side  of  the
infinity  which  forms  the  contents  of  the  phenomenon"  (Luthardt,  lib.  dt.,  p.  230).  If
we  can  believe  that  "  the  Word  did  become  flesh  "  in  Jesus,  we  cannot  feel,  or  need  not
feel,  that  there  is  any  psychological  impossibility  in  the  utterance  by  our  Lord  of  the
ipsissima  verba  that  John  attributed  to  him.  (4)  A  subjective  element  cannot  be
denied,  so  far  as  the  choice  of  subject-matter  is  concerned,  and  even  the  order,  the  sym-
metry, the  dramatic  grandeur,  and  monotony  of  Divine  substratum  and  ethical  ajipeal ;
but  it  appears  to  us  infinitely  impossible  that  the  subjectivity  went  so  far  as  to  create
the  form  and  substance  of  the  Johannine  Gospel.

It  is  conceivable  that  the  author,  in  the  longer  discourses,  may  have  introduced
germane  thoughts  and  words  which  belonged  to  different  occasions — as  it  is  commonly
assumed  that  Matthew  and  Luke  have  also  done  (Matt,  x.,  ziii.,  xxiii. ;  Lu^e  xli.,  xv.,
xvi.) — and  he  may,  moreover,  have  selected  those  more  notable  and  impressive  teach-
ings which  justified  and  created  in  his  own  mind  the  sublime  theodicy  of  the  prologue  ;
but  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  author  of  the  Gospel  invented,  rather  than  recited,
marvellous  utterances  of  the  Christ,  that  he  appealed  to  his  imagination  rather  than  to
his  memory  for  the  significant  portraiture  of  him  who  was  pre-eminently  "  Grace  and
Truth,"  "  the  Truth,"  "  the  Life,"  and  "Light  of  the  world."

The  Jews  were  accustomed,  far  more  than  we  can  now  readily  appreciate,  to  depend
on  the  memory  of  the  spoken  words  of  their  most  honoured  teachers.  For  hundreds  of
years  the  Misbnah  and  large  portions  of  the  Gemaras  and  of  the  Midrash  on  the  sacred
books  must  have  been  verbally  retained  in  the  memory  of  reverential  disciples,  and
consequently  the  whole  of  these  discourses  would  make  a  comparatively  small  demand

'  A  defect  in  Dr.  Salmon's  most  excellent '  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament '  is  that
he  repeatedly  attributes  the  recent  hostility  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  an  arriere-pensee  of  the
following  kind :  "  If  it  be  genuine  and  historical,  then  the  supernatural  order  must  be
admitted,  and  the  Divinity  of  the  Son  of  God  is  proved.  And,  seeing  that  such  conclusions
as  these  oan  be  drawn  from  its  historicity,  the  Johannine  authorship  must  be  traversed  at
all  hazards,  and  repudiated  either  by  fair  or  by  false  means."


cxxtW  introduction  TO


on  the  powers  of  such  a  disciple  as  we  imagine  St.  John  to  have  heen.  The  prolonged
discourse  on  the  night  of  the  Passion  may  easily  have  heen  indelibly  impressed  upon
the  mind  of  the  more  susceptible  hearers.  The  history  of  the  Church  as  it  enacted
itself  at  Jemsalem  and  elsewhere  would  perpetually  bring  to  light  and  tend  to  empha-
size the  special  instrnctions  given  on  that  memorable  night,  so  eminently  adapted  to
prepare  their  minds,  not  only  for  the  great  catastrophe,  but  for  such  scenes  as  Pente-
cost, and  for  the  numerous  conflicts  which  arose  as  the  little  band  went  forth  to  face
the  world,  and  to  become  rapidly  that  illustrious  society  which  spread  from  the  upper
chamber  in  Jerusalem  to  Antioch  and  Ephesus,  to  Babylon  in  the  East,  and  to  the
metropolis  of  the  world.

If  Jesus  can  be  believed  to  be  the  "  Word  made  flesh,"  the  Head  of  a  new  humanity,
the  Door  opened  into  heaven,  the  Giver  of  eternal  life,  the  Dispenser  and  Baptizer  with
the  Holy  Ghost ;  If  he  were  one  with  the  Father,  and  continued  after  his  departure  to
rule,  teach,  and  save  his  disciples,  and  to  blend  them  into  a  sacred  and  unique  fellow-
ship ; — it  is  not  in  the  least  degree  abnormal  that  he  -should  have  uttered  every  one  of
these  august  and  solemn  words.

IX.  The  Teachiho  or  the  Fottrth  Gospbl.

Numerous  hypotheses  touching  the  occasion  of  the  production  of  the  Gospel  vanish
if  the  main  thesis  which  "has  been  sustained  throughout  the  foregoing  pages  be  proved.
We  are  brought  back  from  the  agitations  of  Gnostic  heresy  to  earlier  struggles.  The
speculations  are  less  complicated ;  the  struggle  between  the  Hellenic  and  Hebraic
element  in  the  Church  less  severe  than  in  the  days  of  Marcion,  Justin,  and  the  Clemen-
tines. The  early  influence  of  the  Cerinthian  ideas  was  a  source  of  agitation  Jn  the
Church.  The  perfect  humanity  of  the  Son  of  God  was  doubted  on  the  one  side,  his
enthronement  as  our  "  Lord  God  "  spurned  on  the  other.  The  aged  apostle  was  induced
to  add  to  the  widely  circulated  synoptic  literatm-e  his  own  richest  reminiscences  of  the
teaching  of  the  Master.  The  fulness  of  this  instruction  may  be  usefully  exhibited  by
reducin;?  it  to  the  following  heads  or  giroups  of  thought.*

1.  The  teaching  nf  the  Gospel,  whether  on  the  lips  of  Jesus  or  the  evangelist  himself,
touching  the  Oodhead.  We  have  already  shown  that  there  are  fundamental  distinctions
in  the  style  and  vocabulary  of  John  and  of  the  Johannine  Christ;  but  it  is  more  than
probable  that  John's  own  style  was  framed  by  the  influence  which  his  communion  with
the  Lord  had  exerted  upon  him.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  thoughts  of  Jesus  inter-
penetrated him.  He  was  saturated  with  them,  and  they  gave  a  character  to  all  his  own
meditations  on  the  outcome  and  meaning  of  the  Lord's  life.  The  prologue  is  the  generali-
zation of  all  the  teaching  of  our  Lord,  and  is  based  line  by  line,  thought  by  thought,
upon  the  teaching  of  Jesus  and  the  special  activities  that  he  records.  The  teaching  of
John  may  be  derived,  therefore,  from  every  part  of  the  Johannine  writings.

The  concrete  presentation  in  the  Old  Testament  of  "  the  One,"  "the  only  God,"  the
free  creation  of  all  things  by  the  Word  or  Spirit  of  his  own  eternal  essence,  is  the  basis
of  the  Johannine  teaching.  The  unlikenable  One  of  Isaiah;  God  invisible  not  merely  to
the  eyes  of  flesh,  but  even  to  the  faculties  of  human  intellect,  which  cannot  find  God  by
searching;  God  dwelling  (as  St.  Paul  says)  in  the  inaccessible  light; — was  a  fundamental
idea  with  the  apostle.     "  No  one  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  "  (ch.  i.  18)  is  a  saying

•  The  literature  on  this  subject  is  extensive.  A  few  only  of  the  recent  writing's  on  the
subject  maybe  mentioned.  Neaiider,'  Hlstoryof  the  Planting  and  Training  of  the  Christian
Church' (Eng.  trans.,  ii.  1—58).  Eeuss,  'Histoire  de  la  Theologie  Ohretienne,'  ii.  369 —
561 ;  also  his  '  Theologie  Johannique.'  Sehmid  and  Van  Oosterzee  have,  in  their  '  Biblical
Theologies  of  the  New  Testament'  (Eng.  trana.),  separated  the  theology  of  Christ  as
contained  in  the  Gospel  from  that  of  John  himself  in  his  prologue  and  Epistles-  and
Apocalypse.  Baur, '  .Biblische  Theologie,'  represents  the  doctrinal  system  of  the  Fourth
Gospel  as  the  highest  form  of  New  Testament  teaching,  rising  above  both  Judaism  and
Paulinism,  and  accentuating  the  diiferenoe  between  them.  Kostliu, 'Der  LehrbegrifFdes
Evangeliums  und  der  Briefe  Johannis '  (1843)  is  from  the  Tiibiugen  standpoint  of  dogmatic
end  polemical  aim  of  the  writer.  B.  Weiss,  '  Biblical  Theology  of  the  New  Testament'
(Eng.  trans.),  ii.  311 — 421;  Hilgenfold,  'Das  Evangelium  und  die  Briefe  Johannis  nach
ihrem  Lelrrbegriff  dargestellt;  Thoma, '  Die  Genesis  des  Johannes-Evangeliums  ein  Beitrag
2U  seiner  Auslegung,  Gesohichte  und  Kri*ik'  (1882),  pp.  171 — 302.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxxix

avouched  or  implied  in  our  Lord's  -words  (ch.  v.  37).  This  reduces  the  theophanies  of
the  Old  Testament  to  something  less  than  they  were  supposed  to  establisL  They  are
along  the  line  of  Divine  manifestations,  but  he  himself  was  witness  of  far  more  than
patriarch  or  prophet  ever  beheld.  The  representation,  however,  is  perfectly  different
from  the  philosophic  conception  of  "  the  abyss,"  or  "  the  absolute,"  from  the  dream  of
the  Gnostic  or  the  impassive  and  impersonal  abstraction  of  the  Hindu.  The  personality
and  individuaUty  of  the  very  essence  of  Deity  is  affirmed  by  every  reference  to  the
activity  and  characteristics  of  God.

(1)  One  of  the  most  fundamental  utterances  is  that "  God  is  [a]  Spirit"  (ch.  iv.  24) — a
statement  which  makes  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  the  surest  guide  to  human  concepts
of  his  invisible  essence.  Man's  inmost  ego,  his  self-conscious  intelligence,  the  centre  of
his  mental  processes,  gives  the  direction  to  all  our  approximations  to  the  essence  of  God.
He  is  the  "  veritable  God"  (ch.  xvii.  3),  answering  as  no  heathen  deity  has  ever  done  to
that  august  reality.  Two  other  commanding  and  comprehensive  terms  lie  at  the  heart  of
the  Johannine  conception.  "  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all "  (1  John  i.  5).
This  is  suggestive  of  the  absolute  perfection  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  the  illumination
which  proceeds  from  him,  by  which  all  other  things  can  be  perceived,  as  well  as  of  the
unsullied  purity  of  all  his  character.  We  learn  that  God  is  (not  luminous,  but)  Light
itsdf.  The  Lord  addresses  him  as  "  righteous  "  (ch.  xvii.  25),  justifying  all  his  ways
and  vindicating  all  his  providence.

The  other  supreme  definition  of  the  essence  of  the  Godhead  is  "  God  is  love,"  and
"  love  is  of  God  "  (1  John  iv.  8).  The  most  fundamental  and  comprehensive  idea  of  God
is  that  he  loves,  that  he  lavishes,  bestows  himself  upon  the  objects  which  he  has  made.
The  God  of  whom  Jesus  speaks  "loved  the  world"  (ch.  iii.  16),  and  evermore  con-
templates the  world  which  he  has  made  with  supreme  satisfaction.  He  is  "in  the
beginning"  (ch.  1. 1),  and  therefore  "before  all  things;"  and  his  "bosom"  (ch.  i.  18)  is
spoken  of  as  the  dwelling-place  of  infinite  blessedness.

(2)  But  the  most  instructive  term  which  is  frequently  on  the  lips  of  the  evangelist  is
"  the  Fafher."  The  idea  is  not  an  original  one  fashioned  by  this  writer  or  set  down
alone  by  him,  but  it  is  the  dominant  and  all-pervading  one.  God  was  described  by  the
prophets  as  the  Father  of  the  theocratic  people  (Deut.  xxxiL  6 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  16 ;  Ixiv.  8 ;
Jer.  xxxi.  9,  20;  Hos.  xi.  1).  Israel  is  spoken  of  in  some  of  these  passages  as  his
"  sons  and  daughters  "  (Isa.  i.  2,  4 ;  Ixiii.  8 ;  Deut.  xiv.  1).  A  spiritual  relationship
between  God  and  his  people,  based  on  fundamental  qualities,  and  connoting  far  more
than  the  creatorship  or  the  makership  of  Zetis  irarjjp  av^pav  re  eeav  re.  Our  Lord  is
reported  by  the  synoptists  to  have  called  God  "  my  Father  "  (Matt.  xi.  27),  and  in
many  places  to  have  spoken  of  " your  Father"  (Matt.  vi.  4,  6,  8, 15 ;  xxiii.  9 ;  Luke
vi.  36).  The  term  is  expanded  in  many  ways  by  the  addition  "in  heaven,"  or  "heavenly"
(Matt.  V.  16,  45 ;  vL  1,  9,  14,  26,  32 ;  vii.  11).  God  is  not  the  Father  of  inanimate
or  irrational  beings,  showing  that  those  who  can  call  God  their  "  Father  "  possess  a
nature  akin  to  his  own.  But  the  Fatherhood  of  God  suggests  a  special  form  of  moral
and  spiritual  relationship  which  may  have  been  forfeited,  and  whicti  by  Divine  love  is
re-established.

The  Gospel  of  John  represents  our  Lord  as  continually  speaking  of  God  as  "  the
Father,"  "my  Father,"  and  as  " your  Father"  (ch.  xx.  17).  He  is  the  "  living  Father"
who  has  "  life  in  himself "  (ch.  v.  26),  who  seeks  for  spiritual  worshippers  (ch.  iv.  23),
who  loves  the  Son  (ch.  v.  19  ;  x.  17 ;  xvii.  24,  26)  with  a  supreme  affection  which  yet
passes  over  and  through  the  Son  to  those  who  have  entered  into  living  harmony  with
himself  (ch.  xvi.  27 ;  xviL  26).  The  connection  between  God  as  Father  and  God  as
Spirit  is  strenuously  preserved  (ch.  iv.  22 — 24),  the  latter  term  expounding  the  method
in  which  the  Fatherhood  energizes  and  reveals  itself  in  its  fulness  of  power.  The
Father  is  Almighty,  and  this  is  especially  enforced  in  his  power  to  quicken  the  dead
(ch.  V.  21).  He  is  greater  than  all  (ch.  x.  29) — greater  than  the  Son  (ch.  xiv.  28).  He
is  eternal  (ch.  xvii.  5,  24),  holy  (ch.  xvii.  11),  and  righteous  (ch.  xvii.  25).

This  writer  builds  his  entire  conception  on  this  as  its  fundamental  basis.  It  differs
profoundly  from  that  of  the  Alexandrine  or  Oriental  metaphysic ;  and  though  abundant
preparation  had  been  made  for  it  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  though  all  its  essential
features  are  found  in  the  synoptists,  it  is  the  distinguishing  element  of  the  teaching  of
Christ  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  and  had  verily  saturated  the  mind  of  the  author  of  th«

JOHN.  k


INTRODUCTION  TO


Gospel  and  Epistles.  In  a  sense,  and  to  a  degree  never  before  realized  on  earth  or
expressed  in  literature,  do  we  come  face  to  face  with  One  whose  God-consciousness  was
veritably  expressed  by  the  epithet,  "  the  Father,"  "  my  Blather."  Christ  is  not  merely
the  Expression  of  the  ineffable  One,  and  "  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God  "  (Col.  L  15),
but  the  Son  of  the  Father.  The  relation  of  Logos  to  Theos  is  warmed  into  and
e:5pounded  by  the  relation  of  a  Son  to  a  Father.  The  idea  is  not  peculiar  to  John,  for
St.  Paul  declared  that  "  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell,"  and
that "  through  Christ  we  have  access  to  the  Father; "  and  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews  (L  2)
had  laid  it  down  in  words  suggested  by  the  author  of  '  Wisdom  of  Solomon,'  that  Christ
the  Son  was  the  Effluence  of  the  Father's  glory,  the  express  Image  of  his  substance  or
essence.    That  essence  was  a  Father's  heart ;  that  effluence  was  the  tSon  of  the  Blessed.

(3)  The  Father  and  the  Son.  The  Fatherhood  of  God  does  not  exhaust  the  concept
which  St.  John  formed  of  the  Godhead;  for  within  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  in  his
essential  Divinity,  insphered  in  his  eternal  glory  before  the  world  was,  "  with  him,"  and
yet  "  One  with  him,"  was  "  the  Son."  The  Fatherhood  was  essential  to  God,  and
therefore  the  Sonship  was  before  all  worlds.  The  gracious  self-communication,  the
infinite  benevolence  of  God,  appertains  to  his  eternal  essence.  Prom  before  all  time,
and  independently  of  time  and  place  and  earthly  service,  the  evangelist  saw  love  in
infinite  activity,  streaming  forth  in  boundless,  inexhaustible  fulness,  and  adequately
responded  to.  This  conception  of  God  goes  down  to  the  depths  of  thought,  and  forms
the  basis  of  all  the  moral  perfections  of  Deity,  and  discriminates  it  from  the  impersonal
abstractions  and  characterless  quiescence  and  inaccessibility  of  the  Supreme  Monad  of
the  Platonic  schools.

The  Johannine  conception  starts  with  the  use  of  certain  expressions  which  had  arisen
in  the  schools  of  Jewish  thought,  and  confers  upon  them  a  meaning  and  application
from  which  those  schools  would  have  shnmk.  The  @e6s,  whose  most  fundamental
Name  and  whose  essential  Being  is  set  forth  as  "  the  Father,"  is  first  of  all  described  as
before  the  creation  of  the  world,  or  of  every  thing  and  force  which  has  come  into  being,
standing  in  intimate  immanent  relations  with  the  ASyos  (the  expression  of  his  own
thought  and  will),  who  is,  while  "  with  God,"  also  God  himself.  Distinction  from  Giod
is  twice  over  covered  by  the  explicit  assertion,  "  the  Word  was  God,"  and  the  same  idea
is  subsequently  expressed  in  the  prologue  (ch.  i.  18)  by  the  terms  of  "  Father  "  and
"  only  begotten  Son."  The  (wvoyevis  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  therefore  alone
competent  to  reveal  him.  Equality  of  essence  is  predicated  alike  of  Father  and  Son,  of
Theos  and  Logos,  and  yet  distinction  of  hypostasis  is  also  asserted.  The  Godhead,
therefore,  involves  an  internal  and  reciprocally  immanent  relation.  Beuss  strongly
maintains  that  the  evangelist  simply  leads'  us  back  to  the  beginning  of  time,  and  says
nothing  of  an  eternal  relation.  Any  such  assertion  is,  according  to  criticism,  an
inference  from  the  text,  and  not  contained  in  it.  We  may  concede  that  the  earliest
Creeds,  culminating  in  those  of  Nicaea,  Chalcedon,  and  the  so-called  Athanasian,  do  draw
this  inference;  but  it  is  one  which  logically  and  immediately  flows  out  of  the  text.  The
converse  of  the  inference,  or  the  Arian  assertion,  "  that  there  was  (time  or  period)  when
he  was  not,"  and  "before  he  was  begotten,"  does  immediately  predicate  an  infinite
difference  between  the  Father  and  Son — a  statement  entirely  incompatible  with  the
equality  of  nature  and  essence  and  with  the  true  monotheism  of  the  entire  biblical
revelation.  But  so  far  as  the  self-consciousness  of  this  Son  is  represented  in  the  con-
Bciotisness  of  Jesus,  we  fraiikly  concede  that  there  is  in  the  Divine  order  a  superiority,
primacy,  solity,  ascribed  to  the  Father:  he  who  has  independently  life  in  himself
gave  the  like  self-dependence  to  the  Son  (ch.  v.  27).  The  Father  sent  the  Son.  "  The
Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do  "  (ch.  v.  19).  The
Father  and  Son  are  one,  but  the  Father  sanctified  and  sent  the  Son  into  the  world
(ch.  X.  31 — 37).  The  Father  created  all  things  "  through  (Sth)  the  Logos."  "  The
Father  is  greater  than  I,"  said  Christ  (ch.  xiv.  28).  "  I  live,"  said  he  (8ict  rhy  Ilwrepa,
ch.  vi.  57), "  on  account  of  the  Father."  The  Father  gave  the  Spirit  to  the  Son  (ch.  iii.
34).  This  headship  of  the  Father  does  not  contradict  the  eternal  filiation,  but  both
Ideas  are  necessary  to  interpret  the  fulness  of  meaning  which  St.  John  gives  to  the
concept  of  the  "  only  veritable  God."

(4)  Ood  and  the  Logos.    The  characteristics  of  the  A6yos  before  bis  manifestation  in
th«  humanity  of  Christ  are  that  he  is  the  Divine  Agent  in  the  creation,  the  Source  of


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


life  and  the  light  of  the  world,  because  both  the  Life  and  Light  of  God.  He  was  ever-
more coming  like  light  into  the  darkness  of  humanity,  like  life  into  the  soul  of  man.
He  came  in  many  ways  to  his  own.  He  gave  power  (iiouirta)  to  those  who  believed  on
his  Name  "  to  become  sons  of  God."  Although  the  Father  sent  him,  commissioned  the
Son  for  these  lofty  purposes,  yet  it  was  as  "  beam"  proceeds  from  "  light,"  as  "  Word"
follows  "Spirit."  He  dwells,  like  Wisdom,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  In  the  bosom
of  the  Almiahty.  He  is  one  with  the  Father  in  being,  essence,  and  will.  This  blending
and  unity  of  the  Father  and  Son,  of  Theos  and  Logos,  was  the  metaphysical  basis  of  the
entire  Johannine  superstructure.  We  see  that  it  is  not  peculiar  to  John.  The  Old
Testament  was  built  on  the  same  synthetic  representation.  Jehovah,  and  the  Angel
of  Jehovah,  the  unapproachable  self-existent,  eternal  One,  yet  came  into  personal  and
anthropomorphic,  visible  and  audible,  relations  with  men.  The  true  Wisdom  in  the
heart  of  man,  found  and  cherished  by  those  who  love  her,  is  the  eternal  effulgence  of
God's  glory  and  co-possessor  of  his  throne  (see  p.  li.).

The  conception  interprets  the  phenomena  of  both  providence  and  prophecy,  of
conscience  and  theophany.  The  Lord  is  always  coming  to  his  own,  and  even  giving
them  power  to  receive  him,  and  authority  to  become  sons  of  the  ever-blessed  and
Almighty  Father.  Before  he  came  in  the  flesh,  human  nature  was  fashioned  in  his
image  and  likeness,  and  his  most  appropriate  manifestation  assumed  freely  the  appear-
ance of  an  august  and  Divine  humanity.  The  Word  or  Angel  of  the  Lord  was  con-
cerned with  the  fortunes  and  perils  of  individuals  whose  career  would  affect  the  whole
subsequent  history  of  the  people-  of  the  covenant.  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  Hagar,
Joshua,  Gideon,  Manoah,  received  these  open  visions  until  the  rise  of  the  prophetic
order,  whose  function  was  "to  bear  witness  to  the  true  Liuht  which  lighteth  every
man."  The  Christ  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  recognizes  those  who  are  "  of  the  truth,"  and
come  to  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  who  hear  his  voice.  This  "Light"  and  this
"voice"  must  have  been  available  apart  from  the  special  revelation  and  effulgence  of
his  glory  in  the  Son  of  man.  One  peculiarity  of  the  Johannine  conception  was  that
in  the  Word  there  was  life,  and  instead  of  making  this  lile  the  consequence  of  the  light,
the  process  is  reversed — ^the  life  was  the  light.  "  Life  "  is  more  than  being,  and  in  its
fulness  of  manifestation  could  appertain  on  earth  to  man  only.  The  reason  or  ths
motive  of  the  manifestation  of  Ufe  was  communication  of  blessedness  and  kinship  to
the  Source  of  all  blessedness  to  tlie  human  race.  From  the  Divine  life  produced  in
man,  from  the  new  creation  wrought  in  human  nature,  light  has  been  evermore  gleam-
ing. In  pwportion  to  the  reality  and  extent  of  the  life  is  the  brilliancy  of  the  light.
But  while  he  came  to  his  own,  even  to  those  best  prepared  to  receive  him,  they
"  received  him  not."  The  darkness  of  humanity  did  not  apprehend  the  light  of  Deity,
so  that  a  method  of  approach  for  the  life  and  the  light,  more  explicit  and  efficacious
than  any  which  had  preceded,  became  necessary  to  satisfy  the  irrepressible  and  unutter-
able love  of  God.

(5)  The  Word  made  flesh.  The  great  proof-text,  the  motto  of  the  Johannine  Gospel,  is
that  "the  Word  became  iiesh"  (ch.  i.  14),  i.e.  became  man  in  his  weakness  and  dependence,
and  in  his  composite  and  mysterious  nature.  "  Flesh"  {<rdp^)  does  not  mean  the  bare
physical  nature,  nor  the  physical  and  psychical  natures  combined.  "  Flesh  '  in  numerous
passages  connotes  the  whole  of  human  nature  without  grace,  and  therefore  the  iryeB/tui  as
well.  Abundant  evidence  is  forthcoming  to  show  that  Jesus  possessed  both  soul  and  spirit
(ch.  xi.  33;  xii.  27 ;  xiii.  21 ;  xix.  30),  and  therefore  the  Fourth  Gospel  must  be  supposed
to  include  under  the  o-ctpf  which  the  A6j(is  became,  the  whole  interior  manhood,  inclusive
of  "  will,"  "  spirit,"  "  soul ; "  but  the  term  is  used  in  preference  to  ifSpmnos,  in  order  to
mark  especially  the  visibility,  the  corporeity,  the  sensuous  and  phenomenal  aspect  of  this
his  last  and  greatest  self-communication  to  man.  Great  conflict  has  prevailed  in  later
years  over  the  nature  of  the  "  becoming  "  which  St.  John  here  attributes  to  the  Logos.
The  kenotic  speculations  of  Thomasius,  Gess,  Godet,  and  others  press  the  force  of  St.
Paul's  statement  that  he  who  was  in  the  form  (ju}p<p^')  of  God  emptied  (Jxevaaev  ahr6v)
himself,  forewent  his  glory ;  and  that  therefore  the  expression  before  us  must  imply
such  a  depotentiation  of  the  Logos  that  he  was  no  longer  Logos,  but  that  temporarily
he  was  copf,  and  aip^  only,  without  any  of  the  consciousness  of  his  own  Divine  perfec-
tions, not  even  of  Divine  love  and  righteousness.  This  theory  has  insuperable  difficulties
of  its  own.    The  consciousness  by  Christ  of  his  own  pre-existence  lifts  him  above  mere


cxxxH  INTBODUCTION  TO


(rdpi,  or  any  psilantliropicalinterpretation.  The  simple  fact  that  he  waa  conscious  of
"  a  glory  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was,"  and  that  he  was  about  to  return  to
it  (ch.  xvii.  5,  24)  and  reveal  it  to  his  disciples;  that  he  was  conscious  while  on  earth
of  being  "  in  heaven,"  having  come  down  thence  (ch.  iii.  13) ;  that  his  earthly  life  was
a  "  coming  down  from  heaven  "  as  heavenly  manna ;  that  he  was  about  to  ascend  to
where  he  was  before  (ch.  vi.  33,  51,  62) ;  that  before  Abraham  came  into  being  he
could  say,  "  I  am  " — furnish  abundant  proof  of  his  self-conscious  pre-existence,  aad  show
that  the  Ego  in  and  of  which  he  spake  was  more  than  the  tripi — was  nothing  short  of
the  Aiyos.  Eeuss  is  very  urgent  in  calling  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  human  life
of  the  Logos  was  not  (according  to  the  Fourth  Grospel)  any  humiliation,  or  exinanition ;
that  even  death  itself  was  his  S6^a  and  his  u;|/i)S<r9ot  (ch.  iiL  14 ;  viii.  28 ;  xii.  23,  32 ;
xiii.  31).

Yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  caUs  more  express
attention  to  the  humanity,  and  to  the  dogma  of  Christ  having  come  "  in  the  flesh,"  than
any  other  writer  of  the  New  Testament.  He  was  Son  of  a  human  mother,  was  interested
in  the  domestic  affairs  of  his  neighbourhood  (ch.  ii.  1 — 12),  had  brothers  who  were
unable  frankly  to  admit  his  claims  to  Messiahship  (ch.  vii.  3 — 6),  was  influenced  by  the
movements  of  different  tendencies  at  work  in  Jud»a  and  Galilee,  was  "  weary  and  thirsty  "
with  his  wayfaring  in  the  heat  of  the  day  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3,  6,  7),  "  wept "  at  the  grave  of  a
friend  (ch.  xi.  35),  was  pierced  by  the  treachery  and  unsusceptibility  of  his  disciples
(ch.  vi.  66,  67,  70)  as  well  as  by  the  Roman  soldier's  spear  (ch.  xix.  34 — 37),  was  con-
cerned about  his  mother  even  when  hanging  on  the  cross  (ch.  xix.  25 — ^27),  and  about
the  physical  need  of  his  disciples  after  he  had  risen  from  the  dead  (ch.  xxL  9).  We  can
accept  the  position  that  his  essential  Person  was  never  obliterated,  but  we  consider  that
the  Fourth  Gospel  represents  the  very  union  of  this  humanity  with  the  Divine  nature
to  be  a  humbling  of  himself  to  human  conditions  that  is  altogether  unspeakable.  The
limitation  of  human  knowledge,  the  consciousness  of  physical  need,  the  pain  and  suffer-
ing, temptation  and  resistance,  experienced  throughout  his  career,  were  the  expression  of
an  infinite  love  and  condescension.  The  closeness  of  the  union,  the  perfect  blending
into  one  Person  of  the  purely  human  with  the  Logos  who  was  with  God  (or  with  the
Only  Begotten  of  the  Father),  involved  two  things :  (a)  the  humiliation  of  the  Logos,
and  (b)  the  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten,  full  of  grace  and  truth.  The  eyes  of  the
apostles  saw  and  received  this  fulness,  perceived  the  continuous  glorification  of  the
humanity  by  which  they  were  being  drawn,  mastered,  overwhelmed;  but  it  is
perfectly  compatible  with  this  conception  that  the  Lord  by  his  Divine  nature  was
actually  made  participant  in  the  humiliation  and  weakness  of  the  flesh  and  the  bitter
hostility  and  prejudice}  of  the  world.  It  is  abundantly  evident  that  only  a  few  men
rose  to  the  full  apprehension  of  his  glory.  Consequently,  he  must  have  had  the
perpetual  consciousness  of  indescribable  loneliness  and  sorrow.  The  almost  feminine
inquiry,  "  Do  ye  now  believe  ?  "  (ch.  xvi.  31,  32),  enforces  the  opposite  of  the  contentiou
of  Beuss.

It  is  often  said  that  prayer  on  the  part  of  Christ  is  in  itself  an  unmistakable  indication
of  the  depotentiation  of  the  Logos,  or  else  it  was  a  meaningless  display  of  what  was  in  no
sense  genuine  prayer.  We  do  not  regard  it  as  either  one  or  the  other.  John's  Gospel
especially  reveals  the  necessity  on  the  part  of  our  Lord's  humanity  for  the  exercise  of
prayer,  and  so  far  indicates  the  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  mediatorial  work  he  had
undertaken  (ch.  vi.  15 ;  xi.  41 ;  xii.  27 ;  xvii.).  But  why  should  the  Logos  be  supposed,
in  these  prayers,  to  have  retired  into  inaccessible  depths  of  Deity  ?  It  is  the  Logos  now
made-flesh  of  whom  the  apostle  is  speaking,  and  therefore  experiencing  in  his  media-
torial work  the  need  of  prayer,  and  giving,  moreover,  the  true  conception,  and  embodying
the  fundamental  ideal  of  prayer,  viz.  of  the  human  in  perfect  hai^mony  with  the  Divine,
knowing  that  God  hears  him  always,  anticipating  the  conscious  acts  of  God.  Prayer,
like  death,  is  a  Divine  act  of  the  Son  of  God,  only  capable  of  being  enacted  through
the  himianity  that  he  assumed.

The  "  Logos  made  flesh  "  corresponds  with  "  water  which  became  [was  made]  wine  "
in  this — that,  as  water  was  not  transubstantiated  into  something  essentially  different
from  itself,  but  rather  took  up  into  itself  elements  not  previously  in  the  water,  so  the
Logos  took  human  nature  up  into  itself,  and  the  Ego  of  the  lucamate  Word  could
henceforth  feel  and  declare  tli'it,  though  the  Father  was  "greater  than  he,"  the  Father


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxxxlii

and  he  were  essentially  one  (ch.  xiv.  28).  The  Father  and  the  Son  were  one  in  so
deep  a  sense  (ch.  x.  30)  that  all  men  were  to  honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the
Father  (ch.  v.  23,  24).  In  the  question,  "  Have  I  heen  so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet
hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip?"  (ch.  xiv.  9),  Jesus  felt  that  he  had  not  been
recognized  by  his  disciples  if  they  had  not  perceived  the  Father  in  him.  They  must
have  formed  an  entirely  inadequate  notion  of  himself  if  they  had  found  nothing  more
than  his  human  perfections.  Even  the  outline  of  the  Man  mubt  have  been  blurred,  and
the  impression  of  the  humanity  imperfect.  Notably  so ;  the  very  tone  of  his  prayers,
the  quality  of  his  assumptions,  the  greatness  of  his  human  claims,  the  declaration  that
he  would  quicken  the  dead  and  judge  the  world,  would  be  sure  to  have  led  those  who
heard  these  words  into  wrong  notions  of  his  humanity,  unless  they  could  have  also
penetrated  to  the  amazing  truth  that  he  was  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  him.

(6)  The  Son  of  God,  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  man.  These  relations  between  the  God-
Man  and  the  Father  justify  the  two  great  names  by  which  the  Lord  designated
himself.  He  calls  himself  "  Son  of  God."  He  did  not  reprove  Nathanael  (ch.  i.  50,  51)
when  he  attributed  this  title  to  him  in  a  theocratic  sense,  but  he  took  much  higher
ground  when  he  spoke  of  himself  as  "  the  Son  of  God,"  or  "  the  Son,"  sent  by  the  Father
to  save  the  world  (ch.  iii.  16, 17),  to  give  eternal  life  (ch.  xvii.  2),  to  judge  (ch.  v.  27)
and  exercise  authority  over  all  flesh  (ch.  xvii.  2),  as  the  Agent  of  the  Father,  the
Messenger  of  the  Father,  and  as  "  sent  into  the  world  "  to  "  do  the  Father's  will "  and
"  to  finish  his  work."  The  "  Son  of  God "  is  the  eternal  Companion  and  Co-operator
with  the  Father ;  he  knows  the  Father,  and  is  the  Object  of  the  Father's  love.  The
Father  is  the  Potency,  the  Son  is  the  Reality  of  all  creative  and  redemptive  operations ;
the  Father  is  the  eternal  Ground,  the  Son  is  the  Means  and  Organ  and  Executor  of  all
the  Divine  activity  in  nature  and  grace.  In  all  these  respects  the  Divine  aspect  of  his
Personality  comes  into  view,  almost  separated  from  the  humanity,  or  overshadowing
it  with  glory.  The  Word  made  flesh  tabernacled  among  us,  took  up  his  habitation
among  us  as  in  the  temple  of  his  body,  and  the  glory  which  flashed  from  the  adytum
of  this  temple  was  the  grace  and  truth  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father  (ch.  i.  14).

The  identity  of  the  "Logos  made  flesh"  with  "the  Christ"  receives  the  greatest
prominence  in  the  Gospel  (ch.  i.  17).  Grace  and  truth  (which  are  said  in  ver.  14. to  have
streamed  forth  from  the  Logos  made  flesh)  came  by  Jesus  Christ  (cf.  1  John  v.  20,  "  We
are  in  the  true,  [even]  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ ").  In  the  intercessory  prayer  (ch.  xviL
3),  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  veritable  God,  and  Jesus
Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  While  the  Baptist  repudiates  the  assumption  of  being  the
Christ  (ch.  L  20),  it  is  clear  that  some  of  the  mighty  things  done  by  him  whom  as  vet
they  knew  not  were  associated  with  the  Christ  of  whom  Moses  and  the  prophets
had  spoken  (ch.  i.  41,  45).  The  "King  of  Israel"  is  but  another  name  to  express
Nathanael's  conviction.  The  following  chapters  reveal  the  purifying  process  passing
over  the  conception  (ch.  iii.  28,  29).  The  Samaritans  hail  him  as  the  Christ  (oh.  iv.
25,  26,  29).  The  effect  produced  by  his  great  sign  (ch.  vi.  14)  involves  the  confession,
"  This  is  the  Prophet  coming  into  the  world."  He  refuses  the  temporal  kingship,  but
he  raises  their  conception  to  the  transcendent  gift  of  his  Divine  Person.  The  text  of
many  manuscripts  makes  the  confession  of  Peter  (ch.  vi.  68)  an  acknowledgment  of
Messiahship  (see  notes).  The  whole  argument  of  oh.  vii.  25 — 43  shows  that  Jesus  li
accepting,  and  that  the  author  is  assigning,  the  idea  of  the  Christ  to  the  Lord  (cf.  ch.  ix.
22,  35).  Martha,  without  rebuke,  ascribes  the  same  function  to  him  (ch.  xi.  27),  and
all  that  follows  refines,  matures,  illumines,  the  mighty  Name.  The  public  assumption
of  Messianic  glory  (ch.  xii.  12 — 19)  suffers  further  exposition  (ch.  xii.  34—36).  AU  the
revelations  of  ch.  xiii. — xvii.  proceed  on  the  assumption.  The  conversation  with
Pilate,  the  title  of  the  cross,  but  above  all  the  declaration  of  the  evangelist  (ch.  xx.  31),
show  the  full  identification  of  the  Christ,  the  Logos  made  flesh,  and  the  Son  of  God.

It  is  equally  remarkable  that  our  Lord,  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  quite  as  frequently
designated  himself  as  "  Son  of  man  " — a  term  probably  derived  from  the  Old  Testa-
ment usage,  which,  though  occasionally  denoting  the  bare  idea  of  "man"  (in  Ezekiel),
in  Daniel  is  associated  with  the  highest  manifestation  of  God  (Dan.  vii.).  The  phrase
there  seems  to  mean  the  ideal  of  man,  the  perfect  Image  of  God,  the  heavenly  Man,
realizing  the  conception  of  what  St.  Paal  calls  the  Second  Adam.  Christ,  in  the
Bynoptists,  adopts  the  name,  though  his  disciples  never  attribute  it  to  him  (except  in


cxxiiv  INTRODUCTION  TO


the  two  exoeptional  cjasesof  the  dying  Stephen, 'who  beheld  him  in  his  plory,  and  of  St.  John
in  the  Apocalypse).  The  occasions  on  which  our  Lord  thus  names  himself  by  no  means  lay
special  emphasis  thereby  on  the  humiliation  of  the  Christ.  Thus  it  is  as  "  Son  of  man  "
that  he  "  forgives  sin  " — a  function  which  none  can  discharge  but  God  only  (Matt  ix.
6  and  parallel  passages).  The  Son  of  man  is  "  Lord  of  the  sabbath  "  (Matt.  xii.  8  and
parallel  passages),  is  "  the  Sower "  of  the  seed  of  the  kingdom  (Matt.  xiii.  37) ;  he
geeks  and  saves  the  lost  (Luke  xix.  10) ;  comes  not  to  be  served,  but  to  serve  (Matt.  xx.
28 ;  Mark  x.  45).  The  Son  of  man  will  rise  from  the  dead  and  judge  the  world  (Mark
viii.  38 ;  Luke  ix.  26 ;  xii.  8,  etc. ;  Matt.  xix.  28).  The  Fourth  Gospel  corresponds  with
the  synoptists  in  the  same  usage,  and  oh.  L  51  and  iii.  13  show  that  the  Lord  spoke  of
himself  as  "  Son  of  man  "  when  implying  that,  behind  the  attributes  of  his  humanity,
and  conferring  upon  that  humanity  its  archetypal  character,  was  his  Divine  nature.
He  was  "  Son  of  man  "  because  he  was  "  Son  of  God."  The  heavens  are  opened  roimd
about  him  ;  though  on  earth,  he  is  in  heaven.  He  is  lifted  up  in  the  likeness  of  sinful
flesh,  that  he  may  heal  the  deadly  poison  of  that  flesh  (ch.  iii.  14).-  He  will  judge  all
men  because  he  is  the  "  Son  of  man  "  (ch.  v.  27) ;  not  a  tertium  quid,  neither  God  nor
man ;  but  God  in  the  plenitude  of  his  power,  man  in  the  sufficiency  of  his  knowledge
and  sympathy.  The  consciousness  of  his  pre-existence  with  God  must  have  intensified
the  sense  of  contrast  between  "  the  form  of  God  "  and  "  the  form  of  a  servant,"  between
the  eternal  "  Effulgence  of  the  Father's  glory "  and  "  the  fashion  of  man,"  through
which  for  certain  ends  the  glory  was  veiled  for  all,  and  but  dimly  and  slowly  perceived
by  any.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  evangelist's  conception  of  the  Godhead  was  not  com-
plete by  the  bare  ascription  of  the  name  of  Father  to  the  Deity.  Having  learned  in  the
school  of  Christ,  he  considered  and  taught  that,  in  order  to  appreciate  the  Father,  we
must  recognize  and  realize  the  existence  of  his  only  begotten  Son.  He  held  that  the
fulness  of  God  is  not  an  impersonal  unity,  but  an  eternal  relationship ;  that  the  relation
between  "  God  "  and  "  the  Word,"  between  "  the  Father  "  and  "  the  Son,"  is  necessary
to  any  adequate  conception  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  Jesus  was  therefore  a  revelation
of  both  the  Father  and  the  Son.

(7)  The  Spirit  and  the  Triunity.  But  the  Johannine  conception  of  the  Godhead  was
not  consummated  in  this  duality.  A  mysterious  method  of  s^ech  pervades  the  Scripture,
by  which  the  self-consciousness  of  both  Father  and  Son  is  reduced  to  a  personal  unity.
The  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the  New  is  charged  with  this  aid  to  our  imagination  and
this  solace  to  our  faith.  There  is  no  place  here  for  a  review  of  the  doctrine  or  idea  of  the
Holy  Spirit  as  set  forth  either  in  the  earlier  Scriptures  or  in  the  Pauline  Epistles  beyond
this — that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  there  described  as  the  Source  and  Agent  of  Divine  activity
in  the  old  creation;  aa  effecting  and  preserving  the  immanence  of  God  in  nature;  as  itself
the  Source  of  human  ego ;  as  the  element  of  order  and  beauty  in  heaven  and  earth ;  as  the
silent  but  mighty  energy  which  lifts  and  develops  the  intellect  of  man  to  its  highest  flights,
and  encourages  the  heart  and  stimulates  the  conscience  to  their  noblest  exercise.  The
prophets  and  psalmists  confess  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  anticipate  that  the
highest  functions  of  Messiah  will  be  conferred  upon  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Certainly
this  appellation  is  sometimes  used  as  though  the  term  meant  nothing  more  than  a
Hebrew  parallelism  for  Ood  himself,  but  yet  in  other  places  it  expressly  defines  the
Spirit  as  the  mighty  Agency,  by  which  God  himself  works  in  the  nature  of  man.  The
synoptists  preserve  this  same  phraseology  and  attitude  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  formation
of  the  humanity  of  Jesus  (Matt.  i.  20 ;  Luke  i.  35),  the  direction  of  his  purposes  (Mark  i.
12),  the  consecration  of  that  humanity  to  tlie  Messianic  office  (Mark  i.  10, 11  and  parallel
passages),  the  order  and  power  by  which  Jesus  met  and  foiled  the  tempter.  The  Spirit
of  God  is  the  power  by  or  in  which  Jesus  commences  his  ministry  (Luke  iv.  1)  and  per-
forms his  miracles  on  those  possessed  by  the  devil  (Matt.  xii.  28).  In  the  synoptists  the
Lord  contrasts  the  dispensation  of  the  Son  of  man  with  that  which  is  inaugurated  by
the  Holy  Spirit  (Matt.  xii.  29 — 32  and  parallel  passages).  Jesus  will  baptize  with  the
Holy  Spirit  and  fire  (Matt.  iii.  H),  and  promises  the  Spirit  as  the  greatest  and  best
gift  of  the  Father's  love  CLuke  xi.  13).  This  is  the  "  promise  of  the  Father  "  for  which
the  early  Church  waited  (Luke  xxiv.  49),  and  which  came  upon  the  disciples  with  strange
potency  on  Pentecost  (Acts  i.,  ii.).  This  Spirit,  which  bound  discordant  elements  into
»  unity,  into  a  body,  and  produced  in  individuals  and  m  the  conmiunity  the  most


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxxxv

radical  changes  and  conferred  the  most  amazing  powers,  is  reckoned  by  St.  Paul  to  be
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  Christ  from  the  dead  (Rom.  viii.
9 — 11).  Through  the  eternal  Spirit  he  offered  himself  without  spot,  and  he  was
declared  to  be  Son  of  God  by  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead
(Rom.  i.  4).  This  Spirit  can  be  resisted,  blasphemed,  quenched,  obeyed,  loved,  and
adored ;  and,  while  unquestionably  Divine,  is  nevertheless  distinct  from  the  Father  and
the  Son.  What  new  teaching  does  the  Fourth  Gospel  introduce  on  this  subject  ?  We
learn  that  Jesus  will  baptize  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (ch.  i.  33),  and  that  the  Holy  Spirit
rested  on  Christ  (ch.  i.  32),  and  was  given  to  him  in  unmeasuiable  abimdance  (ch.  iii.  34).
When  God  was  said  to  be  Spirit  (ch.  iv.  24),  it  would  seem  that  the  whole  Godhead
(whether  Father,  Son,  Logos,  or  Spirit)  was  Spirit,  and  nothing  can  be  gathered  hence
of  any  hypostasis  or  ousia,  but  rather  a  hint  is  given  of  the  supreme  character  of  the
very  essence  of  Deity,  as  antithetic  to  theories  of  his  impersonality,  of  his  corporeal
limitation,  of  ritual  observance,  or  of  idolatrous  localization  of  his  energies.  Christ  had
often  spoken  of  the  "living  water  "  which  he  could  and  would  give  to  quench  all  human
thirst.  He  promises  the  great  abundance  of  this  gift,  and  describes  it  as  a  kind  of
blessedness  which  would  make  each  recipient  a  perennial  supply  of  it  for  others  (ch.  iv.
14).  St.  John  says  this  was  Christ's  description  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  those  who
should  believe  on  himself  would  receive,  for  the  "  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet  [given],
because  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified "  (ch.  vii.  37 — 39).  In  other  words,  when  Christ
should,  as  the  Victor  over  death,  have  taken  his  place  on  the  throne  of  G-od,  then  the
whole  material  wherewith  the  Spirit  would  deal  with  men  would  so  immeasurably
transcend  all  that  had  ever  been  previously  vouchsafed,  that  in  comparison  with  what
had  gone  before  the  Holy  Spirit  had  not  yet  been  (given)  at  alL  The  entire  "  ministra-
tion of  death  [and  of  the  letter,  and  of  the  body]  had  no'glory  by  reason  of  the  glory  that
excelleth."  When  the  hour  at  length  drew  near  that  the  brief  manifestation  in  the
flesh  was  to  be  removed  from  human  eyes,  our  Lord  declared  more  fully  the  substitute
for  his  own  constant  care  which  he  was  about  to  send  to  them.  One  who  should  "  abide
with  them  for  ever,"  "  whom  the  world  would  not  see,  or  receive,  or  take  away  from
them  "  (oh.  xiv.  17).  This  "  other  Paraclete  "  is  described  as  the  "  Holy  Spirit,"  whom
the  Father  would  send  in  his  Name,  whom  he  too  would  send  from  the  Father  (ch.  xiv.
25,  26),  whose  coming  to  them  for  all  gracious  purposes  was  identical  with  the  coming
of  Christ  himself.  Nay,  more,  his  advent  would  prove  a  coming  to  them  of  both  the
Father  and  the  Son.  As  he  had  glorified  the  Father,  the  Holy  Spirit  would  glorify
him ;  for  he  would  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  show  these  to  the  disciples  (ch.  xvi.
18 — 15).  He,  like  the  Son  himself,  would  not  speak  from  himself.  He  would  declare  that
which  he  knew  of  the  Father.  He  would  so  quicken  the  understanding  of  the  disciples
as  to  bring  all  things  to  their  remembrance,  and  thus  perpetuate  the  primary  instruction
they  had  received,  but  the  power  of  which  they  might  lose  sight  of.  The  glorious  gift
of  the  Spirit  is  said  to  be  in  answer  to  his  own  prayer  as  the  exalted  and  glorified  Chnst,
and  as  co-operating  with  them,  not  only  for  their  own  solace  and  refreshment,  but  also
as  a  testimony  to  himself,  and  (ch.  xv.  26, 27)  a  convicting  and  convincing  power  on  the
outside  world  (ch.  xvi.  7 — 11).  The  exaltation,  the  departure  of  Christ,  the  cessation  of
the  manifestation  in  the  likeness  of  the  flesh,  was  indispensable  to  the  full  bestowment
of  the  spiritual  gift.  Then  the  woild  should  be  convinced  of  sin,  righteousness,  and
judgment  (ch.  xvi.  7 — 11).  In  anticipation  of  this  new  dispensation,  he  symbolically
breathed  on  his  disciples,  and  said,  "  Receive  the  Holy  Spirit "  (ch.  xx.  22),  thus  pre-
paring the  way  for  the  great  manifestation  of  the  Day  of  Pentecost.

The  teaching  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  was  in  harmony  with  the  biblical  idea  throughout,
and  it  explains  the  intensity  with  which  Paul  had  already  dwelt  on  this  sublime  theme,
and  the  detail  into  which  he  had  expanded  the  fundamental  idea.  John  had  not
borrowed  from  Paul,  nor  from  Alexandria,  nor  from  Gnostic  notions  of  »onio  develop-
ment, but  set  forth  those  positions  out  of  which  both  revelation  and  superstition  and
the  speculative  tendencies  of  the  age  have  severally  developed  so  much.

To  suppose  these  Johanuine  doctrines  to  have  been  the  crystallization  of  Pauline,  or
Gnostic,  or  Montanistic  thought  is  contrary  to  all  probability.  If  Christ  himself  had
given  forth  (as  John  says  he  did)  this  idea  of  the  relation  of  the  Holy  S|iirit  to  his
own  Person  and  to  his  prospective  work,  and  if  many  hints  of  this  specific  teaching
were  circulating  in  the  Church,  the  entire  Pauline  representation  and  tiiat  of  the  Acts


cixxvl  INTEODUOTION  TO


becomes  thinkable.  As  a  condensation  of  St.  Paul  or  a  corrective  of  second-centuiy
ideas,  it  is  incredible  and  confused.

The  Fourth  Gospel  thus  does  much  to  prepare  the  Christian  Church  for  the  full
doctrine  of  the  Godhead.  The  consciousness  of  Jesus  was  so  set  forth  therein  as  to
induce  aU  Chrisrians  to  believe  in  God,  not  in  the  form  of  a  solitaiy  Monad,  but  as  One
who  from  etevnity  contained  in  his  own  Being  the  relations  of  Father  and  Son,  and
whose  unity  of  essence  is  itself  as  personal  as  is  the  Father  or  the  Son.

To  bring  together  the  whole  teaching  that  emerges  firbm  the  "  Word  made  flesh,''
from  the  God-Man  as  the  centre  of  the  life  of  a  renewed  humanity,  we  are  led  to
positive  distinctions  in  that  Deity  which  stood  in  such  close  relations  with  human
nature.  "  The  Spirit "  is  none  other  than  the  Spirit  of  the  Christ  ener-izing  in  the  hearts
of  believers.  The  Spirit  of  the  Christ  which  unites  the  Logos  and  the  flesh  is  none  other
than  the  Spirit  of  the  Logos,  the  Spirit  of  God's  Son ;  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Son  is  the
Spirit  of  the  Father,  for  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one.  The  doctrine  of  the  immanent
Trinity  seems  an  inevitable  consequence  of  any  admission  that  the  Fourth  Gospel  sets
forth  historically  the  veritable  consciousness  of  the  Lord  Christ.  The  argument  moves
on  from  incident  to  incident,  from  word  to  word,  from  synonym  to  synonym,  of  the  all-
blessed  One ;  vmtil  he  who  is  hailed  as  Messiah  and  sacrificial  Lamb  and  theocratic
King  appears,  to  be  the  Opener  of  heaven,  endowed  with  creative  power,  the  Lord
of  the  temple,  the  Reader  of  human  hearts,  the  Source  of  life  and  healing,  the  Bride-
groom of  the  true  theocracy,  greater  than  he  who  was  the  greatest  of  the  sons  of  men.
We  follow  on  in  the  narrative,  to  find  that,  though  the  flesh  of  the  Christ  provokes
endless  antagonism,  and  so  moves  the  "  darkness "  that  it  becomes  a  fearful  and  felt
oppression,  yet  the  idea  of  the.  Divine  humanity  becomes  more  and  more  intense  in
each  department  of  this  mighty  synthesis.

The  humanity  admits  the  need  of  water  from  Jacob's  well,  but  flashes  forth,  while  so
doing,  such  spiritual  truth  that  he  is  hailed  as  the  Messiah-Prophet  and  Saviour  of  the
world.  The  bestowment  on  the  impotent  man  of  life  leads  Jesus  to  declare  the  power
that  he  wields  to  confer  life  on  dead  souls  and  bodies,  and  the  authority  he  has  received
to  judge  the  quick  and  dead  (ch.  v.) ;  he  assumes  to  be  the  Life  of  the  world  by  two
great  signs  on  land  and  sea  (ch.  vi.),  and  by  conferring -upon  mankind  himself  as  the
veritable  "Bread  of  God  which  hjid  come  down  from  heaven."  In  great  variety  of
form  he  claims  to  be  not  only  life,  but  light.  He  calls  himself  the  Shepherd  of  souls
(ch.  X.),  able  to  give  to  those  who  submit  to  him  eternal  life,  because  he  and  the  Father
are  one.  He  wrestles  with  death,  and  snatches  one  whom  he  specially  loves  from  the
grave  (ch.  xi.).  At  that  grave  his  mysterious  Personality  is  displayed  as  intensely
human  and  unmistakably  Divine.  Throughout  the  closing  scenes  he  becomes  more
and  more  consciously  Divine,  as  his  heart  breaks  with  human  tenderness.  He  loves  to
the  uttermost  when  he  is  most  of  all  alive  to  the  fact  that  all  things  are  entrusted  to
him  (ch.  xiii.  1 — 5).  So  complete  is  his  revelation  of  the  Divine  love  that  he  dares  to
say,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  "  (ch.  xiv.  9).  He  promises  to  bestow
the  Divine  gift  of  "  the  Spirit,"  and  with  the  Father  to  come  and  dwell  in  human  hearts.
He  takes  the  whole  future  into  his  glance,  and  offers  prayer  for  those  who  shall  believe
on  him  to  the  end  of  time  (ch.  xvii.  20).  He  goes  forth  to  meet  his  doom,  to  drink  the
cup  of  trembling  and  humiliation  to  the  dregs.  He  is  condemned  and  submits.  He
triumphs  over  death,  and  receives  the  unrebuked  exclamation,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God ! "
If  this  be  an  historical  setting  forth  of  one  indubitable  series  of  his  highest  revelations,
then  we  recognize  the  consciousness  of  Jesus  as  having  cast  a  gleam  of  surpassing  light
into  the  "  thick  darkness  "  and  prufoundest  mysteries  of  the  Divine  Being.  The  record
of  his  words  and  life,  as  set  forth  by  his  most  loving  friend,  furnishes  the  largest  pro-
portion of  those  facts  which  the  Christian  consciousness  has  endeavoured  to  bring
together  in  what  is  called  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.

2.  The  Johannine  teaching  concerning  the  world.  This  divides  itself  into  a  trilogy,
even  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Godhead  does.  (1)  The  world  as  the  creature  of  God ;  (2)
the  world  of  men ;  (3)  the  world's  prince.

(1)  All  things  (vivra)  came  into  existence  through  the  agency  of  the  Logos.  Not
one  (thing)  entity,  atom,  force,  can  be  excepted.  The  entire  region  of  Divine  operation
is  itself  the  creation  of  God  by  the  Logos,  corresponding  to  the  teaching  of  the  writer
0  the  Hebrews,  that  by  the  agency  of  the  Son  (equivalent  to  Logos)  God  made  the  tdSyas,


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  oxxxyii

the  very  conditions  of  time  and  place.  In  antithesis  to  this  last  conception  an  organized
opposition  appears  to  the  Creator-Logos.  Darkness,  which  is  not  merely  negative  of
light,  but  an  antagonism  to  it,  must,  so  far  as  it  is  a  designation  of  moral  agencies,  be
the  creation  of  the  Logos,  not  as  darkness,  but  as  free  to  act  in  opposition  to  God,  and
thus  to  take  on  itself  the  aspect  and  characteristics  of  darkness.  la  the  "  all  things,"
not,  however,  called  k6(tijios,  there  is  both  an  "above"  and  a"beneath;"  the  heaven  from
which  the  Son  of  man  has  come,  and  to  which  he  will  return,  and  to  which  "  he  lifts
his  eyes  "  in  prayer,  and  where  are  his  "  Father's  house  "  and  "  many  mansions."  He
who  is  "  from  above  is.  above  all."  The  process  that  passes  over  men  in  their  becoming
sons  of  God  is  a  birth  "  from  above,"  or  "  from  the  beginning,"  or  "  from  the  Spirit."
This  heaven  opens  over  and  behind  the  Son  of  man  (oh.  i.  51),  and  he  is  consciously  in
"  heaven,"  and  may  be  seen  by  regenerated  eyes  to  be  one  who  can  and  does  pass  from
earth  to  heaven,  from  heaven  to  earth  (ch.  iii.  13).  The  xiiriios  is  often  used  to  denote
the  whole  of  this  visible,  tangible,  terrestrial  dwelling-place.  Into  it  the  Son  of  man
comes  when  the  Logos  is  made  flesh  (ch.  i.  13,  14).  From  it  at  last  he  ascends  (ch.  vi.
62),  when  he  has  conquered  death  and  put  on  the  vesture  of  an  immortal  humanity
(ch.  XX.  17).  Christ  speaks  of  the  "light  of  tJiis  world,"  meaning  that  which  proceeds
from  the  sun  (ch.  xi.  9).  The  Johannine  Christ  notices  the  most  striking  features  of
the  earth  in  which  we  live — the  wind  that  careers  over  its  surface ;  the  local  dwelling-
places  of  men ;  the  food  that  human  bodies  need,  even  his  own ;  the  washing  of  feet
from  its  defilement;  the  soil  in  which  the  com  of  wheat  takes  root;  the  vineyard  and
the  sheepfold ;  the  burning  of  the  pruned  and  fruitless  branches ;  the  contests  among
its  children  for  sovereignty  over  it.  All  things  are  put  under  him,  and  all  the  powers
of  the  world  are  at  his  disposal.  He  can  accelerate  processes  of  nature  and  meet  great
forces  of  the  (crfff/aoi  with  his  will.  He  can  face  all  the  powers  of  nature  and  all  their
protest  against  man  with  the  simple  fiat  of  his  will ;  saving  men  from  starvation  and
from  shipwreck  by  his  word.  He  told  the  Jews  that  they  were  "  of  this  world,"  but
that  he  was  "  not  of  this  world."  There  is  no  indication  that  the  (S\j))  stuff  or  matter
of  which  the  world  was  made  was  evil,  or  that  the  forces  of  nature  were  per  se  opposed
to  their  Maker  or  to  the  interests  of  man.  He  utilizes  them,  he  makes  them  the  instru-
ments of  his  most  beneficent  deeds  (ch.  ii.,  vi.,  ix.,  xiii.).  Nor  is  the  Bxtj  eternal ;  for  it
had  its  beginning,  and  again  the  world  and  the  fashion  of  it  will  pass  away  (1  John
ii.  17).  It  is  the  scene  of  Divine  manifestation.  The  very  flesh  which  he  had  himself
assumed  was  "  of  this  world,"  though  he,  the  Ego  dwelling  in  it,  was  "  not  of  this  world."
He  loved  his  own  to  the  uttermost  while  they  were  "  in  the  world  "  (ch.  xiii.  1).  He
did  not  pray  that  they  should  be  "  taken  out  of  the  world,"  but  kept  from  the  evil
(ch.  xvii.  14^-16).

(2)  The  world  of  men.  The  sense  of  the  word  thus  considered  is  not  the  whole
connotation  of  the  word.  It  is  used  more  frequently  (Kfoinoi,  not  aidir,  or  i  vw  aXiv),
for  the  whole  of  humanity  considered  independently  of  God.  The  xdanos,  which  was
made  by  the  li.6yos  (ch.  i.  10),  recognized  him  not,  even  when  he  was  in  the  world,
whether  immanently  or  by  incarnation.  This  power  of  cognition,  which  was  not  exer-
cised, indicates  moral  freedom  and  intellectual  power,  and  therefore  refers  to  men,  not
things.  In  the  great  prayer  the  Lord  said  (ch.  xvii.  25),  "  0  righteous  Father,  the
world  [humanity  as  a  whole]  hath  not  recognized  thee."  The  world  of  men  was,  in  its
ignorance  and  estrangement,  in  great  danger  of  destruction  (ch.  iii.  16),  and  was  exposed
to  judgment  (Kplais).  The  world  hates  the  Christ  for  the  light  that  he  throws  on  its
own  evil,  and  will  hate  the  disciple  as  it  does  hate  the  Master  (ch.  xv.  16 — 19).  But
the  world  of  men,  notwithstanding  its  antagonism  to  and  separation  from  God,  is  an
object  of  Divine  love  (ch.  iii.  16).  This  love  is  the  condition  and  occasion  of  the
mission  of  the  only  begotten  Son.  Jesus  has  come  to  save  the  world ;  he  took  upon
himself  the  sin  of  the  world  (ch.  L  29) ;  he  is  the  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
world  (1  John  iL  2) ;  he  came  down  from  heaven  to  give  life  to  the  world  (ch.  vi.  33,  51).
So  that  it  was  not  an  inert  mass  of  incurable  corruption.  Those  who  are  "  saved,"  who
receive. "life,"  who  are  chosen  out  of  the  world  and  called  to  holy  service,  reveal  the
great  contrast  between  themselves  and  those  who  "will  not  come  to  him  that  they
may  have  Uie  "  (ch.  v.  40),  and  a  more  restricted  use  of  the  word  KSa/ios,  is  confined  to
those  who  from  that  standpoint  resist,  hate,  persecute,  all  who  approach  and  find  him.
So  that  "  world"  is  often  the  antithesis  of  the  children  of  God  (ch.  xiv.  19,  22).    Yet


cxxxvffl  ENTEODUOTION  TO


even  the  "world,"  in  this  darkest,  deadliest,  hatefullest  form,  is  not  irretrievably
doomed.  Jesus  sends  his  disciples  into  this  very  world  to  teach  it,  and  promises  the
gift  and  aid  of  the  Comforter  to  convict  it  of  sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment  (oh.  xvi.
8 — 11).  The  world  may  give  the  disciples  much  "  tribulation ;  "  but  (said  Christ)  "  be
of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  world"  (ch.  xvi.  33).  The  fellowship  and  love  of
the  disciples  for  each  other  is  to  convince  the  world.  The  purport  and  end  of  the
conviction  is  that  the  world  may  believe  (ch.'  xvii.  23- — 26).

The  effort  that  the  school  of  Hilgenfeld  and  others  made  to  find  a  Gnostic  dualism,  an
unremediable  darkness  set  over  against  an  eternal  light,  has  failed  in  dealing  with  these
definitions  of  "  the  world."  The  caustic  and  terrible  words  of  the  eighth  chapter  should
be  judged  by  the  dramatic  controversy  in  which  they  occur.  The  deadly  hatred  of  the
Jews  to  Christ  was  at  its  climax  intensified  by  the  very  suppression  and  failure  of  its
attempts,  and  Christ  pressed  home  the  alliance  between  them  and  the  author  of  all
murder  and  falsehood;  and  declared  that  they  would  "die  in  their  sins  "  because  they
did  not  believe  that  he  was  essentially  that  which  he  had  evermore  said  to  them  (ch.
viii.  24 — 26).  But  a  very  forced  conclusion  is  drawn  from  the  words  when  this  teach-
ing is  identified  with  dualism.  The  condition  of  deliverance  is  conspicuous  throughout.
A  recognition  pf  the  scene  as  historic  certainty  at  once  shatters  the  speculation  that
has  been  founded  upon  it.

Doubtless  throughout  the  Gospel,  as  throughout  the  New  Testament  and  the  Old
Testament,  the  selective  and  redemptive  activity  of  God's  grace  is  referred  to.  There
are  those  who  are  not  drawn  to  the  Son  by  all  his  tenderness,  and  are  not  given  to  the
Son,  that,  having  reached  him,  they  may  find  access  by  him  to  the  Father  (see  notes
ch.  vi,  44 ;  xiv.  6).  There  are  who  practise  evil  (vpdaffovTis  t4  <pav\a),  and  who  will  not
come  to  the  light  (ch.  iii.  20,  21),  upon  whom  the  wrath  of  God  abides  (ch.  iii.  36),
who  will  eventually  come  forth  to  the  resurrection  of  judgment  (ch.  v.  29),  whom  the
Moses  in  whom  they  trust  charges  with  sin  (ch.  v.  45).  One  human  being  is  spoken  of
as  8«£j3o\oi  (oh.  vi.  70).  Christ's  unbelieving  hearers  are  contrasted  with  himself  as
being  *k  toO  koo-^oO  tovtov  (ch.  viii.  23).  They  are  "  the  servants  of  sin  "  (ch.  viii.  34).
They  are  children  of  the  manslayer,  of  the  liar,  of  the  devil  (ch.  viii.  43, 44).  They  fancy
that  they  see,  but  are  blind,  and  their  sin  remaineth  (ch.  ix.  41).  The  final  summary
of  the  teaching  quotes  Isa.  vi.,  "He  hath  blinded  their  eyes,'  etc.  (a  passage  quoted
by  all  the  synoptists  and  St.  Paul).  In  every  one  of  these  passages  of  St.  John  there
is  no  other  dualistio  teaching  than  that  which  pervades  the  New  Testament.  The
redemptive  work  itself  is  arrested  and  limited  by  responsible  disobedience  and  unbelief
of  men.  The  entire  position  of  the  Johannine  theology  recognizes  the  human  will  as  the
£^ency  which  is  to  appropriate  or  reject  the  fuU  benediction.  The  exclusion  from  privi-
lege is  hypothetical,  not  predestinated.  The  mission  and  message  of  the  Son  of  God  is
not  primarily  one  of  judgment,  but  one  of  mercy  and  of  deliverance.  "  The  world,"
which  is  the  synonym  and  comprehensive  term  lor  "humanity  apart  from  grace,"  is
loved  by  God.  The  Son  of  God  came  to  save  it ;  the  Comforter  to  convict  it  of  sin,'
righteousness,  and  judgment ;  and  the  answer  to  the  great  intercessory  prayer  will  be
that  the  K6jriios,  till  then  estranged,  hateful,  unsusceptible,  will  believe  that  the  Father
has  sent  him.

(3)  The  prince  of  this  world.  The  Johannine  teaching  recognizes  a  centre  to  the
evil  that  is  in  the  world,  a  personal  antagonist  to  God  and  goodness ;  but  in  this  it  is  not
so  explicit  as  the  synoptic  or  the  Pauline  teaching:  It  is  to  the  synoptists  we  must
turn  to  see  the  distinct  work  of  this  hostile  spirit.  The  peculiarity  of  John's  report  is
that  some  of  the  Jews  are  addressed  as  tlie  children  of  the  devil,  doing  their  father's
work,  imitating  the  source  of  falsehood  and  the  first  murderer  of  human  life  in  the
evil  passions  and  purposes  they  were  at  that  moment  cherishing.  I  have  discussed
(sect.  VIII.  C.  3)  the  supposition  that  John  puts  into  the  lips  of  Jesus  a  reference  to
the  father  of  the  devil.  The  language  cannot  bear  tliis  interpretation.  We  have  simply
the  strong  metaphor  which  treats  the  reseiriblance  of  nature  as  equivalent  to  filiation.
The  evil  desires  and  plans  of  the  would-be  murderers  of  Jesus  are  referred  to  the
suggestion  of  the  father  of  lies.  They  are  in  the  strong  language  of  the  synoptic
Baptist  and  Christ,  the  "  offspring  of  vipers,"  the  seed  of  the  serpent.

John's  Gospel  does,  however,  bestow  a  title  on  the  great  evil  spirit  which  is  in  per-
fect harmony  with  th    claim  made  by  the  devil  in  the  synoptic  account  of  the  tempta-


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN  oxxxix

tion  (Lake  iv.  6).  Christ  speaks  of  him  as  "  the  prince  (ipxiv)  of  this  world  " —
a  term  which  is  made  even  more  explicit  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  where  he  is  "  ruler  of
the  darkness  of  the  world"  (Eph.  vi.  12;  2  Cor.;i7.  4;  Eph.  ii.  2;  1  Tim.  i.  20);  he
is  prince  of  death  (Heb.  ii.  14 — 16)  and  roaring  lion  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  Thoma  Qoc.  cit,
pp.  202 — 205)  endeavours  to  make  out  a  fundamental  difference  between  the  Johannine
teaching  and  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  in  this — that  the  only  region  of  operation
assignied  to  "  the  prince  of  this  world "  is  the  human  spirit  (even  the  human  spirit  of
Jesus  himself),  not  the  bodies  of  men,  or  the  world  as  such,  or  the  heavens  or  the
abode  of  spirits;  that  we  have  no  "possession"  of  the  bodies  of  men,  no  diseases
entrusted  to  his  manipulation,  but  rather  that  the  evil  miiid  of  the  traitor  and  the
mental  trouble  of  the  Master  himself  is  the  only  region  of  hia  activity  and  the  sole
indication  of  the  devil's  nearness  or  presence.  There  is  no  reference  in  John  to  "  pos-
session," but  observe  also  that  there  is  no  reference  to  "  leprosy,"  nor  to  the  "  issue  of
blood,"  nor  to  "  dropsy,"  nor  to  "  fever,"  which  evil  diseases  our  Lord  healed  in  Galilee ;
but  we  learn  that  he  did  work  many  signs  and  works,  the  nature  of  which  is  not
portrayed  (ch.  ii.  23 ;  iv.  45,  48 ;  v.  36 ;  xx.  30).  The  absence  from  John's  narra-
tive of  a  specific  reference  to  healing  those  possessed  with  devils  may  not  indicate
any  metaphysical  diflference.  In  1  John  iii.  8  we  are  told  that  "  he  was  manifested  to
destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  We  should  be  going  too  far,  therefore,  to  say  that
John  ignores  them.  The  very  phrase,  "  prince  of  this  world,"  gives  the  flat  denial  to
the  inference  drawn  by  the  Tubingen  school.  The  references  to  the  devil  under  this
title  are  comparatively  few.  In  ch.  xiv.  30  "  the  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and
findeth  nothing  in  Christ."  In  oh.  xii.  31  he  is  cast  out  of  the  earth  by  the  submission
of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  ch.  xvi.  8,  11,  because  he  is  judged,  the  Comforter  will  convict
the  world  of  judgment.

We  learn  from  Christ  that  "he  abode  not  in  the  truth;"  and  when  "he  speaketh
a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  "  (ch.  viii.  44) ;  so  that  some  hint  is  given  of  the  mysterious
event  elsewhere  referred  to,  that  when  the  prince  of  this  world  began  to  be,  he  was  not
evil,  but  iecame  so  in  the  exercise  of  his  own  free  will.

Thoma  rejects  Hilgenfeld's  supposed  discovery  that  the  Johannine  writer  refers  to
the  demiurge  of  the  Gnostic  Valentinus  as  the  father  of  the  devil  (see  sect.  VIII.  C.  3,
and  notes  on  ch.  viii.  44).

The  future  of  the  devil  himself  is  not  touched  upon  in  the  Gospel ;  but  the  ultimate
consecration  of  the  world,  and  the  expulsion  from  the  world,  and  the  final  condemnation
of  the  prince  of  the  world,  are  firmly  promised  and  predicted.  As  Eeuss  admits
('  Theol.  Chret.,'  ii.  474),  there  is  no  indication  that  John  emphasized  a  fundamental,
irresponsible,  or  inevitable  evil,  or  referred  the  existence  of  evil  to  the  decrees  of  fate
or  Divine  predestination.  In  every  case  the  fault  lies  in  the  will  of  the  moral  agent,
and  is  the  consequence  of  the  rejection  of  advantage  >md  of  slight  offered  to  opportunity.

3.  2%e  Johannine  teaching  concerning  the  salvation  of  the  world.  This  compre-
hensive subject  embraces:  (1)  The  Person  of  the  Saviour.  (2)  ITie  nature  of  the  salva-
tion efiiected  by  him,  as  (a)  Life,  (6)  Light,  (c)  Love.  (3)  The  means  adopted  by  him  to
accomplish  the  end  proposed :  (a)  his  own  life  (or  example) ;  (6)  his  revelation  of  the
truth  (light  of  men) ;  (c)  his  love,  in  giving  himself  unto  death,  laying  down  his  life
for  his  sheep;  (d)  his  bestowment  of  the  Spiiit — the  true  coming  of  himself  to  indi-
viduals and  to  the  Church.  (4)  The  method  of  himian  appropriation — faith,  recon-
ciliation, love.

(1)  The  Saviour  himself.  The  Johannine  teaching  concerning  the  Godhead  has
,  embraced  the  main  features  of  his  Divine-human  Person,  which  was  at  one  and  the
^ame  time  the  highest  representation  of  ideal  manhood,  of  God's  conception  of  man,  and
the  most  perfect  and  exhaustive  revelation  of  the  Divine  nature  of  the  heart  of  the
Father.  The  ultimate  end  of  the  Incarnation  may  well  have  been  wider  than  the
redemption  or  salvation  of  the  world.  It  may  be,  and  it  has  been  supposed  to  include
(even  if  man  had  never  sinned),  the  fullest  self-manifestation  of  the  eternal  God  in
a  nature  intended  from  its  first  inception  to  besr  the  full  weight  of  the  Divine  glory
(see  Dr.  Westcott's  important  essay  on  "The  Gospel  of  the.  Creation :"  'Appendix
to  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  St.  John ').  Whether  it  were  so  or  not,  the  Gospel
describes  the  (proximate)  end  of  the  Incarnation  and  of  the  sending  of  the  Son  of  God
into  the  world  4s  nothing  less  than  the  salvation  of  the  world  of  men.     He  came  (not


cxl  INTBODDCTION  TO


to  condemn,  but)  to  save  the  world  (ch.  lii.  16, 17),  and  that  all  men  through  him
might  be  saved.  He  is  hailed  in]  Samaria  as  "  the  Savioiir  of  the  world  "  (ch.  iv.  42 ;
1  John  iv.  14).  "  Salvation  "  (truriipla)  is  not  a  new  idea  invented  by  the  author  of  the
Fourth  Gospel.  The  Old  Testament  constantly  uses  the  word  to  describe  the  greatest
necessity  of  man  and  the  mightiest  work  of  God.  It  is  the  most  comprehensive  of  all
terms  adopted  to  express  the  beneficent  action  of  God.  It  is  the  restoration  of  all  the
relations  between  God  and  man  which  had  been  dislocated  by  sin,  and  the  conference
of  subjective  conditions  and  experiences  of  transcendent  preciousness  and  importance.
It  would  be  easy  to  show  that  this  word  covers  all  that  is  meant  by  justification  and
new  life,  by  reconciliation,  pardon,  and  sanotification,  by  adoption  and  eternal  life.^
The  term  "  salvation  "  covers  all  that  this  evangelist  describes  by  his  use  of  the  verb
ffdiew.  He  who  is  able  to  do  this  thin?  must  possess  lofty  powers  and  Divine  Person-
ality. As  John  uses  the  word,  it  implies  a  terrific  and  hopeless  condition  into  which
the  world  has  fallen.  Dai  kness,  ignorance,  unsusceptibility,  falsehood,  rebellion,  bondage,
and  exposure  to  moral  destruction  (a7rci5A.6ia,  ch.  xvii.  12),  death  without  any  prospect
or  principle  of  life.  The  serpent-bitten,  plague-stricken,  and  dying  hosts  of  Israel ;  sheep
exposed  to  the  ravages  of  the  wolf,  existence  without  any  life,  death  in  sin,  death  in  all
its  defilement,  shame,  and  mystery,  are  metaphors  more  or  less  explicit  and  translucent
to  describe  the  condition  of  humanity  indepeadently  of  God's  saving  grace.  St.  John
discriminates  between  "  sins  "  and  sin,  and  shows  that  to  him  sin  is  not  an  isolated  act
of  transgression.  His  definition  of  afLaprta,  is  avoiila,  or  lawlessness  (1  John  iii.  4),
t.e.  antagonism  to  the  known  Law  and  will  of  God.  It  assumes  in  Gospel  and  Epistle
the  twofold  meaning  of  concrete  acts  of  rebellion  and  transgression,  as  in  (oh.  v.  14)
"  Go,  and  sin  no  more,"  and  "  He  that  deUvered  me  to  thee  hath  the  greater  sin  "  (oh.
xix.  11) ;  1  John  ii.  2, "  He  is  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins,"  etc. ;  1  John  i.  9,  "  He  is  just
to  forgive  us  our  sins."  But  it  is  also  used  as  descriptive  of  a  power  or  principle  of  cor-
ruption, a  tendency  to  sin,  as  in  (ch.  viii.  34)  "He  that  doeth  sin  is  the  bond-slave  of
sin,"  and  (ch.  viii.  46)  "Which  of  you  convicteth  me  of  sin?"  Whereas  Jesus  said
boldly  to  the  religious  leaders  in  Jerusalem  (ch.  vii.  19),  "  Which  of  you  doeth
[keepeth]  the  Law  ?  "  This  is  the  state  of  man  from  which  Christ  comes  to  deliver  the
human  race,  commencing  with  individuals.  There  is  a  positive  objective  work  to  be
done  in  and  for  human  nature  by  its  Saviour,  and  there  is  inducement  and  motive  to
be  supplied  to  perishing  man  to  accept  this  objective  work  of  his.

The  sending,  the  coming,  the  descent,  the  woik,  the  acts,  the  words,  of  the  Son  of
God  have  all  been  conditioned  by  the  desperate  condition  of  humanity.  It  is  admitted
that  in  some  sense  he  had  always  been  coming,  and  had  always  been  in  the  world,  had
been  seen  by  prophets  (ch.  xii.  41)  and  testified-  to  by  the  prophetic  spirit  (ch.  i.  5) ;
that  patriarchs  desired  to  see  his  fuller  manffestation  (ch.  viii.  56),  that  the  great  Law-
giver had  written  of  him  (ch.  v.  47),  and  the  entire  Scripture  of  the  Old  Testament
testified  to  him  (ch.  v.  39) ;  but  all  this  agelong  and  universal  approach  of  the  Logos
to  the  mind  of  man  had  not  disarmed  resistance,  nor  did  the  darkened  understanding  see
the  brightness  of  he  glory  of  the  Father.  So,  before  any  further  or  final  display  of  the
purpose  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  men  could  take  place,  "the  Logos,"  says  John,
"  became  flesh,  and  tabernacled  amongst  us."  The  Divine  hmnanity  thus  constituted
was  specially  equipped  for  the  work  to  be  done.  Every  lofty  name  he  bears  or  assumes
has  a  distinct  reference  to  the  reconstitution,  saving,  and  redemption  of  humanity;
while  the  very  nature  of  the  changes  to  be  wrought  in  human  nature  and  individual
souls  corresponds  with  the  attributes  and  perfections  and  ofiSces  that  in  the  Fourth
Gospel  he  is  prepared  to  fulfil.  Thus  he  is  to  save  the  world ;  to  save  those  that  believe
on  him  from  destruction  (ch.  iii.  16,  17) ;  to  set  them  free  from  bondage  to  sin,  their
hard  taskmaster  (ch.  viii.  36) ;  to  provide,  for  whosoever  looks  to  him  with  eye  of  faith,
deliverance  from  worse  than  the  bite  of  fiery  serpent  (ch.  iii.  14,  15).  He  is  "  the  good
Shepherd,"  who  has  come  to  deliver  from  the  fangs  of  the  wolf  or  the  malice  of  the
thief  who  comes  on  apace  "  to  steal,  to  kill,  and  destroy  "  (ch.  x.  10).  "  I  am  come  that
they  might  have  life."  He  is  the  Giver  to  the  starving  soul  of  man  (rh.  vi.  50)  of  the
true  food,  of  which,  if  a  man  eat,  he  shall  not  die.

(2)  The  nature  of  salvation  may  be  summed  up  in  thiee  great  terms,  alike  descriptive
of  the  need  of  man  and  the  character  of  the  Christ  and  his  work — life,  light,  and  love.
'  Essay  on  "  Forgiveness  of  Sins,"  in  '  Ecclesia,'  first  series,  by  the  present  writer.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxU

(o)  Salvation  must  be  life,  the  possession  of  more  than  the  transitory,  ever- vanishing,
«lwaya-threatened  earthly  existence  which  we  are  content  to  call  by  the  name.  It  is
a  mode  of  being  unmenaced  by  the  ten  thousand  perils  of  earth  and  by  the  organized
enmity  of  hell,  rendered  incapable  of  perishing,  delivered  from  the  tempter,  and  freed
from  the  fear  which  hath  torment.  Life,  not  a  diseased,  paralyzed,  and  distorted  exist-
ence, the  source  of  endless  unrest,  and  ever  tending  to  destruction ;  but  life  in  its  whole-
ness and  perpetuity — "  life "  independent  of  these  local  conditions  and  physical  sur-
roimdings,  and  "  more  abundant "  than  can  be  realized  in  the  flesh ;  "  veritable,"
answering  to  its  fundamental  idea,  a  life  which  is  proper  to  man  as  a  veritable  child  of
God ;  "  eternal  life,"  a  life  which  flows  on  like  a  river  abounding  in  its  strength  into
the  great  ocean  of  eternity.  "  The  living  water,"  the  spiritual  life,  the  Holy  Spirit  him-
self, shall  be  in  those  who  receive  his  gift  of  life  as  a  well-spring  which  leaps  up  in
boundless  fulness  and  entire  sufBoienoy  for  all  human  craving  for  ever  and  ever.  The
constant  references  made  in  the  Gospel  to  "  life,"  "  eternal  life,"  show  that  it  was  the
synonym  of  the  salvation  which  Christ  came  to  give.  It  is  more  than  existence,  or
continuity  of  an  existence  which  had  been  forfeited.  It  is  the  blessedness  of  complete
satisfaction,  the  continuity  of  participation  in  the  very  nature  of  him  who  has  life  in
himself,  and  who  *'  hath  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself"  (ch.  v.  26,  27).  In  the
Logos  is  life,  and  in  the  Logos  incarnate,  "  made  flesh,"  is  life  (ch.  i.  4, 14) ;  "  He  that
hath  the  Son  hath  life ; "  "  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son  "
(1  John  v.  11, 12).

The  recOTd  of  the  Gospel  insists  upon  and  illustrates  the  life-giving  power  of  the
Logos  when  made  flesh.  Thus  he  maintains  that,  though  the  temple  of  his  body  be
destroyed,  he  will  raise  it  up ;  and  though  he  lay  down  his  life,  he  will  take  it  again,  by
the  intrinsic  life  which  is  in  him.  Due  relation  to  him  is  to  secure  "eternal  life"
(ch,  iii.  16, 17,  36) ;  he  offers  to  give  it  to  the  Samaritans  (ch.  iv.  14) ;  he  confers  "  life  "
on  the  paralyzed  man  (ch.  v.  9) ;  and  he  vindicates  his  authority  to  do  this  on  the
sabbath  by  the  position  that  "  as  the  Father  raiseth  and  quickeneth  the  dead,  so  the
Son  quickeneth  [maketh  to  live]  whom  he  wills  "  (ch.  v.  21) ;  and  he  predicts  that  the
dead  souls  and  dead  bodies  of  men  shall  arise  to  life  at  his  word  (ch.  v.  25 — 29).  He
supplies  the  means  of  life  to  the  starving  multitudes  (ch.  vi.  1 — 14),  he  protects  from
death  his  troubled  disciples  (ch.  vi.  15 — '21),  and  then  expounds  his  willingness  to  give
himself  as  the  veritable  Bread  of  God  for  the  life  of  the  world.  "  He  that  eateth  of
this  Bread  shall  live  for  ever"  (ch.  vi.  51).  The  apostles  recognized  this  lofty  preroga-
tive, and  declared  their  unalterable  decision  not  to  leave  him,  because  he  had  "  the  words
of  eternal  life"  (ch.  vi.  68).  In  other  imagery  describing  those  who  appropriate  the
Word  and  the  gift,  he  said  (ch.  x.  28,  30)  that  they  should  not  by  any  means  perish,
and  they  should  have  eternal  life,  and  no  power  should  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand  or
his  Father's  hand,  since  he  and  the  Father  are  one  in  essence  and  power  to  protect  and
bless.  The  life-giving  is  most  wonderfully  set  forth  afterwards  as  a  concrete  fact.  The
death  of  the  body,  the  corruption  of  the  grave,  are  no  barri'i.rs,  though  they  may  be
a  concealment  of  his  power  to  give  life,  and  so  he  snatches  from  death  and  the  grave
the  man  he  calls  his  "  friend"  (oh.  xi.).  He  further  illustrated  his  power  to  give  life
on  the  night  of  the  Passion,  by  saying,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also"  (ch.  xiv.  19).

In  the  intercessory  prayer  he  gives  eternal  life  to  those  whom  the  Father  has  given
him  (ch.  xviL  2,  3).  The  final  scenes  record  the  victory  he  won  over  death  in  his
own  Person,  and  the  pledge  he  thus  becomes  and  gives  to  all  who,  whether  they  have
had  phenomenal  proof  of  it  or  not,  believe  on  his  Name.  The  whole  Gospel  is  written
that  helieving  we  might  have  life  in  his  Name  (oh.  xx.  31).

(6)  Salvation,  however,  is  more  than  life :  it  includes  a  further  conception,  which
pervades  the  Gospel  from  end  to  end ;  it  is  synonymous  with  light.  The  antithesis  of
life,  or  of  continuous  participation  in  the  nature  of  God,  is  death — death  of  body  and
death  of  soul,  destruction,  loss  of  privilege,  insensibility  to  the  Divine.  The  antithesis
of  light  is  darkness,  equivalent  to  ignorance,  corruption,  impurity,  evil.  The  life  that
is  in  the  Logos  is  light.  "  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness."  This  is  the
great  burden  of  the  New  Testament.  All  darkness  is  alien  from  his  nature,  whatever
our  weak  sense  or  feeble  intelligence  may  suggest  to  the  contrary.  The  Father  is  free
from  all  imperfection,  and  the  glory,  moral  splendour,  of  his  essential  nature  consists  in
this,  that  it  is  diffusive,  radiating  forth  as  unshadowed  light  in  all  places  of  his  dominion;


cilii  INTEODUCTION  TO


the  means  whereby  all  moral  agency  in  the  universe  is  competent  to  know  both  himself
and  all  things.  The  gospel  is  concerned  with  men,  with  the  moral  universe  of  men,
and  with  the  fearful  possibility  and  fact  that  the  moral  nature  of  man  has  been  alienated
from  the  life  of  God,  and  that,  though  the  life  streams  forth  as  light  upon  the  universe,
yet  the  free-will  of  man  has  resisted  and  opposed  itself  to  the  life  of  Grod,  and  "  dark-
ness" has  failed  to  comprehend  the  unsullied  beam.  Salvation  for  man  includes  a
piercing  of  this  darkness ;  the  sphere  of  death  is  conspicuous  in  that  department  of
man's  nature  by  which  he  comes  to  know  (yiviiffKetv)  God.  His  very  faculties  were
themselves  arrested.  His  eyes  were  blinded.  The  irradiation  of  all  things  with  which
man  has  to  do  by  the  life  of  God  failed  to  produce  its  legitimate  effect  upon  him,  by  the
prolonged  indifference,  the  mental  Incapacity,  the  moral  blindness,  the  judicial  blind-
folding, that  had  befallen  him  through  sin.  Moral  death  is  mental  blindiess.  This  is
the  inversion  of  the  Platonic  thesis  which  charges  all  moral  obliquity  upon  intellec-
tual deficiency.  So,  though  the  Logos  is  in  the  world  as  life  and  light,  yet  the  world
knows  it  not.     God  is  not  in  men's  thoughts. '

In  the  Logos  is  Life  and  Light.  There  is  an  eternal  eflfulgenoe  of  the  glory  of  God
in  the  coetemal  beam  of  the  Divine  Word.  He  is  the  Brightness  of  the  glory  of  God,
the  express  Image  of  his  substance.  St.  John's  teaching  is  that  the  Logos,  when  made
flesh  and  when  tabernacling  with  us,  inhabiting  the  temple  of  the  body  prepared  for
him,  was  Light.  The  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth,
shone  thence  upon  all  human  life.  This  illumination,  this  forth-streaming  of  the
omnific  Word  in  a  perfect  life,  is  calculated  to  turn  the  darkness,  the  intellectual  per-
versions and  moral  corruption  of  men,  into  light.  The  salvation  which  the  Logos
incarnate  ministers  to  men  is  iDumination.  On  more  than  one  occasion  Jesus  declares
himself  to  be  "  the  Light  of  the  world  "  (ch.  viii.  12 ;  ix.  5 ;  xii.  35,  36,  46).  (.-'oming
to  him  is  called  a  coming  to  the  Light  (ch.  iii.  19 — 21).  Apart  from  the  light  that  the
Lord  has  cast  upon  the  way  which  a  man  should  take,  he  will  not  see  the  path,  but,
by  keeping  in  his  light,  he  becomes  "  a  child  of  the  light."  The  entire  world  is  illu-
mined lor  him,  the  darkness  of  death  and  the  grave  are  pierced,  the  realities  of  the
otherwise  unknown,  invisible  world  are  revealed.  The  corresponding  term  to  "  Light "  ia
"Truth,"  the  adequate  expression  of  reahty,  the  veritable  utterance  of  the  thought  of
the  Father.  Weiss,  '  Biblical  Theology,'  ii.  354,  "  'AA^flejo  is  not  knowledge,  but  the
object  of  knowledge  ;  not  therefore  identical  with  life ;  but  the  revelation  of  the  truth  is
the  presupposition  of  it," — Christ  as  Logos-made-flesh,  full  of  grace  and  truth  (ch.  i.  14).
"  I  am,"  said  he,  "  the  Truth,  as  well  as  the  Way  and  the  Life  "  (ch.  xiv.  6).  He  is  the
Truth  about  God's  essential  nature,  adequately  revealing  it  j  he  is  the  Truth  about
man's  ideal  nature,  as  God  conceived  it  and  produced  it ;  and  he  is  the  Truth  about  the
relation  between  God  and  man,  showing  a  unity  of  consciousness  and  will  with  the
Father,  which  issues  in  the  confession  that  he  does  always  those  things  that  please
God,  and  knows  that  the  Father  hears  him  always.  His  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  God,
and  to  finish  his  work  (ch.  iv.  34).

The  conditions  of  adequate  knowledge  of  God  and  duty  and  deliverance  are  provided
in  the  simple  fact  of  his  being.  He  has  come  to  bear  witness  to  truth,  as  well  as  to  be
Truth  (ch.  xviii.  37 ;  viii.  "10) ;  i.e.  the  Person  of  the  Saviour  is  not  only  a  revelation  of
reality  in  itself,  but  it  illumines  other  realities  as  well.  All  who  are  of  the  truth  do
hear  his  voice  (ch.  xviii.  37).  So  great  a  light  as  his  life  is  not  only  glorious  and
refulgent  in  itself,  but  it  brings  before  the  open  and  susceptible  eye  a  world  of  reality
not  otherwise  known.  The  light  behind  him  is  an  opening  of  heaven  ;  the  light  before
him  reproves,  all  evil  by  revealing  it  in  its  true  proportions.  The  effect  ol  "  walking
in  the  light "  is  moral  purity  and  conformation  of  character  to  the  Light  of  God,  so
that  those  who  accept  this  Light  have  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  them.  So  St.
John  speaks  of  believers  as  "  being  of  the  truth,"  as  denying  all  that  is  false  (1  John
iii.  19;  ii,  4);  and,  moreover,  as  "walking  in  the  truth,"  and  "doing  the  truth"
(3  John  4).

But  truth,  objective  revelation,  the  shining  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  is  not  the
only  condition  of  salvation  by  light,  seeing  that  the  "darkness"  of  roan  is  not  a  bald
negation,  but  an  unsusceptibility  to  light.  Power  is  therefore  wielded  by  the  Logos
incarnate  to  open  blind  eyes.  The  synoptists  frequently  recognize  this  as  a  feature  of
the  Chiist's  work,  and  represent  the  Lord  as  restoring  vision  in  various  ways  to  blinded


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  BT.  JOHN.  cxliU

men,  as  symbolic  of  the  direct  personal  treatment  of  souls.  In  the  synagogue  at
Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  18) ;  in  the  blind  man  at  Bethsaida,  whose  gradual  cure  seems  to
correspond  with  the  gradual  illumination  of  the  disciples  (Mark  viii.  22—26);  in  the
two  blind  men  at  Capernaum ;  and  in  blind  Bartimseus, — the  great  privilege  is  sought  and
conferred  in  vindication  of  the  prime  condition  of  faith  (Matt.  ix.  27 — 31 ;  xx.  29 — 34).
Li  reply  to  the  messengers  from  John's  prison,  he  bade  them  tell  the  Baptist  that  "  the
blind  receive  their  sight"  (Matt.  xi.  5).  The  Fourth  Gospel,  in  one  of  its  most
characteristic  and  circumstantial  narratives,  sets  forth  the  Light  of  the  world  as
opening  the  eyes  of  one  born  blind.  Christ  does  not  even  ask  for  faith,  but  he  heals
first,  and  then  reveals  himself  aa  Son  of  Grod.  The  teaching  of  the  narrative  corresponds
with  the  whole  of  the  Saviour's  work  with  humanity.  The  power  of  vision  is  conferred
by  the  new  birth  (ch.  iii.  3,  4).  The  writer  takes  explicit  pains  to  reveal  the  entii'e
aioral  of  the  cure  of  blindness,  and  regards  this  as  the  complement  to  the  assertion,  "  I
im  the  Light  of  the  world."  Salvation  as  light  is  inadequate  and  incomplete,  unless
with  light  cornea  also  the  power  of  vision.  "  I  am  come  that  thoae  which  see  not  might
see,"  said  the  Light  of  the  world.  The  apecial  grace  which  is  thus  suggested  is  not  the
objective  illumination  with  which  his  unique  Personality  floods  the  Kda/jios,  but  the
subjective  work  of  his  Spirit  on  individual  souls,  re-creating  their  dormant  faculties,
producing  a  new  manhood,  calling  into  being  powers  which  from  birth  or  by  disease  or
folly  had  been  in  utter  abeyance.  This  imperial  exercise  of  the  power  to  save  leads  ua
forward  to  the  grandest  definition  of  all.

(c)  Salvation  as  love.  The  first  great  utterance  of  the  prologue  is  that  the  glory  of
the  Only  Begotten  was  full  of  grace,  i.e.  of  unmerited,  self-communicating  favour.  The
sublime  suggestion  of  the  eighteenth  verse  is  that  he  the  Only  Begotten  was  the
eternal  Object  of  an  infinite  love:  "  He  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father."  He  very  early
made  the  supreme  announcement  that  God  loved  the  world  (ch.  iii.  16),  and  sent  him
forth  as  the  expression  of  the  Divine  love.  "  God  is  Love,"  said  St.  John;  "  and  he  that
dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God ;  "  "  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for  God
is  Love  "  (1  John  iv.  16, 8).  Jesus  was  reminded  on  grand  occasions  of  the  Divine  love
to  himself;  and  he  knew  that  the  Father  loved  him,  because,  said  he,  "  I  lay  down  my
life  that  I  may  take  it  again "  (ch.  x.  18).  His  most  exhaustive  and  comprehensive
self-manifestation  was  not  of  life  or  light,  but  of  love.  The  whole  of  the  Divine  self-
manifestation  as  set  forth  in  the  Gospel  is  a  revelation  of  this  the  most  comprehensive
of  all  the  Divine  perfections,  and  is  the  adequate  expression  of  them  all — the  supreme
blessedness  of  giving,-  of  imparting  self  for  the  life  and  joy  of  others.  The  other
apostles  grasped  the  same  thought,  and  Paul  held  it  not  to  sacrifice  thereby,  but  to  express
therein  the  Divine  righteousness.  "  God  commendeth  his  love  to  us."  Love  of  God
shed  abroad  in  the  heart,  and  producing  within  us  an  adequate  response,  is  one  of  the
fundamental  themes  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (v.  5, 8).  Jude  tells  us  to  "  keep  our-
selves (TTipeTy)  in  the  love  of  God,"  as  in  a  citadel  and  well-defended  sanctuary,  "looking
[thence]  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life  "  (Jude  21).  But  the
chief  burden  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  the  love  of  God,  and  the  manifestation  of  that
love  in  power,  in  healing,  in  sacrifice,  in  death,  in  resurrection.  The  motive  of  the  first
miracle,  though  it  be  one  of  power,  is  love  to  his  mother  and  her  friends.  The  key-
note of  the  discourse  to  Nicodemus  is  the  self-sacrificing  love  of  God.  The  self-humilia-
tion of  the  well  of  Sychar  discloses  the  vast  compass  of  his  love  to  men,  that  his  great
aim  was  the  saving  of  others  by  the  forgetfidness  of  self.  The  great  miracles  of
ch.  vL  1 — 21  are  displays  of  love  to  his  disciples,  and  they  become  the  text  on  which
he  proclaims  the  extent  of  his  own  self-sacrificial  love  in  securing  the  life  of  the  world.
The  love  which  saves  the  sinner  while  it  denounces  sin  beams  through  the  heated  and
angry  discussions  of  ch.  vii.  and  viii. ;  and  it  dictated  the  healing  of  the  blind  man,
and  it  is  also  the  stimulus  to  the  good  Shepherd  to  effect  the  redemptive  acta  which
would  save  the  scattered  and  imperilled  sheep.  The  treatment  of  the  family  of  Bethany
•nd  of  the  deceased  or  sleeping  Lazarus  is  the  very  apotheosis  of  love.  Jesus  risks  his
human  life  that  he  may  give  life  and  cheer  to  the  home  which  he  loved.  He  weeps.  He
struggles  with  death.    He  wins  by  love.

The  victory  of  love  over  death  is  followed  by  the  first  and  earliest  response  of
'jnbovmded  love  to  himself  (ch.  xii.  1 — 8) ;  a  token  was  given  which  has  been  the
precious  memorial  of  Christendom,  and,  by  its  imitation,  the  beginning  of  heaven  upon


cxUt  INTEODUCTION  TO


earth.  He  testifies  his  love  unto  the  uttermost  in  ch.  xiii.  1,  etc.,  where  the  humiliation  of
the  God-Man  receives  its  highest  sanction,  and  prepares  for  a  most  surprising  and  con-
tinuous display  of  the  throbbing  of  an  infinite  love  to  his  very  own.  His  high -priestly
prayer  for  those  who  have  believed  that  he  came  out  from  God,  was  that  "  the  love
wherewith  he  had  loved  them,"  to  the  point  of  "  laying  down  his  life  for  them,"  might
be  "  in  them,",  that  they  might  know  that  "  the  Father  himself  loved  them  "  even  as
he  loved  the  Son  (ch.  xiv.  21 ;  xv.  12 ;  xvi.  27 ;  xvii.  23—26).  The  love  for  them  is
seen  in  marvellous  display  on  the  arrest  by  the  temple-guards  (ch.  xviii.  8).  The  entire
demeanour  of  the  august  Victim  is  the  unveiling  of  an  eternal  love  to  those  who  were
bitterly  misconceiving  it.  The  care  of  his  tuother,  in  his  dying  moments,  expresses  and
intensifies  the  consummation  of  a  perfect  love.  The  whole  manner  of  the  resurrection
lays  special  emphasis  on  the  condition  of  mind  which  would  most  certainly  appreciate
and  beheve  in  the  revelation.  The  highest  revelations  were  made  to  the  Magdalene,
whose  love  opened  her  eye  and  ear  to  perceive  the  stupendous  fact.  The  disciples  whom
he  loved,  and  Thomas  who  was  ready  to  die  with  him,  were  singled  out  to  be  recipients
of  his  supreme  revelations.  The  final  scenes  on  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret  were  for  the
last  time  the  putting  into  human  forms  of  the  Divine  Belf-abandonment  of  a  perfect
love.

"  The  Logos  made  man  "  u  the  expression  of  the  supreme  aSection  of  the  eternal
God  to  man,  heightened  and  completed  by  the  response  of  human  love  ;  and  the  moral
and  spiritual  result  in  humanity  of  the  reception  and  response  of  love  to  God  is,  on  the
part  of  believers,  love  to  one  another.  This  is  especially  conspicuous  when  the  curtain
falls  over  the  public  ministry,  and  the  Lord  enters  into  familiar  relations  with  those
who  have  at  length,  for  life  and  death,  accepted  the  revelation  of  heaven  and  of  God
made  in  his  Person.  Thus  love  to  himself  is  made  the  ground  and  reason  of  obedience
to  his  commandments  (ch.  xiv.  15),  and  (ch.  xiv.  21)  love  to  Christ  carries  with  it  the
love  of  the  Father,  and  further  manifestations  of  himself;  and  the  surprising  assurance
is  given  that  "  we  will  come  and  take  up  our  abode  with  him  who  guards  aud  keeps  the
A^7»/  of  Christ."  The  abiding  in  the  love  of  Christ  becomes  the  initiation  of  holy  joy
(ch.  XV.  9- — ll).  The  ruling  condition,  guarantee,  and  fruit  of  holy  love  is  keeping
the  greatest  commandment  of  all,  viz.  the  love  of  one  another  (ch.  xv.  12,  17).  The
supreme  benediction  for  which  the  high-priestly  Intercessor  prays  is  that  "  the  love
wherewith  thou  lovedst  me  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them  "  (ch.  xvii.  26).

(3)  The  MEANS  adopted  by  our  Lord  to  effect  the  salvation  of  men.  How  does  St.  John
represfnt  the  Life  arid  Light  and  Love  of  God  becoming  ours  ?  Most  certainly  Christ
gives  life.  He  is  the  Life  of  those  who  are  united  to  him.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live
also."  He  vindicates  his  authority  to  bestow  life  upon  those  partially  and  absolutely
deprived  of  it  or  in  peril  of  losing  it.  His  full  authority  to  do  this  thing  is  reserved
for  the  future,  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  have  been  lifted  up,  shall  be  jjlorified,  shall
have  re-entered  upon  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was
Still  he  describes  himself  as  the  Vine-stock,  of  which  the  disciples  are  the  branches,  and
the  life  in  himself  is  to  awaken  and  sustain  their  life  (ch.  xv.  1 — 10).  He  speaks  of
power  to  convey  this  life,  to  dispread  this  energy,  through  the  personality  of  those  united
to  him.  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life  more  abundantly ; "  "  He  that  eateth
me  shall  live  on  account  of  me."  The  union  of  his  life  with  that  of  his  followers  is  the
special  theme  of  ch.  vi.  and  xv.,  and  implies  an  exercise  of  Divine  authority,  and
nothing  short  of  Divine  prerogative.  The  Divine  Humanity  is  the  stay  of  all  believing
men.  As  he  is  one  with  God,  they  also  become  one  with  the  Father,  and  one  in  him.
He  Ib  their  Resurrection  and  their  Life,  to  such  an  extent  that  whosoever  liveth  and
believeth  in  him  shall  never  die,  shall  not  experience  in  dissolution  what  death  means —
thall  live  far  ever.  The  method  he  is  represented  as  employing  is  a  Divine  giving  to
those  who  can  and  will  receive  the  gift.

(o)  The  shining  of  the  Light.  We  have  already  seen  that  his  method  of  communi-
cating I'^ht  and  truth  to  soiils  is  twofold.  He  is  Liglit,  and  he  opens  blind  eyes  to  see
this  illumination,  and  all  other  things  thereby.  The  constitution,  therefore,  of  the
Personality  of  the  God-Man  is  the  forthstroaming  of  eternal  light  on  human  life  and
duty,  or  human  way  and  human  destiny.  This  is  not  all,  because  of  the  opacity  and
dulnesB  of  human  faculty,  and  so  by  his  spiritual  power  he  produces  receptivity  in  the
human  subject.     The  Spirit  will  lead  into  all  the  truth  concerning  himself  and  all  othei


ISE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  J0H17.  oxlv

things,  past,  present,  and  to  come  (ch.  xiv.  26 ;  xvi.  13).  The  method  of  light-giving  is
the  exhibition  in  himself  of  a  perfect  exemplar,  which,  though  he  is  the  Logos-made-
iiesh,  and  they  are  flesh,  nevertheless  they  are  bound  to  imitate.  This  is  the  high
teaching  of  ch.  xiii.  12 — 17  ;  xv.  12  (see  1  John  iv.  17 ;  ii.  6 ;  iii.  3, 16).  It  is  also  the
theme  of  many  passages  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul  and  Peter  (Phil.  ii.  5 ;  1  Pet.  it  21 ;
iv.  1).  To  realize  this  lofty  ideal  of  life  and  light  in  human  experience  might  seem
and  virould  be  impractical  and  impossible,  apart  from  the  allied  and  co-operating  sugges-
tion that  his  life  is  actually  given  to  the  new  humanity,  and  that  he  came  by  his
Spirit  to  generate  a  new  life  in  the  barren  stock  of  Adam's  race.

(6)  The  sacrificial  death.  In  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  to  man  there  is  a
breadth  and  specialty  of  teaching  which  cannot  be  overlooked.  The  method  of  the  love
of  the  God-Man  to  man  received  one  high  and  far-reaching  development,  and  was
accompanied  by  one  stupendous  consequence,  which  was  a  necessity,  an  order,  an  ivroKij
of  the  Father,  which  the  author  of  the  Pourtli  Gospel  not  only  does  not  conceal  but  con-
spicuously enforces.  The  death  of  the  God-Man  is  to  him  the  indispensable  preliminary
of  the  -fuU  and  even  the  unrestrained  communication  of  life,  and  the  exercise  of  his
life-giving  powers.

Keuss  labours  hard  to  exclude  from  the  teaching  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  all  reference
to  the  sacrificial  or  expiatory  value  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the  Tiibingen  school  of
criticism  insists  much  on  the  contrast  between  the  synoptic  and  Pauline  doctrine  of
the  death  of  our  Lord,  and  that  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  It  is  obvious  that  his  death
is  not  explicitly  spoken  of  in  this  Gospel  as  a  humiliation,  but  a  glorification.  Thus
the  com  of  wheat  becomes,  by  dying,  the  source  of  much  fruit.  The  "  lifting  up  of
the  Son  of  man"  (ch.  iii,  14;  xii.  32)  is  somewhat  ambiguous,  though  the  evangelist
and  the  Jews  understood  Jesus  to  speak  under  this  term  of  his  death  and  departure
from  the  world.  The  glorious  issues  of  the  death  of  Christ  so  filled  the  mind  of  the
apostle  that  the  repulsive  and  humiliating  features  had  themselves  become  effulgent  with
new  glory,  and  he  who  had  seen  "  the  Lamb  slain "  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  may
have  not  felt  the  shudder  and  recoil  at  the  premonitory  hints  of  the  necessity,  quality,
and  meaning  of  his  death.  Nay,  more,  we  are  ready  to  admit  that  the  imperial  majesty
of  the  sublime  Sufferer  overpowers  the  features  of  shame  and  curse  which  were  irrevocably
blended  with  it.  The  death-scene  ia  his  case  is  a  victory  over  death.  His  very  corpse
propels  at  once  a  life-stream  for  the  healing  and  cleansing  of  the  world.  John  is  silent
concerning  the  death-struggle  in  Gethsemane  and  on  the  cross,  as  well  as  the  institution
of  the  Sujiper  of  the  Lord,  and  does  not  cite  the  special  saying,  "  This  is  my  blood  shed
for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."  The  question  arises — Does  the  Fourth  Gospel  ignore
the  piaoular  and  propitiatory  aspects  of  the  death  of  Christ  ?  Weiss  (in  his  '  Biblical
Theology  of  New  Testament'  (Eng.  trans.),  vol.  ii.  pp.  358,  etc.)  has  well  replied  to
Sohenkel,  Fromann,  Reuss,  Baur,  who  have  in  different  degrees  affirmed  this  position.
Let  the  following  points  be  remembered.  He  refers  (ch.  i.  29)  to  the  language  of  the
Baptist  as  having  been  the  first  and  inducing  cause  of  his  own  adhesion  to  the  Lord.
The  Lamb  of  God  (see  notes,  ch.  i.  29)  is  the  image  of  the  great  vicarious  sacrifice
portrayed  in  Isa.  liii.  7,  the  victim  wounded  for  the  sins  of  others  and  smitten  for
the  transgression  of  God's  people,  who  bears  their  iniquities  and  carries  their  sorrows,
by  whose  stripes  they  are  healed.  The  sins  to  be  taken  away,  cleansed  by  blood,  are  in
the  Epistle  (1  John  i.  7)  sins  that  have  been  committed  and  leave  their  guilt  and  stain  and
curse  on  the  conscience  until  they  are  cancelled ;  and  in  ii.  2  and  iv.  10  the  Lord  Jesus
is  the  'Waffjih,  the  "  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  His  death,  therefore,
in  Johannine  thought,  was  anticipated  and  explained  by  the  presentation  of  the  blood
of  the  sin  offering  before  the  Lord.  If  all  that  John  believed  the  Baptist  to  mean  was
that  the  Son  of  man  would  puri  fy  the  conscience  by  the  presentation  of  a  higher  standard
of  oberlience,  why  did  he  not  say,  "  Behold  the  Prophet  or  Servant  of  God,  who  by  his
life  and  preaching  will  purify  the  sons  of  sin,  that  they  might  offer  unto  the  Lord  an
offering  in  righteousness  "  ?

However,  from  first  to  last  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  written  under  the  shadow  of  the
cross,  which,  when  the  author  wrote,  had  become  irradiated  with  the  crown  of  glory,
and  was  illumining  and  saving  the  world.     Continual  anticipations  of  Calvary  occur.

In  the  first  cleansing  of  the  temple  Jesus  cried,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three
days  I  wiU  raise  is  up,"    The  animosity  that  he  aroused  in  some  created  an  omen

JOHV.  I


exM  INTBODUOTION  TO


which  repeatedly  led  to  the  measures  which  might  have  at  once  cuhninated  in  hia
death  (ch.  v.,  viii.,  x.).

Twice  over  (ch.  xi.  61,  52 ;  xviii.  14)  the  evangelist  refers  to  the  words  of  the  high
priest  Caiaphas,  who  unwittingly  prophesied  of  one  who  should  die  (iwip  rod  KaoS)  on
behalf  of  the  people,  so  that  the  whole  people  should  not  perish.

In  ch.  vi.  51  Jesus  declares  that  he  has  not  only  come  down  from  heaven,  hut  will
give  his  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world.  "  As  meat  and  drink  sustain  life,  so  his  flesh
and  blood,  which  seem  to  be  so  separated  by  violent  death,  become  the  means  by  which
the  world,  which  has  fallen  under  abiding  death,  is  maintained  in  life"  (Weiss).

In  ch.  iii.  16,  etc.,  the  work  which  the  Son  of  man  will  be  able  to  effect  is  to  save
men  from  (icpf<ris  and  air(i\eia)  condemnation  and  destruction.  The  eternal  life  which
he  secures  for  those  who  believe  on  him  is  verified  by  the  uplifting  (as  the  serpent  in
the  wilderness  was  uplifted)  in  the  very  image  of  the  diseased  and  poisonous  and  sinful
flesh,  conquered,  slain,  and  yet  exalted  to  be  the  provocative  of  faith  and  the  channel
of  the  supreme  love  to  a  dying  world.

In  ch.  X.  Jesus  speaks  under  the  figure  of  a  Shepherd,  who  is  not  only  willing  to  give
his  life  for  the  safety  of  the  sheep,  but  who  is  actually  preparing  to  do  this  that  they
may  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly.  Beuss  thinks  that  the  metaphor  conveys
no  vicarious  or  propitiatory  idea,  because  a  shepherd  yiho  dies  in  endeavouring  to  save
his  sheep  still  leaves  them  to  the  fangs  of  the  wolf  or  the  wiles  of  the  thief,  and  because
a  shepherd  by  not  dying  is  better  able  to  save  if  he  have  courage  to  risk  so  much  for
their  advantage.  But  let  it  be  especially  noticed  that  while  giving,  sacrificing,  laying
down  his  life  for  the  sheep,  the  good  Shepherd  represents  himself  as  victoriously  clutch-
ing his  sheep  from  the  fangs  of  the  wolf,  and  declaring  that  his  dying  arms  are  one  vrith
the  everlasting  Father's  arms,  because  he  and  the  Father  are  one.  The  allegory  of  the
tenth  chapter  is  continually  dropped  for  the  sake  of  the  spiritual  and  transcendental
truth  conveyed  by  it.  Those  parts  of  the  work  of  Christ  imperfectly  supplied  by  the
imagery  when  carried  out  by  Reuss,  are  actually  introduced  by  our  Lord  when  he  says,
"  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  because  I  lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might  take
it  again.  ...  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  He
contemplates  death  and  resurrection,  and  a  continued  presidency  and  guardianship  of
the  sheep  for  whom  he  relinquishes  his  life.

Apart  from  his  death,  the  love  of  God  to  man  would  not  have  been  revealed  to  the
uttermost.  Hence  the  uplifting  of  Christ  in  agony  and  redeeming  might  was  the
highest  glorification  of  God,  and  a  means  of  glorifying  himself;  for  it  was  a  condition
of  the  ultimate  glory  of  his  resurrection  and  of  his  ascension  to  where  he  was  before.
We  do  not  meet  with  the  phraseology  of  "ransom,"  "redemption,"  or  "propitiation"
on  the  lips  of  Jesus  in  the  Fourth  Gospel ;  but  the  idea  had  entered  into  the  thought
of  the  evangelist,  as  we  judge  from  the  Epistle,  where  the  i\a(rfi6s  is  referred  to  (1  John
ii.  2  ;  iv.  10) :  "  Our  sins  are  forgiven  us  (aipeavTat)  for  his  Name's  sake  "  (1  John  ii.  12) ;
"  He  laid  down  his  life  for  (inrip)  us :  and  we  ought  to  lay  down  ovir  lives  for  the
brethren"  (1  John  iii.  16);  "God  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins"
(1  Juhniv.  10).

It  is  clear  from  the  valedictory  discourse  that  the  Lord's  departure  from  the  world,
from  the  fellowship  of  his  disciples  on  earth,  was  the  great  condition  of  his  power  to
fulfil  his  great  and  mysterious  promises.  The  world  would  rejoice  over  its  temporary
victory,  but  would  ultimately  be  convinced  of  its  sin  and  of  righteousness  and  judgment
by  his  going  to  the  Father.  It  wa,s  granted  that  the  disciples  would  have  sorrow  (Xirni),
a  travail-pang,  but  their  bitterness  would  be  transformed  into  joy.  The  whole  address
turns  on  this  departure  of  his  from  the  world  as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  their
blessedness.  Seeing  uhat  the  evangelist  has  prepared  the  way  for  these  great  utterances,
he  follows  them  up  by  the  tragedy  of  the  death  of  the  God-Man,  and  records  subse-
quently an  explanation  of  the  mystery  in  Pauline  phrase ;  it  seems  to  us  idle  to  separ
rate  the  teaching  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  from  that  of  the  synoptists  or  of  St.  Paul,  and
stiD  less  from  that  of  the  Apocalypse  (see  sect.  VII.  p.  Ixxxv.).

(c)  JTu  rising  again.  The  teaching  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  with  reference  to  the
method  of  salvation  is  crowned  by  the  historical  detail  of  the  Resurrection.  The  life
was  laid  down  and  taken  again ;  and  the  evangelist  shows  the  recommencement  of  the
i|iew  and  heavenly  life  in  a  form  which  is  itself  a  new  revelation  of  the  possibilities  and


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxlvU

mode  of  human  existence,  like  and  yet  unlike  the  humanity  which  had  secured  the
affection  and  impressed  itself  on  the  memories  of  his  disciples.  He  reveals  in  his  own
Person  some  of  the  most  impressive  differentiae  of  the  eternal  life.  One  with  his  former
life,  hearing  the  marks  upon  him  of  his  awful  death,  "  the  Lamh  as  it  had  heen  slain,"
he  nevertheless  wields  the  power  of  the  Supreme.  He  is  ascending  to  where  he  was
before,  so  that  his  disciples  may  thenceforth— by  faith  and  independently  of  sight —
"  touch  "  him.  He  reveals  himself  and  this  higher  mode  of  Being  to  the  fervent  love
of  the  Magdalene,  to  the  meditation  and  intuitions  of  the  disciples,  even  to  the  honest
and  devout  doubt  of  Thomas.  He  imparts  the  Divine  Spirit  and  the  heavenly  commis-
sion ;  he  takes  command  and  superintendence  of  his  Church ;  he  rules  the  destinies  of
individuals ;  he  bids  them  wait  evermore  for  his  coming  again.  These  historical  details
of  the  death  and  Besurrection  are  incompatible  with  the  mere  phantasmal  or  docetic  life
of  the  Logos-manifestation  in  humanity.  The  evangelist  was  not  inventing  a  romance,
hut  professes  to  give  the  facts  which,  if  men  believe,  they  will  know  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God ;  and  believing,  they  may  and  will  have  life  in  his
Name  (ch.  xx.,  xxi.).

(d)  The  Paraclete.  The  most  complete  manifestation  of  the  love  of  Grod  in  Christ
is  the  royal  bestowment  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  "the  other  Paraclete,"  upon  those  who
would  receive  him.  "  The  Father  will  send  him  in  my  Name ; "  "I  will  send  him  to
you  from  the  Father ; "  " He  will  teach  ; "  " He  will  show  you  things  to  come ; "  "He
will  lead  you  [make  a  way  for  you]  into  all  the  truth ; "  "He  will  bear  witness  of  the
truth ; "  "  He  will  take  of  the  things  that  are  mine,  and  show  them  imto  you."  St.
John  knew  that  the  promise  had  been  redeemed,  and  exclaimed,  "  Ye  have  an  unction
of  the  Holy  One,  and  know  all  things."  This  coming  of  the  Comforter  would  not  be
other  than  the  coming  of  himself.  The  spiritual  presence  of  which  they  would  be
inwardly  conscious  would  prove  to  be  a  veritable  return  and  indwelling  of  himself  in
their  nature  and  in  the  world,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  age.

(4)  Q'he  METHOD  OF  APPBOPBiATiNa  the  salvation,  which  is  light  and  life  and  love,
(a)  Faith  in  his  Name.  The  Fomth  Gospel  is'  as  explicit  as  either  of  the  other  records
of  the  life  of  Christ,  or  as  is  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter,  in  the  primary  place
assigned  to  faith.  In  the  prologue  (ch.  i.  12),  those  that  believe  on  his  Name  (equiva-
lent to  "  receive  "  the  Logos)  receive  Q^ovtrla)  "  power  to  become  sons  of  God."  Belief
in  his  Sonship  or  in  his  mission  is  the  great  link  between  himself  and  his  earliest  dis-
ciples, and  it  is  the  seed  or  germ  within  them  of  still  greater  and  nobler  communications
of  himself.  Moral  and  mental  surrender  to  his  will  is  the  test  of  disoipleship  (oh.  i.
39,  41,  45,  50).  The  glory  of  his  creative  power,  manifested  as  love,  becomes  the  life
of  his  disciples  when  they  "  believed  on  him  "  (ch.  ii.  11).  When  they  made  the  ful'
discovery  of  the  fact  that  his  body  (destroyed  and  raised  again)  was  the  true  temple  of
the  living  God,  "  they  believed  the  Scripture,  and  the  word  which  Jesus  spake "  (ch.
ii.  22).  Jesus  told  Nicodemus  that  "  whosoever  believed  in  him  might  have  eternal
life."  This  is^'  repeat-ed  in  great  variety  of  foim  in  ch.  iiL  15 — ^18 ;  John  the  Baptist
repeats  it  (ch.  iii.  36).  The  truth  taught  the  woman  of  Samaria  was  of  a  more  elemen-
tary character,  yet  she  was  enjoined  to  receive  and  "drink  the  living  water,"  to  make
her  own  the  offered  blessing  of  life  and  truth.  The  Samaritans  know  and  believe  that
he  is  "  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  In  both  her  case  and  that  of  her  feUow-
citizens,  the  "  sign  "  that  convinced  them  of  this  life-giving  truth  was  the  perception  of
his  superhuman  knowledge  and  his  penetration  of  the  secrets  of  all  hearts.  "  He  told
me  all  things  that  I  ever  did  :  is  not  this  the  Christ?"  To  induce  faith  inhimsalf  was
tlie  purport  of  other  "  signs  and  wonders,"  though  they  ought  not  to  have  been  necessary
(ch.  iv.  48 ;  cf.  ch.  v.  36 ;  x.  37,  38).  The  belief  on  him  that  sent  him  is  the  condition
of  eternal  life,  and  transition  from  veritable  death  to  life  (oh.  v.  24).  The  physical  act
of  "coming"  to  him,  surrenderinc;  human  wUl  to  his  Divine-human  will,  is  often  the
synonym  of  faith,  and  is  clearly  identified  with  it  (ch.  vi.  36).  This  faith  is  the  work
assigned  to  men,  "the  work  of  God"  (ch.  vi.  29);  and  this  faith  will  lead  to  a  life  that
is  the  pledge  ,of  onostosis  at  the  last  day  (ch.  vi.  40).  The  eating  and  drinking  of  his
flesh  and  blood,  again,  are  strong  phrases  for  this  moral  acceptance  of  his  incarnate  love
and  also  of  the  significance  of  his  sacrifice.  The  Divine  drawing  may  be  a  necessity,  is
a  preliminary,  in  every  case ;  but  he  himself  is  the  great  Power  by  which,  through  the
Son,  the  Father  draws  men  unto  himself  (ch.  vi.  65 ;  cf.  ch.  xii.  32 ;  xiv.  6,  notes) ;  and


•xItUi  introduction  to


"no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  him."  The  climax  of  Peter's  experience  is,
"  We  have  believed,  and  have  come  to  know  that  thou  haat  come  out  from  God  "  (ch,
vi.  68,  69).

Most  significant  light  is  thrown  on  the  mejaning  of  faith  by  the  contrast  between
the  open  antagonism  of  "  Jews,"  the  misapprehensiou  and  "  stumbling  "  of  the  Oaper-
naites,  and  the  worldly  anticipations  of  the  brethren  of  Jesus,  who  did  not  believe  on
him.  There  was  a  preliminary  to  full  belief,  and  this  was  the  purely  intellectual  con-
viction that  his  teaching  (8iSox^)  was  the  eternal  truth  (ix^fleio)  of  God  himself.  How
was  this  mental  certitude  to  be  achieved  ?  By  a  willingness  to  do  the  will  of  God
(ch.  vii.  17).  Ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  God  and  the  real  meaning  of  the  v6iioa,
of  the  at  ypoKjyal,  were  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  such  recognition  of  his  claims  as,  when
made,  would  infallibly  lead  them  to  fuH  moral  surrender  to  his  claims  (ch.  vii.  19,  28;
V.  39;  viii.  19).

Belief  in  him  was  declared  to  be  the  necessary  condition  of  receiving  the  Holy
Spirit  (ch.  vii.  37 — 39),  and  to  be  the  antecedent  of  "  following  "  him  and  consequent
"walking  in  the  hght"  (ch.  viii.  12).

(6)  Following  Jesus,  with  its  conbbqubnoes.  Faith,  however,  from  this  point
onwards,  always  demands  this  "  following,"  such  continuity  of  relationship,  veritable
abiding  in  him,  and  it  is  accompanied  by  corresponding  consequences.  Thus  "  faith  "
and  "  abiding  in  him  "  and  "  in  his  word  "  would  prove —

(o)  An  emancipation  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  None  but  "  the  Son,"  who  is  "  the
Truth,"  can  set  men  free  from  this  bondage  (ch.  viii.  31 — 37).

(j8)  It  will  lead  to  hve.  The  opposite  of  love  to  him  shows  that  in  the  deepest  sense
God  is  not  the  Father  of  such  souls.  The  unloving  have  not  been  begotten  anew ;  they
have  not  come  to  him  that  they  might  have  life  (ch.  viii.  42).  Truth  ought,  by  the
nature  of  truth,  to  induce  belief;  if  it  does  not,  it  shows  that  those  to  whom  it  is  pre-
sented are  "  not  of  God ; "  for  as  he  said  to  Pilate,  "  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth
heareth  my  voice "  (ch.  xviii.  3).  The  blind  man  (ch.  ix.  35)  is  asked,  "  Dost  thou
believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  and  the  issue  in  this  case  ia  even  more  than  "  love :  "
it  is —

M  Worship  (ch.  ix.  38;  of.  ch.  xx.  28).

(  5  Faith  is  the  great  assurance,  pledge,  and  sign  that  a  human  soul  is  one  of  the
sheep  of  his  flock,  that  follow  him,  and  that  receive  from  him  eternal  life,  who  will
therefore  never  perish  (ch.  x.  27 — 29).  As  the  revelation  advances,  Christ  declares
that  faith  in  him  ought  to  be  equivalent  to  faith  in  the  fact  that  he  is  the  Conqueror  of
death,  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life  (ch.  xi.  25).  Faith  in  the  Lord,  notwithstanding
his  approaching  death  and  burial,  is  strongly  commended  (ch.  xii.  7,  8),  and  the  follow-
ing of  Jesus  will  involve  a  hating  and  a  denial  of  self-life,  and  a  willing  relinquishing
of  it  for  his  sake  (ch.  xii.  25).  And  even  this  is  not  all.  The  Lord  not  only  promises
life,  eternal  life,  a  life  independent  of  death,  but  a  life  with  himself,  a  sharing  with  him
of  the  glory  which  was  his  before  the  world  was  (ch.  xii.  26 ;  xiv.  1 — 3-;  of.  ch.  xvii.  24).

(t)  In  the  sublime  summary  of  the  public  ministry,  in  ch.  xii.  44,  etc.,  faith  in  a  vision
of  himself  is  faith  in  a  vision  of  the  Father  that  sent  him.  Such  faith  means  immunity
from  judgment.  The  awful  consequences  of  non-faith,  of  the  rejection  of  his  claims,  aug-
ments the  solemnity  of  the  prime  condition.  Throughout  the  valedictory  discourse  the
key-note  of  faith  is  perpetually  heard  associated  with  these  and»other  consequences,  until
at  its  close,  when  his  disciples  reiterate  their  confession  of  faith,  the  Lord  seems  to  say,
"  Now  then  I  can  go  onward  and  to  my  Passion  and  my  cross  with  joy  "  (ch.  xvi.  29 —
33).  The  greatest  and  most  impressive  of  his  beatitudes  was  that  which  followed  the
exclamation  of  Thomas,  "  Blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  helieved  I "
"  These  things,  says  the  evangelist,  "  are  written,  that  ye  may  hdieve  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ,  the  Son  of  God ;  and  that  believing  ye  might  have  lile."

But  the  antecedents  and  consequences  of  faith  scarcely  express  the  fulness  of  that
appropriation  of  salvation  on  which  the  Gospel  insists.

(f)  Union  with  Christ,  on  earth  and  in  the  Father's  house,  is  one  of  the  sublime
themes  of  the  Gospel  throughout — union  with  him  in  his  Person,  his  sacrifice,  his  vic-
tory, his  exaltation,  his  Divinity.  The  will  of  men  lost  in  the  will  of  God.  "  From
hia/ulness  of  grace  and  truth  have  we  all  received,"  said  John,  when  he  wrote  his  pro-
logue, "  and  grace  in  place  of,"  ana  as  capacity  for  the  reception  of  more  "  grace,"


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cxlix

(ij).The  union  of  his  own  with  himself,  even  in  his  eternal  life  and  glory,  is  a  Irey-ni  te
of  his  teaching.  Even  the  Samaritaness  is  told  that  the  girt  of  living  water  should  be
in  a  man  a  fountain  of  blessedness  and  refreshment.  The  great  Sower  of  the  harvest-
field,  and  those  that  reap,  shall  rejoice  together  (ch.  iv.  37).  The  union  with  himself  is
pre-eminently  involved  in  the  strong  metaphor,  "  He  that  eateth  me,  he  shall  live  on
account  of  me"  (ch.  vi.  57).  Still  more  so  in  the  solemn  word,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto
you.  He  that  receiveth  whomsoever  I  shall  send  receiveth  me  "  (ch.  xiii.  20),  even  though
he  adds,  "  He  that  receiveth  me  receiveth  him  that  sent  me."  "  The  Paraclete  whom
the  world  cannot  receive,  wiU  abide  with  you,  and  will  be  in  yon"  (ch.  xiv.  17).  In
i.ther  words  he  adds,  "Because  I  live,  even  ye  shall  live.  And  ye  shall  know  that  I
am  in  my  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I  in  you  "  (ch.  xiv.  19,  20).  Love  will  promote
obedience ;  "  And  my  Father  will  love  you,  and  we  wUl  come,  and  make  our  abode
with  you  "  (ch.  xiv.  23).  The  mutual  indwelling  of  the  vine  and  its  branches  explains
the  reciprocal  relation — the  branch  abides  in  the  vine,  by  the  connecting  link  of  faith  ;
the  vine  abides  in  the  branch,  enabling  it  to  bear  fruit,  by  the  flow  and  circulation
of  the  life.  As  the  stem  and  the  branches  form  one  vine,  so  he  suggests  that  his  own
God-Manhood  is  incomplete  without  the  living  contact  of  those  that  believe  in  him  with
himself  (ch.  xv.  1 — 10).  The  intercessory  prayer  is  charged  with  the  same  sublime
hope,  even  though  it  involve  separation  from  them.  Separation,  so  far  as  visibility  goes,
will  be  compatible  with  the  union  which  a  head  has  with  a  body.  They  will  still  have
his  "peace,"  hia  "joy,"  his  "love,"  his  "glory"  (ch.  xiv.  27;  xv.  11;  xvi  22;  xvii.
22,  26).

4.  The  Jbhannine  teaching  with  reference  to  the  future  judgment  and  the  future  life.
We  are  bound  to  concede  a  greater  contrast  here  with  other  and  antecedent  types  of
Christian  doctrine.  There  are  no  parables  of  theocratic  judgment,  of  final  discrimina-
tion between  the  wicked  and  the  good  (Matt,  xiii.) ;  no  casting  out  of  the  unresponsive
guests  into  the  outer  darkness ;  no  prophecy  of  the  fall  of  the  existing  order  of  things ;
of  the  abomination  of  desolation  standing  in  the  holy  place ;  of  the  confusion  of  the
theocracy  and  the  saving  of  the  remnant;  nor  any  august  picture  of  the  final  judgment
when  the  Son  of  man  comes  in  his  glory,  to  separate  the  nations  and  decide  the  des-
tinies of  the  world.  The  judgment  (icpta-ts)  of  which  Jesus  speaks  is  "  that  men  love
darkness  rather  than  light."  The  awful  process  is  brought  about  by  the  oiier  of  love.
"  Now,"  says  he,  "  is  the  xpliris  of  this  world,  now  is  the  prince  of  this  world  cast  out "
(ch.  xii.  31).  The  blinding  of  the  foolish  heart,  the  abiding  of  the  wrath  of  God  upon
the  disobedient,  the  perpetual  discrimination  ever  going  on  and  brought  about  by  the
forth-streamiug  of  a  Light  which  some  neither  apprehend  nor  walk  in, — seems  to  take
the  place  of  the  dread  consummation  when  the  Son  of  man  should  come  in  the  glory  of
his  Father  and  of  his  holy  angels.

Yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  Jesus  does  speak  of  "  the
resurrection  at  the  last  day,"  of  "  the  resurrection  of  life,"  and  of  "  the  resurrection  of
judgment "  (ch.  v.  28,  29).  He  speaks  (oh.  xv.  6)  of  the  burning  up  of  the  fruitless
branches,  pruned,  cut  off,  from  the  living  Vine ;  that  those  who  refuse  to  believe  in  him
will  "  die  in  their  sins  "  (ch.  viii.  21).  Just  as  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and
Lazarus,  the  unbeliever  and  those  who  do  evil  have  Moses  in  whom  they  trust  to  judge
them.  "If  I  judge,"  says  he,  "my  judgment  is  just"  (ch.  viii.  16).  The  world  is  to
be  convinced  of  judgment  to  come  by  the  condemnation  of  the  prince  of  the  world
(ch.  xvi.  11).

We  would  not  underrate  the  surprising  contrast  between  the  visions  of  judgment  in
Paul's  Epistles,  in  Matthew's  Gospel,  and  the  Apocalypse,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
searching  inward  work  of  judgment  which  the  Fourth  Gospel  describes  as  constantly
going  on  in  the  inmost  nature  of  souls.  The  whole  history  of  Christ  is  represented  in
this  Gospel  as  a  discrimination  between  man  and  man ;  a  constant  sifting  of  the  grain
from  the  chaff;  a  perpetual  separation  between  the  sheep  and  the  goats,  between  those
who  see  and  those  who  see  not,  between  those  who  ouly  profess  to  be  and  those  who  really
are  the  true  disciples.  We  must  remember  that,  when  these  words  were  recorded,  the
terrible  drama  of  the  visible  theocracy,  the  obliteration  of  Hebrew  nationality,  had  been
long  consummatefl.  Much  that  had  been  predicted  had  been  seen  in  awful  fulgurous  ful-
filment. John  had  himself  described  these  scenes  in  phrases  drawn  from  the  synoptic
Gospels  and  from  the  earlier  prophecies,  and  it  would  seem  as  though  long  meditatioa


INTRODUCTION  TO


on  the  word  of  Jesus  made  him  linger  in  his  historic  narrative  on  the  principle*  of
judgment  which  are  evermore  at  work,  and  to  which  the  Lord  had  referred.

Moreover,  in  the  Epistle  we  do  find  that  the  author  anticipates  an  approaching
climax  of  all  this  judgment  (1  John  ii.  18,  28 ;  iv.  17).  The  Lord  is  coming,  and  those
that  believe  ought  not  to  be  ashamed  before  him,  but  should  have  boldness  in  the  day
of  judgment.

Eeuss  admits  ('Theol.  Chret.,'  ii.  563) -a  difference  between  the  view  of  the  future
contemjlated  by  the  author  of  the  Grospel  and  of  the  Epistle,  and  some  have  pressed
jt  into  a  reason  lor  assigning  the  two  documents  to  different  hands  (pp.  Ixii.,  Ixiii.).
There  are,  however,  too  many  indications  of  harmony  between  the  two  writings  to
justify  such  an  interpretation.  Reuss  concedes  this,  but  imagines  "the  fragmentary
residue  of  notions  familiar  to  the  author  in  his  earlier  life,  which  had  not  been  absorbed
completely  nor  perfectly  repudiated  by  his  mysticism."  But  are  not  the  views  mutually
compatible  and  reconcilable  ?  Is  there  not  enough  in  the  Gospel,  in  the  passages
referred  to  above,  to  justify  all  the  solemn  fear  and  sacred  hopes  discernible  in  the
Epistle?

6.  The  Johminine  teaching  with,  reference  to  the  formation  of  a  kingdom,  the
founding  and  training  of  the  Chv/rch.  In  harmony  with  the  previous  synoptic  and
Pauline  teaching,  Jesus,  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  is  "  King  of  Israel."  He  came  to  his
own,  and  some,  though  not  all,  received  him  as  such.  As  a  Prophet  and  Master  of  the
old  theocracy  he  cleansed  the  temple.  He  declared  that  neither  at  Gerizim  nor  Jeru-
salem would  men  worship  the  Father.  Though  recognizing  the  patriarchs,  the  fathers,
the  Moses  of  the  old  covenant,  he  anticipated  the  time  when  all  who  were  of  the
truth  would  hear  his  voice.  He  rejoiced  that  there  were  sheep  of  different  folds  who
would  hear  his  voice,  whom  he  would  bring  into  and  make  part  of  one  flock.  When  the
Greeks  were  anxious  to  see  him,  he  broke  forth  into  a  great  exclamation,  "  Now  is  the
Son  of  man  glori6ed  I  "  He  declared  to  Pilate  that  he  was  a  King,  though  not  of  this
world.  The  Fourth  Gospel  represents  the  very  accusation  placed  over  his  head  upon
the  cross  as  nothing  short  of  the  fact,  not  assumption,  "  This  is  the  Kma  of  the
Jews."  The  ironical  testimony  borne  by  a  heathen  governor  to  the  agelong  hope  of
Israel  was  transfigured  and  displayed  in  the  agony  of  a  suffering  Saviour,  in  the  dying
and  uplifting  upon  the  cross  of  One  who  would  thereby  draw  all  men  to  himself.  The
fellowship  in  his  death  and  resurrection,  in  his  Person  and  glory,  is  to  embrace  all  who
believe  on  him  through  the  word  of  the  apostles.  The  union  and  communion  of  the
disciples  in  mutual  love  is  to  be  the  most  powerful  testimony  to  his  mission  from
heaven,  and  the  reality  of  his  spiritual  presence.

The  baptism  of  John  is  referred  to,  and  we  are  expressly  told,  what  we  learn  nowhere
else,  that  at  the  beginning  of  our  Lord's  ministry  the  disciples  baptized  men  into  a
general  admission  of  his  claims — into  the  confession  of  Christ,  and  the  hope  of  One  who
would  baptize  with  fire  and  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  society  was  thus  commenced,
but  Jesus  declai  es  the  supreme  importance  of  birth  from  the  Spirit,  and  of  worship  in
spirit  and  truth.  The  true  meaning  of  the  well-known  Supper  of  the  Lord  was  illus-
trated by  John,  not  by  the  record  of  the  institution,  but  by  the  discourse  in  Caper-
naum, which  lay  deep  foundations  for  a  spiritual  brotherhood  of  those  who  assimilated
his  flesh  and  drank  into  the  spirit  of  his  life,  who  could  appreciate  the  Divine  back-
ground of  his  human  personality,  and  accept  the  fact  of  his  sacrifice.

Thoma  concludes  his  view  of  this  great  theme,  "  Christ  is  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,
who  only  have  to  follow  him  to  find  rest. ...  He  is  the  all-dominant  Idea,  the  Light  of
the  world,  the  Sun  to  which  every  eye  must  turn,  by  which  all  things  live,  and  to  which
all  things  tend.  The  doctrine  of  the  Johaimine  Gospel  is  throughout  nothing  less  than
a  Ohristology."

X.  Arbanoement  op  thb  Contents  of  thb  Foubth  Gospel.

The  perception  of  the  plan  of  this  Gospel  has  varied  with  every  theory  of  its  aut
■hip,  and  every  hypothesis  as  to  the  occasion  or  motive  which  led  to  its  publicatl
Augustine,  Chryeostom,  Theophylact,  and  even  later  writers  who  entertain  no  breath
of  suspicion  as  to  the  apostolic  origin  and  perfect  historicity  of  the  Gospel,  were  oon-
tant  to  ignore  the  question  of  its  plan.    It  was  enough  for  tbem  that  the  facts  came


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  «E

within,  the  cognizance  of  the  writer,  and  that  the  words  were  heard  by  the  credible
witness.  The  order  in  which  they  are  narrated  was  simply  the  order  of  time  and
nature.  The  motive  stated  in  oh.  xx.  30,  31  was  all-sufficient,  and  was  ever\  where
apparent.  The  Galilaaan  fisherman  was  innocent  of  art.  He  simply  spake  that  he
knew,  and  testified  to  that  which  he  had  seen  and  heard.  Hardly  an  attempt  was
made  by  either  of  these  writers  to  classify  or  arrange  the  contents  of  the  Gospel.

Lampe  (1724,  Utrecht)  was  the  first  to  propose  a  simple  classification  :  I.  The  pro-
logue (ch.  1.  1 — 18).  II.  The  narrative  (ch.  L  19 — xx.  29).  This  narrative  was  sub-
divided into  the  "  public  ministry  "  (from  ch.  i.  19  to  xii.  60)  and  the  "  last  act.s  "  (ch.
xiii.  1 — XX.  29).  This  was  followed  by :  III.  The  epilogue  (ch.  xx.  30 — xxi.  25).  The
most  important  principle  suggested  here,  was  the  strong  line  of  demarcation  between
the  public  ministry  and  last  acts  of  our  Lord,  drawn  with  respect  to  ch.  xii.  and  xiii.

Bengel,  followed  to  some  extent  by  Olshausen,  and  even  by  Lucke  in  his  first
edition,  classified  the  entire  subject-matter  that  foEows  the  prologue  (ch.  i.  1 — 18)  by
exhibiting  the  chronological  sequence  of  the  feasts — ^the  three  Passovers  (ch.  ii.  13 ;
vL  4 ;  xiii.  1),  the  Pentecost  (or  Purim)  of  ch.  v.  1,  and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (ch.
vil.  2).  The  ceremonies  and  import  of  the  great  feasts  furnished  our  Lord  with  illus-
trations of  his  own  Person  and  mission ;  but  they  leave  the  theme  of  the  discourses  and
multitudinous  detail  untouched.  Bengel  drew  some  attractive  parallels  between  the  first
week  of  our  Lord's  ministry  (oh.  i.  19 — ii.  11)  and  the  last  week  (ch.  xii.  1 — xx.  31).

De  Wette,  who  conceived  that  the  writer's  main  purpose  was  to  exhibit  the  glory  of
Christ,  supposed  that  in  ch.  i.  the  idea  was  set  forth  summarily ;  that  in  ch.  ii. — ^xii.
the  same  thought  is  set  forth  in  actions;  that  between  ch.  ii.  and  vi.  the  glory  is
revealed  in  particular  examples,  while  in  ch.  vii. — xii.  preparation  is  made  for  the
last  catastrophe.  The  glory  of  our  Lord  then  appears  in  all  its  brightness  in  ch.  xiii. —
XX. ;  in  ch.  xiii, — xix.  inwardly  and  morally ;  in  ch.  xx.  by  his  resurrection.  Both
Luthardt  and  Godet  regard  this  as  by  far  the  most  suggestive  and  beautiful  arrange-
ment of  the  material  up  to  De  Wette's  day.

Baumgarten-Orusius  ('  Einleitung,'  xxx.  11)  divides  the  narrative  portion  (1)  into  the
record  of  Christ's  works  (ch.  i. — iv.) ;  (2)  his  conflict,  including  misunderstandings  of
his  character  and  word ;  (3)  this  is  followed  by  his  victory ;  and  (4)  by  his  glorification.
Lticke  (in  the  third  edition,  1840,  of  his  '  Kommentar  fiber  das  Evangelium,'  vol.  i.
183)  does  not  subdivide  ch.  i.  18 — xii.  50  any  further  than  by  notifying  the  advance
of  opposition  to  our  Lord  in  ch.  v.  He  sees,  however,  in  the  later  part  of  the  Gospel,  in
oh.  xiii. — xix.,  the  glorifying  of  the  Father  by  the  Son,  and  in  ch.  xx.  the  glorifying
of  the  Son  by  the  Father,  both  in  his  death-hour  and  by  the  Resurrection.  This  last
contrast  is  fanciful,  and  in  some  respects  might  be  inverted.

Schweizer  ('  Das  Bvang.  Johannis,'  1841)  added  an  important  consideration,  in
making  a  part  of  the  author's  purpose  to  be  the  development  of  unbelief.  I.  Ch.  i. — iv.,
f'The  battle  is  only  heard  at  a  distance."  [We  submit  that  it  is  heard  very  audibly,
as  in  ch.  i.  29,  37,  46,  in  the  temptation  of  his  mother  (ch.  ii.  3),  in  the  criticism  of  the
authorities  (ch.  ii.'  20),  in  the  distrust  of  Jesus  (ch.  ii.  24),  in  the  luisconception  of
Nicodemns  (ch.  iii.  4, 9 — 12 ;  cf.  ch.  iii.  32),  in  the  hostility  of  the  Pharisees  (ch.  iv.  1),
and  the  numerous  misapprehensions  of  the  Samaritaness,  the  disciiiles,  and  the  lovers
of  signs  and  portents  (ch.  iv.  12,  15,  33,  44,  48).]  II.  The  struggle  breaks  out  in  its
violence  (ch.  v. — xiii.).  III.  The  closing  chapters  detail  the  issue.  Schweizer  errs  in
not  recognizing  the  part  which  faith  talses  as  well  as  unbelief,  and  how  the  growth  of
both  is  a  consequence  of  each  step  which  Jesus  takes.

Beuss  ('  Historie  de  la  Theol.  Chret.,'  ii.  pp.  392 — 394 ;  '  Theologie  Johannique,'  etc.)
limits  the  prologue  to  ch.  i.  1 — 5,  and  from  oh.  i.  6 — ^xii.  50  supposes  the  author  first
to  exhibit  an  orderly  representation  of  various  Christian  ideas  to  the  world,  which
secures,  however,  in  ch.  i. — iv.,  an  enrolment  of  disciples,  and  in  ch.  v. — xii.  the  selec-
tion of  the  innermost  circle  of  his  followers,  to  whom  (ch.  xiii. — xvii.)  he  then  makes
known,  in  practical  and  mystical  form,  what  had  been  previously  set  forth  in  its  specu-
lative or  polemical  aspects.  The  third  part  (ch.  xviii. — xx.)  is,  according;  to  Eeuss,  a
kind  of  pseudo-historic  treatment  of  the  denouement  of  the  whole:  "Jesus  remains
dead  to  the  unbelieving ;  while  to  believers  he  rises  again  victoriously."

In  Reuss,  '  Hist.  Sacred  Scriptures  of  New  Testament,'  Eng.  trans.,  §  221  (1884),  a
■lightly  different  arrangement  ocoars.    I.  Ch.  i,  6 — xii.  (1)  Entrance  into  the  world  of  th«


dU  INTRODUCTION  TO


incarnate  Logos,  attestation  of  testimony,  miracle,  prophetic  zeal,  prophecy  (ch.  L— iL).
(2)  Jesus  and  the  world,  (a)  The  world  seeks  him ;  i.e.  the  people,  the  schismatics,
the  Ileal  hen,  all  do  so  on  better  terms  than  does  scholastic  wisdom  (ch.  iii.,  iv.).  Qi)
The  wodd  as  hostile  (ch.  v. — xi.),  recapitulation  and  hint  of  calling  the  Gentiles.  II.
Ch.  xiii. — xvii.,  Complete  contrast  with  the  foregoing — love,  secrecy,  the  favoured  few,
promise  and  prospect,  victory  in  death,  practical  and  ethical  treatment.  IIL  Ch.  xviii.
— XX.,  The  narrative  of  the  Passion,  but  only  in  small  degree  lifted  up  to  the  theological
stanii  point  of  the  rest  of  the  Gospel,     IV.  The  epilogue  (ch.  zxi.).

Luthardt  and  Godet,  in  their  comments  on  this  scheme,  appear  to  think  that,  by
showing  this  exaltation  of  the  ideal  and  dogmatic  element,  Beuss  virtually  destroys
all  the  historic  element,  or  that,  by  confounding  the  facts  of  the  Lord's  death  and
resurrection  with  a  "  mere  mirror  of  religious  truths,"  Eeuss's  theory  would  be  con-
demned. But  it  should  he  remembered  that  Beuss  avowedly  treats  the  Gospel  as  a
"  mirror,"  or  plastic  arrangement  of  ideas — a  series  of  reflections  on  the  Person  of  Christ,
and  nothing  more.

Baur's  division  of  the  Gospel  corresponds  very  nearly  with  that  of  Beuss.  (1)  The
first  manifestations  of  the  Word,  and  earliest  symptoms  of  faith  and  unbelief  (ch.  i. — vi.).
(2)  The  victory,  dialectically,  of  laith  over  unbelief  (ch.  vii. — ^xii.).  (3)  The  positive
development  of  faith  (ch.  xiii. — xvii.).  (4)  The  death  of  Jesus,  being  the  work  of
unbelief  (ch.  xviii.,  xix.).  (5)  The  resurrection  of  Jesus,  being  the  consummation  of.
faith  (ch.  XX.).

After  the  fashion  in  which  the  Alexandrines  resolved  all  the  histories  of  the  Penta-
teuch into  psychological  facts  and  ethical  relations,  so,  according  to  Baiir,  the  Logos  is
that  which  is  Divine  in  itself.  It  is  set  forth  illustratively  in  Jesus,  as  coming  for
him  into  a  consciousness  which  all  elect  souls  may  share.  There  is  no  essential  fact
accentuated  as  having  taken  place  in  the  Incarnation,  only  the  idea  of  belief  in  such  a
possible  experience  produced  by  the  antagonism  of  light  and  darkness.  The  testimony
of  the  Baptist  to  the  Logos-light  was  a  mode  of  finding  the  link  of  relation  between
the  old  and  the  new.  Ch.  iv. — vi.  are  the  record  of  the  first  movements  of  faith  and
unfaiih.  Nicodemus  (ch.  iii.)  represents  Jewish  faith,  Samaria  (ch.  iv.)  the  faith  of
the  world ;  subsequently  the  faith  of  the  Jews  is  unveiled  as  nothing  less  than  unbelief
(ch.  v.,  vi.),  which  is  then  dialectically  refuted  (ch.  vii. — x.).  After  this  the  Divine
element  of  Logos  must  declare  itself  to  be  the  absolute  life  (in  ch.  xi.),  and  opposition
to  this  reaches  its  highest  expression.  From  ch.  xiii.  to  xvii.  the  Logos  presents  itself
in  all  its  fulness,  but  only  to  implicit  faith.  Prom  that  innermost  circle  the  traitor  is
excluded.  The  idea  of  the  Logos  thus  revealed  must  complete  itself  in  its  historical
glorification.  The  death  is  a  glory  brought  about  by  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  to  whom
Jesus  is  dead.  The  Besurrection  is  the  view  of  the  Logos  in  the  eye  of  faith ;  so  the
process  of  unbelief,  as  seen  first  in  Nathanael's  doubt  (ch.  i.),  is  seen  eventually  to  be
scattered  in  the  triumphant  exclamation  of  Thomas  (oh.  xx.).  Baur  regards  the  final
section  (ch.  xxi.)  by  another  hand.

The  appearance  of  biographic  fact  is  thus  regarded  as  the  mere  clothing  of  the  pro-
cesses of  faith,  stimulated  by  the  antagonism  of  unbelief.  The  object  of  faith  disappears,
because  the  incarnate  Logos  is  simply  a  mental  process,  an  ethical  experience  of  the
second  century.  The  Son  of  God,  as  a  Saviour,  as  life,  light,  and  love,  cannot,  with
Baur,  be  the  object  of  faith.     He  is  in  his  final  glory  nothing;  but  pure  absolute  idea.

This  survey  of  various  efibrts  prepares  the  way  for  the  admirable  and  penetrative  repre-
sentation of  Luthardt.  Two  points  especially  emerge  of  prime  importance:  (1)  the
great  change  in  theme  and  tone  which  is  observable  between  ch.  iv.  and  v. ;  and  (2)
the  opening  of  a  new  iheme  in  ch.  xiii.  Luthardt,  however,  emphasizes  the  historic  or
chronologic  relation  of  ch.  xii.  with  what  follows.  The  final  week,  which  is  introduced  as
the  sequel  of  the  death-sentence  recorded  in  ch.  xi.,  certainly  commences  with  ch.  xii.  1.
The  subject-matter  of  ch.  xii.,  as  well  as  the  tone  and  spirit  of  it,  does,  however,  belong
to  themes  which  precede  in  ch.  v. — xi.,  rather  than  to  those  which  follow,  in  ch.  xiii. —
xvii. ;  e.g.  the  anointing  refers  to  the  animosity  and  deadly  antipathies  of  the  Jews  then
reaching  their  culmination,  but  it  is  a  prophetic  anticipation  of  the  "bm-ial."  The
incident  of  "  the  desire  of  the  Greeks  "  certainly  betokens  the  offer  of  the  Messianic
kingdom  to  the  Gentile  world,  and  reflects  strong  light  on  more  than  one  angry  retort
ijl^the  previous  chapters ;  but  it  is  also  closely  intertwined  with  the  mysterious  agony


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHW.  «BU

and  death  through  which  the  seed-corn  of  the  great  harvest  should  bring  forth  much
fruit.  Consequently,  it  faces  both  ways.  Moreover,  it  contains  the  anticipation  of
Gethsemane,  and  thus  anticipates  the  agony  and  victory  of  the  cross.

Luthardt  and  Godet  disHgree  about  the  close  connection  of  ch.  xiii. — xvii.  with  ch.
xviii. — XX.  They  are  sinn}ly  two  sides  of  one  and  the.  same  thing  according  to
Luthardt.  In  Godet's  view  they  are  utterly  disparate,  and  cannot  be  regarded  under
the  one  heading  of  "Jesus  and  his  own."  Lf  they  are  looked  at  in  their  union  of  idea,
Godet  is  right  in  repudiating  the  title  "  Jesus  and  his  own ; "  but  if  the  whole  notion  he
love  in  its  uttermost  manifestation — the  eh  rb  jroxT^A.ej  of  ch.  xiii.  1 — then  it  corre-
sponds with  the  TfTeXeiTTai  of  ch.  xix.  The  pedilaviwn  of  ch.  xiii.  is  closely  linked
with  the  tragedy  of  self-abandonment  that  follows  in  ch.  xviii.,  xix.  The  warning  to
Peter  (ch.  xiii.)  and  the  expulsion  of  Judas  are  connected  with  the  story  of  the  treachery
of  Judas  and  the  denial  of  Peter  (ch.  xviii.).  The  whole  conception  of  the  departure
(ch.  xiv. — xvi.)  prepares  for  the  manner  of  its  occurrence,  and  the  intercessory  prayer
for  "  the  resurrection,"  the  promise  of  the  Comforter  with  the  spiration  (ch,  xx.).  But
to  let  this  pass.  Luthardt  is  singularly  happy  in  his  perception  of  the  dramatic  unity
of  the  whole  book.  "  In  the  first  part  the  threads  are  laid ;  in  the  second  the  knots
are  twisted ;  in  the  third  the  whole  is  resolved  into  the  glorification  of  Jesus  on  the  one
hand,  and  in  the  completion  of  both  faith  and  unbelief,  and  of  the  spiritual  communion
of  the  believers  with  Jesus,  on  the  other."  I.  Tlie  introduction  of  the  Logos  incarnate
to  the  world.  (Ch.  i. — iv.)  II.  Hie  struggle  between  Jesvs  as  thus  revealed  and  the
Jews.  III.  The  revelations  of  love  in  word  and  deed.  (Ch.  xiii. — xx.)  IV.  The
epilogue.    (Ch.  xxi.)

Albrecht  Thoma,  in  his  'Genesis  des  Johannis  Bvangeliums,'  has  arranged  the
matter  as  follows  in  five  sections: — I.  The  significance  ^  the  essence  and  work  of
Christ.  II.  The  worh  of  Christ:  Associaii'm  and  division.  IIL  2%e  conflict  with
the  world.  IV.  Farewelii  commission  and  promise.  V.  The  houb  :  the  glorification
of  sorrow.    Appendix:  an  outline  of  apostolic  history.

There  is  no  reason  to  conclude,  even  if  we  proceed  to  set  forth  in  detail  a  more
abundant  classification  of  these  discourses,  narrations,  and  lessons,  that  the  author  of  the
Gospel  needs  to  have  strained  a  fact,  or  to  have  altered  the  chronological  order  of  a  (tingle
narrative,  or  to  have  invented  a  solitary  revelation  of  the  eternal  life  which  was  with  the
Father,  and  was  manifested  to  the  world.  The  possible  point  of  view  on  which  the
evangelist  took  his  stand  was  entirely  justified  by  the  history.  He  does  not  clash  with
the  current  synoptic  narrative.  All  along  he  acknowledges  its  existence,  and  gives  hints
that  he  is  aware  of  the  charge  of  possible  or  apparent  discrepancy,  and  by  a  side  note
or  parenthetical  expression  he  leaves  room  for  all  the  additional  matter  that  belongs  to
the  Galilsean  ministry.  Throughout,  the  synoptists  are  necessary  for  a  riiht  under-
standing of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Moreover,  there  is  so  much  of  profound  transcendental
utterance  and  claim  in  the  synoptic  narratives,  that  they  are  to  a  large  extent  incom-
prehensible if  the  customary  aspects  in  which  the  Lord  appears  in  the  Fourth  Gospel
had  not  been  historically  prepared  for  our  use.  We  ought  never  to  forget  that  the
synoptic  narratives  do  not,  any  more  than  the  Fourth  Gospel  does,  consist  of  sustained
biographical  treatment  of  the  life  of  Jesus.  Each  of  the  Gospels  betrays  a  distinct  purpose
on  the  part  of  its  author  to  justify  the  presupposition  on  which  it  rests.  Matthew
discerns  with  vivid  insight  the  Messidhship ;  Mark,  the  great  features  of  the  Son  of  God ;
Luke,  the  dominating  grace  of  his  perfect  humanity ;  and  John  proceeds  on  the  sup-
position that  he  was  nothing  short  of,  and  nothing  less  than,  all  of  these,  becatise  he  was  the
Logos  madeflesh — the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth.  The  biography
is  neither  exhausted  nor  completed  by  the  fourfold  representation.  Each  narrative
abounds  in  startling  lacunes,  in  blank  spaces  of  time,  of  which  a  few  solitary  expressions
or  incidents  only  have  been  preserved.  The  portraitures  are  none  the  less  real  because
they  preserve  only  specimens  of  the  life-work  of  Jesus,  characteristic  moments  in  the
great  life,  not  the  successive  hours,  days,  weeks,  and  years  of  his  sublime  and  wondrous
existence.

The  Holy  Spirit  of  truth  and  revelation  has  followed  here  the  great  method  which
has  been  virtually  followed  in  preserving  the  memory  of  the  greatest  men  of  our  world's
history.  Many  of  the  philosophers  and  poets  of  antiquity,  of  its  princes,  legislators,
and  patriots  are  preserved  for  us  in  a  few  scenes  only  of  their  busy  and  protracted


«Ht  mTRODUOTION  TO


lives — ^in  a  few  sentences  only,  hj  means  of  which  their  inner  life  in  part  expressed
itself.

Should  a  biographer  be  content,  in  delineating  the  career  of  Luther,  to  paint  with
perfect  accuracy  three  or  four  palmary  events  in  his  life,  to  provide  the  setting  of  three
or  four  memorable  utterances  of  the  Eeformer,  which  appear  to  the  writer  to  represent
the  essential  spirit  of  the  man, — he  ought  not  to  be  charged  with  inventing  those  facts
or  fabricating  the  sayings,  even  should  it  turn  out  that  the  events  and  words  inherently
possess  a  dramatic  propriety  in  themselves.  A  description  of  Luther  nailing  his  theses
to  the  church  door ;  his  journey  to  Worms ;  his  characteristic  speeches  on  his  progrea
thither  and  before  the  Diet;  his  language  to  the  prophets  at  Wittemberg,  when  he
burst  from  his  retirement  to  confront  them ;  his  conduct  during  the  Diet  at  Augsburg,
and  the  death-scene, — would  not  constitute  a  biography  of  Luther.  Yet  should  a  com-
petent student,  who  perceives  in  these  events  and  words  powerful  expression  of  the
chief  momenta  of  Luther's  mission  in  this  world,  elect  thus  to  represent  it,  and  confine
himself  to  them,  their  dramatic  relation  to  one  another  ought  not  to  invalidate  confi-
dence in  their  accuracy  and  historicity.  Other  consistent  hypotheses  of  the  personality
of  the  great  Reformer  might  be  framed  which  would  not  include  more  than  one  or  two
of  these  events,  but  might  include  other  groups  of  sayings  equally  historic  and  revela-
tory. They  need  not  be  charged  with  being  merely  subjective  creations  because  of  this
difference  of  subject-matter.

The  Personality  of  the  Logos  incarnate,  if  such  an  hypothesis  or  presupposition  be
rational  at  all,  could  not  have  evolved  itself  in  human  life  without  evoking  a  faith  and
a  distrust  which  acted  and  reacted  on  each  other.  The  leading  revelations  of  his  own
essential  Being  would  be  made  through  actions  and  words  more  or  less  obviously  related.
The  unconscious  poetry  and  dramatic  effect  of  the  revelation  of  the  conflict  and  the
victory  must  evince  and  evolve  itself  to  one  who  reflects  upon  the  whole  effect  upon
his  own  mind  of  the  life  and  ministry  of  the  Lord.  The  dramatic  unity  of  the  whole  is
a  testimony  to  the  reality  of  the  facts.  Such  a  conception  of  the  life,  vindicated  by
the  citation  of  its  chief  momenta,  renders  the  testimony  thus  borne  to  Jesus  the  most
remarkable  fact  in  all  literature.  The  Fourth  Gospel  is  so  interrelated  in  all  its  parts,
and  conveys  such  powerful  testimony  to  what  was  consecutively  unfolded,  accoimts  so
wondrously  for  the  catastrophe,  and  prepares  so  fully  for  the  final  revelations  of  the
risen  Lord  and  strong  Son  of  God,  that  little  controversy  remains  as  to  its  unity.  No
mythopoeio  tendency  can  have  produced  such  a  drama.  The  whole  is  so  harmoniously
built  up  out  of  its  several  parts  that  a  variety  of  authorship  is  hardly  so  much  as  sus-
pected by  the  most  resolute  of  its  opponents.  The  vision  is  not  one  of  many  minds  at
different  epochs,  but  of  one  richly  stored  mind  at  one  consummating  period  of  his  own
career.  The  elaboration  of  the  details  and  the  exhaustive  presentation  of  great  truths
touching  the  work  and  person  of  the  God-Man  reflect  in  every  verse  the  spiritual
apprehension  of  one  exalted  mind.  There  can  be  no  question  that  the  writer  wishes
himself  to  be  regarded  as  the  near  relative  and  most  intimate  friend  and  beloved
disciple  of  Jesus.  If  the  considerations  already  advanced  justify  us  in  holding  that
this  writer  was  the  identical  person  whom  he  represents  himself  to  be,  we  have  scarcely
any  option — we  must  believe  that  Jesus  was  and  is  the  Son  of  God.  If  such  a  concep-
tion of  his  Master  was  prepared  by  an  intimate  disciple  and  one  who  knew  that  he
spake  truth,  then  in  him  we  have  "  the  true  God  and  eternal  life."  Before  making
any  attempt  to  grasp  the  representation  in  its  fulness,  we  have  need  to  take  our  shoes
from  our  feet — we  are  on  holy  ground.

The  aid  to  this  task  obviously  available  in  the  numerous  arrangements  of  the  subject-
matter  to  which  we  have  referred  alone  makes  it  possible  to  the  present  writer  to  propose
the  following  scheme : —

I.  The  Revelation  op  the  Logos  to  the  Womj).

Exposition  of  tlie  fundamental  nature  of  "  the  Word,"  and  comprehengive  specimens  of  his
nature  and  method,  with  the  twofold  effect  of  his  self-rerelation.     Ch.  i, — ^iv.    ,

1.  The  explanation  offered  by  the  evangelist  of  the  series  of  foots  whioA  he  is  about  to  narrate.
This  is  contained  in  ch.  i.  14,  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  as."
Bat  before  he  makes  this  assertion,  He  states —
(1)  The  pre-existence,  Personality,  ana  Divinity  if  the  Logos.     Ch.  t.  1,  9.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.  dr


(2)  The  creation  of  all  things  through  the  Logos,  ai  the  Agent  of  the  eternal  counsel  and

actirity  of  God.     Ch.  i.  3.
(a)  Inclusiye  of  the  fact  that  he  has  always  been  and  now  is  the  Life,  and  therefore
(*)  The  Light  of  men.     Ch.  i.  3,  4.

(3)  Throughout  the  entire  history  of  the  action  of  the  Logos  on  man,  the  effulgence  of

the  light  has  been  encountered  by  the  misapprehension  of  human  darkness.  Ch.  i.  5.

(4)  The  general  manifestations  of  the  revealing  Logos.     Ch.  i.  6 — 13.

(a)  The  prophetic  dispensation  recapitulated  in  John's  ministry,  with  its  effects,
hearing  witness  to  the  Light,  but  not  itself  the  Light.     Ch.  i.  6—8.

(6)  The  illumination  streaming  from  the  veritable  Light  before  he  came  historically
into  the  world.    Ch.  i.  9.

(o)  The  twofold  effect  of  the  pre-Incamation  activity,  anticipatory  of  the  complete
manifestation  in  the  elected  nation  and  individuals,     Ch.  i.  10 — 13.

(5)  The  Incarnation  of  the  Logos.    Ch.  i.  14.

(6)  The  testimony  to  this  fact  by  the  prophetic  spirit.     Ch.  L  IS.

(7)  The  experience  of  the  writer.     Ch.  i.  16 — 18.

Close  of  the  prologue,
t.  The  testimony  of  the  Baptist.    Ch.  i.  19—34.

(1)  He  defines  his  own  position,  negatively  (ch.  i.  19 — 21);  positively  (ch.  i.  22,  23).

(2)  His  testimony  to  the  pre-existence  and  superiority  of  the  Christ,  with  indications  of

place  and  time.     Ch.  i.  24 — 28.

(3)  His  perception  of  the  fulfilment,  by  Jesus,  of  prophetic  symbolism,  in  virtue  of  his

pre-natal  glory.     Ch.  i.  29,  30.

(4)  The  prime  purpose  of  John's  mission — to  introduce  him  to  Israel ;  and  the  special

preparation  by  which  he  was  empowered  to  do  this  thing.     Ch.  i,  31 — 34.
*,*  The  incarnate  Word  recognized  as  Son  of  God,  Laub  of  Goo,  Baptizes  with
THE  Holt  Ghost.
8.  The  first  disciples,  and  their  testimony.     Ch.  i.  35 — 51,

(1)  John  and  Jesus.     John  directing  his  own  disciples  to  Jesus,     Ch,  i,  35 — 3S

(2)  The  naming  and  first  convictions  of  the  disciples,     Ch,  i.  40 — 49

(a)  The  Messiah.     Ch,  i,  40—44.

(6)  The  theme  of  the  Old  Testament.     Ch.  i,  45,  46.

(c)  The  Son  of  God,  and  King  of  Israel.    Ch.  i,  46—49.

(d)  The  Son  of  man,  the  link  between  earth  and  heaven.     Ch.  i,  50,  51.

i.   The  testitnony  of  signs  to  the  glory  of  the  Word  who  was  made  flesh.     Ch.  ii.  1 — iii.  2.

(1)  The  first  sign,  mastery  over  the  old  creation:  sign  of  love  and  power.     Ch,  ii,  1 — 11,

(2)  The  second  sign,  supremacy  over  the  theocratic  house  :  illustrations  of  righteousness,

power,  and  sacrifiaial  ministry.     Ch.  ii.  12 — 22.

(3)  Numerous  signs  in  Jerusalem,  at  the  Passover,  with  twofold  effect—  some  yielded  a

momentary  but  untrustworthy  allegiance ;   others  knew  that  God  was  with  him.
Ch.  ii.  23 — iii,  2.
6.  The  revelation  of  earthly  and  heavenly  things  to  one  who  knew  that  God  was  with  him.     Ch
ui.  3—21,

(1)  The  conditions  of  admission  into  the  kingdom  of  God,     Kew  birth  of  the  Spirit.     Ch

iii,  3—12,

(2)  The  truth  concerning  the  Son  of  man  and  his  sacrifice.     Ch.  iii,  13 — 15.
(3)-  Divine  love  and  judgment.     Ch,  iii,  16 — 21,

6,  The  swanlike  song  of  the  Baptist.     Ch,  iii,  22 — 36,

(1)  Circumstance  which  led  to  its  utterance.     The  ministry  and  baptism  of  Jesus  in

Jud^a,     The  baptismal  difBculty.     Ch.  iii.  22 — 26.

(2)  The  earthly  and  the  heavenly  commission,     Ch,  iii,  27 — 32,

(8)  The  consequences  of  accepting  and  rejecting  the  supreme  revelation.     Ch,  iii.  83 35.

7.  TA«  ministry  and  revelation  of  the  Lord  to  those  beyond  the  strict  compass  of  the  f-Woawoy

Samaria,     Ch,  iv.  1 — 42,

(1)  The  contrast  between  Jewish  nnsusceptibility  and  Samaritan  predisposition  to  foith,

in  the  entire  narrative,  as  compared  with  the  previous  chapter,  richly  prophetic
of  subsequent  development.     Circumstantial  introduction.     Ch,  iv,  1 — 6,

(2)  Revelations  and  misunderstandings  comprised  in  the  interview  with  the  Samaritaness.

Ch,  iv,  7—26.
(a)  The  Giver  and  Creator  of  all  asks  alms,  thus  submitting  to  the  conditioas  «/

humanity,    Ch.  iv,  7 — 9,
(J)  The  LIVING  WATER  offered  and  misunderstood.     Ch,  It.  10 — 15.

(e)  The  heart-seaiching  issuing  in  the  perception  of  the  prophetic  rank  of  Jesna,

by  the  Samaritan  woman.     Ch,  iv,  16 — 20,
(<i)  The  spiritual  nature  of  God  and  his  worship,     GoD  IS  Spirit.     Ch.  iv.  31 — ^24.


cW  INTRODUCTION  TO


C«)  The  Christ,  as  conceived  by  Samaria.    Ch.  ir.  25,  26.

(3)  Revelation  and  misnndeTstanding  involTcd  in  the  conduct  of  the  disdplu.     Ch.  ir.

27—38.

(4)  The  harvest  of  the  tord's  sowing,  and  the  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  WORLD.     Ch.  ir.  39—42.

8.  The  Galilaan  ministry.     [Summed  np  in  one  event,  of  great  impoi'tance,  as  illustrating  the

superiority  of  word  to  signs  and  wonders.]     Ch.  ir.  4H — 54.

Here  the  first  great  division  of  the  Gospel  terminates.

11     CONFUCT  WITH   THE  CHOSEN   PEOPLE  IN  JERUSALEM,  GALILEE,   AND   JeRDSALEM  AGAIN,

FROM  ITS  Earliest  Murmurs  of  Hostilitt  to  the  Formal  Death-sentence  of  the

Sanhedein.    Ch.  V. — xi.
*,*  The  conflict  brings  out  loftier  claims  on  the  part  of  Jesus,  and  divergent  results  among
the  people.     The  assault  stimulates  the  self-revelation.

1.  Christ  proved  by  sign  and  various  testimony  to  he  the  Source  of  life.     Ch.  v.  1 — 47.

(1)  A  remarkable  sign  on  a  paralyzed  body  and  unsusceptible  soul.     Ch.  v.  1 — 9a.

(2)  The  outbreak  of  hostility  due  to  the  breach  of  the  sabbatic  law  enjoined  by  the  new

Prophet  on  the  healed  man.     Ch.  v.  96 — 16.

(3)  The  reply  of  Jesus  to  the  hostile  Jews.     Ch.  v.  17 — 47.

(a)  The  claim  of  special  relation  and  equality  of  operation  with  the  Father  evoking

deadly  malice.     Ch.  v.  17, 18.
(6)  Christ  vindicated  his  equality  with  the  Father.     Ch.  v.  19-^29.

(a)  He  is  the  Son,  and   his  work  is  i>  following  of  the  Father's  activity

Ch.  V.  19,  20a.
(j8)  The  greater  works.     Ch.  r.  205—29.

(i.)  The  resurrection  of  the  dead.     Ch.  v.  21—26.
(ii.)  The  judgment  of  the  world.     Ch.  v.  27—29.
(o)  The  witness  borne  to  these  supreme  claims.     Ch.  v.  30 — 40.

(o)  The  Father's  all-embracing  (ch.  v.  32,  37,  38),  and  including—
(/3)  The  temporary  witness  of  John.     Ch.  v.  33 — 35.
(7)  The  witness  of  the  works.     Ch.  v.  36.
(S)  The  witness  of  the  Scriptnras.     Ch.  v.  39,  40.
(d)  The  effect  upon  the  people  of  the  revelation  of  the  Son,  and  his  offer  of  himself
as  the  "  Source  of  life."     Ch.  v.  41—47.
3.  Christ  declares  himself  to  he  Sustainer  of  the  life  of  which  he  is  the  Source.     Ch.  vi.  1 — 71.

(1)  The  supply  of  human  wants  illustrated  by  a  "  sign  "  of  power  and  of  his  being  the

Source  of  all  things.     Ch.  vi.  1 — 15.
•**  The  misunderstanding  of  the  sign.     Ch.  vi.  14,  15.

(2)  The  mastery  of  the  forces  of  nature  in  the  control  of  wind  and  wave,  a  "  sign  "  of

love.     Ch.  vi.  16—21.

(3)  The  sequel  of  the  signs  (ch.  vi.  22 — 59),  with  the  discourses  at  Capernaum,  in  which

be  offers  himself  as —
(a)  "  The  veritable  Bread,"  "  the  Bread  which  cometh  down  from  heaven,"  as  well

as  discovery  of  the  method  of  participating  in  it,  and  the  everlasting  life

which  those  who  feed  on  it  enjoy.     Ch.  vi.  26 — 36.
(6)  Episode  on  the  blessedness  of  those  who  "  come  "  to  Christ.     Ch.  vi.  37 — 40.

(c)  The  murmur  of  the  Jews  encountered  and  aggravated  by  the  additional  claim

that  his  flesh  (humanity)  is  "the  living  bread  which  came  down  from
heaven."     Ch.  vi.  41—51.

(d)  The  conflict  among  the  Jews  as  to  the  possibility  of  their  eating  his  flesh,

leading  him  to  insist  on  special  participation  of  his  "flesh  and  blood,"  i«.  ef
his  Divine  humanity  and  his  sacriflced  humanity  as  the  condition  of  life.
Ch.  vi.  52—59.

(4)  The  twofold  effect  of  these  instructions.     Ch.  vi.  60 — 71.

(a)  The  unbelief  of  the  Capernaites,  leading  him  to  proceed  further  and  predict  the

ascension  .of  his  humanity,  to  where  he  was  before.     Ch.  vi.  60 — 66.
(6)  The  loyalty  of  the  twelve,  with  a  note  of  prophetic  warning.     Ch.  vi.  67 — ^71.

9.  Christ  the  Source  of  truth.     Ch.  vii,  1— viii.  11.

(1)  Treatment  of  his  unbelieving  brethren.     The  hatred  of  the  world  arises  from  the

truth  of  his  testimony.    His  hour  of  manifestation  not  yet  come.    Ch.  vii.  1 — 10.

(2)  Controversy  among  the  "  Jews,"  and  Christ's  first  discussion  with  them.     Ch.  vii.

11—13  and  13—19.

(3)  Treatment  of  the  ignorance  and  insolence  of  "  the  multitude.''     Ch.  vii.  20 — 24.

(4)  Special  perplexity  of  "  some  Jerusalemites,"  and  Christ's  reply.     Ch.  vii.  25 — 29,

(5)  The   divided   opinions   of  the   Jerusalem    people,  the    general    multitude,  and    the

Pharisees ;  the  attempt  on  his  life,  and  its  failure.     Ch.  vii.  30 — 36.


THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  cWi


(6)  The  claim  to  be  Organ  and  Giver  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Ch.  vii.  37 — 39.

(7)  The  conflict  among  hi»  hearers,  and  divers  results  of  this  series  of  discourse!.     Fresh

attempts  on  his  life.     The  Sanhedrin  and  its  officers.     Their  confutation.     Ch.
vii.  40—53.
[(8)  The  pericope  advitera.     Ch.  vii.  53 — viii.  11.

(o)  The  evidence  and  counter-evidence  for  the  genuineness  of  the  paragraph.
(6)  The  plot  against  the  honour  or  the  loyalty  of  the  Lord  foiled  with  marvelloui
wisdom  and  great  love.]

4.  Christ  the  Light  of  the  world.     Ch.  viii.  12 — ix.  41.

(1)  The  solemn  and  formal  assertion.     Ch.  viii.  12,

(2)  The  refusal  of  the  Pharisees  to  accept  such  a  claim  on  his  own  unsupported  testimony,

and  the  reply  of  Jesus  based  "on  the  testimony  of  the  Father,  who  was  ever  with
him.     Ch.  viii.  13—19.

(3)  Controversies  with  different  groups,  ending  in  a  partial  admission  of  his  claims  by

some.     Ch.  viii.  20—30.

(4)  The  test  Christ  applied  to  those  who  admitted  his  testimony — true  discipleship  and

freedom.     Ch.  viii.  31,  32.

(5)  The  offer  of  spiritual  freedom  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  provoked  bitter  hostility  and

misapprehension.     Ch.  viii.  33 — 46.

(6)  The  I  AM.     The  appeal  to  their  father  Abraham  and  their  Father  God  led  him  to

assert  his  anteriority  to  Abraham.     Ch.  viii.  47 — 58.

(7)  The  conflict  and  victory.     Ch.  viii.  59.

(8)  The  Lord  reasserts  his  own  declaration  of  ch.  viii.  )2  by  a  sign  of  his  power  to  give

eyesight  as  well  as  light.     Ch.  ix.  1 — 7.

(9)  The  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  miracle,  the  antagonism  of  the  Pharisees,  and  the

persecution  inflicted  on  the  healed  man.     Ch.  iz.  8 — 34.
•^*  The  conviction  of  the  prophetic  authority  of  Jesus  produced  by  the  sign  alone.

(10)  The  issues  of  the  ministry  of  Light.     Ch.  ii.  35 — 41.
(a)  The  vision  of  those  who  see  not.     Ch.  ix.  35 — 38.

(6)  The  blindness  of  those  who  are  satisfied  with  their  twilight,  and  the  remaining
of  their  sin.     Ch.  ix.  39 — 41.

5.  Christ  the  Shepherd  of  the  flock  of  God.     Ch.  i.  1—21.

(1)  Parable  of  the  fold  and  flock,  the  door  and  the  porter,  the  robber  and  the  shepherd.

Ch.  X.  1—6.

(2)  Allegory  of  the  door  and  the  fold,  in  which  Christ  claims  to  be  "the  Door  of  the

sheep."     Ch.  x.  7—10.

(3)  The  functions  and  responsibilities  of  the  veritable  Shepherd,  and  the  relation  of  the

Shepherd  to  the  flock.     Ch.  x.  11—21.
(a)  The  continuity  of  his  Shepherd-activity,  notwithstanding  the  laying  down  of

his  life.     Ch.  x.  16—18.
(6)  The  twofold  effect  of  this  declaration.     Oh.  i.  19 — 31.

6.  The  oneness  of  Christ  with  the  Father.     Ch.  i.  22 — 42j

(1)  The  Feast  of  Dedication,  and  the  excitement  of  the  people.     Ch.  «.  32 — 28.

(2)  Christ's  claim  to  equality  of  power  and  essence,  and  similarity  of  gracious  operation

with  the  Father.     Ch.  x.  27 — 30.    •

(3)  Resented  and  challenged,  but  vindicated  by  word  and  sign.     Ch.  x.  31 — 39.

(4)  The  susceptibility  of  those   who  had  been  prepared  for  his   Word   by  the  early

ministry  of  John.     Ch.  i.  40 — 42.

7.  Christ  the  Antagonist  of  death — a  victory  of  power  and  love.     Ch.  xi.  1 — 57.

(1)  The  mystery  and  might  of  sacrificial   love  seen    in  the  prelude  of  the  miracle.

Ch.  xi.  1—16.

(2)  The  reciprocities  of  human  affection  drawing  from  Christ  the  vast  assertion  and

promise,  "  I  AM  THE  Kesubreotion  and  the  LirE."     Ch.  xi.  17 — 32.

(3)  The  struggle  with  death,  the  groaning,  the  weeping,  the  aggravation,  the  victory  of

power  and  love.     Ch.  xi.  33 — 44.

(4)  The  different  results  produced  on  the  multitude,  on  the  Pharisees,  on  the  Sanhedrin,

and  the  high  priest.     The  final  resolve  of  the  authorities.     Ch.  xi.  45 — 57.

IIL  Consummation  o»  the  Public  Ministry.

1.  The  feast  of  love  and  gratitude.     The  culmination  of  the  previous  events,  but  the  anticipa-

tion  of  the  burial — the  discordant  note.     Ch.  xii.  1 — 8.
3.  The  effects  of  the  great  sign,     Ch.  xii.  9 — 11.

(1)  On  much  people  of  the  Jews.     Ch.  xii.  9.

(2)  On  the  chief  priests.     Ch.  xii.  10,  11.


clvlM  INTRODUCTION  TO


3    The  triumplial  entry  into  JervsaUm,     Christ's  challenge  of  the  authorities,  and  its  results.

Ch.  xu.  12—19.
4.  The  desire  of  the  "  Greeks  " — the  representatives  of  the  world  heyond  the  theocracy — to  see

Jesus.     Ch.  xii.  20—23.     The  reply  of  Jesus.     Ch.  xii.  23—30.

(1)  The  glorification  of  the  Son  of  man  in  and  through  death.     Ch.  xii.  23 — 26.

(2)  The  anticipation  of  Gethsemane,  and  the  heavenly  voice  which  answers  the  cry  of  the

Son  of  man.     Ch.  xii.  27 — 30.
6.  The  judgment  of  this  world.     Ch.  xii.  31 — 36.

6.  The  reflections  of  the  evangelist.     Ch.  xii.  37 — 43.

7.  TIte  summation  of  tAe  supreme  conflict  between  our  Lord  and  the  world.     Ch.  xii.  44 — 50.

IV.  The  FiNiiL  Manifestations  in  Word  and  Action  op  the  Logos  incarnate,  as  Love,

EIPRESSINO  ITSELF   ABSOLUTELT  AND  TO  THE   UTTERMOST.      In  two  divisions —

(A)  "The  inner  glorification  of  the  Christ,"  in  the  presence  of  those  who  received  and
believed  him.     Ch.  xiii. — xvii.

(B)  "The  outer  glorification  of  the  Christ,  both  in  his  Passion  and  resurrection."  The  Lord
of  all  spontaneously  yielding  himself  to  death,  laying  down  his  life,  taking  it  again,  and  lifting
his  disciples  into  vital  union  with  the  risen  life.     Ch.  xviii. — xxi.

In  further  detail —

A.  The  Inner  Globipication  op  Perfect  Love.

1.  The  God-Man,  humiliating  himself  to  the  extremity  of  self-sacrificing  service,  becomes  the

example  and  inspiration  of  mutual  love.     Ch.  xiii.  1 — 17.

2.  The  exclusion  of  the  faithless  disciple.     Ch.  xiii.  18 — 30.

3.  The  valedictory  discourses.     Ch.  xiii.  31 — xvi.  33.

(1)  The  glorification  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  of  the  Father  in  the  Son.     Ch.  xiii.  31 — 33.

(2)  The  demand  which  this  glorification  would  make  on  the  mutual  fidelity  and  affection

of  the  disciples.     Ch.  xiii.  34,  35.

(3)  The  question  of  Bmon  Peter,  with  the  terrible  response  which  broke  the  eleven

disciples  down  into  a  passion  of  grief,  followed  by  onr  Lord's  consoling  promise.
Ch.  xiii.  36— xiv.  4.

(4)  The  question  of  Thomas,  eliciting  from  Christ  that  he  was  going  to  the  Father,  and

that  his  death  was  their  "  way  "  as  well  as  his  own  way  thither.     Ch,  xiv.  5—7.

(5)  The  question  of  Philip,  with  the  reply.     Ch.  xiv.  8 — 21.

(a)  Jesus  the  full  Revelation  of  the  Father.     Ch.  xiv.  8 — 11.

(6)  The  greater  works,  and  their  conditions  and  issues.     Ch.  lir.  12 — 15.

(c)  The  greatest  Gift — the  other  Paraclete.     Ch.  xiv.  16 — 21.

(6)  The  question  of  Judas,  answered  by  indicating  conditions  of  our  Lord's  self-manifesta-

tion ;  the  call  for  love  to  himself,  the  promise  of  the  Comforter,  and  the  gift  of
peace.     Ch.  xiv.  22—31.

(7)  The  parable  of  the  vine  and  its  branches.     Living  union  and  incorporation  of  the

disciples  in  one  personality  with  himself.     Ch.  xv.  1 — 10.

(8)  The  results  of  the  union  between  Christ  and  his  disciples.     Ch.  xv.  11 — xvi.  6.
(a)  To  themselves.     Ch.  xv.  11 — 16.

(6)  To  the  unbelieving  world.     Ch.  xv.  17 — 27.

(c)  The  bitter  issues  of  the  hostility  of  the  world.     Ch.  xvi.  1 — 6,

(9)  The  promise  of  the  Paraclete.    Ch.  xvi.  7 — 33.

(a)  The  threefold  conviction  of  the  world.     Ch.  xvi.  7 — 11.

(6)  The  power  of  the  Paraclete  upon  the  disciples  themselves.     Ch.  xvi.  12 — 15.

(c)  The  sorrow  turned  to  joy.     Ch.  xvi.  16 — 24.

(d)  The  final  conviction  wrought  that  Jesus  was  what  he  had  said  he  was,  •  The  joy

of  Christ,  with  its  note  of  warning.     Ch.  xvi.  25 — 33.

4.  The  high-priestly  intercession.     Audible  communion  of  the  Son  with  the  Father.      Ch.

xvii.  1 — 26.     The  prayer  he  bfiers —

(1)  For  himself.     Ch.  xvii.  1—6.

(2)  For  his  disciples.     Ch.  xvii.  6 — 19.

(3)  For  the  Church  Catholic  m  all  time.     Ch.  xvii.  20—26.

*,*  5.  Review  of  the  difficulties  attending  the  preservation  and  characteristics  of  this  discourst
and  prayer.

B.  The  Hour  has  comb.

1    The  outer  glorification  of  Christ  in  his  Passion.     Ch.  xviii.  1 — lix.  42.

(1)  The  betrayal,  the  majesty  of  his  bearing,  accompanied  by  hints  of  the  bitter  enp  h*
was  prepared  to  drink.     Ch.  xviii.  1 — 11.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  elix

(2)  The  pTeliminaT^  examination  before  Annas,  and  hint  of  the  fnll  eccIesiasticBl  trial,

and  of  the  weakness  and  treachery  of  Simon  Peter.     Ch.  xviii.  12 — 27.

(3)  The  Roman  trial,  presupposing  the  decision  of  the  Sanhedrin.     Ch.  xviii.  28— xix.  16.

(o)  [Without  the  Prsetorium.]  Pilate  extorts  the  malign  intention  of  the  Jews,  and
dares  them  to  disobey  Roman  law.     Ch.  xviii.  28 — 32.

Q))  [Within  the  Prsetorium.]  Christ  admits  that,  in  a  sense  far  deeper  than  his
questioner  conceived,  he  was  a  King,  but  that  his  Icingdom  was  not  of  this
world.     Ch.  xviii.  33—38.

(e)  [Without  the  Prsetorium.]  Where,  notwithstanding  the  clamour  with  which  his
protestation  of  Kingship  and  subsequent  reserve  had  been  met,  Pilate  declared
him  innocent  of  the  charge  brought  against  him.  The  Barabbas-proposal.
Ch.  xviii.  39,  40.

(d)  [Within  the  Prsetorium.]  The  nnjust  scourging,  and  crown  of  thorns.  Ch.  xix.
1—3.

(«)  [Without  the  Prastorium.]  The  further  protestations  on  the  part  of  Pilate  of
his  helplessness  and  innocence  bring  up  the  concealed  Jewish  verdict  of  blas-
phemy because  he  had  claimed  to  be  Son  of  God.     Ch.  xix.  4 — 7.

(/)  [Within  the  Praetorinm.]  The  fear  of  Pilate,  and  the  apportionment  of  the
measures  of  guilt  by  the  majestic  Sufferer.     Ch.  xix.  8 — 11.

(9)  Pilate  vanquished  by  his  selfish  fears,  and  judgment  given.     Ch.  xix.  12 — IS

(4)  The  Crucifixion.     Love  unto  the  uttermost.     Ch.  xix.  17 — 24.

(a)  The  circumstances  of  the  death.     Ch.  xix.  17, 18.
(6)  The  title  on  the  cross.    Ch.  xix.  19—22.
(0)  The  seamless  garment.    Ch.  xix.  23,  24.

(5)  The  words  on  the  cross.     Ch.  xix.  25 — 30.

(a)  Filial  love—"  Behold  thy  son."    Ch.  xix.  25,  28.

(6)  Filial  love— "Behold  thy  mother,"  and  the  issue.     Ch.  xix.  27.

(c)  "  I  thirst  "—the  last  agony.     Ch.  xix.  28,  29.

((Q  "It  is  finished  I" — the  great  victory  of  completed  sacrifice.     Ch.  xix.  30.

(6)  The  piercing  of  the  side,  with  its  signifiance — the  final  close  of  the  life  of  earth.     Ch.

xix.  31—37.

(7)  The  burial — the  two  friends,  Joseph  and  Nicodemus.     Ch.  xix.  38—42.
3.    The  complete  glorification  of  Jesaa  in  his  resurrection.    Ch.  xx.  1 — 31.

(1)  The  process  of  John's  own  personal  conviction,  by  the  discovery  that  the  sepulchre

was  deserted.     Ch.  xx.  1 — 10.

(2)  The  manifestation  to  adoring  love,  answering  to  the  first  portion  of  the  high  priestly

prayer.     Ch.  xx.  11 — 18.

(3)  The  manifestation  to  the  ten  disciples  and  others,  corresponding  to  the  great  prayer

for  them  in  ch.  xvii.     Ch.  xx.  10,  20,

(4)  Peace,  spiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  power  to  remit  or  retain  sin.     Ch.  xx.

21—23.

(5)  The  manifestation  made  to  anxious  scepticism.     The  victory  of  faith  by  the  grace  of

sight  and  touch.      The  still  greater  blessing  on  those  who  have  not  seen  and  yet
have  believed.     Ch.  xx.  24 — 29.

(6)  The  summation  of  the  argument  of  the  Gospel.      "  These  things  are  written  that  ye

may  believe  that  Jeaus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God."    Ch.  xx.  30,  31.
3,  Epihgue,  answering  to  prologue.    Ch.  xxi.  1 — 25.

*,*  The  post-Resurrection  life,  con-esponding  with  the  pre-incamate  energy  of  the  Logos.

(1)  The  manifestation  of  himself  in  the  work  of  life.     Ch,  xxi,  1 — 14.

(2)  The  revelations  to  be  made  in  the  services  dictated  by  love  and  issuing  in  martyrdom.

The  confession  of  Simon  Peter,  and  the  charge  given  to  him.    Ch,  xxi.  15 — 19.

(3)  The  revelations  made  to  patient  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  with  correction

of  a  misunderstanding  touching  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.     Ch.  xxi.  20 — 23.

(4)  Note  of  subsequent  editors  with  reference  to  the  authorship  and  the  fulness  of  unre-

corded traditions  touching  the  words  and  deeds  of  Jesus.     Ch.  xxi.  24,  25.

He  that  in  the  heginning  and  throughout  all  time  has  been  one  with  God,  the  Creator,
the  Source  of  life  and  light,  the  Giver  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  represented  as  becoming
human  flesh,  and  through  that  flesh  manifesting  the  Divine  idea  of  man.  The  Spirit  is
triumphant  over  the  flesh.  He  suffers,  indeed,  from  weariness  and  thirst,  and  from  the
temptations  to  use  the  Divine  power  always  at  his  disposal  for  his  own  refreshment  or
for  the  establishment  of  a  temporal  sovereignty  ;  but  he  uniformly  resists  every  such
subtle  temptation.  Elect  souls  see  by  intuition,  and  by  the  aid  of  the  prophetic  word
and  testimony,  that  he  is  Son  of  God  and  King  of  Israel,  that  he  is  the  perfect  Man,


dx  INTEODUOTION  TO


the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Mere  intellectual  power,  senatorial  position,
hierarchical  authority,  fail  to  perceive  and  receive  that  which  more  simple  minds
embrace  with  comparative  ease.  He  opens  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He  reveals  the
Father  by  the  confession  of  his  own  SoDship  and  the  character  which  he  everywhere
assigns  to  Q-od.  The  grandest  conceptions  of  all  religions  thought  date  from  the  lan-
guage of  this  Gospel,  with  its  Epistle.  God  is  Spirit ;  God  is  Light ;  God  is  Love.  The
incarnate  Word  is  the  Baptizer  with  the  Spirit.  He  offers  living  water  to  tie  thirsty
and  living  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  the  blood  (which  is  his  life)  to  man,  that  man
nay  live,  and  not  die,  for  ever.  By  a  series  of  selected  signs  he  is  demonstrated  to
have  all  power,  all  righteousness,  all  judgment,  all  sustenance,  in  his  hands.  He  claims
identity  with  the  eternal  light,  and  proves  that  he  can  pour  such  light  upon  those
who  are  blind  even  from  birth.     He  can  give  light  and  also  eyesight.

His  self-revelations  are  continually  stimulated  by  the  antagonism  and  carnal  mis-
understanding of  his  hearers.  He  claims  to  be  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  but  a  Shepherd
who  would  lay  down  his  life  that  he  might  resume  it  in  the  interest  of  the  widespread
flock,  the  vast  multitude  whom  the  Father  gives  to  him,  and  who  come  to  him  for
eternal  life  akin  to  his  own.  He  grapples  with  death  itself,  and  declares  that  he  is  the
BesurrectioD  and  the  Life.  Dead  souls  and  dead  bodies  in  their  graves  should  hear  his
voice,  and  live.  The  antagonism  to  these  claims  becomes  a  furious  madness,  and,  while
he  is  binding  those  who  receive  him  into  a  compact  fellowship  which  will  survive  his
departure  and  transcend  life  and  death,  while  he  is  promising  the  Paraclete  and  sur-
rounding them  with  a  new  glory,  his  own  people  are  plotting  his  death.  Nothing  short
of  death,  the  full  extremity  of  human  humiliation,  aggravated  by  the  malice  of  the
devil,  can  give  adequate  or  absolute  expression  to  the  intbiisiiy  of  his  love  to  the
men  whoie  nature  he  has  assumed.  From  this  he  shrinks  as  a  man,  but  to  this  he
voluntarily  and  majestically  yields.  At  every  stage  of  the  humiliating  process  and
aggravated  curse  of  his  death  he  comes  forth  with  some  more  convincing  proof  of  his
Divine  mission,  that  he  was  empowered  to  destroy  death ;  and  glorify  himself  in  it  and
through  it.  His  treacherous  disciples  are  vanquished ;  his  captors  fall  at  his  feet ;  his
judges  are  either  baffled  by  his  silence  or  his  answers ;  he  condemns  his  judge ;  he
transforms  his  crown  of  thorns  by  the  cruelty  of  its  infliction  and  his  patient  endurance
into  a  crown  of  glory,  and  his  cross  into  a  throne.  Death  fails  with  him.  He  proves
that  it  can  have  no  dominion  over  him,  and  he  takes  possession  of  his  kingdom.  He
creates  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  out  of  this  sinning  and  dying  world ;  by  the  reve-
lation he  makes  of  his  spiritual  and  glorified  body,  and  of  the  relation  between  the
two  worlds,  he  satisfies  love,  he  removes  doubt,  he  hallows  work  by  the  ineffable  sweet-
ness of  his  eternal  presence  with  those  who  believe  on  him.  "  The  Spirit,  the  water,
and  the  blood  agree  in  one  "  signification,  appeasing  the  conscience,  cleansing  the  heart,
and  inspiring  the  whole  nature  of  man.

"  These  things  are  written  that  ye  may  believe  on  the  Name  of  the  Son  of  God,  and,
believing,  that  ye  may  have  life."

XI.  References  to  Liteeature  and  Text.

Numerous  references  are  made  in  the  foregoing;  pages  and  in  the  course  of  the
Exposition  to  the  literature  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  My  obligations  to  my  predecessors
are  so  various  and  abundant  that  they  defy  enumeration.  Illustrious  scholars  have
contended  on  opposite  sides  in  this  "  battle-field  of  the  New  Testament."  Many  of
these  are  most  honourably  distinguished  for  their  learning,  reverence,  candour,  and
ingenuity.  To  their  extensive  research,  suggestive  criticism,  and  various  interpretation
I  am  greatly  indebted,  and  humbly  desire  to  do  justice.

A  list  of  the  principal  works  and  treatises  on  the  authorship  of  the  Gospel  may
be  found  in  Dr.  Caspar  E.  Gregory's  appendix  to  his  English  translation  of  Luthardt's
work  entitled  '  St.  John  the  Author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,'  and  a  select  list  of  com-
mentaries on  St.  John's  Gospel  is  placed  at  the  commencement  of  the  second  volume  of
the  Eev.  F.  Crombie's  translation  of  Meyer's  'Commentary  oh  St.  John.'  These
valuable  lists  were  completed  in  1875,  since  which  time  many  notable  dissertations
have  been  published ;  «.(/.  Albrecht  Thoma's  remarkable  work  entitled  '  Die  Genesis  des
Johannes-Evangeliums,  ein  Beitrag  zu  seiner  Auslegung,  Geschichte  und  Kritik : '


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  clxl

1882 ;  Dr.  Edwin  Abbott's  articles  on  "  The  Gospels,"  in  the  new  edition  of  the  'Ency-
clopaedia Brittanica;'  Mangold's  edition  of  Holtzmann's  'Einleitung  z.  Neuen  Test.;'
English  translations  of  Dr.  F.  Q-odet's  invaluable  introduction  and  commentary  (T.  and
T.  Clark) ;  the  commentary  and  introduction  by  Canon  Westcott,  in  the  '  Speaker's
Commentary;'  commentary  and  introduction  by  Drs.  Moulton  and  Milligan, in  Schaffs
'  Popular  Commentary ; '  and  by  Archdeacon  "Watkins  in  Bishop  EUicott's  '  New  Testa-
ment Commentary  for  English  Beaders ; '  translations  of  Bernard  Weiss's  great  work
on  the  'Life  of  Christ'  (3  vols.,  T.  and  T.  Clark),  and  of  Theodore  Keim's  'Jesus  of
Mazara,'  and  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott's  '  External  Evidence  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.'  Further,  a
ontributlon  to  literary  evidences,  entitled  '  Canonicity  of  the  New  Testament,'  by
L'rofessor  Charteris,  D.D.,  on  the  basis  of  Kirchhofer's  '  Quellensamlung ; '  and  a  com-
mentary by  Dean  Plummer,  in  the  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools  and  Colleges,  appear
to  me  singularly  useful.

I  acknowledge  great  indebtedness  to  these  works,  as  well  as  to  many  others  that  are
referred  to  in  the  course  of  the  Introduction  and  Exposition.

Whensoever  and  by  whomsoever  "the  spiritual  Gospel"  was  produced,  it  is  •
veritable  prodigy  of  thought  and  suggestion,  and  it  involves  conceptions  of  the  Divine,
and  possibilities  of  the  human  that  are  ineffably  sublime.  Its  simplicity  invites  atten-
tion, its  depth  bewilders.  "  A  great  water  "  is  it,  where  an  infant  can  wade,  and  where
I  he  mightiest  craft  can  float,  do  business,  and  ride  at  anchor.  Its  metaphysic  bridges
the  chasm  between  thought  and  reality.  The  spiritual  becomes  the  eternal  The
philosophy  of  the  union  of  the  human  to  the  Divine  has  never  been  conceived  with
such  practical  force  and  astounding  realism.  All  this  would  be  true,  if  it  be  only  the
dream  of  some  divine  of  the  second  century,  more  profound  than  Plato,  mofe  terrible
than  ^schylus,  more  sympathetic  than  Pascal,  more  mystic  than  Boehmen,  more  self-
annihilating  than  Buddha,  and  of  one  albeit  who  has  left  no  name  behind  him.

But  if  the  book  be  what  it  professes  to  be,  the  record  of  a  positive  experience,  a
selection  and  arrangement  of  the  memories  of  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  then,
without  any  question  or  exaggeration,  it  is  the  most  Inestimably  precious  fragment  of
all  recorded  history.  This  is  the  deep  conviction  the  Gospel  has  inspired  in  successive
ages,  and  this  conclusion  is  forced  upon  many  of  us  by  a  candid  perusal  of  all  that
has  been  written  with  the  view  of  shattering  it.

One  word  concerning  the  text  and  the  English  translation  presented  in  these
volumes.  Every  place  has  been  noted  where  the  Revised  Text  of  1881  has  deviated
from  the  Textus  Beceptns,  or  from  the  well-known  text  of  the  eighth  edition  of  Tisohen-
dorf,  or  from  those  of  TregeUes,  and  of  Westcott  and  Hort.  Some  of  the  principal
authorities  on  which  these  distinguished  critics  have  in  the  main  relied  will  be  found
in  the  footnotes.  A  few  of  the  more  celebrated  texts,  such  as  ch.  i.  28 ;  r.  3 — 5 ;
vii.  53 — ^viii.  12,  have  been  discussed  at  greater  length.

Deviations  from  the  Revised  Version  have  been  admitted  into  the  translation  with
the  view  of  exhibiting  a  closer  approach  to  the  exact  force  of  certain  sentences  and
words.  They  are  not  offered  as  revision  of  the  Revisers'  work,  but  as  moving  along  the
lines  of  exegetical  and  interpretative  comment.  The  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Roman
letters  represent  the  uncial  manuscripts,  usually  signified  by  them,  and  the  AraUc
numerals  indicate  the  cursive  manuscripts  cited  by  Tischendorf,  TregeUes,  Westcott
and  Hort,  Meyer,  Alford,  Godet,  and  others.  The  versions.  Fathers,  and  other  materials
of  judgment  are  indicated  in  a  sufficiently  explicit  manner — ^the  critical  notes  of  Meyer
and  Alford  and  Dr.  Weymouth's  composite  text  have  been  carefully  observed.

*,*  I  desire  especially  to  record  my  gratitude  to  the  Rev.  William  Henry  Beckett,  of
Stebbing,  for  the  valuable  help  he  has  afforded  to  me  in  bringing  the  work  through  the
press,  and  for  other  important  services  and  saggestiona.


»Rlf.


THE


GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEE  I


The  title  of  the  book  is  differently  given

in  the  manuscripts  and   ancient  versiona,

and  the  differences  are  so  considerable  that

they  cannot  be  referred  to  the  original  text.

The  simplest  form  of  the  title  is  found  in  K,

B,  D,  and  is  nothing  more  than  "  according

to  John,"  KATA  IliANNHN  (B  gives  only

one  N  in  John's  name,  but  S  two) ;  and  this

is  followed  by  the  Vulgate  and  Syriao  as  a

running  title.    The  immense  proportion  of

the  uncials — A,  C,  E,  F,  G,  L,  and  eight  or

nineothers — read"GospeIaccordingtoJohn"

(EliayyeKiov  Karck  ladi/vnv).    This  is  followed

by  Tregelles,  Lachmann,  Alford.   The  T.B.,

witli  a  large  number  of  manuscripts,  reads,

"  The  Gh>spel  according  to  John ; "  and  in

Stephen's  third  edition  the  word  "holy"

occurs  before  "Gospel."    The  cursives  69,

178,  259,  read  Evayy4\iov  ix  roO  Kuril  'laiv-

v-qv.    Some  cursives  read,  "Of  the  (holy)

Gospel  according  to  John.''    The  printed

texts  of  the  Peschito  Syriao  have  Emmgelmm

Banettim   prtsdioationii    JohannU  prasconia.

The  Bevisers,  with  T.E.,  have  placed  Th  k«t4

'Iwdvvriv  Z'ayyiMoii  as  their  title.

The  phrase,  "  according  to,"  has  been
thought  by  some  to  suggest  a  type  of  doc-
trine or  teaching  with  which  the  document
might  be  supposed  to  harmonize,  and  there-
fore to  set  aside  the  idea  of  personal  authen-
ticity by  its  very  form.  This  interpretation,
seeing  it  applies  to  Hark  and  Luke  as  well
as  to  John  and  Matthew,  woold  lose  iti
meaning;  tat  Mark  and  Lake,  b/  numerous


traditionary  notices,  have  been  eontlnnonsly
credited,  not  with  having  personally  set  any
special  type  of  doctrine  before  the  Church,
but  as  having  been  respectively  the  inter-
preter of  Peter  or  Paul.  Consequently  the
meaning  of  the  phrase  compels  us  to  ask
whether  the  word  "Gospel"  or  "Holy
Gospel "  did  in  the  first  instance  refer  to  the
hook  at  all.  It  is  not  "John's  Gospel"
that  is  intended,  but  the  good  news  or  glad
tidings  of  God  related  by  John,  of  which
this  and  similar  titles  speak.  Moreover,
numerous  instances  occur  where  the  Kara  is
similarly  used  to  denote  authorship.  Thus
"  The  Pentateuch  according  to  Moses,"  "  The
History  according  to  Herodotus,"  "The
Gospel  according  to  Peter,"  are  titles  which
in  every  case  are  meant  to  sugges.  the  idea
of  authorship  (Godet).  We  cannoi  Jmagine
that  any  other  implication  was  Intel  de^  by
this  ancient  superscription.

Each  of  the  evangelists  starts  -MIL.  ■
grand  "presupposition,"  t.^  main  thesis,  (rf
his  own,  expressed  with  more  or  less  of
explicitness,  which  it  becomes  his  obvious
purpose  to  sustain.

This  main  thesis  is  set  forth  in  the  first
sentences  of  each  of  the  synoptists.  Thus
Mask  opened  with  the  memorable  words,
"The  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesut
Christ  the  Bon  of  God."  >    Prom  the  first

'  The  text,  vlov  0cov,  Mark  i.  1,  is  not
rejected  by  Tregelles,  nor  Lachmann,  nor
E.T.,  though  omitted  by  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.).  It  is  found  in  K»,  B,  D,  L,  vlov  toS
0eov,  A,  E,  F,  G,  and  many  other  uncials.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [ch.  i.  1—51.


he  refers  to  the  prophetto  atitioipfttions  and
historic  realization  of  glad  tidings  uttered
bj  th«  Lord,  and  he  based  all  his  teaching
on  the  fact  that  Jesni  Christ  was  Son  or
God.  Matthew,  who  wished  to  establish
the  Lord's  special  olaim  io  Messiahship,
and  his  o^cial  right  to  the  throne  of  David,
began  with  a  geneslogical  proof  of  the
Lord's  descent  from  David  and  Abraham.
Luke,  who  aimed  throughout  to  illustrate
the  Divine  humanity,  and  to  build  his
narrative  on  historic  facts  and  chronological
data,  took  up  his  story  with  the  birth  of  the
Baptist,  and,  in  conjunction  with  his  bap-
tizing of  Jesus,  presents  a  lineal  genealogy
of  the  supposed  father  (and  probably  of  the
mother)  of  Jesus,  through  the  line  of
Nathan  to  David,  thence  from  David  to
Abraham,  aud  finally  to  Adam,  the  first  son
of  God.  In  his  prologue  Luke  indicated
the  biographical  use  he  had  made  of  the
material  in  bis  hands,  and  of  the  personal
knowledge  he  had  acquired,  and  that  he
aimed  to  set  forth  the  grounds  of  security
that  existed  for  the  things  most  fully
believed  by  the  Church  (Luke  i.  1 — 4).

The  fourth  evangelist  was  as  earnestly
»et  upon  giving  proof  of  the  Memidhship  of
Jesus  as  Matthew  was  (see  oh.  xx.  31),
and  as  resolved  to  emphasize  the  complete
humanity  of  the  Son  of  God  as  even  Luke
himself  was  (see  ver.  14,  and  all  the
many  signs  of  the  Saviour's  resemblance  to
his  brethren,  and  sympathy  with  their
sufferings  and  joyi — oh.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  6 ;  v.  13,
14;  xi.  5,  35,  etc.).  But  John  had  felt
more  deeply  than  many  of  the  apostles
the  effulgence  of  the  Father's  glory  which
gleamed  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Olirist.  John
had  heard  in  the  words  of  Jesus  the  veri-
table voice  of  the  living  God ;  "  The  Word  of
the  Lord  (i  h6yoi  Kvpiov)  came  to  him "  in
the  speech  (\aXi£)  of  Jesus.  There  was  a
Divineness  about  the  mission  of  the  Lord
which  deeply  impressed  this  evangelist —
that  Jesus  had  come  in  a  special  sense  from
God,  that  he  was  the  Giver  of  eternal  life
and  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation,  and  that
he  had  the  "  form  of  God,"  though  in  the
likeness  of  men.  John's  mind  revolved  fl,U
the  truth  which,  long  before  this  prologue
or  introduction  was  written,  had  been  pro-
claimed by  Paul  and  the  author  of  the
£piatla  to  the  Hebrews,  in  every  varying


phrase.  It  was  in  harmony  with  the  whole
purpose  of  his  Gospel  that  he  should  begin
it  before  the  baptism,  before  the  birth,
before  the  conception,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;
that  he  should  press  back  in  thought  to
the  Divine  activity  itself— to  those  idea*
of  the  older  revelation  which,  though  not
in  conflict  with  the  pure  monotheism  of
the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  involved  the  veri-
table preparation  for  the  stupendous  reality,
for  the  supreme  tragedy,  for  the  Divine
kingdom  which  had  evolved  itself  nnder
his  very  eyes.  He  looked  back  into  the
past,  nay,  he  gazed  out  of  time  into
eternity ;  he  looked  up  from  the  miraculous
conception  to  that  holy  thing  which  was
conceived  in  the  womb  of  humanity;  he
endeavoured  to  set  forth  that  form  of  God
which  could  alone  become  "  flesh  "  and  taber-
nacle among  men ;  and  which,  though  it  did
this,  did  not  destroy  the  unity  of  Deity,  but
confirmed  and  established  it.  He  was  not
slow  to  reflect  on  all  the  methods  in  which
God  had  ever  come  near  to  men,  nor  could
he  believe  that  God  Incarnate  had  never
foreshadowed  his  presence  with  men,  or  his
manifestation  to  them,  before  his  own  day
and  hour.  When  the  old  man  was  at
EphesuB,  many  dangerous  speculations  were
rife.  Some  denied  that  Christ  had  ever
come  in  the  Jlesh  at  all,  and  said  that  so
Divine  a  presence  as  his  was  no  objective
reality — was  allied  to  the  Doeetie  "  seeming  "
manifestations  made  to  the  patriarchs  of  the
Old  Testament.  Jesus  was  to  them  a  Oteo-
phany,  not  a  living  Man.  Now,  we  learn  from
the  First  Epistle  that  such  a  thesis  was,
in  the  opinion  of  John,  the  quintessence  of
antichrist.  Others,  again,  had  speculated
about  the  emanations  of  Deity,  until  a
new  mythology  was  beginning  to  hover  on
the  borderland  between  Christendom  and
heathendom.  Essenic  and  Ebionitic  errors
had  grieved  him.  At  length  the  moment
arrived  when  the  "Son  of  Thunder,"  who
saw  all  the  glory  of  the  risen  Lord,  all  the
majesty  of  his  triumphant  reign,  uttered
these  opening  words,  replying,  in  every
sentence,  to  one  or  other  of  these  miscon-
ceptions of  his  Lord's  Person.  And  he  pro-
ceeded to  lay  a  simple  basis  deep  and  strong
enough  to  support  the  facts  upon  which  tht
faith  of  the  Church  was  resting.  Men  had
oome  veritably  to  believe  that  Otef  were


OH.  I.  1 — 51.]


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


children  of  Ood,  and  had  been  generated  ai
such  by  the  will  of  God,  and,  if  children,
that  they  were  heirs  of  God  through  Jesua
Christ  OElom.  viii.  16,  17;  Gal.  iii.  26).
"  Grace  and  truth  "  were  lighting  up  broken
and  bewildered  hearts  when  they  accepted
the  reality  of  th«  Divine  manhood  of  Jesua,
and  something  better  than  the  mere  specu-
lations of  the  schools  of  Palestine,  Alex-
andria, or  Ephesus  was  needed  in  order  to
explain  (as  he,  the  beloved  disciple  saw  it)
the  mystery  of  the  life  of  Christ.  That
which  he  laid  down  as  the  solution  of  the
problem  of  "  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel "
is  called  the  prologue  of  this  Gospel.  Even
apart  from  the  inspiration  which  breathe*
through  it,  no  passage  in  literature  can  be
cited  which  has  exercised  a  more  powerful
influence  upon  the  thought  of.  the  last
eighteen  hundred  years  than  that  which
sets  forth  John's  fundamental  ideas  con-
cerning the  essence  and  character,  the
idiosyncrasy  and  the  energy,  of  the  Divine
fulness  which  dwelt  in  Jesus.

The  question  has  been  asked  —  Where
does  the  prologue  end  ?  M.  Beuss  strongly
presses  the  view  that  the  proem  terminated
with  the  fifth  verse,  and  that  with  the  sixth
the  apostle  commenced  his  historical  recital.
He  urges  that  there  is  no  break  from  the
sixth  to  the  eighteenth  verse ;  that  in  this
paragraph  the  author  sets  forth  the  general
effect  of  the  testimony  of  the  historical
Baptist  to  Jesus ;  and  that,  in  consequence
of  it,  a  limited  number  of  individuals  were
led  to  recognize  (1)  the  Divine  nature  of  the
Word  manifested  in  the  flesh,  (2)  the  truth  of
the  assertions  of  the  Baptist,  (3)  the  radical
distinction  between  Moses  and  Christ,  (4)
the  fact  that  the  true  knowledge  of  God  can
only  be  obtained  by  the  mediation  of  the
latter.  Some  preliminary  advantage  is  thus
secured  by  the  critic  who  seeks  to  ally  this
paragraph  with  the  rest  of  the  history,  and
to  impute  to  the  whole  Gospel,  as  well  as  to
the  passage  in  question,  the  character  of  a
theological  or  didactic  romance.  The  enor-
motu  majority  of  all  scholars,  while  recog-
nizing new  points  of  departure  at  ver.  6,  and
again  at  vers.  14—18,  do  not  admit  that  the
evangelist's  preliminary  representations  or
presuppositions  have  come  to  a  pause  until
he  reached  the  sublime  utterance  which
points  so  obviously  back   to  ver.  1,  "No


one  hath  seen  God  at  any  time;  the  only
begotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the
Father,  he  hath  declared  him."  Prom  the
first  verse  to  the  eighteenth  the  evangelist  re-
volves around  the  fundamental  idea  of  "  the
Word  which  was  with  God  and  was  God."
But  his  aim  is  to  show  how  the  Word  came
into  relations  with  man,  and  how  man  may
come  into  relations  with  the  Godhead  through
him  who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh  in  all
the  fulness  of  grace  and  truth.

An  obvious  method  of  this  author  in  the
Gospel,  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse  shows  that '
he  was  wont  to  return  upon  thoughts  which
he  had  previously  uttered,  yet  at  the  same
time  doing  so  in  fresh  cycles  and  with  added
meanings  (see  Introduction).  The  large
spiral  of  his  meditations  sweeps  at  first
round  the  entire  region  of  **  all  things "
which  have  their  centre  in  the  "Word  of
God : "  "  All  things  came  into  being  through
him."  Then  he  formally  discriminates  be-
tween "things"  and  "forces,"  and  especi-
ally indicates  the  relation  of  "  the  Word  "
to  the  energies  and  blessedness  of  the
entire  universe  of  sentient  and  responsible
beings  which  derive  all  their  "life"  from
the  "  life  that  is  in  him,"  and  their  "  light "
from  that  "life,"  indicating,  as  he  pro-
ceeds, the  presence  of  the  antagonism  to  the
light  and  life  displayed  by  our  imperfect
and  damaged  humanity  (vers.  1 — 5).  Here
the  entire  testimony  of  prophecy — gathered
up  in  the  person  of  an  historic  man,  John
Baptist — is  broadly  characterized,  and  some
conception  of  the  aid  which  revelation  and
inspiration  have  given  to  men  torecogniie  the
light  when  they  see  it,  and  to  hear  the  voice
of  the  Lord  God  while  it  speaks.  The  entire
function  of  prophecy  is  discriminated  from
the  light-force  at  work  in  every  living  man.
The  special  aid  given  to  the  holy,  prepared,
and  selected  reuse,  by  the  manner  of  his  self-
revelations  brings  the  spiral  thought  round
into  the  region  of  the  intensified  dMkness  of
those  who  refuse  the  brightest  light  (vers.
9—11),  so  that  ver.  11  corresponds  with  ver.  5.
Vers.  12,  13  pause  in  the  region  of  light.
Some  souls  are  at  least  transformed  into  the
light,  beooDM  conscious  of  a  Divine  genera-
tion, are  bom'(through  faith),  independently
of  all  earthly,  national,  or  sacramental  means,
into  the  same  kind  of  relation  to  God  that
has  from  eternity  been  enjoyed  by  the  Word


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh,  1 1— 6L


At  thii  pc^t  a  novel  nirolntion  of  thought
is  conunenoed,  characterized  by  mora  intense
brilliancy  and  efflcacity,  becanse  levealed  in
a  naiTowei  lange  of  £Eust  He  touches  the
very  focus  and  centre  of  Divine  manifesta-
tion, when  he  says,  •*  And  the  Word  was
made  flesh,  and  tabernacled  among  us,"
"The  Word"  did  not  become  "all  things,"
nor  was  he  identified  with  life,  still  less
with  light.  The  wide  radiance  and  glorions
glancing  of  the  light  was  not  identified  with
.the  objects  on  which  through  prophetio
agencies  it  alighted.  The  ri  ISia,  the  special
race  of  light-bearers,  were  not,  even  in  their
highest  form  of  recipiency,  incarnations  of
the  Word.  Neither  conscience,  nor  prophecy,
nor  Shechinah-glory  was  of  the  substance  or
essence  of  "the  Word,"  although  all  the
energy  of  each  of  these  was  and  is  and  ever
wUl  be  the  shining  of  the  primal  light  on
humanity.

This  is  the  theory  of  the  writer  of  this
prologue,  but  his  chief  contribution  to  the
sum  of  human  thought  is  that  "  this  Word
became  flesh."  Having  announced  this
stupendous  fact,  the  author  relates  the  evi-
dence of  his  own  personal,  living  experi-
ence; and  he  records  his  invincible  assent
to  this  unique  and  central  glory  of  Divine
manifestation.  This  at  once  leads  to  a  few
oomprehensiTe  antitheses  drawn  between  the
Incarnation  and  all  the  most  illustrious  and
luminous  of  previous  revelations.  Just  as
vers.  6,  7  revealed  the  difference  between
prophecy  and  the  "light  of  men,"  so,  having
come  to  this  focal  point  of  splendour,
prophecy  again  speaks  in  the  person  of  the
Baptist ;  and  ver.  15  cites  the  highest  testi-
mony to  the  supreme  rank  of  the  incarnate
God  above  the  greatest  of  the  teachers  of
men.  In  ver.  16  the  apostle  refers  to  the
Incarnate  Word  as  the  Source  of  all  apostolic
emotions  and  life.  Through  him,  aud  not
from  the  mere  teachings  of  prophecy  or
conscience,  have  we  all  received  grace  and
truth.  Then,  sweeping  back  to  the  grandest
epoch-making  man  and  moment  of  all  past
history,  Moses  himself  appears  to  .shine  only
like  the  light  of  a  waning  moon  in  the  advent
of  the  dawn.  More  than  that ;  neither  Adam
in  Paradise,  nor  Noah  gazing  on  the  ayerted
bow,  nor  Abraham  at  Moriah,  "nor  Jacob  at
Peniel,  nor  Moses  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock,  nor
Bl^ah  at  Horeb,  nor  Isaiah  in  the  temple,


nor  Ezekiel  at  the  river  of  Ohebar,  have
•rer  leen,  in  the  sense  in  which  Jesus  saw,
the  fooe  of  the  Father.  The  only  begotten
Son  who  was  with  God  and  was  God,  and  in
the  bosom  af  the  Father,  he  hath  revealed
him.  The  entire  proem  does  not  cease  till  it
reaches  this  triumphant  peroration.  Detailed
exegesis  of  the  passage  can  alone  justify  thia
estimate  of  the  signiflcanoe  of  the  prologue.
Different  commentators  have  divided  it  some-
what differently,  and  many  have  drawn  too
sharp  a  distinotiou  between  the  pre-incama.
tion  life  of  the  Logoe,  and  the  historical,
theocratic,  or  ecclesiastical  manifestation.
Surely  that  which  the  eternal  Logos  was
before  his  manifestation  and  before  the
humiliation  of  the  infinite  love,  he  was  and
must  have  been  during  the  human  life  of
Jesus,  he  must  be  now,  and  he  must  ever
be.  In  other  words :  The  Word,  who  was  in
the  beginning  with  God,ia  stiU  "with  God."
All  life  is  continually  the  effluence  of  one  of
his  infinite  energies ;  all  light  is  the  efful-
gence of  that  bright  essence  uncreate.  He  u
still  coming  "to his  own,"  and  "  they  receive
him  not."  The  processes  described  in  vers.
6 — 13  have  never  ceased ;  nay,  they  are  indeed
more  conspicuous  than  they  ever  were  before
in  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  but  they  have
not  exhausted  nor  diminished  one  iota  of  the
stupendous  activity  of  the  eternal,  creative,
revealing  Logo*.

The  first  part  of  the  Gospel,  consisting  of
ch.  i. — It.,  we  have  already  described  as

L  Ths   Bevblation    of   tbm    Loaoa    so

TBS  WOBLD.

Vers.1 — 18. — 1.  The  hypothesis  framed  by
the  evangelist  to  account  for  the  series  of
facts  iohich  he  is  about  to  narrate  is  seen
especially  in  ver.  14;  but  before  asserting
this  great  fact  that  the  Wont  was  made
flesh,  he  proceeds  to  show  (1)  The  pre-exist-
enee,  personality,  and  Divinity  of  the  Logos.

Yer.  1. — ^In  the  beginning  was  the  Word.
From  early  times  expositors  have  perceived
that  the  evangelist  essayed  here  a  com-
parison with  the  4v  ipxv  ("  ^  tJiB  begin-
ning") of  the  first  verse  of  the  Book  of
Genesis.  This  can  hardly  be  doubted ;  but
the  resemblance  immediately  ceases  or  is
transformed  into  an  antithesis ;  for  whereas
the  Mosaic  narrative  proceeds  to  indicate
the  beginning  of  the  creation  and  of  time
by  saying,  "  In  the  beginning  God  ereated
the  heavens  and  the  earth,"  this  passage
asserts  that  the  Word  then  iccm.    He  was


oa.  1. 1— «!.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


neither  created,  nor  did  he  then  begin  to
be.  Consequently,  there  is  no  reason  to
gather  from  this  passage  the  temporal  origin
of  "  the  Word,"  or  from  the  first  verse  of
Geneiis  to  argue  the  eternity  of  matter.
The  writer  here  show*  that  he  was  pro-
foundly impressed  by  the  Lord's  own  self-
consoiuusnesa  which  permitted  his  disciples
to  believe  in  »  personal  Being  and  glory
"before  the  world  was,"  and  "before  the
foundation  of  the  world  "  (eh.  xvU.  5,  21).
The  idea  of  existence  before  the  world  was
is  attributed  to  the  Divine  (Sophia  or)
wisdom  (Frov.  viii.  23  and  elsewhere;  1
Epist.  i.  1).  The  same  apostle  speaks  more-
over of  "  that  which  was  (cStt'  apxvs)  from
the  beginning,"  but  has  been  manifested  to
us.  The  interpretations  which  made  the
ipxh  mean,  with  Cyril,  the  Divine  "  Father ; "
the  Valentinian  notion  that  i.px'h  was  a  dis-
tinct hypothesis,  distinct  from  the  Father  or
from  the  Logos;  Origen's  notion  that  it
meant  the  "  Divine  Wisdom ; "  the  Socinian
view  that  it  referred  to  "  the  beginning  of
the  preaching  of  the  gospel ;  "^-are  not  now
seriously  maintained.  "The  beginning  of
time"  launchei  the  mind  into  the  aby8s.of
the  eternal  wna.  At  that  starting-point  of
all  creation  and  all  Divine  manifestation,
"  the  Word  was."  It  would  be  difficult  to
express  in  human  speech  more  explicitly  the
idea  of  eternal  existence.  In  Greek  usage
and  philosophy  the  term  AOrOS  sustained
the  double  sense  of  reason  or  thought
immanent  in  the  supreme  Godhead  (\6yot
iviiaStTos),  and  also  of  "speech"  or
"  word  "  (\6yos  irpo^opM6s').  Attempts  have
often  been  made  to  identify  the  \6yos  of
Joha  with  the  former  phase  of  its  meaning
common  to  Plato  or  Philo,  and  to  find  in
the  prologue  the  metaphysical  speculations
of  the  Alexandrine  school — to  identify  the
xiyos  with  the  Philonic  conception  of  the
K6<rnot  voT)TiKis,  with  the  Divine  "idea  of  all
ideas,"  the  archetype  of  the  universe,  the
personality  of  God  personified,  or  the  Divine
self-consciousness.  But  Philo's  entire  system
of  philosophy  by  which  he  tried  to  explain
the  creation  of  the  world,  his  theory  of  the
Logos  which  was  abhorrent  to  and  entirely
incapable  of  incarnation,  which  was  based
on  a  thorough-going  dualism,  which  was
significantly  reticent  as  to  the  Messianie
idea,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  hopes  or
national  anticipations  of  Israel,  was  not  the
source  either  of  John's  revelation  or  nomen-
clature (see  Introduction).  The  disciple  of
the  Baptist  and  of  Jesus  found  in  Holy
Seriptun  itself  both  the  phraseology  and
the  idea  which  he  here  unfolds  and  applies.
The  New  Testament  writers  never  use  the
term  Logos  to  denote  "  reason,"  or  "thought,"
or  "  self-eonsoiousnesi,"  but  always  denote
hf  ifspeeeh,"  "utterance,"  or  "word"—


the  forthcoming,  the  clothing  of  thought,
the  manifestation  of  reason  or  purpose,  but
neither  the  "  thought,"  nor  the  "  reason,"
nor  the  "purpose"  itself.  The  term  is
used  here  without  explanation,  as  though
it  would  be  well  understood  by  its  readers.
Numerous  explanations  have  been  offered
in  later  times,  which  are  far  from  satis-
factory. Thus  Beza  regarded  the  term  as
identical  with  &  K^y6iievos,  "  the  Promised
One" — the  Personage  spoken  of  by  the
prophets.  This,  even  with  Hofmanu's  modi-
fication of  it,  viz.  "the  Word  of  God,  or
Gospel,  the  great  theme  of  which  is  the
personal  Christ,"  breaks  to  pieces  as  soon
as  it  ia  referred  to  the  various  predicates
which  follow,  and  especially  to  the  state-
ment of  ver.  14,  that  "the  Word  was
made  flesh,  and  tabernacled  amongst  us."
Beaders  of  the  Old  Testament  would  not
forget  that,  in  the  record  of  the  creation
in  Gen.  i.,  the  epochs  of  creation  are  de-
fined eight  times  by  the  expression,  "  And
God  said."  The  omnifio  Word  uttered  itself
in  time,  and  thus  called  into  being  "light"
and  "  life "  and  "  all  things,"  and  gave
birth  to  man.  The  record  thus  preserved  is
confirmed  by  the  corresponding  teaching  of
the  Psalms :  "  By  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were
the  heavens  made,  and  all  the  host  of  them
by  the  breath  of  his  mouth"  (cf.  1  Sam,
iii.  21;  Pa.  xxxiii.  6;  cvii.  20;  cxlviii.  5;
Isa.  Iv.  10, 11).  Moreover,  the  Scripture  in
the  Book  of  Proverbs  (viii.,  ix.).  Job  (xxviii.
12),  as  well  as  the  apocryphal  Books  of  Wis-
dom, Baruch,  Ecclesiasticus,  had  set  forth
the  Divine    "  wisdom,"  npan^  iro<pta,  with

more  or  less  of  personification  and  even
personal  dignity,  answering  to  the  creative
energy  and  resources  here  attributed  to  the
Logos.  From  eternity  was  it  brought  forth,
in  the  beginning  of  all  God's  ways.  "  The
Lord  possessed  me,"  Wisdom  says,  "before
his  works."  In  the  controversy  of  the  third
and  fourth  centuries  the  LXX.  translation
in  Prov.  viii.  22  of  rajj  by  eKT«re  led  Arius
and  others  to  the  idea  of  the  ereation  of  the
Lngos  before  all  worlds.  The  Vulgate  trans-
lation, "possessed  me,"  is  a  far  closer  ap-
proach to  the  original.  The  whole  of  tlie
passage,  Prov.  viii.  22—27,  is  in  correspon-
dence with  the  functions  and  dignity  of
him  who  is  here  described  as  "  in  the  begin-
ning with  God."  The  Jewish  translators
and  commentators  had  so  thoroughly  grasped
the  idea,  tliat  they  were  accustomed,  in  their
Chaldee  paraphrases  of  the  Old  Testament,
to  substitute  for  the  name  of  the  Most  High,
the  phrase  Memra-Jah,  "The  Word  of  the
Lord,"  as  though  the  Lmrd,  in  his  activities
and  energies;  and  in  his  relations  with  the
aniverse  and  man,  could  be  better  under-
stood nnder  the  form  of  this  periphrasia


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDmO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


[oh.  1. 1—61.


th&n  in  that  which  connoted  hii  eternal
and  abBolnte  Being.  The  Targum  of  Onke-
loe — the  oldest,  most  accurate,  and  preciouB
of  these  documents — in  numerous  places  sub-
stitutes "the  Word  of  the  Lord"  for  Je-
hovah, "the  Word  of  Elohim"  for  EloMm,
and  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  "  for  the  angel  or
messenger  of  Jehovah.  Thus  in  Gen,  vii.  16
it  is  said,  "  The  Lord  protected  Noah  by  his
Word;"  ixi.  20,  "The  Word  of  the  Lord
was  with  Ishmael  in  the  wilderness."  In
Gen.  zxyiii.  21  Jacob  made  a  covenant
that  "the  Word  of  the  Lord  should  be  his
Grod ; "  Ezod.  six.  17,  "  Moses  brought  forth
the  people  to  meet  the  Word  of  God."  The
term  DeburoA,  which  is  analogous  in  mean-
ing to  Memra,  is  also  used  in  the  Jerusalem
Targum  of  Numb.  vii.  89  in  a  similar  sense.
The  substitution  was  adopted  in  the  same
way  by  Jonathan  ben  Uziel,  in  his  para-
phrase of  Isa.  Iziii.  7  and  Mai.  iii.  1,  so  that
the  Jewish  mind  was  thoroughly  imbued
with  this  method  of  portraying  the  instru-
ment and  agent  of  the  Divine  revelations,
as  one  savouring  of  the  smallest  amount  of
anthropomorphism,  which  they  were  willing
to  attribute  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.
Another  group  of  highly  important  biblical
representations  of  the  activity  and  self-reve-
lation of  God  consists  of  the  personal "  Angel
(or  Messenger)  of  Jehovah,"  who  not  infre-
quently appears,  even  in  human  tbrm,  con-
versing with  the  patriarchs,  and  making
covenant  with  man  (see  Gen.  xxxii.  24,  etc. ;
Exod.  xxxiu.  12,  etc. ;  Hos.  xii.  4 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.
9 ;  Mai.  iii.  1  and  other  places).  In  some  of
these  passages  the  Name  of  Jehovah  himself
is  attributed  to  his  Angel,  and  the  form  of
Divine  manifestation  becomes  more  and
more  clearly  personal.  Nevertheless,  this
Angel  appears  to  stand  within,  rather  than
without,  tiie  very  bosom  of  the  Eternal  One.
Jehovah  does  not  lose  his  Name  of  unap-
proachable dignity  and  absolute  existence
while  yet  he  clothes  himself  with  angelic
powers,  or  even  human  form,  and  enters
'  into  living  and  intimate  relations  witli  his
own  people.  Kurtz  ('  Old  Covenant,'  vol.  L
pp.  181 — 201)  has  urged  that  the  numerous
references  in  Old  Testament  to  the  "  Angel
Jehovah,"  are  compatible  with  the  idea  of
a  created  spirit,  endowed  with  plenipoten-
tiary functions  and  titles,  and  perfectly  dis-
tinct from  the  "Logos."  The  strength  of
his  position  is  that  during  the  Incarnation
and  afterwards  the  New  Testament  writers
still  speak  of  the  activity  and  might  of
"  the  Angel  of  the  Lord."  But  this  position
is  greatly  modified  by  the  obvious  fact  that
the  Logos  did  not  become  depotentiated  and
limited  to  the  life  of  Jesus  during  the  thirty
years  of  his  earthly  manifestation.  During
the  whole  of  that  period,  and  ever  since,  the
Logos  has  Bot  wasad  to  exercise  the  fono-


tions  which  belong  to  his  eternal  gloiy.  It
cannot  be  said  that  Philo  was  ignorant  of
these  modes  of  expression,  though  in  th«
main  he  allows  the  idea  of  "  Word "  to
puss  away  from  the  term  \iyos,  and  he
charged  it  with  •  meaning  whioh  he  found
in  Platonic  and  stoical  philosophy,  and  tiaed
it,  not  in  the  historic  or  theocratic  seiue,
which  was  current  in  the  Palestiniaa
schools,  but  in  the  metapbysio  and  specu-
lative sense  which  enabled  him  to  make  the
Hebrew  Scriptures  the  vehicle  of  his  ethical
system.  Word,  in  the  Old  Testament  and
in  the  Chaldee  Paraphrases,  represented  the
nearest  possible  approach  to  a  definition  of
the  activity  and  revelations  of  QoA. ;  and
that  activity  is  regarded,  not  as  a'mere  attri-
bute, but  as  an  essential  and  personal  aspect
of  the  Eternal  One.  In  the  hands  of  the
Apostle  John  (unlike  Philo's),  the  Logos
was  a  distinct  hypostasis,  identifiable  with
God,  and  yet  in  union  and  relation  with
him.  He  was  "in  the  beginning,"  and
therefore  before  aU  creation.  He  did  not
hecome.  He  was  not  made.  He  was.  As
speech  answers  to  the  immanent  realities  of
which  it  is  expression,  the  idea  of  John  in
this  first  verse  suggests,  though  the  sugges-
tion does  not  come  into  further  expression,
the  "  thought "  or  "  reason  "  which  ever-
more was  shaping  itself  into  "  word."  It
would  seem  as  though  the  apostle  had  been
led  to  gather  together  into  one  teaching  the
various  suggestions  of  the  Old  Testament.
He  realized  the  significance  of  the  omnifio
Word.  He  embodied  and  improved  upon
the  sapiential  philosophy  in  its  conception
of  Divine  Wisdom,  of  the  Brightnese  of  the
Father's  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his
substance ;  he  felt  the  force  and  justice  of
the  Hebrew  periphrases  for  God,  the  only
God,  in  his  gracious  relations  with  man ;  and
he  was  not  ignorant  of  the  speculations  of
the  Hellenists  who  found  in  this  term  the
phasis  of  all  Divine  self-consciousness,  and
the  symbol  of  pure  being  in  its  relation
with  the  universe.  In  the  heginning  the
LogoB  was.  And  the  Word  (Logos)  •was
with  God  (rrphs  rhv  @e6ry.  The  preposition  is
diilicult  to  translate;  it  is  equivalent  to
"was  in  relation  with  God,"  "stood  over
against,"  not  in  space  or  time,  but  eternally
and  constitutionally.  It  is  more,  even,
than  the  iropct  <roi  (ch.  xviL  6);  for,  in
addition  to  the  idea  of  proximity,  there
is  that  of  "motion  towards"  involved  in
rpit.  A  verb  of  rest  is  here  combined
with  a  preposition  of  motion,  exactly  as
in  i)v  fis  Thy  K6Kirov  of  ver,  18.  In  Hark
vi  3;  ix.  19;  Matt  ziiL  86;  xxvt  69;  1
Oor.  xvi  6,  7 ;  Gal.  i.  18  the  similar  use  of
irpkf  shows  that  the  idea  of  intercourse  is
suggested,  and  mutual  amnaintance,  so  that
the  personality  «f  th*  Logos  is  therefore


OH.  L  1— «L]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


strongly  forced  upon  as.  The  strength  and
peculiarity  of  the  gxpreasion  precludes  the
interpretation  of  some  who  see  here  simply
some  "intuition  in  the  Divine  mind,"  or
that  "  the  Word  was  eternally  in  the  Divine
plan."  There  is  relation  between  these  two,
laying  the  foundations  of  all  ethio  in  the
nature  and  subsistence  of  Deity.  Bighteous-
ness  and  love  are  inconceivable  perfections  of
an  Eternal  Monad.  But  if  within  the  bosom
of  God  there  are  affirmations,  hypostases
in  relation  with  each  other,  the  moral  nature
of  the  Eternal  is  assured.  Philo's  concep-
tion of  Logos  as  "  the  sum  total  of  all  Divine
energies  made  it  possible  for  him  to  urge
that  God,  so  far  as  he  reveals  himself;  is
called  Logos,  and  Logos,  so  far  as  he  reveals
God,  is  called  God  "  (Meyer)..  But  this  falls
short  of  the  Johannine  thought.  The  Logos
was  with  the  God  (rhv  &eiy) — was  in  relation
with  the  Supreme  and  Absolute  One,  was  in
eternal  communion  with  him.  The  notion
of  "  Logos  "  limited  to  the  mere  revelation
of  the  Divine  to  the  universe,  or  the
Mjsiiatoror  Archangel  of  tlie  Divine  counsels
to  men,  is  seen  to  be  insufficient.  The  -n-phs
rhv  0e^i/  Implies  communion  as  anterior  to
revelation.  And  the  (Logos)  Word  was
God.  Though  @i6s  precedes  the  verb,  yet
the  disposil^ion  of  the  article  shows  that  it  is
the  predicate,  and  not  the  subject,  of  the
sentence.  The  absence  of  the  article  is  im-
portant. If  0£(!s  had  been  written  with  the
article,  then  the  sentence  would  have  identi-
fied the  ti.6yos  and  Oeos,  and  reduced  the
distinction  expressed  in  the  previous  clause
to  one  that  is  purely  modal  or  subjective.
Again,  he  does  not  say  Bitos,  Divine,  wliioh,
seeing  the  lofty  dignity  of  the  Logos,  would
have  been  a  violation  of  the  eternal  unity,
and  have  corresponded  with  tlie  Seirepos
@e6s  which  Philo  attributed  to  the  Logos;
but  he  says  ®e6s  simply  (not  OeoC,  accord-
ing to  Crellius,  for  which  there  is  no  justi-
fication)— God  in  his  nature,  essence,  and
kind;  God,  t.e.,  as  distinct  from  man,  from
angel,  or  from  the  kosmos  itself.  Thus  the
Son  is  not  confounded  with  the  Father,  but
declared  to  be  of  the  same  oba-la,  the  same
(piirts.  Though  with  God  when  God  is  re-
garded in  all  the  fulness  of  his  eternal
being,  he  is  nevertheless  of  the  same  order
and  kind  and  substance.  Luther  translates
the  passage,  "  Gott  war  das  Wort,"  but  this
translation  jars  on  the  sublime  symmetry
of  the  whole  passage,  which  is  not  concerned
with  definitions  of  God,  but  with  revela-
tions concerning  the  Logos.

Ver.  2. — The  same  Logos  whom  the  writer
has  just  affirmed  to  have  been  God  himself,
was,  though  it  might  seem  at  first  reading
to  be  inoompatible  with  the  first  or  third
clause  of  the  first  verse,  nevertheless  in  the
beginning  with  God—"  in  the  beginning,"


and  therefore,  as  we  have  seen,  etemaUj  in

relation  with  God.  The  previous  state-
ments are  thus  stringently  enforced,  and,
notwithstanding  their  tendency  to  diverge,
are  once  more  bound  into  a  new,  umfied,  and
emphatic  utterance.  Thus  the  airis  of  the
following  sentences  is  charged  with  the
sublime  fulness  of  meaning  which  is  involved
in  the  three  utterances  of  ver.  1.  The  first
clause  (1)  declared  that  the  Logos  preceded
the  origination  of  all  things,  was  the  eternal
ground  of  the  world ;  the  second  (2)  asserted
his  unique  personality,  so  that  he  stands
over  against  the  eternal  God,  in  mutual
communion  with  the  Absolute  and  Eternal
One ;  the  third  clause  (3)  maintains  further
that  the  Logos  was  not  a  second  God,  nor
merely  Divine  (&eias)  or  God-like,  nor  is  he
described  as  proceeding  out  of  or  from  God
(^K  &iov  or  dirb  &eov),  nor  is  he  to  be  called
i  ®eis,  "  the  God  absolute,"  as  opposed  to  all
his  manifestations;  but  the  Logos  is  said  to
be  0e(Ss,  i.e.  "  God  " — God  in  his  nature  and
being.  This  second'  verse  reasserts  the
eternal  relation  of  such  a  personality  "  with
God,"  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  state-
ments of  the  following  verses.  The  unity  of
the  Logos  and  Theos  might  easily  be  sup-
posed to  reduce  the  distinction  between  them
to  subjective  relations.  The  second  verse
emphasizes  the  objective  validity  of  the  re-
lation.

Vers.  3,  4. — (2)  The  creation  of  all  thingi
through  the  Logos,  aa  the  instrument  of  the
eternal  counsel  and  activity  of  Ood.

Ver.  3. — All  things  (vii/ra,  not  tA  irivTo)
taken  one  by  one,  rather  than  all  things  re-
garded in  their  totality — "  all  things,"  i.e.  all
beings  and  elements  of  things  visible  or
invisible,  in  heaven,  earth,  and  under  the
earth  (see  Col.  i.  16,  etc),  came  into  being
through  him,  through  the  Logos,  who  was  in
the  beginning  with  God,  and  was  God.  The
Logos  is  the  organ  or  instrument  by  which
everything,  one  by  one,  was  made.  Two
other  words  are  used  in  \ha  New  Testament
to  denote  "creation" — (crifeiv,  used  in  Eev.  iv.
11  and  Col.  i.  16,  a  word  indicating  the  mind
and  act  of  the  Creator;  and  iroieiv,  which,
as  in  Mark  x.  6,  points  generally  to  the  thing
made.  The  parts  of  the  verb  ylyvea-dai  indi-
cate the  progress  of  the  work,  the  process  of
some  creative  order,  the  occurrence  of  some
event  in  the  evolution  of  Divine  providence.
This  word  does  not  by  one  solitary  expres-
sion dogmatically  convey  the  creative  act,
but  the  fact  of  the  "  becoming,"  from,  it  may
be,  the  region  of  pure  thought ,  to  that  of
existence,  or  from  non-observation  into  pro-
minence, or  from  an  inchoate  to  a  perfect
development,  or  from  nothing  to  something.
The  context  must  determine  the  fulness  of
its  meaning.  '  Occasionally,  as  in  ch.  viii.  58,
it  is  powerfully  contrasted  with  existence:


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1-«1.


"  Before  Abraham  was  [had  come  into  being]
I  am."  The  context  here  does  not  allow  ns
to  affirm  that  St.  John  repudiated  the  prior
existence  of  the  b\n,  stuff,  of  which  irdrra
were  made.  He  does  not  affirm  nor  deny
such  a  prior  existenoy  or  condition,  but  by
referring  the  nniTerse  in  all  its  parts  and
items  to  the  Logos,  he  absolutely  ignores  the
Platonic  notion  of  eternal  matter.  He  could
scarcely  be  ignorant  of  the  speculation  as  it
entered  into  the  Philonio  interpretation  and
formed  the  basis  of  the  Gnostic  speculations
which  were  beginning  to  infest  the  early
Church.  By  giving,  however,  a  Divine  origin
and  instrument  to  the  "  becoming  "  of  -irdvTa,
and  strengthening  his  statement  by  the
negative  co-assurance,  he  absolutely  excludes
the  dualism  of  Philo  and  of  Gnostic  ten-
dency. In  asserting  that  the  Logos  is  he
or  that  through  whom  all  things  were  made,
the  writer  does  not  lower  the  dignity  of
the  Logos  by  regarding  him  merely  as  the
opyavov  of  the  Father,  because  the  same  pre-
position is  used  of  the  relation  of  the  Father
to  the  world  or  to  his  servants  (Hom.  xi.  36 ;
Gal.  i.  1 :  Heb.  ii.  10).  Elsewhere  St.  Paul
powerfully  affirms  the  same  application  of
Sid.  (1  Cor.  viii.  6)  to  Christ's  part  in  the
Creation,  reserving  for  the  One  God,  the
Father,  the  preposition  4k.  From  God  and
hy  or  through  God  are  all  things,  still  "  all
things"  derive  their  existence  "through"  the
activity,  the  will,  the  thought,  of  the  Logos.
"  The  sphere  contracts  as  the  blessing
enlarges  [query,  'intensifies']:  exiitence
for  everything;  life  for  vegetable  and
animal  world ;  light  for  men  "  (Plummer).
The  same  idea  is  made  more  explicit  by  the
negative  form  in  which  it  is  restated :  and
without  him — that  is,  independently  of  his
co-operation  and  volition  (of.  ch.  xv.  5) — ^not
even  *  one  thing  came  into  being.  The  ii\ri
could  hardly  be  spoken  of  as  "one  thing,"
seeing,  according  to  the  theory,  it  was  not  a
unit  as  opposed  to  a  multiplicity,  but  the
condition  of  all  things.  Tho  eye^/eTo  would
drive  harder  against  any  recognition  of  tlie
5\ti  than  would  the  ?c.  There  is  not  the
faintest  approach  to  any  supposition  on
John's  part  of  the  existence  of  such  a
primeval  entity  or  eternal  reality.  The  8
yiyovev  gives  the  student  of  the  text  and  of
the  meaning  grave  difficulty.  From  very
early  times  the  Alexandrine  Fathers  and
numerous  uncial  manuscripts,  and  an  im-
mense group  of  quotations  and  versions,  un-
questionably close  the  sentence  we  have  just
considered  with  iyiviro  o65c  tV,  and  consider
the  'i  ytyoviv  as  the  subject  of  the  following
clanae,  translating  it   either,    That   which

'  The  reading  oOSi  JV,  of  T.E.  aud  R.T.
stand*  on  the  authority  of  K,  A,  B,  C,  though
D  and  some  Fathers  read  oiiSei/.


ha$  eame  into  heing  in  him  viai  life  ;  m,  M«<
which  hat  come  into  being  was  (cat  it)  K/a  in
him — ^for  one  manuscript,  K,  has  rendered
the  text  more  grammatical  by  reading  ^art
instead  of  ^v.'  This,  adopting  the  supposed
early  punctuation,  Tregelles  and  Westcott

'  The  authorities  for  this  punctuation  are
thus  given  by  Westcott  and  Tregelles :  A,
C*,  D,  L,  one  manuscript  of  the  Vulgate,
though  not  Cod.  Am.  Some  of  the  old
Latin  manuscripts  leave  it  without  doubt.
The  Curetonian  Syriac  and  some  Egyptian
Versions  coincide.  The  Fathers  seem  to
quote  both  modes  of  punctuation.  Thus
Urigen  gives  it  nine  times  as  above  and  six
times  as  in  T.B.  Ambrose  and  Jerome,
Hippolytus  and  Eusebius,  recognize  both
punctuations.  On  the  other  hand,  the  great
bulk  of  the  later  uncial  manuscripts  and
cursives  give  the  "  point "  after  eV.  N,  B,
cannot  be  appealed  to  for  punctuation,
as  they  have  none;  but  Tatian,  'Ad.  Gr.,'
IrensBus  very  frequently  (Tregelles  cites  six
passages),  Tertullian,  Eusebius,  and  others
place  the  point  after  oliSf  'iv.  The  "  modem
stopping,"  to  use  Canon  Westcott's  phrase,
was  adopted  by  the  school  of  Antiooh,  who
wished  to  make  it  clear  that  tiie  Holy  Spirit
was  not  included  among  the  itdvTa.  Chrysos-
tom  says  that  he  will  not  put  the  stop  at  o  JSe
eV,  as  the  heretics  do,  who  say, " '  That  which
hath  become  in  him  was  life,'  wishing  to
speak  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Kria/ia."  Thi«
passage  seems  to  show  that  Chrysostom
attributed  the  punctuation  in  question  to
the  heretics.  He  does  not  admit  that  the
heretics  could  prove  the  reference  to  the
Holy  Spirit,  even  if  the  punctuation  was  the
true  one.  The  quotation  made  from  Epipha-
niuB,  *  AncoratuB,'  c.  Ixxiv.  and  Ixxv.,  shows
quite  as  much  for  the  common  punctuation.
Lachmann  and  Tregelles  led  the  way  in  this
interpretation,  and  Dr.  Moulton  agrees  with
Dr.  Westcott  in  adopting  it.  Liicke  re-
cognized the  antiquity  of  the  punctuation,
but  found  great  difficulty  in  the  construction.
He  did  not  think  that  oSSe  ev  is  weakened
by  the  6  yiyovev,  and  says,  justly,  that  the
author  could  not  have  intended  to  say, "  that
that  which  had  come  into  existence  was  the
Life  or  Light  of  the  world."  He  thought
that  the  reassortion  of  the  crentive  force  of
the  Logos,  as  subject  of  the  following  sen-
tence, would  have  been  expressed  by  a  repe-
tition of  the  Si*  auToC.  Moreover,  he  urges
that,  though  John  uses  the  form  ytviaBai  i
and  eTcai  iv,  he  never  uses  yeveaSai  (v  in  thi
sense,  and  he  decides  against  the  punctni^
tion  which  makes  '6  yiyovfv  the  subject  of
the  next  sentence.  In  this  he  has  been
confirmed  by  Godet,  Luthardt,  Meyer,Lange,
M'Lellan,  Alford,  Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),
and  B.T.  "


OH.  1.1— 61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO   ST.  JOHN.


and  Hort  have  introduced  into  the  text;
but  E.T.  has  coincided  with  T.K.  Dr.
Westcott  has  an  elaborate  note  affirming
the  deep  thought  Involved  in  the  "  ancient
punctuation,"  to  the  effect  that  the  8  7E70-
rev  refers,  not  merely  to  the  original  creation,
iyiviTo,  but  to  the  continued  existence  of
that  which  has  come  into  being.  Of  this,  it
is  said,  it  deiives  its  life,  has  its  life  in  the
Logos,  and  that  this  idea  is  expressed  in  a
profonnder  way  than  by  saying  ?x"  Cw^" ;
that  it  UKM  Ufe  (before  it  was  called  into
being,  or  became)  in  him.  This  profound
and  mysterious  statement  is  affirmed  by  Dr.
Moulton  and  Dr.  Westcott  to  find  different
but  clear  expression  in  Rev.  iv.  11,  "  Thou
art  worthy,  our  Lord  and  our  God,  to  teoeive
glory,  etc. ;  for  thou  didst  create  all  things,
and  for  thy  pleasure  they  were  [flffoi',  the
reading  preferred  by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)
and  Westcott  and  Hort,  instead  of  ila-i, '  they
are ']  and  were  created."  Dr.  West<!ott  thinks
that  "life"  here  represents  "the  Divine
element  in  creation,  that  in  virtue  of  which
things  'are'  each  according  to  the  fulness  of
its  being."  What  has  been  created  repre-
sents the  eternal  thought,  the  life  that  it  had
in  the  Logos  before  tlie  world  was.  Unless
one  were  compelled  to  take  this  thought  by
the  exigencies  of  the  textual  criticism,  we
should  hesitate  to  affirm  that  this  can  be  the
author's  intention.  To  us  the  common  punc-
tuation is  far  more  satisfactory  in  meaning :
Apart  from  him  there  came  into  existence
not  one  thing  which  has  come  into  existence.
This,  in  its  grand  comprehensiveness  and
individualizing  of  every  molecule  and  every
force,  brings  the  mind  of  the  reader  down
from  eternity  to  time,  from  the  creation  to
the  preservation  and  providence  of  the
world,  and  it  prepares  the  way  for  the  great
assertion  of  the  following  verse.

Ver.  4, — (a)  The  Life,  and  therefore  inclu-
sive of  the  fact  that  the  Logos  always  has
been  and  now  is  (&)  the  Light  of  men.  In
him  was'  life.  "Life"  in  all  its  fulness
of  meaning — that  grand  addition  to  things
which  confers  upon  them  all  their  signifi-
cance for  men.  There  is  one  impassable
chasm  which  neither  history,  nor  science,  nor
philosophy  can  span,  viz.  that  between
notliing  and  something.  The  evangelist
has  found  the  only  possible  method  of  facing
it — ^by  the  conception  of  One  who  from  eter-
nity has  within  himself  the  potency  of  the
transition.  There  is  another  impassable
chasm  in  thought — that  between  non-living

'  The  reading  itrrlv  is  a  very  ancient  inter-
pretative gloss,  introduced  by  Tischendorf
(Sth  edit.)  into  the  text,  on  the  authority  of
K,  D,  a  codex  known  to  Origen,  a,  b,  c,  but  not
adopted  by  Tregelleg,  Westcott  and  Hort,  or


ntoms  and  living  energissand  individualities.
The  assortii in  now  is  tliat  life,  (aii,  with  all
its  manifeEtations  and  in  all  its  regioiLS ;  that
the  life  of  plant,  tree,  and  animal,  tlie  life  of
man,  of  society,  and  of  worMs  as  such ;  that
the  life  of  tlie  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  the.life
transitory  and  the  life  eternal  (fm))  aldpios),
was  in  the  Logos,  "  who  was  God  and  in  the
beginning  with  God."  Elsewhere  in  the
Gospel  Jesus  said  that  "  as  the  Father  had
life  in  himself,  so  he  gave  to  the  Son  to  have
life  in  himself"  (ch.v.  26);  i.e.  he  communi-
cated to  the  Son  his  own  Divine  self-depend-
ence. The  Gospel,  however,  lays  the  greatest
emphasis  on  the  life-giving  powers  of  the
Christ  as  incarnate  Logos.  The  healing  of  the
impotent  man  (ch.  v.),  the  raising  of  the  dead
Lazarus  (oh.  xi.),  are  chosen  proofs  of  his
life-giving  energy.  His  claim  (ch.  x.)  to
retake  the  life  that  he  would  voluntarily
relinquish,  and  the  august  majesty  with
which,  in  his  resurrection-life  (ch.  xx.,  xxi.),
he  proclaimed  his  absolute  and  final  victory
over  death,  constitute  the  reasons  which  in-
duced the  evangelist  to  lay  down  at  the  very
outset  that  in  the  Logos  was  Ufe.  Life,  in
all  its  energies,  past,  present,  and  future,  is
an  outcome.an  effluence,  of  theEtemal  Word.
And  the  life  was  (and  is)  the  light  of  men.
Observe,  it  is  not  said  here  that  pliysical  life
is  a  consequence  or  issue  of  the  solar  beam,
or  of  the  Word  which  in  the  beginning  called
light  out  of  darliiness.  All  the  religious
systems  of  the  East  and  all  modem  sciences
agree  to  extol  and  all  but  worship  the  light-
force,  with  all  that  seems  so  inseparably  asso-
ciated with  it.  The  evangelist  was  reaching
after  something  far  more  momentous  even
than  that  dogma  of  ancient  faith  and  modem
science.  He  is  not  speaking  of  "  the  light  of
the  sun,"  but  of  "  the  light  of  men."  What-
ever this  illumination  may  include,  John
does  not  refer  it  directly  to  the  Logos,  but  to
the  life  which  is  "  in  him."  "  Tlio  light  of
men  "  has  been  differently  conceived  by  ex-
positors. Calvin  supposed  that  the  "  under-
standing" was  intended — ^"  that  the  life  of
men  was  not  of  an  ordinary  description,  but
was  united  to  the  light  of  understanding,"
and  is  that  by  which  man  is  differentiated
from  animals.  Hengstenberg  regards  it,  in
consequence  of  numerous  associations  of
"  light"  with  "salvation"  in  Holy  Scripture,
as  equivalent  to  salvation ;  Lnthardt  with
"  holiness ;  "  and  many  with  the  "  eternal
life,"  which  would  introduce  great  tautology.
The  context  is  our  best  guide.  This  light  is
said  to  be  the  veritable  light  which  lighteth
every  man,  and  to  be  shining  into  darkness.
Consequently,  to  make  it  the  complex  of  all
the  gracious  processes  which  beautify  the
renewed  soul  is  to  hurry  on  faster  than  the
apostle,  and  to  anticipate  tlie  evolution  of
his  thought.    "The  light  of  men"  seems  to


10


THE  GtOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  x.  1—61.


be  the  faonlty  or  condition,  the  inward  and

outwiird  means,  by  which  men  know  God.
"  The  light  of  men "  is  the  conscience  and
reason,  the  eye  of  the  soul  by  which  the
liuman  race  comes  into  contact  with  truth
iind  riglit  and  beauty.  The  perfections  of
God  answering  to  these  functions  of  the  soul
are  not,  and  were  never,  manifested  in  mere
matter  or  force.  Until  we  survey  the  opera-
tions of  God  in  life  we  have  no  hint  of
either.  The  lower  forms  of  life  in  plant  or
animal  may  reveal  the  wisdom  and  benefi-
cence and  beauty  of  the  Logos,  and  so  far
some  light  shines  upon  man ;  but  even  these
have  never  been  adequately  appreciated  until
the  life  of  man  himself  comes  into  view,  then
the  Divine  perfections  of  righteousness  and
moral  loveliness  break  upon  the  eye  of  the
soul.  In  the  life  of  conscience  and  reason  •
higher  and  more  revealing  light  is  made  to
shine  upon  man,  upon  his  origin,  upon  his
Divine  image,  upon  his  destiny.  In  the
spu-itual  life  which  has  been  superinduced
upon  the  life  of  ihe  conscience  and  of  the
flesh,  there  is  the  highest  hght,  the  brightest
and  warmest  and  most  potent  rays  of  the
whole  spectrum  of  Divine  illumination.
"  The  life  "  which  was  in  the  Logos  "  was,"
has  always  been,  is  now,  will  ever  be,  "  the
light  of  men."  The  plural,  "  of  men  "  (jSiv
avBiulnrav),  justifies  this  larger  and  sweeping
generalization.  The  two  "  imperfect*  "  (^k)
placing  the  process  in  the  past  do  not  compel
us  to  Umlt  the  operation  to  the  past  or  ideal
sphere.  They  assert  what  was  "  in  the  be-
ginning," and  which  can  never  cease  to  be ;
but  they  partly  imply  further  consequences,
which  the  actual  condition  of  man  has
introduced.

Ver.  5.  —  (3)  The  antagonism  helwee»
light  and  darknett.  The  highest  manifesta-
tion and  proof  of  the  following  statement
will  be  found  in  that  great  entrance  of  the
Eternal  Logos  into  human  life  which  will
shed  the  most  complete  ray  of  Divine  light
upon  men ;  but  before  that  great  event,
during  its  occurrence,  and  ever  since,  i.e.
throughout  all  times  and  nations,  the  light
shineth  in  the  darkness.  Many  expositors,
like  Godet,  after  long  wavering  and  ponder-
ing, resolve  this  expression  into  a  distinct
epitome  of  the  effect  of  the  Incarnation,  the
highest  manifestation  of  the  light  in  the
theanthropio  life,  and  hesitate  to  see  any
reference  to  the  shining  of  the  light  upon
the  darkness  of  humanity  or  of  the  heathen
world.  They  do  this  on  the  ground  that
there  is  no  confirmation  or  illustration  of
this  idea  in  John's  Gospel.  However,  let
the  following  parallels  and,  expositions  of
this  thought  be  considered.  Our  Lord  dis-
criminates between  those  who  "  hate  the
light"  and  "those  who  do  the  truth  and
come  to  the  light "  (oh.  iii.  21).    He  delights


in  those  whom  the  Father  has  given  to  him,
and  who  come  to  him  (ch.  vi.  37).  He  speaks
of  "  other  sheep  which  are  not  of  this  fold,
who  hear  his  voice"  (ch.  x.  16).  He  tells
Pilate  that  "  every  one  who  is  of  the  truth
heareth  my  voice  "  (oh.  xviii.  37).  In  solitary
address  to  the  Father  (ch.  xvii.  6X  he  says,
"Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them
me."  In  all  these  passages  abundant
hint  is  given  of  a  direct  treatment  of  gonls
antecedent  to,  or  rather  irrespective  of,
the  special  grace  of  Christ's  earthly  mani-
festation. This  passage,  so  far,  in  the  wide
embrace  of  its  meaning,  asserts  that  ttte  light
here  taken  as  the  effluence  of  the  life  itself,
perpetually,  for  ever,  shineth  (<paiv(i,  not
<l>a}Ti(fi) — pours  forth  its  radiance  by  its  own
essential  necessity  into  the  "  darkness."
"  Darkness  "  and  "  light "  are  metaphors  for
moral  conditions.  Though  there  is  a  "  light
of  men  "  which  is  the  result  of  the  meeting
of  man's  capacity  with  Divine  revelation,
yet,  for  the  most  part,  there  is  a  terrible
antagonism,  a  fearful  negative,  a  veritable
opposition  to  the  light,  a  blinding  of  the
eye  of  the  soul  to  the  clearest  beam  of
heavenly  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  truth.
Light  has  a  battle  to  fight,  both  with  the
circumstances  and  the  faculties  of  men.  The
ancient  light  which  broke  over  the  childhood
of  humanity,  the  brighter  beams  which-  fell
on  consciences  irradiated  and  educated  by  a
thousand  ministries,  the  light  which  was
focused  in  the  incarnate  Logos  and  diffused
in  all  the  "  entrance  of  the  Divine  Word  "
into  the  heart  of  men,  have  all  and  always
this  solemn  contingency  to  encounter — "  The
light  shineth  in  the  darkness."  And  the
darkness  apprehended  it  not.  This  word
translated  "  apprehended  "  (/coTcAo/Sf)  has,  in
New  Testament  Greek,  undoubtedly  the
sense  of  "  laying  hold  with  evil  intent,"
"overtaking"  (oh.  xii.  35;  1  Thess.  v.  4;
Mark  is.  18),  "suppressing"  (Lange),  "over-
coming "  (Westcott  and  Moulton) ;  and  a  fine
sense  would  arise  from  this  passage  if  it
means  that,  while  the  light  shone  into  the
darkness,  it  did  not  scatter  it,  but,  on  the
other  hand,  neither  did  the  darkness  sup-
press or  absorb  and  neutralize  the  light.
Certainly  the  darkness  was  disastrous,  tragi-
cal, prolonged,  but  not  triumphant,  even  in
the  gloomiest  moments  of  the  pre-Incarnation
period,  even  in  the  darkest  hour  and  place
of  savage  persecution,  even  in  the  time  of
outrage,  superstitious  impenetrability,  or
moral  collapse.  There  are,  however,  two
classes  of  difficulty  in  this  interpretatioii.
(1)  KaToKanfidvai  is  in  LXX.  used  for  a'E'n,
13^,  and  MXD,  and  in  many  places  in  the
Kew  Testament  has  its  ordinary  classical
sense, "  lay  hold  of,"  "  apprehend,'  "  compre-
hend,"   "understand,"  "come   to   know,"


CH.  I.  1—61.]         THE  GOSPEIi  AOCOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


11


itUelligo,  and  cognosco  (Eph.  iii.  18),  though
in  this  latter  eense  it  is  mostly  used  in  the
middle  voice.  (2)  When  the  apostle,  in  greater
detail  and  more  immediate  reference  to  the
individual  illustrations  he  gives  of  tlie  rela-
tion of  the  darkness  to  the  light,  says  in
vers.  10,  11,  'O  Kifffios  airhv  od«  ^yvw,  and  Oi
IfSioi  avrhv  ov  irapiAa^ovi  though  slightly
different  words  are  used,  yet  the  return  upon
the  thought  in  these  parallel  sentences  is  too
obvious  to  be  overlooked.  The  non-suscep-
tibility of  the  darkness,  the  positive  resist-
ance it  makes  to  the  action  of  light,  finds  its
strongest  illustration  in  the  more  defined
regions  and  narrower  sphere  of  the  coming
of  the  Logos  to  the  world,  and  in  his  specif
mission  to  his  own  people.  In  tiiis  view
Alford,  Bengel,  Soliaff,  Godet,  Luthardt,
Tholuck,  Meyer,  Ewald,  coincide,  though
the  suggestion  of  Origen  and  Chryeostom,
and  in  later  years  of  Schulthess,  Westoott,
etc.,  has  been  powerfully  urged.  The  broad,
general  fact  is  stated,  not  excluding  the
exceptions  on  which  the  evangelist  himself
afterwards  enlarges.  If  the  darkness  had
"  apprehended  "  the  light,  it  would  no  more
be  darkness.  The  melancholy  fact  is  that
tbe  corruption  in  the  world  has  been,  for  the
most  part,  impervious  to  the  light  alike  of
nature,  of  life,  of  conscience,  and  even  of
revelation.  Hence,  says  Bengel,  "  the  occa-
sion for  the  Incarnation."  This  is  exaggera-
tion, because  the  whole  record  of  the  incaru  ate
Word  is  a  continuous  story  of  the  resistance
of  the  darkness  to  tbe  light.

Vers.  6 — 13. — (4)  The  general  manifesto-
turn  of  the  revealing  Logos.

Vers.  6 — 8. — (a)  The  prophetic  dispensa-
tion.

Yet.  6. — There  was  a  man,  sent  from  (irapk
&€oS)  God,  whose  name  was  John.  Observe
the  contrast  between  the  eyeveTo  of  John's
appearance  and  the  fv  of  the  Logos,  be-
tween the  "  man  "  John  sent  from  God  and
the  (AOroS  2APH  EFENETO)  "  Word  became
fli  sh "  of  ver.  14.  At  this  point  the  evan-
gelist touches  on  the  temporal  mission  and
effulgence  of  the  true  Light  in  the  Incarna-
tion ;  yet  this  paragraph  deals  with  far  more
general  characteristics  and  wider  ranges  of
thought  than  the  earthly  ministry  of  Olirist
on  which  he  is  about  to  enlarge.  First  of
all,  he  deals  with  the  testimony  of  John  in
its  widest  sense;  afterwards  he  enlarges
upon  it  in  its  striking  detail.  Conseciuently,
we  think  that  "the  man,"  "John,"  is,  when
first  introduced,  referred  to  in  his  repre-
sentative character  rather  than  his  historical
position.  The  teaching  of  the  prophets  and
synoptist*  shows  that  "John"  was  rather
the  exponent  of  the  old  covenant  than  the
harbinger  of  the  new.  He  was  the  embodi-
ment of  the  idea  of  prophet,  priest,  and
ascetic  of  the  patriarchal,  Mosaic,  and  latest


Hebraic  revelation.  He  was  "  more  than  a
prophet."  No  one  greater  than  he  had
ever  been  bom  of  woman,  and  his  functions
in  these  several  particulars  are  strongly
impressed  upon  that  disciple  who  here
loses  his  own  individuality  in  the  strength
of  liig  Master's  teaching.  Through  this
very  "  man  sent  from  God  "  the  apostle  had
been  prepared  to  see  and  personally  receive
the  Logos  incarnate.  His  personality
gatliered  up  for  our  autlior  all  that  there
was  in  the  past  of  definite  revelation,  while
Jesus  filled  up  all  the  present  and  the
future.  First  of  all,  he  treats  the  mission
of  the  Baptist  as  representative  of  all  that
wonderful  past.

Ver.  7. — This  man  oame  (historic,  ?i\de)
for  witness,  that  he  might  bear  witness
oonoerning  the  Light.  The  entire  pro-
phetic dispensation  is  thus  cliaracterized.
That  which  the  Baptist  did,  Malachi,  Isaiah,
Elijah,  Hosea,  Moses,  had  done  in  their  day.
He  came,  and  by  penetrating  insight  and
burning  word,  by  flashes  of  moral  revelation
and  intense  earnestness,  "  bare  witness  con-
cerning the  Light "  which  was  ever  shining
into  the  darkness.  His  aim  and  tlieirs  was
to  prevent  the  forces  of  darkness  from  sup-
pressing or  absorbing  the  light.  He  came
to  sting  the  apathy  and  disturb  the  self-
complacency  of  the  darkness.  He  came  to
interpret  the  fact  of  the  Light  which  was
shining  but  not  apprehended;  and  so  did
all  the  prophetic  ministry  of  which  he  was
the  latest  and  most  illustrious  exponent.
He  came  to  assert  the  meaning  for  man  of
all  Gtod's  perfections;  to  caU  conscience
from  its  death-sleep;  to  draw  distinctions  of
tremendous  significance  between  moral  and
ceremonial  obedience;  to  exalt  obedience
above  sacrifice,  and  works  meet  for  repent-
ance above  Abrahamio  privilege ;  to  warn
by  lurid  threatenings  of  a  fiery  wrath  and
a  terrible  curse  which  would  fall  on  the
disobedient,  though  consecrated,  people.  In
this  he  was  but  the  last  of  a  goodly  fellow-
ship of  prophets  who  bore  witness  to  the
Light  of  life  which  had  its  being  in  the
Eternal  Logos  of  God.  He  came,  as  they
all  liad  come,  with  a  view  of  producing
results  far  greater  than,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
they  have  actually  achieved.  He  came  to
bear  such  testimony  that  all  through  him,
i.e.  by  the  force  of  his  appeal  or  by  the
fierce  glow  thus  cast  upon  the  perils  and
follies  of  the  hour,  might  believe — might
realize  the  full  significance  of  the  Light
which  they  had  hitherto  refused  to  accept.
The  greatness  of  this  expectation  corre-
sponds with  the  hope  which  the  ministry
of  Jesus  failed  also  to  realize  (Matt.  xi.
9 — 14).  The  splendid  ministry  of  this
"burning  and  shining  lamp"  might,  it
would  seem,  have    brought    all  Israel    in


12


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1—61.


acknowledge  Christ  as  the  Light  of  the
world;  but  "the  darkness  apprehended  it
not."  The  entire  prophetic  dispensiition,
the  testimony  which  the  priestly  services
and  sacrifices  bore  to  the  evil  of  sin  and  to
the  awfulness  of  righteousness,  as  well  aa
the  condemnation  of  the  follies  and  pleasures
of  the  world,  involved  in  John  the  Baptist's
ascetic  profession,  might  have  roused  all
Israel  to  believe  in  the  Light.  He  gathered
together  all  the  forces  of  the  Mosaic,  pro-
phetic, Levitical,  Essenic  ministries  to  bear
on  the  people.  Everything  that  Law  could
do  was  done  to  reveal  the  Light ;  but  "  all "
did  not  believe,  for  "the  (£irkness  appre-
hended it  not."

Ver.  8. — A  (olemn  warning  is  giren,
which  for  ever  discriminates  the  ministry
of  man  from  the  eternal  ministry  of  the
Logos.  He  (John,  and  with  him  all  the
prophetic,  Levitical,  ascetic  teachers  in  all
ages)  was  not  the  Light,  but  [he  mat  or  came]
that  he  might  bear  witness  of  the  Light.
The  iva  depends  upon  some  unexpressed
verbal  thought;  foreveninthe  passages  where
it  stands  alone  (ch.  ix.  3 ;  xiii.  18 ;  xiv.  31 ;
XV.  25)  the  reference  is  not  obscure  to  some
pre-existing  or  involved  verb.  The  distinc-
tion here  drawn  between  John  and  the  Light
is  thought  by  some  expositors  to  point  to  the
condition  of  the  Ephesian  Church,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  which  there  still  lingered
some  who  placed  John  in  even  a  higher
position  than  that  accorded  to  Jesus  (Acta
xix.  3,  4) ;  but  the  teaching  of  the  evan-
gelist is  far  more  comprehensive  than  this.
The  Light  of  men  has  higher  soturce  and
wider  range  of  operation  than  that  of  any
prophetic  man.  All  that  he,  that  any  seer
whatsoever  can  do,  is  to  bear  witness  to  it.
The  prophets,  from  Moses  to  John,  derived
all  their  power,  their  sanction,  and  the  corro-
boration of  their  message,  from  the  Logos-
light  shining  throngh  conscience  and  blazing
through  providential  events  and  burning
up  the  stubble  of  human  action  with  un-
quenchable fire.  The  prophets  are  not  the
light  of  God ;  they  are  sent  to  bear  witnesi
to  it.

Ver.  9. — (6)  The  illumination  of  the  arche-
typal Light  before  incarnation.  There  are
at  least  tliree  grammatical  translations  of
this  verse.  Either  (1),  with  Meyer,  we  may
give  to  ?ii>  the  complete  sense  of  existence,
presence,  and  include  in  it  the  full  predicate
of  the  sentence;  thus:  "Existing,  present
(when  John  commenced  his  ministry),  was
the  veritable  Light  which  enlighteneth  every
man  coming  into  the  world."  Bat  the
clause,  "coming  into  the  world,"  would  here
not  only  be  superfluous,  but  moreover,  while
used  elsewhere  and  often  of  Christ's  incar-
nation, is  never  »sed  of  ordinary  birth  in
the  Scriptures,  though  it  is  u  rabbinical


expression.  (2)  Lange,  Monlton,  Westoott,
Godet,  applying  the  ipxif^^vov  els  rhv  K6anov
to  the  light  rather  than  to  man,  translate  it,
"That  was  the  true  Light  which  lighteth
every  man,  by  coming  into  the  world,  or  that
Cometh  into  the  world."  The  difficulty  of
this  is  that  it  makes  the  coming  into  the
world,  in  some  new  sense,  the  occasion  of
the  illumination  of  every  man,  although  the
evangelist  has  already  spoken  (ver.  4)  of
the  Life  which  i«  the  Light  of  men.  A
third  method  is  to  make  the  ipx^l'^^'""'  "^  ''^''
KSiriioy  the  true  predicate  of  the  sentence,
and  translate  thus:  The  veritable  Light  which
illumines  every  man  was  coming  (ever
coming)  into  the  world ;  *  and  there  is  a  sense
and  manner  of  his  coming  which  transcends
all  others,  about  which  he  is  to  speak  at
length.  This  might  receive  another  mean-
ing if  ^K  ipxi/teyoy  were  equivalent  to  ^Afle ;
then  a  positive  reference  would  here  be
made  to  the  historic  fact  of  the  Incarnation.
But  it  seems  to  me  the  evangelist  is
drawing  a  contrast  between  the  continuous
coming  into  the  world  of  the  veritable  Light
and  the  specific  Incarnation  of  ver.  14.  Con-
sequently, the  author  here  travels  over  and
connotes  a  wider  theme,  namely,  the  opera-
tion of  that  archetypal  Light,  that  veritable
Light  which  differs  from  all  mere  reflections
of  it,  or  imitations  of  it,  or  luminous  testi-
monies to  it.  The  difference  between  aAr)6^f
and  a.\riBiv6s  is  important.  'AK-qBiis  is  used
in  ch.  iii.  33  and  v.  31 ,  and  very  often  to  denote
the  true  in  opposition  to  the  false,  the  ve-
racious as  ^stinct  &om  the  deceptive.
'A\yiBti/6s  is  used  in  the  Gospel  (ch.  iv.
23, 37 ;  vi.  32 ;  vii.  28 ;  xv.  1 ;  xvii.  3),  First
Epistle  (v.  20),  and  Apocalypse  (iii.  7),  and
hardly  anywhere  else  (see  Introduction),  for
the  real  as  opposed  to  the  phenomenal,  the
archetypal  as  opposed  to  the  various  em-
bodiments of  it,  the  veritable  as  distinct
from  that  which  does  not  answer  to  its  own
ideal.  Now,  about  this  veritable  light,  in
addition  to  all  tliat  has  been  said  already,
two  things  are  declared.  (1)  It  illumines
every  man,  giveth  light  to  every  individual
man,  in  all  time.  Though  the  darkness  ap-
prehendeth  it  not,  yet  man  is  illumined  by
it.  Various  interpretations  have  been  given
of  the  method  or  conditions  of  this  illumi-
nation, (a)  The  light  of  the  reason  and
conscience— the  higher  reason,  which  is  the
real  eye  for  heavenly  light,  and  the  sphere
for  the  operation  of  grace.  This  would  make
the  highest  intellectual  faculty  of  man  a
direct  efiulgence  of  the  archetypal  Light,  and
confirm  the  poet  Wordsworth's  definition
of  oonaoience  as  "  God's  most  intimate  pre-

'  This  is  one  of  the  passages  which  Hip-
polytus  tells  us  that  Basilides  quoted  lirom
John  (<  Befot.  HierV  viL  22>


OH.  1. 1—61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


13


gence  In  the  world."  (6)  The  Inner  light
of  the  mystical  writers,  and  the  "  common
grace "  of  the  Remonstrant  theology.  Or
(o)  the  Diyine  instruction  bestowed  on  every
man  from  the  universal  manifestation  of
the  Logos-life,  No  man  is  left  without
some  direct  communication  of  light  from
the  Father  of  lights.  That  light  may  be
quenched,  the  eye  of  the  soul  may  be  blinded,
the  folly  of  the  world  may  obscure  it  as  a
cloud  disperses  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun ;
but  a  fundamental  fact  remains — the  veri-
table Light  illumines  every  man.  Then  (2)
it  is  further  declared  that  this  Light  was
ever  coming  into  the  world,  Bengel  and
Hengstenberg,  as  Lange  and  Baumgarten-
GrusiuB,  regard  it  as  in  the  purely  historic
sense,  declaratory  of  the  great  fact  of  the  In-
carnation. But  Ewald,  Keim,  Westcott,  and
others  decide  that  it  refers  to  his  continual
coming  into  the  world.  Up  to  the  time  of
the  Incarnation,  the  great  theme  of  the
prophets  is  (6  Ipx'^/'^'"'^)  ^^  Coming  One.
Nor  can  we  conceal  the  numberless  assur-
ances of  the  old  covenant  that  the  Lord  of
men  was  always  "  coming,"  and  did  come,
to  them.  At  one  time  he  came  in  judgment,
and  at  another  time  in  mercy ;  now  by  world-
vride  convulsions,  then  by  the  fall  of  em-
pires ;  again  by  the  sense  of  need,  of  guUt
and  peril,  by  the  bow  of  promise  which
often  broke  in  beauty  on  the  retreating
storm-cloud,  by  the  mighty  working  of  con-
science, by  the  sense  given  to  men  of  their
Divine  relationships  and  their  deamess  to
God, — ^by  all  these  experiences  lie  hat  ever
been  coming,  and  he  cometh  stitt.  Ever  since
the  coming  in  the  flesh  and  the  tubsequent
cessation  of  that  manifestation,  he  has  ever
been  coming  in  the  grace  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  in  all  the  mission  of  the  Comforter,
in  the  fall  of  the  theooratio  system  and  city,
in  the  great  persecutions  and  deliverances,
the  chastisements  and  reformations,  the
judgments  and  revivals  of  his  Church.  The
eternal,  veritable  Light  which  does,  by  its
universal  shining,  illumine  every  man,  is
still  coming.  The  cry,  "He  is  coming,"
was  the  language  of  the  noblest  of  heathen
philosophies ;  "  He  is  coming,"  is  the  burden
of  the  Old  Te.-tament;  "He  is  coming
again,"  Is  the  great  under-song  of  the
Church  to  the  end  of  time;  "Even  so,  come.
Lord  Jesus."

Vers.  10,  ll.-<c)  ITie  twofold  effect  of
(he  pre-Incamation  activity  in  the  elected
nation  and  individuals.  The  highest  ex-
pression of  this  truth  .was  seen  in  the  unique
"coming"  of  which  the  evangelist  had
been  the  spectator  and  witness;  but  the
words  cannot  be  limited  to  it— they  stretch
back  to  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  the
world  and  on  to  the  final  consummation.
ihey  explain  or  divide  the  solemn  theme


of  the  previous  announcement  into  two  re-
lated proofs  of  the  fact  that  the  Light  which
illumines  every  man  shineth  in  darkness,
and  that  the  darkness  apprehendeth  it  not.

Ver.  10. — Of  him  who  was  evermore  com-
ing into  the  world,  it  is  said.  In  the  world
he  was,  and  the  world  was  made  (came  into
being)  through  him,  and  the  world  recog-
nized him  not.  The  kSct/ios  is  a  term  speci-
ally used  by  St.  John  to  denote  the  ordered
whole  of  the  universe,  viewed  apart  from
God  (see  Introduction).  Sometimes  this  is
emphasized  by  the  pronoun,  "  This  world,"
when  it  is  contrasted  with  the  higher  and
heavenly  "  order  "  to  which  the  Lord's  per-
sonality belonged,  both  before  and  after  this
manifestation  in  the  flesh.  From  being  thus
the  scene  of  ordered  existence  apart  from
God,  it  rapidly  muves  into  the  organized
resistance  to  the  will  of  God,  and  therefore
it  often  denotes  humanity  taken  as  a  whole
apart  from  God  and  grace.  It  may  be  the
object  of  the  Divine  love  and  compassion
(ch.  iii.  16),  while  the  redemption  and
deliverance  of  the  world  from  sin  is  the
great  end  of  the  ministry  and  work  of  Jesus
(ver.  29) ;  but  throughout  this  gospel  "  the
world  "  is  the  synonym  of  the  adverse  power
and  order  of  humanity,  until  it  is  illumined,
regenerated,  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The
world  here  signifies  humanity  and  its  dwell-
ing-place, considered  apart  from  the  changes
wrought  in  any  part  of  it  by  graoe.  The
three  assertions  concerning  me  world  drop
the  imagery  of  light  and  life,  and  by  their
emphatic  concatenation,  without  the  assist-
ance of  a  Greek  particle,  tell  the  tragic
story  of  human  departure  from  God.  Thus
only  can  the  mystery  of  the  previous  verses
be  explained.  At  the  very  forefront  of  the
argument  of  the  Gospel  is  put  a  statement
wMch  concedes  the  strange  perplexity  of
the  rejection  of  the  incarnate  Logos.  Not
only  does  the  entire  narrative  illustrate  the
awful  fact,  strange  and  inconceivable  as
such  an  idea  appears  when  baldly  stated,
but  the  author  generalizes  the  antipathy
between  the  Logos  and  the  world  into  a
more  comprehensive,  damning,  and  jfet  un-
deniable, proposition.  From  the  beginning,
though  the  world  came  into  being  through
the  Logos,  though  he  was  in  the  world,  in
every  atom  of  matter,  in  every  vibration  of
force,  in  every  energy  of  life,  yet  the  world,
notwithstanding  all  its  power  of  recognizing
the  fact,  yet  the  world,  as  concentrated  in  an
antagonistic  humanity,  did  not  come  to  know
him  fully  (Hyvai).  This  is  the  lesson  we  learn
from  all  the  melancholy  and  tragic  perver-
sions of  his  glorious  perfections  which  every
heathenism  and  every  oultus,  and  even  every
philosophy,  has  perpetrated.  St.  Paul  says
precisely  the  same  thing:  "The  world  by
wisdom  knew  not  God"  (see  also  Bom.  i.


14


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.        [oh.  1 1-^1.


19 — 22,  which  might  be  taken  as  an  inspired
commentary  on  the  whole  paseage).  And
the  awful  statement  is  still,  with  reference
to  the  majority  of  men,  true,  that  "  the
world  knoweth  not  God,  neither  the  Father,
nor  the  Word,  nor  the  Holy  Ghost."

Ver.  11. — It  is  not  without  interest  that
the  ideas  contained  in  these  verses  did  not
need  a  second  century  to  evolve  them ;  they
were  current  in  Paul's  letters,  a  hundred
years  before  the  date  assigned  by  some  to
this  Gospel.  Here  the  question  arises — Has
no  more  direct  approach  been  made  to  our
race  than  that  which  is  common  to  every
man?  Undoubtedly  the  whole  theocratic
dispensation  would  be  ignored  if  this  were
not  the  case — and  consequently  the  evan-
gelist coBtinues  the  recital  of  the  peculi-
arities and  specialties  of  the  approach  of  the
Logos  to  the  human  understanding.  He
came  unto  his  own  possession  (eis  ret  tSia).
Here  all  expositors  agree  to  see  the  special
manifestation  of  the  Logos  to  the  house  of
Israel,  which  is  called  in  numerous  passages
of  the  Old  Testament,  God's  own  possession
(Exod.  xix.  5 ;  Deut.  vii.  6 ;  Ps.  cxxxv.  4  ;
Isa.  xxxi.  9).  And  his  own  (people)  reoeived
him  not  (irapiha^ov  ;  of.  /caTcAajSec  of  ver.  4,
and  ^yfiv  of  ver,  10).  Here,  again,  the  most
astonishing,  direct  and  prominent  illustra-
tion of  such  a  statement  is  seen  in  the  his-
toric ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  the
terrible  record  of  his  rejection  by  his  own
people,^  by  his  own  disciples,  by  the  theo-
cratic chiefs,  by  the  assembled  Sanhedrin,
by  the  very  populace  to  whom  Pilate  ap-
pealed to  save  him  from  murderous  fury.
But  the  significance  of  the  prologue  is  to
my  mind  missed,  if  the  earlier  agelong  re-

i'ection  of  the  ministry,  and  light  of  the
jOgOB,  nay,  the  perpetual  and  awful  treat-
ment which  he  continually  receives  from
"  his  own  possession,"  be  not  perceived.
There  was  a  Divine  and  special  sense  in
which  the  perpetual  coming  of  the  Logos  to
the  world  was  emphasized  by  his  gracious
self-manifestations  to  the  people  of  Israel.
The  great  Name  of  Jehovah,  the  Angel  of
the  presence,  the  manifestations  to  Abraham,
to  Moses,  to  David,  to  Elijah,  to  Isaiah,  and
Ezekiel;  the  Shechinah-glories,  the  whole
ministry  of  grace  to  the  house  of  Israel,  was
a  perpetual  coming  to  his  own  peculiar  pos-
session ;  but  yet  the  sum  total  of  their  his-
tory is  a  continuous  repudiation  and  lapse.
Tliey  rejected  the  Lord,  they  fell  in  the
wilderness,  they  were  turned  unto  other
gods,  they  went  a- whoring  after  their  own
inventions.  They  knew  not  that  God  had
healed  them.  The  great  things  of  his  Law
were  accounted  strange  things  to  them
(compare  Stephen's  apology  for  an  elaborate
exposition  of  thi*  thought).  The  same  kind
of  treatment  has  continually  been  given  by


the  world,  and  even  by  those  who  Lave
boasted  of  standing  in  the  special  lines  o(
his  grace.  This  suggestion  cannot  be  fully
expanded  here.  Chrysostom  tn  loco  calls
much  attention  to  the  argument  of  the  Epistle
to  Romans  (ii.  12 ;  ix.  30,  32 ;  x.  S,  12).

Vers.  12,  13. —  But  before  the  apoBUe
advances  to  the  central  statement  of  the
entire  proem,  he  stops  to  show  that,  though
the  whole  world,  though  man  as  an  organ-
ized mass,  though  Israel  as  a  favoured  and
selected  theocracy,  have  refused  to  know  and
confess  his  supreme  claims,  yet  there  has
always  been  an  election  of  grace.  All  have
not  perished  in  their  unbelief.  Some  have
received  him.  The  twelfth  and  thirteenth
verses  do,  indeed,  in  their  full  meaning,
refer  unmistakably  to  the  entire  ministry  ol
the  living  Christ  to  the  end  of  time;  but
surely  every  word  of  it  applies  primarily
(though  not  exclusively)  to  the  whole  pre-
vious pleadings  of  the  Light  and  Life— to
the  ministry  of  the  pre-existing  and  eternal
Logos,  and'to  the  privileges  and  possibilities
consequent  thereupon.  As  many  as  reoeived
him.'  This  phrase  is  subsequently  explained
as  being  identical  with  "believed  in  his
Name."  The  siiuple  verb  e\a$oi>  is  less
definite  than  are  its  compounds  with  Kira
and  Trapd,  used  in  the  previous  verses  (5,
11).  The  acceptance  is  a  positive  idea,  is
broader,  more  manifold,  less  restricted  as  to
manner  of  operation,  than  the  negative  re-
jection which  took  sharp  and  decisive  form.
The  construction  is  irregular.  We  have  a
nominaiivus  pendens  followed  by  a  clause
in  the  dative ;  as  much  as  if  he  had  writ-
ten, "There  are,  notwithstanding  all  the
rejections,  those  who  received  lum."  To
these,  the  evangelist  says,  however  many
or  few  they  may  be,  who  believe  in  his
Name,  he — ^the  subject  of  the  previous  sen-
tence— gave  the  authority  and  capability  oi
becoming  children  of  God.  Believing  in
his  Name  is  discriminated  from  believing
him.  The  construction  occurs  thirty-five
times  in  the  Gospel,  and  three  times  in  the
First  Epistle — and  the  Name  here  especially
present  to  the  writer  is  the  Logos,  the  full
revelation  of  the  essence,  character,  and  ac-
tivity, of  God.  John,  writing  in  the  close  of
his  life,  surveys  a  glorious  company  of  indi-
viduals who,  by  realizing  as  true  the  sum  of
all  the  perfections  of  the  manifested  Word,
by  believing  in  his  Name,  have  also  received
as  a  gift  the  sense  of  such  union  to  the  Son
of  God  that  they  become  alive  to  the  fact
that  they  too  are  the  offspring  of  God.  This
realization  of  the  Divine  fatherhood,  which
had  been  so  obscure  before,  is  itself  the

'  Tregelles  introduced  iiv,  after  txafioi:
but  it  was  before  he  had  seen  a  colUtion  of
Bor^.


OH.  1, 1—61,]         THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDIWa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


15


origination  within  them  of  filial  feeling.
Thus  a  new  life  ia  begotten  and  supervenes
upon  the  old  life.  This  new  life  la  a  new
humanity  within  the  bosom  or  womb  of  the
old,  and  so  it-  corresponds  with  the  Pauline
doctrine  of  new  creation  and  of  resurrection.
'EJo«(r(o  is  more  than  opportunity,  and  less
than  (SiSra/iis)  power;  it  is  rightful  claim
(which  is  itself  the  gift  of  God)  to  become
what  they  were  not  before,  seeing  that  a
Divine  generation  has  begotten  them  again.
They  are  born  from  above.  The  Spirit  of
the  Son  has  passed  into  them,  and  they  cry,
''  Abba,  Father."  This  Divine  begetting  is
still  further  explained  and  differentiated
from  ordinary  human  life.  The  writer  dis-
tinctly repudiates  the  idea  that  the  con-
dition he  speaks  of  is  a  consequence  of
simple  birth  into  this  world.  This  is  done
in  a  very  emphatic  manner  (o?  here  in  the
masculine,  is  the  well-known  constructio  ad
eensum,  and  refers  to  reVyo  ©eoO).  Who  were
begotten  from  God,  not  from  (or,  of)  blood.
(The  plural  word  atfidrap  has  been  variously
rendered  by  expositors :  Augustine  regard-
ing it  as  a  reference  to  the  blending  of  the
blood  of  both  sexes  in  ordinary  generation  j
Meyer,  as  not  different  from  the  singular  in
meaning,  giving  numerous  passages  in  the
classics  where  this  or  an  equivalent  usage
of  the  plural  for  the  singular  occurs.  The
suggestion  of  Moulton  is  more  satisfactory —
that  it  points  to  pride  of  race,  common
enough  in  Israel,  but  not  peculiar  to  Jews.)
John  repudiates  for  this  "generation"  any
connection  with  mere  hereditary  privilege.
No  twice-born  Brahmin,  no  dignified  race,
no  descendant  of  Abraham,  can  claim  it  as
such,  and  the  writer  further  discriminates
it,  as  though  he  would  leave  no  loophole  for
escape :  Nor  yet  from  the  will  of  the  flesh,
nor  even  from  the  will  of  the  man  (aySpis
not  avSpdmov).  Some,  very  erroneously,  have
supposed  that  "the  flesh"  here  refers  to
"woman"  in  omitradistinctionto  "man," and
numerous  efforts  have  been  made  to  point
out  the  threefold  distinction.  The  simplest
und  most  obvious  interpretation  is  that
"  the  will  of  the  flesh "  here  means  the
liuman  process  of  generation  on  its  lower
Bide,  and  "  the  will  of  the  man  "  the  higher
purposes  of  the  nobler  side  of  human  nature,
which  lead  to  the  same  end.  Special  dig-
nity is  conferred  by  being  the  son  of  a  special
father ;  but  however  honoured  such  might
br-,  as  in  the  case  of  an  Abraham,  a  David,  a
Zacharias,  such  paternity  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  sonship  of  which  the  evangelist  is
tliinking.  Doubtless  this  triumphant  new  be-
ginning of  humanity  can  only  be  found  in  the
full  revelation  of  the  name  of  the  incarnate
Logos ;  but  surely  the  primary  application
of  the  passage  is  to  the  fact  that,  notwith-
Rtanding  tbe  stiff-necked  rejection  of  the


Logos  by  the  peculiar  possession  and  people
of  his  love,  there  were,  from  Abraham  to
Malachi  and  to  John  the  Baptist,  those
who  did  recognize  the  Light  and  live  in  the
love  of  God.  The  author  of  Ps.  xvi.,  xvii.,
xxiii.,  XXV.,  ciii.,  cxix.,  and  a  multitude  be-
yond calculation,  discerned  and  received
him,  walked  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  were
kept  in  perfect  peace,  found  in  the  Lord
their  most  exceeding  joy.  "Like  as  a
father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord
pitied  them."  He  nourished  and  brought
up  children,  and  to  the  extent  to  which
they  appreciated  his  holy  Name  they  therein
received  as  a  gift  the  capability  and  claim
to  call  him  their  Father.  This  was  not  a
question  of  human  fatherhood  or  hereditary
privilege  at  all,  but  of  gracious  exchanges  of
affection  between  these  children  of  his  love
and  the  Eternal,  who  had  fashioned  them
in  his  image  and  regenerated  them  by  his
Holy  Spirit.  To  restrict  any  element  of
this  passage  to  conscious  faith  in  the  Christ
is  to  repudiate  the  activity  of  the  Logos  and
Spirit  before  the  Incarnation,  and  almost
compels  a  Sabellian  interpretation  of  the
Godhead.  Even  now  the  grandeur  of  the
biblical  doctrine  of  the  Trinity — a  doctrine
which  treats  these  relations  as  eternal  and
universal — compels  us  to  believe  that  when-
ever among  the  sons  of  men  there  is  a  soul
which  receives  the  Logos  in  this  light,  i.e.
apart  from  the  special  revelation  of  the
Logos  in  the  flesh,  to  such  a  one  he  gives
the  capacity  and  claim  of  sonship.  John
certainly  could  not  mean  to  imply  that  there
had  never  been  a  regenerated  soul  uiitU  he
and  his  fellow-disciples  accepted  their  Lord,
Up  to  this  point  in  his  argument  he  has
been  disclosing  the  universal  and  the  special
operations  of  the  Logos  who  in  the  begin-
ning was  with  God  and  was  God,  the  Source
of  fill  life,  the  Giver  of  all  light,  the  veri-
table Light  which  shines  upon  every  man,
which  does  more  even  than  that — which
made  a  long-continued  series  of  approaches
to  his  own  specially  instructed  and  prepared
people.  Prophecy  all  through  the  ages  haa
had  a  wondrous  function  to  bear  witness  to
the  reality  of  this  Light,  that  all  might  be-
lieve in  it,  that  aU  might  become  song  by
faith ;  but,  alas  I  darkness,  prejudice,  de-
pravity, corruption — "  darkness  "  did  not
apprehend  the  nature,  name,  or  mystery  of
love.  And  so  he  proceeds  to  describe  the
greatest,  the  most  surprising,  supreme  energy
of  the  Eternal  Logos— that  which  iUustrates,
confirms,  brings  into  the  most  forcible  relief,
the  natuie  of  his  personality,  and  the  extent
of  the  obligation  under  which  he  has  placed
the  human  race;  and  proves  iu  the  most
irresistible  way,  not  only  the  character  and
nature  of  God,  but  the  actual  condition  of
humanity.    The  great  extent  of  the  liteift<


Ifi


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,       [oh.  i.  1—61.


turo  and  the  imposing  controversies  which
have  accumulated  over  the  entirely  unique
sentence  that  heie  follows  render  any  treat-
ment of  it  difficult.  A  volume  rather  than
a  page  or  two  is  required  to  exhibit  the
significance  of  a  verse  which  is  probably  the
most  important  collocation  of  words  ever
made.

Ver.  14. — (5)  The  incarnation  of  tlie  Logos.
And  the  Logos  became  flesh.  The  ko!  has
been  variously  expanded,  some  giving  it  the
force  of  "then"  or  "therefore,"  as  though
John  was  now  resuming  the  entire  argument
from  the  beginning;  others  the  sense  of
"for,"  as  though  the  apostle  needed  to
introduce  a  reason  or  justification  for  what
had  been  said  in  vers.  12,  13.  It  is  enough
to  regard  the  koI  as  a  simple  copula,  after
the  same  manner  in  which  it  is  used  in
vers.  1,  1,  5,  10,  introducing  by  it  a  new
and  suggestive  truth  or  fact  which  must  be
added  to  what  has  gone  before,  qualifying,
illumining,  illustrating,  consummating  all
previous  representations  of  the  activity  and
functions  of  the  Eternal  Logos.  Meyer,
rejecting  all  the  explicative  modificatians
of  the  copula,  nearly  approaches  the
emphasis  which  Oodet  would  lay  upon  it,
by  saying,  "  John  cannot  refrain  from  ex-
pressing the  how  of  that  appearing  which
had  such  blessed  results  (vers.  12,  13),  and
which  he  had  himself  experienced."  The
circumstance  that  in  this  verse  the  author
goes  back  to  the  verbal  use  of  the  great
term  i  A6yos  suggests  rather  the  fact  that
the  fourteenth  verse  follows  directly  upon
the  stupendous  definitions  of  ver.  I,  and
indicates  a  powerful  antithesis  to  the  several
clauses  of  that  opening  sentence.  The
Logos  which  was  in  the  beginning  has  now
become  ;  the  Logos  which  was  God  became
flesh ;  the  Logos  that  was  with  God  has  set
up  his  tdbernacU  among  us.  If  so,  the  ical
does  suggest  a  parenthetical  treatment  of
vers.  2 — 13,  every  clause  of  which  has  been
necessary  to  prepare  the  reader  for  the  vast
announcement  whieh  is  here  made.  Various
things,  relations,  and  powers  have  been
asserted  with  reference  to  the  Logos.  All
things  became  through  him;  not  a  single
exception  is  allowed.  Not  one  thing  tan
be,  or  can  have  come  into  existence,  inde-
pendently of  him ;  yet  he  is  not  said  in  any
sense  to  have  "become  all  things,"  More
than  that,  the  twofold  form  of  the  expres-
sion stringently  repadiates  the  pantheistio
hypothesis.  All  life  is  said  to  be  "  in  him,"
to  have  its  being  in  his  activity ;  yet  he  is
not  said  to  have  become  life,  as  if  the  life-
prinoiple  were  henceforth  the  mode  of  his
existence,  or  a  state  or  condition  into  which
he  passed,  and  so  the  emanation  theories
of  early  Gnostics  and  of  modem  pantheistio
evoltttionistB  are  virtually  set  aside      "Th*


veritable  Light  which  lighteth  every  man  "
is  the  illumination  which  the  lAfe  pours  on
the  understanding  and  conscience  of  men,
to  which  all  prophecy  bears  witness ;  but
he  is  not  said  to  have  become  that  light.
Thus  the  incarnation  of  the  Logos  in  every
man  is  most  certainly  foreign  to  the  thought
of  the  apostle.  He  is  said  to  have  boon
"  in  the  world  "  which  he  made,  yet  in  such
manifestation  and  concealment  that  the
world  as  such  did  not  apprehend  the
wondrous  presence ;  and  he  is  said  also  to
have  been  continually  coming  to  his  own
people  "  in  sundry  times "  and  "  divers
manners,"  in  prophetic  visions  and  angelic
and  even  theaiitbropic  form  or  fashion.
Elsewhere  in  tliis  Goijpel  we  hear  that
Abraham  "  saw  his  day,"  and  Isaiah  '*  beheld
his  glory ; "  but  it  is  not  said  that  he  became,
i.e.  entered  into  permanent  and  unalterable
relations  with  these  thuophanic  glories.
Consequently,  the  deep  self-conscious  reali-
zation of  the  glory  of  his  Name,  enjoyed  by
greatest  saints  and  sages  of  the  past,  was
but  a  faint  adumbration  of  what  John
declared  he  and  others  had  bad  distinct
historical  opportunity  of  seeing,  hearing,
handling,  of  that  Word  of  life  which  was
with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  unto
us  (1  John  L  1,  2).  The  statement  of  this
verse,however,  is  entirely,  absolutely  unique.
The  thought  is  utterly  new.  Strauss  tells
us  ttat  the  apostolic  conception  of  Jesus
can  have  no  historic  validity,  because  it
represents  a  state  of  things  which  occurs  no-
where else  in  history.  37im  u  exactly  what
Christians  contend  for.  He  is  in  the  deepest
sense  absolutely  unique  in  the  history  of
mankind.  Moses,  Isaiah,  John  the  Baptist,
John  the  Apostle,  Socrates,  Buddha,  Zoro-
aster, may  have  borne  witubss  to  the  Light ;
but  of  not  one  of  them  can  it  be  said,  and
at  least  it  was  not  said  oi  even  imagined  by
St.  John,  the  Logos  became  flesh  in  their
humanity.  Yet  this  is  what  he  did  think
and  say  was  the  only  explanation  of  the
glory  of  Jesus;  this  unspeakable  relation
to  the  Eternal  Logos  was  sustained  by  his
well-known  Friend  and  Master.  And  the
Word  wa»  made  flesh.  Flesh  (iritpl,  answer-
ing in  the  LXX.  to  l^a)  is  the  term  used  to
denote  the  whole  of  humanity,  with  prominent
reference  to  that  part  of  it  which  ia  the
region  of  sensibility  and  visibility.  The
word  is  more  comprehensive  than  (irm/ia)
"  body,"  which  is  often  used  as  the  antithesis
of  vovs,  tfiux^,  and  TrveSfia ;  for  it  is  unques-
tionable that  the  conventional  use  of  aip^,
and  ffip^  Ka\  ai/ia,  includes  oftentimes  both
soul  and  spirit — includes  the  whole  of  human
constitution,  yet  that  constitution  considered
apart  from  God  and  grace,  answering  in
this  way  to  k6itims.  The  flesh  is  not  neoes-
■aiily  oonnotatire  of  sin,  though  th»  oiw


OH.  L  1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


IT


ditions,  the  possibilitiei,  the  temptableneBa
of  created  finite  nature  are  involved  in  it.'
It  ia  nearly  equivalent  to  saying  Mpavos,
generic  manhood,  but  it  is  more  explicit
tiian  such  a  dictum  would  have  been.  It
is  not  said  that  the  Word  became  a  man,
although  "  became  man  "  is  the  solemn  and
suggestive  form  in  which  the  great  truth  is
furti^er  expressed  in  the  Nicieno-Constanti-
nopolitan  Creed.'  "  The  Logos  heeame  flesh."
Thus  it  answers  to  numerous. expressions  in
the  Pauline  Epistles,  which  must  have  been
based  in  the  middle  of  the  first  century  on
the  direct  and  well-preserved  teachings  of
our  Lord  himself  (Bom.  i.  3,  Vfv6ii.evos  Karit
(ripxa ;  viii.  3,  '£;>  iixoidiMTi  irapiths  a/iaprtas  i
1  Tim.  iii.  16,  "Os  l<l>avep(ieri  iv  (rapKl;  of.
PhU.  ii.  7;  Heb.  ii.  14;  and  above  all
1  John  iy.  2,  where  Jesus  Christ,  the  centre
of  whose  personality  is  the  Logos,  and  is
there  used  in  the  most  transcendent  sense,
is  there  spoken  of  (4v  aapiei  i\iii\v66Ta)  as
having  come  in  the  flesh).  Very  early  in
the  Christological  discussions,  even  so  far
back  as  Praxeas  whom  TertuUian  sought  to
refute,  and  by  Apollinaris  the  younger,  in
the  fourth  century,  it  was  said  that  this
passage  asserted  that,  though  the  Xjogos  took
or  became  fiesh,  he  did  not  become  or  take
upon  himself  the  human  vovs  or  irvevfia,  the
reasonable  soul  or  spirit  of  man,  but  that  the
Logos  took  the  place  in  Jesus  of  the  mind
or  spirit.  Apollinaris  explained,  in  vindica-
tion of  his  view,  that  thus  Christ  was  neither
God  nor  man,  but  a  blending  of  the  two
natures  into  a  new  and  third  nature,  neither
one  nor  the  other.  This  view  was  stoutly
resisted  by  Athanasius  and  Basil.  It
reappeared  in  the  fifth  century,  in  the  form
of  Eutychianism,  to  do  duty  against  the  two-
fold Christ  of  Nestorianism.  The  opponents
of  Praxeas,  Apollinaris,  and  Butyches  were
all  fain  to  show  that  the  Gospel  of  John
calls  marked  attention  to  the  human  soul  of
Jesus  (ch.  xii.  27)  and  of  his  human  spirit
(ch.  xi.  98 ;  xiii.  21 ;  xix.  30),  to  say  nothing
of  Heb.  T.  8,  where  "  he  learned  obedience,"
etc.    The  fiesh  of  Christ  is  constitutive  and

•  Dr.  Jamieson,  'Profound  Problems  in
Theology,  Philosophy'  (1884),  has  laboured
hard,  without  success,  to  identify  "  fiesh "
with  "sin,"  and  to  regard  this  passage  as
equivalent  to  "  He  made  him  to  be  sin  for
us,"  etc.  (cf.  the  Baird  Lecture  of  Dr.  Dick-
eon  on  St.  Paul's  use  of  the  words  "flesh"
and  "spirit,"  1883).

'  In  the  original  Greed  of  Geesarea,  the
basis  of  the  Nicene  Creed,  we  have  trapKaBh/ra
only;  in  the  earlier  Creed  of  Jerusalem
ivai'Bpwtrf\cravTa  was  added,  and  hoth  terms
are  found  in  the  Nicene,  Constantinopolitan,
and  Chalcedonian  formulie  (see  F.  Hort's
'  Two  Dissertations,'  pp.  138 — 150).
JOBS.


inclnsiye  of  his  entire  humanity.  Flesh
itself  is  not  human  flesh  vrithout  the  human
if'ux'f,  nor  can  there  be  a  human  soul  witiiout
human  spirit.  The  two  terms  are  used
interchangeably,  and  their  functions  are  not
to  be  regarded  as  different  factors  of  humanity
■o  much  as  different  departments  of  human
activity.  There  is  a  complete  humanity,
therefore,  included  in  this  term,  not  a
humanity  destitute  of  one  of  its  most  charac-
teristic features.  But  the  question  arises —
What  is  meant  by  iyiviro,  '*  became,"  "  was
made  "  ?  A  considerable  number  of  modem
Lutheran  divines  have  laid  such  emphasis
on  the  Khaxris,  the  "  r  iptyiug  "  of  his  glory
on  the  part  of  him  who  was  "  in  the  form  of
God,"  that  nothing  short  of  an  absolute
depotentiation  of  the  Logos  is  supposed  to
have  occurred  when  "he  was  made  flesh"
or  "  man."  Gess  and  Godet  have  pressed  the
theory  that  the  iyivero  represents  a  com-
plete transubstantiation  and  metamorphosis.
Thus  Logos  had  been  God  from  eternity,
but  now,  in  the  greatness  of  his  humiliation,
he  was  no  longer  Logos  at  all,  nor  God,  but
flesh ;  so  that  during  the  time  of  the  Incar-
nation the  Logos  was  absolutely  concealed,
potential  only,  and  that  even  a  consciousness
of  his  eternity  and  the  Divine  powers  were
all  in  absolute  abeyance.  This  hypothesis,
on  both  its  Divine  and  human  side,  appears
to  us  hopelessly  unthinkable.  If  the  Logos
was  no  longer  Logos,  and  the  Godhead  thus
ineffably  truncated,  the  very  argument  of
the  apostle  that  in  him  was  life  and  light,  etc.,
must  break  down.  The  sources  of  life  and
light  must  have  been  themselves  in  eclipse,
and  God  himself  was  no  longer  God.  More-
over, the  hypothetical  obliteration  of  the
Logos  would  deprive  the  whole  argument
of  the  apostle  for  the  Divineness  and  God-
head of  the  Lord  of  its  basis  in  fact.  There
are  many  different  forms  in  which  this  mean-
ing of  the  iyevero  is  urged,  but  they  all  break
to  pieces  upon  the  revelation  of  the  self-
consciousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Divine
memories  and  awful  centre  of  his  personality,
in  which  the  nature  of  the  Godhead  and  the
perfect  nature  of  manhood  are  blended  in
one  personality.  Moreover,  the  ^^i/cto  does
not  imply  annihilation  of  the  Aiyos,  or  tran-
substantiation of  A<!7os  into  trdpi.  When  the
water  was  made  iypyevvniihiov)  wine,  the
water  was  not  obliterated,  but  it  took  up  by
the  creative  power  of  Christ  other  substances
into  itself,  constituting  it  wine.  So  when
the  tLiyos  became  "flesh,"  he  took  up
humanity  with  all  its  powers  and  conditions
into  himself,  constituting  himself  "the
Christ."  The  question  arises — ^Wherein  was
the  humiliation  and  the  henosis,  if  the  Logos
throughout  the  incarnate  life  of  Christ,  as
a  Person,  possessed  and  exercised  aU  his
Divine  enerEriea'     The  answer  is,  that,  ia

0


18


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [ch.lI— 51.


taking  human  nature  in  its  humbled,  suffer-
ing, tempted  form  into  eternal, absolute  union
with  himself,  and  by  learning  through  that
human  nature  all  that  himian  nature  is  and
fears  and  needs,  there  is  an  infinite  fulness  of
self-humiliating  love  and  sacrifice.  Hypo-
static union  of  humanity  with  the  Logos,
involving  the  Logos  in  the  conditions  of  a
complete  man,  is  an  infinite  humiliation,  and
seeing  that  this  involved  the  bitterest  conflict
and  sorrow,  brought  with  it  shame,  agony,
and  death,  such  a  stupendous  fact  is  (we
believe)  assumed  to  have  taken  place  once
in  historic  time.  It  is  far  more  than  the
manifestation  in  the  flesh  of  Jesus  of  the
Divine  light  and  life.  Such  an  hypothesis
would  merely  consider  Jesus  as  one  super-
eminent  display  of  "the  veritable  Light
which  lighteth  every  man,"  whereas  what
is  declared  by  St.  John  is  that  the  Word
himself,  after  a  new  exercise  of  this  infinite
potency,  became  flesh.  We  are  not  told  how
this  occurred.  The  fact  of  the  supernatural
birth,  as  stated  by  the  synoptic  writers,  is
their  way  of  announcing  a  sublime  secret,
of  which  John,  who  was  in  the  confidence  of
the  mother  of  Jesus,  gave  a  profounder
exposition.  In  such  a  fact  and  event  we
see  what  St.  Paul  meant  when  he  said  that
in  the  depths  of  eternity  the  inflnity  of
love  did  not  consider  the  undimmed,  un-
clouded, and  unchangeable  creative  majesty
of  equality  with  God  to  be  a  prize  which
must  never  be  relinquislied,  but  emptied
himself,  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  the
flesh  of  sin,  and  was  found  in  fashion  as
a  mem.  There  was  now  and  for  evermore
a  part  of  his  being  in  such  organic  union
with  "  flesh  "  that  he  could  be  bom,  could
learn,  could  be  tempted,  suffer  from  all
human  frailties  and  privations,  die  the  death
of  the  cross.  The  phrase,  moreover,  implies
that  the  Incarnation  was  in  its  nature  distinct
from  the  Docetic,  ail gelio,  transitory  mani-
fettations  of  the  older  revelation.  In  the
"Word  "  becoming  "  flesli"  both  Word  and
flesh  remain  side  by  side,  and  neither  is  the
first  nor  the  second  absorbed  by  the  other,
and  so  Monophysitism  is  repudiated,  while
the  statement  of  what  the  Word  thus  in-
carnate did,  viz.  "dwelt  among  us,"  etc.,
cuts  away  the  support  of  the  Nestorian
division  of  the  Divine  and  human  nalures ;
inasmuch  as  what  is  said  of  the  one  nature
can  be  said  of  the  other.  To  this  we  turn  :
"  And  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  set  up
his  tabernacle  in  our  midst."  The  use  of
this  picturesque  word  eaxiivaaev  points  to
the  tabernacle  in  the  vfilderness,  in  which
God  dwelt  (2  Sam.  vii.  6 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  67,
etc.),  and  to  which  reference  is  made  in
Lev.  xxvi.  11  and  Ezek.  xxxvii.  28.  The
localization  of  Deity,  the  building  a  house
for  the  L(»d  whom  the  heaven  of  Iwavens


could  not  contain,  was  a  wondrous  adumbra-
tion of  the  ultimate  proof  to  be  given,  that,
though  God  was  infinitely  great,  he  was  yet
capable  of  turning  his  glorious  face  upon
those  who  seek  him;  though  unspeakably
holy,' awful,  majestic,  omnipotent,  he  was
yet  accessible  and  merciful  and  able  to  save
and  sanctify  his  people  The  glory  of  the
Lord  was  the  central  significance  of  the
tabernacle  and  temple  worship.  It  was
always  assumed  to  be  present,  even  if  in-
visible. The  Targums  in  a  great  variety  of
passages  substitute  for  the  "glory  of  the
Lord,"  vhich  is  a  continuous  element  in  the
history  of  the  old  covenant,  the  word  "She-
cliinah,"  "dwelling,"  and  use  the  term  in
obvious  reference  to  the  biblical  use  of  the
verb  J3»,  he  dwelt,  when  describing  the
Lord's  familiar  and  accessible  sojourn  with
his  people.  It  is  too  much  to  say  that  John
here  adopts  the  Aramaic  phrase,  or  with
certainty  refers  to  it.  But  itrK-fivatre  recalls
the  method  by  which  Jehovah  impressed
his  prophets  with  his  nearness,  and  came
veritably  to  his  own  possession.  "Now,"
says  John,  "the  Word  made  flesh  took
up  his  tabernacle  in  our  midst."  It
is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  John  subse-
quently shows  that  Jesus  identified  his
body  with  "  tlie  temple  "  of  God  (ch.  ii.  19,
etc.).  The  "us"  represenfs  the  ground  of
a  personal  experience  which  makes  the
hypothesis  of  an  Alexandrine  origin  for  the
entire  representation  perfectly  impossible.
The  reference  to  the  old  covenant  is  made
more  conspicuous :  And  we  contemplated  his
glory.  The  5(i|o  corresponds  with  the  visible
manifestations  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah
under  the  Old  Testament  (Kxod.  xxiv.  17 ;
xl.  34 ;  Acts  vii.  2 ;  Isa.  vi.  3 ;  Ezek.  i.  28).
Dazzling  light  at  the  burning  bush,  in  the
pillar  of  fire,  on  Mount  Sinai,  at  the  dedica-
tion of  tiibernacle  and  temple,  eta,  revealed
the  awful  fact  of  the  Divine  nearness.  The
eye  of  believing  men  saw  the  real  glory  of
the  Logos  made  flesh  when  he  set  up  the
tabernacle  of  his  humanity  among  us.  It
does  not  follow  that  all  eyes  must  have  seen
what  the  eye  of  toith  could  see.  The  dark-
ness has  resisted  all  the  light,  the  world  h3.s
not  known  the  Logos;  the  susceptibilities
of  believing  men  enabled  them  to  perceive
the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  regions  and  by  a
mode  of  presentation  to  which  unregenerate
men  have  not  attained.  The  apostles  saw
it  in  the  absolute  moral  perfection  of  his
holiness  and  of  his  charity ;  of  his  grace  and
truth.  We  can  scarcely  exclude  here  a
reference  to  the  wondrous  vision  upon  which
(as  we  learn  from  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke)
John  himself  gazed  on  the  IVIouutain  ol
Transfiguration,  when  the  venerable  symbd
of  Light  reappeared  from  within  the  person
of  the  Lord,  so  linking  his  personal  manifei-


OB.  1. 1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


19


tation  of  "  the  Word  "  with  the  theophanies
of  the  Old  Testament;  nor  can  we  forget
the  sublime  vision  which  John  undoubtedly
records  in  the  beginning  of  his  Apocalypse.
Nevertheless,  the  glory  which  the  apostles
beheld  must  be  distinct  from  the  "glory"
which  he  had  -with  the  Father  before  the
world  was,  and  to  which  (ch.  xvii.  24)  he
prayed  that  he  might  rtturii,  and  the  full
radiance  of  which  he  would  ultimately  turn
upon  the  eyes  of  the  men  whom  he  had
gathered  "out  of  the  world."  Before  that  con-
tummation  "  we,"  says  he,  "  contemplated  hi»
glory  as  of  an  only  begotten."  The  S>s
implies  comparison  with  the  transcendent
conception  which  had  entered  into  his
inspired  imagining.  The  word  iJiovoyevi^s
is  used  by  John  to  refer  to  the  supremo  and
unique  relation  of  the  Son  to  the  Father
(oh.  iii.  16,  18,  and  1  John  iv.  9).  It  is
used  of  human  sons  in  Luke  (vii.  12  ;  viii.
42 ;  iz.  88),  and  unigenitus  is  the  translation
in  the  Vulgate  of  the  Hebrew  Tn»n,  where
the  LXX.  gives  dynTrTjTdj,  well-beloved
(see  •^:i'n;  Gen.  xiii.  2,  12,  16).  It  corre-
sponds with  the  TrpardroKos  of  Col.  i.  15
and  Heb.  i.  6,  showing  that  an  analogous
thought  filled  the  apostolic  mind.  By  laying
stress  here  on  the  "glory,"  and  giviug
historic  value  and  emphasis  to  the  super-
natural conception  of  Jesus,  many  see  in
this  a  reference  to  the  Incarnation  wherein
he  became  an  only  begotten  Son  of  the
Father.  This  would  be  far  more  probable
if  the  article  had  been  placed  before  fiovoye-
povs.  Here  the  apostle  seems  to  labour  to
express  the  glory  of  One  who  could  thus
stand  in  the  eternal  relation  of  the  Logos  to
0E(is,  making  it  correspond  with  the  relation
also  subsisting  between  fiomyev^s  and  the
"  Father."  Great  speciality  and  peculiarity
is  here  bestowed  upon  the  "  only  begotten,"
as  it  stands  in  close  relationship  with  those
to  whom  he  gives  power  or  capability  to
become  "  children  of  God."  They  are  bom
into  the  family  of  the  God  and  Father  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  glory  which
John  says  "  we  beheld  "  In  his  earthly  flesh
was  the  effulgence  of  the  uncreated  beam
which  broke  through  the  veil  of  his  flesh,
and  really  convisced  us  that  he  was  "  the
Word  made  flesh."  The  Tiiliingen  critics
see  a  contradiction  here  with  the  prayer  of
Christ  (oh.  xvii.  5, 24)  for  "  the  glory  which  he
had  with  the  Father."  If  he  shone  on  earth
with  such  glory  as  John  here  describes,  why
should  he  desire  more?  Godet  resolves  it
by  insisting  on  the  moral  glory  of  his  filial
consciousness  when  he  liad  indeed  deprived
himself  of  his  Divine  perfections.  Thus
Godet  repudiates  the  two  natures  of  his
Person.  There  -S  no  real  contradiction,  as
we  have  seen.  Some  diflerence  of  opinion
occurs  also  as  to  the  reference  of  the  nMfrns


X<ipiros  Kal  4\j)fle(of.  Borne  have  referred
ir\ifp7)s  to  the  Father,  and  some  to  aiiruv,
though  in  both  cases  a  break  in  the  con-
struction would  be  involved,  as  the  ante-
cedent would  have  been  in  the  genitive.
Others,  again  (founding  on  the  reading  ot
one  uncial  manuscrijit,  D,  which  here  has
itATiprf),  refer  it  to  So^af,  and  all  who  thus
construe  eschew  any  parenthetical  treatment
of  the  previous  clause.  The  latter  method
i*  freer  from  dif&culty,  as  then  this  clause,
xA^iprjj  X'^P'''"'"  ""'  i\ri8ttas,  is  directly  and
grammatically  related  with  A6yos.  The
Word  was  made  flesh,  and,  full  of  grace  and
of  truth,  set  up  his  tabernacle  in  our  midst.
Grace  and  truth  are  the  two  methods  by
which  the  glory  as  of  "  an  only  begotten  "
shone  upon  us,  and  we  beheld  it.  The  com-
bination of  these  two  ideas  of  grace  and  truth
pervades  the  Old  Testament  description  of
the  Lord  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiv.  6;  Ps.  xl.  10, 11 ;
Ixi.  7;  XXV.  10).  "Grace,"  the  free  and
royal  communication  of  unlooked-for  and  of
undeserved  love,  is  the  key-note  of  the  New
Testament.  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ"  is  the  compendium  of  all  his  powers
of  benediction,  and  correspomls  with  the
life  which  is  "  in  him,"  and  all  the  gift  of
himself  to  those  who  came  into  contact  with
him.  "  Truth "  is  the  expression  of  the
thought  of  God.  Truth  per  ge  can  find  no
larger  definition  than  the  perfect  revelation
of  God's  eternal  thought  concerning  himself
and  his  universe,  and  concerning  the  rela-
tions of  all  things  to  each  other  and  to  him.
That  which  God  thinks  about  these  things
must  be  "  truth  per  se."  Christ  claimed  to
be  "  the  Truth  "  and  "  the  Life  "  (ch.  xiv.  (i).
and  John  here  says  that  it  v.as  in  virtue  of
his  being  tlie  Logos  of  Gnd  that  he  was  full
of  these.  Grace  and  truth,  love  and  revela-
tion, were  so  transcendent  in  him ;  in  other
words,  he  was  so  full,  so  charged,  so  over-
flowing with  both,  that  the  glory  which
shone  from  him  gave  apostles  this  conception
about  it,  viz.  that  it  was  that  of  an  only  be-
gotten (specially  and  eternally  begotten)  and
with  the  Fatlier.  The  irapa  UaTp6s  corre-
sponds with  the  irapa  aov  rather  than  irapa
(rot  of  ch.  xvii.  5,  and  does  not,  therefore,
necessarily  suggest  more  than  the  premun<
dane  condition,  answering  to  the  irpbs  rhv
0eoi»  of  ver.  1,  and  eis  Toy  K6\iroi>  of  ver.  18.
Erasmus,  Paulus,  and  a  few  others  have
associated  the  Ti\iipt)s,  etc.,  with  the  follow-
ing verse.  This  is  eminently  unsatisfactory
as  unsuited  to  the  character  of  the  Baptist.
Moreover,  the  sixteenth  verse,  by  its  reference
to  Christ's  "  fulness,"  positively  forbids  it.

Ver.  15. — (6)  The  testimony  to  this  fact  by
the  prophetic  spirit.  The  evangelist,  in
support  and  vindication  of  the  profound
impression  produced  upon  himself  and  othess
by  the  Chnst,  cites  the  atartling  and  para-


20


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,        [oh.  i.  1— 61,


doxical  testunony  of  the  Baptist,  which  in
John's  own  hearing  the  gieat  foierunner  had
twice  uttered,  under  yery  extraordinary  dr-
oomstancea  (see  Ters.  26,  30).  In  the  later
verses  this  testimony  is  put  in  its  proper
place.  Its  repetition  deepens  the  impression
wliich  the  narrative  gives  of  the  vivid  reality,
and  of  the  fact  that  the  evangelist  was  trust-
ing to  a  strongly  impressed  recollection,  and
is  not  romanticizing,  as  the  Tiibingen  critics
suppose.  The  sharp  paradoxical  form  is
thoroughly  characteristic  of  the  man  who
called  on  scribes  and  Pharisees  to  "  repent,"
and  spoke  of  God  raising  up  seed  to  Abraliam
from  the  stones  of  the  ground.  From  the
synoptists  we  learn  that  John  declared  that
the  Coming  One  was  "  mightier  "  than  him-
self, would  deal  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and
with  fire  as  he  was  able  to  do  with  water.
He  knew  not  the  kind  of  manifestation  which
was  coming  on  apace.  But  an  enormous
change  passed  over  John  the  Baptist  when
he  came  into  contact  with  our  Lord,  and  at
his  baptism  he  sank  abashed  before  the
revelations  which  flashed  on  his  soul.  The
enigmatical  form  of  the  Baptist's  utterances
was  the  beginning  of  the  evangelist's  faith
in  the  personal  pre-existence  of  the  Logos
who  had  become  flesh  in  Christ.  The  testi-
mony of  the  Baptist  is  here  brought  in,  as
the  kist  great  word  of  the  prophetic  ministry
of  the  Old  Testament,  apart  from  the  historio
setting  in  which  it  afterwards  occurs,  as  if,
moreover,  it  was  an  abiding  word  which  was
yet  sounding  in  the  ears  of  men.  The
greatest  of  the  sons  of  woman,  and  "  more
than  a  prophet,"  he  who  gathered  up  in  his
immense  personaUiy  all  the  functions  of
prophet,  priest,  Nazarite,  and  master  and
teacher  of  men,  the  Elijah  of  the  new
revelation — John,  the  very  ideal  of  Divine
and  supernatural  voice  in  this  world  of  ours,
John,  the  veritable  historic  man,  moreover,
to  whose  disastrous  martyrdom  some  of  the
Jews  (Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  xviii.  T.  2)  referred
the  terrible  judgments  that  befell  their
nation — John  beareth  witness.'  That  was  his
function,  and  his  testimony  still  stands,  his
"voice"  is  still  heard  wherever  his  great
career  is  known  or  properly  appreciated — in
Palestine,  in  Alexandria,  in  Ephesus  or
Corinth.  And  he  orieth  {xeKpayev);  or,  hath

'  K  here  reads  K^Kpayev  oStui  Ijy  i  im<rci
}iov  ipx^f^^yos  is  ifiTTpoffdev  fjLOv  ysyoyeVf  omit-
ting Sr  tlwov,  and  introducing  Ss  before
iimpoaBh.  This  is  rejected  by  Westoott  and
Hoi-t  and  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.).  The  text
of  Weatcott  and  Hort  ia  Kixpaytv  Keywv-olros
?iv  i  (hrdv—i  hiriffa  fim  ipj(6i),evos  IfiirpoaBer,
ete.  'O  cTirav  is  found  in  one  correction  of  K,
B,  0.  Westoott  does  not  adopt  it  in  his  com-
mentary; Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)  speaks  of  it
M  " inept; "  £.T.  places  it  in  the  margin.


cried;  and  the  cry  is  still  heard  among  men:
This  was  he  of  whom  I  spake;  implying  that
John  uttered  words  of  strange  enigmatical
significance  before  he  saw  Jesus  coming  to
his  baptism,  and  that,  as  the  evangelist  sub-
sequently shows,  on  two  memorable  occasions,
the  prophet  recalled  them  and  reafSrmed
their  truthfulness.    Before  I  saw  him,  I  said
it :  He  that  is  coming  after  me  hath  become
— hath  been  in  mighty  activity — ^before  me.
He  came  forth  in  many  ways  from  the  Father,
and    was   the   central   reality  of  the   old
covenant ;  yeyoyey,  he  hath  come  in  the  voice
of  the  Lord,  in  the  Shechinah-glory,  in  the
Angel  of  the  presence,  chronologically  "  before
me."    The  English  Version  has  followed  the
traditionary  interpretation  from  Chrysostom  to
Lucke,  De  Wette,  Alford,  McLellan,  and  has
seen  in  this  iiarpoaBhi  /tou  yiyovev  a  reference
to  the  higher  rank  or  dignity  of  the  Logos
incarnate,  and  translated  the  second  clause
"is  preferred  before  me,"  or  "hath  been
made  before  me,"  etc    But  such  a  statement
would  not  have  conveyed  any  thought  of
great  importance.    A  herald  is  naturally  ex-
ceeded and  superseded  by  the  dignity  and
rank  of  him  for  whom  he  prepares  the  way.
Moreover,  the  two  adverbs  of  place  are  used
in  metaphorical  sense  as  adverbs  of  time
(derived  from  the  relative  position  of  indi-
viduals in  a  line  or  procession),  and  it  is
scarcely  probable  that  the  second  should  be
used  in  another  sense  altogether,  which  would
have  disturbed  the  antithesis  between  them.
On  the  other  hand,  Hengstenberg,  Meyer,
Lange,  Godet,  etc.,  recognize  the  perception
of  the  Baptist,  and  his  utterance  of  belief  in
the  pre-existence  of  the  Christ,  and  that
from  such  passages  as  Isa.  vi.  1  and  MaL  iii.  1
he  knew  that  he  who  was  coming  into  the
world,  and  about  to  baptize  with  the  Holy
Ghost  and  with  fire,  to  take  the  fan  in  his
hand,  etc.,  had  been  in  reality  hefore  him.
The  difiiculty  of  this  interpretation  is  said  to
be  that  the  proof  which  follows — because,  or
for  (irpaJTifs  /iou  fiv),  he  was  before  me —
would  be  tautoIogouB  in  the  extreme;  the
reason  given  for  the  Lord  having  become
before  him  being  simply  the  asseveration  of
the  fact.    But  the  two  very  remarkable  ex-
pressions, ifiirpoaO^v  fiov  yiyovev  and  wpurSs
fiov  ijv,  are  not  identical.   The  first  may  easily
refer  to  the  historio  precedence  of  the  activity
of  the  Coming  One  in  all  the  operations  of
the  Logo»;  the  second  may  refer  to  the  abso-
lute and  eternal  precedence  of  the  Logos  in
itsblf.    If  so,  the  whole  significance  of  the
previous  fourteen  verses  is  gathered  up,  and
shown  to  have  been  flashed  upon  the  con-
■cionsness  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  uttered
with    such   intensity   that   the    evangeliat
caught  the  idea,  and  saw  in  it  the  kej  to
the  whole  mystery.     It  would  seem,  how-
ever, that  the  Sri  wfirrit  luv  did  not  form


OH.  1. 1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  JOHN.


21


part  sf  the  oiiginal  utterance  of  John.  After
the  baptism,  the  whole  truth  had  broken
npon  the  Baptist,  and  he  clenched  or  saw
an  explanation  of  the  mystery.

Vers.  16— 18.— <7)  The  experienee  •/  On
writer.

Ver.  16.— There  can  be  little  doubt  that
the  fifteenth  verse  ig  a  parenthetical  clause,
answering  to  the  sixth  and  seventh  verses,
and  standing  to  ver.  14  very  much  in  the
same  kind  of  relation  that  vers.  6,  7  do
to  vera.  1 — 5.  There  is  a  further  reason ;
the  verses  which  follow  are  clearly  not,
as  Lange  suggests,  the  continuance  of  the
Baptist's  liaprvpta,  but  the  language  of  the
evangelist,  and  a  detail  of  his  personal
experience.  The  entire  context  would  en-
tirely forbid  our  taking  the  aSrov  of  ver.  16
as  referring  to  the  Baptist.  This  is  still
more  evident  from  the  true  reading  of  3ti  in
place  of  KaV  The  "because"  points  back
at  once  to  the  statements  of  ver.  11.  Heng-
stenberg  and  Oodet  think  there  is  no  need
to  transform  the  fifteenth  verse  into  a
parenthesis,  in  order,  after  the  recital  of
John  the  Baptist's  testimony,  to  proceed  to  a
further  experience  of  the  evangelist ;  trans-
lating "  and  even,"  Lange  makes  the  whole
utterance  to  be  that  of  the  Baptist,  which
appears  to  be  profoundly  inconsistent  with
the  position  of  the  Baptist,  either  then  or
subsequently.  The  grand  declaration,  that
the  Logos  incarnate  was  "full  of  grace  and
truth,"  is  justified  by  the  author  of  the  pro-
logue, from  his  conscious  experience  of  the
exhaustless  plenitude  of  the  manifestation.
Because  from  his  fulness  we  all  received.  He
speaks  as  from  the  bosom  of  a  society  of
persons,  who  have  not  been  dependent  on
vision  or  on  individual  contact  with  the  his-
toric revelation  (comp.  oh.  xx.,  "  Blessed  are
they  [Jesus  said]  who  have  not  seen  [touched
or  handled],  and  yet  have  believed,"  but  have
nevertheless  discovered  a  perennial  supply
of  grace  and  truth  in  him).  We  all,  my
fellow-apostles  and  a  multitude  which  no
man  can  number,  received  from  this  source,
as  from  the  Divinity  itself,  all  that  we  have
needed.  An  effort  has  been  made,  from  the
evangelist's  use  of  the  word  pUroma,  to  father
the  "  prologue  "  upon  one  familiar  with  the
Valentinian  metaphysic,  and  thus  to  postpone
its  origin  to  the  middle  of  the  second  century;
but  the  Valentinian  pleroma  is  the  sum  total
of  the  Divine  emanations  of  the  thirty  pairs

'  a,  B,  C*,  D,  L,  X,  33,  with  versions  and
folios,  read  the  former,  and  are  followed
by  Qriesbaoh,  Laohmann,  Tisohendorf  (8th
edit),  Tregelles,  Westcott  and  Hort.  There
is  considerable  authority  for  xal,  which
is  still  preferred  by  Oodet  and  Hengsten-
beig,  and  ia  margin  of  Laohmann  and  BUe
Bevisen.


of  fflons,  which  have  been  produced  from
the  eternal  "  bythos,"  or  abyss,  one  only  of
which  is  supposed,  on  Valentinian  principles,
to  have  assumed  a  phantasmic  form  in  Jesus
Christ.  Nothing  could  be  less  resembling
the  position  of  the  author  of  this  Gospel,  who
clearly  regards  the  Logos  incarnate  as  coin-
cident with  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  as
containing  in  himself,  in  complete  self-posses-
sion, all  the  energies  and  beneficence  of  the
Eternal.  With  the  apostle's  doctrine  of  the
Logos  as  identical  with  God,  as  the  Creator
of  everything,  as  the  Life,  as  the  Light  of
men ;  and,  as  becoming  the  Source  of  all  these
energies  to  men  in  his  incarnation,  there  is
no  basis  for  Valentinianism.  Though  the
phraseology  of  the  Gnostics  was  borrowed
in  part  from  the  Gospel,  and  though  Valen-
tinus  may  have  fancied  himself  justified
in  his  misuse  of  texts;  the  ideas  of  the
Gospel  and  the  Gnostic  were  directly  contra-
dictory of  one  another  (see  Introduction).
Long  before  John  used  this  word,  St.  Paul
had  used  it  In  writing  to  the  Ephesians  and
Oolossians,  as  though,  even  in  his  day,  the
word  had  acquired  a  distinct  theological
meaning,  and  one  that  had  naturally  arisen
from  its  etymology  and  usage  in  Greek
writers.  Bishop  Lightfoot  has  shown  in  his
dissertation  ('Epistle  to  Oolossians,'  2nd
edit.,  pp.  257 — 273)  that  the  form  of  the
word  demands  a  passive  sense,  id  quod
impletur,  and  not  an  active  one  which  some
have  given  to  it  in  certain  New  Testament
passages,  as  if  it  had  the  meaning  of  id
quod  implet.  By  his  examination  of  nume-
rous passages,  he  shows  that  it  always  has
fundamentally  the  sense  of  completeness,
"the  fuU  complement,"  the  plenitude,  TlAri-
piifia  is  the  passive  verbal  from  irXripovv,
to  make  complete.  Thus  Col.  i.  19,  "The
Father  was  pleased  that  all  the  fulness,
the  totality,  should  dwell  in  him,"  explained
elsewhere  in  the  same  Epistle,  "  all  the
completeness,  the  plenitude  of  the  Godhead"
(ii.  9).  The  widespread  diffusion  of  the
idea  of  emanations,  the  hypostatizing  of
perfections  and  attributes,  the  virtual  mytho-
logy which  was  creeping  tlirough  metaphy-
sical subtleties,  even  into  Judaism  and
Christianity,  demanded  positive  repudiation;
and,  while  the  whole  Church  was  united  in
its  recognition  of  the  Divine  energy  of  Christ,
it  became  needful  to  refer  to  Jus  Divine-
human  personality  all  the  fulness  of  the
Godhead  bodily.  In  Ephesians  St.  Paul
speaks,  however,  of  the  Church  which  is  his
body  as  identified  with  him,  and  as  (in
Bph.  V.  27)  a  bride  made  one  flesh  with  her
husband,  withe  mt  spot  or  wrinkle,  ideally  per^
feet,  as  the  part  of  one  colossal  individuality
of  which  Christ  is  the  Head ;  or,  the  one  build-
ing of  which  he  is  the  Foundation  and  the
Corner-stone.  Hence  "the  fulness  of  Christ"


22


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  l  1—61.


(Bph  iv.  13)  is  that  in  wliich  every  member
participatee,  and  "tlie  measure  of  the  stature
of  the  fulness  of  Christ "  is  equated  with  the
perfect  humanity  into  which  all  believers
come.  Hence  in  Eph.  iii.  19  these  individuals
are  completed  in  him,  and  are  thus  as  a
whole,  by  the  realization  of  their  union  to
Christ,  participators  in  the  fulness  of  God.  So
the  difficult  expression,  Eph.  i.  23,  becomes
explained,  a  passage  in  which  the  Church
itself,  his  body,  is  said  to  be  "  tlie  fulness  of
him  who  filleth  all  in  all."  The  Church  ii
the  organ  and  sphere  in  which  all  the.Divine
graces  are  poured,  and  is  considered  as  ever
struggling  to  embody  the  ideal  perfection  of
him  in  whom  all  the  fulness  of  God  dwells.
Both  ideas,  those  of  both  the  Christological
Epistles,  are  involvi  d  in  this  great  assei  tion
of  St.  John.  And  grace  for  grace.  It  is
said  the  evangelist  might  have  written  x"?'"
eTrl  -xdpiTi,  or  eVl  x^P^^j  grace  in  addition
to  grace  received  alicady ;  but  the  use  of  the
preposition  avri,  implies  more,  "  grace  inter-
changing with  grace"  (Meyer) — not  the  grace
of  the  old  covenant  replaced  by  the  grace
of  the  new  dispensation  (Chrysostom,  Lampe,
and  many  others),  for,  though  there  was  grace
underlying  all  God's  self-revelation,  yet  in
the  next  verse  the  contrast  between  "  Law  "
and  "  grace  "  is  too  striking  to  be  ignored.
The  grace  replaced  by  grace  means  that
every  grace  received  is  a  capacity  for  higher
blessedness.  Thus  Christian  liuraUity  is
the  condition  of  Divine  uplifting ;  the  know-
ledge that  leads  to  love  is  the  condition  of
that  higher  gnosis  that  is  born  of  love.  The
faith  that  accepts  mercy  blossoms  into  the
joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.
Keoonoiliation  with  God  becomes  itself  trans-
formed into  active  communion  with  him ;  all
union  to  Christ  becomes  the  harbinger  of
full  identification  with  him,  "  he  in  us  and
we  in  him."  This  is  the  great  principle  of
the  Divine  kingdom:  "To  him  that  huth
shall  be  given."

Ver.  17.  —  The  xApu/  iyrJ  xi^P'^t  is
sustained  by  calling  attention  to  the  con-
trast between  the  two  methods  of  Divine
communication.  Because  the  Law  was  given
through  Moses;  "Law,"  which  in  Paul'i
writings  had  been  even  looked  at  by  itself
as  an  "antithesis  to  grace"  (Bom.  It.  15;
vi.  14;  vii.  3;  X.  4;  Gal.  iii.  10;  It.  4).
The  Law  principle  of  approach  to  God
fails  through  the  weakness  of  the  flesh.
The  will  is  too  far  enslaved  for  it  to  yield
spontaneously  to  the  majesty  of  the  Law-
giver, or  to  feel  the  attractions  of  obedience.
The  Law  condemns, — it  is  incapable  of  justi-
fying the  ungodly;  the  Law  terrifies,^— it
never  reconciles.  The  Law  even  provokes  to
sin  and  excites  the  passions  which  it  punishes.
Law  was  given  through  Hoses,  pointing  to
the  histono  fact  of  the  pomp  and  splendour


of  its  first  delivery,  associated  therefore  with
the  greatest  human  nanje  in  all  past  history.
Law  was  a  "  gift,"  a  Divine  bestowment  of
entirely  unspeakable  value  to  those  who
were  ignorant  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.
Even  the  ruiuistration  of  death  was  glorious.
The  knowledge  of  an  ideal  perfection  is  a
great  advance,  even  though  no  power  should
accompany  the  ideal  to  draw  the  soul  to-
wards it.    To  know  what  is  right,  even  with-
out help  to  do  it,  save  in  the  form  of  sanction,
or  penalty  appealing  to  the  lower  nature,
is  better  and  nobler  tlian  to  sin  in  utter
ignorance.    The  Law  was  given  "  through  "
the   mind,   voice,  conscience,  and  will  of
Moses.      And   alongside  of   him  may  be
supposed  to  be  ranged  all  the  mighty  sages
and  legislators  of  the  human  race — all  who
have  thus  been  the  mouthpiece  of  the  Divine
idea,  all  who  have  impressed  the  "ought"
•nd  "ought  not,"  the  "shall"  and  "shall
not,"  upon  mankind.    Moses  is  not  the  autlwr
of  the  Law,  the  "giving"  of  the  Law  was
not  iy  Moses,  but  through  his  instrumentality.
Grace  and  truth,  however,  came — became,
passed    into    activity  in  human   nature —
through    Jesus    Christ.     For    "grace    and
truth "    (see  notes,  ver.   14),  the  higliest
manifestation    and    self-communication    of
Divine  love  and  Divine  thought,  came  into
human  experience  through  Jesus    Christ.
A  vast  and  wonderful  contrast  is  here  made
between  all  earlier  or  other  dispensations
and  that  of  which  the  apostle  proceeds  to
speak.    Divine  favour  and  help,  the  life  of
God  himself  in  the  soul  of  man,  awakening
love  in  response  to  the  Divine  love;  and
Divine  thought  so  made  known  as  to  bring
all  the  higher  faculties  of  man  into  direct
contact  with  reality,  are  an  enormous  advance
upon  Lawgiving.    The  appropriate  himian
response  to  Law  is  obedience;  the  appropriate
human  response  to  love  is  of  the  same  nature
with  itself — nothing  Ijss  than  love;  so  the
only  adequate  response  to  Divine  truth  is
faith;  to  Divine  thought  may  follow  human
thought    All  this  forth-streaming  of  grace
and  truth  originated  in  the  person  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  became  possible  through  him.
This  great  Name,  this  blending  of  the  human
and  Divine,  of  saving  grace  and  Messianic
dignity,  of  ancient  expectations  and  recent
realization,  is  only  twice  more  used  in  the
Gospel  (ch.  xvii.  3  and  xx.  31);  but  it  pervades
it  tljroughout,  and,  though  not  actually  said
to  be  equivalent  to  tlie  Word  madefied,  yet
no  shadow  of  doubt  is  left  that  this  was  the
apostle's  meaning.    Here  the  full  significance
of  the  prologue  really  bursts  into  view  to
one  who  reads  it  for  the  fiist  lime  (cf.  1  John
i.  1 — 3).    Difficulty  may  be  felt  by  some  as
to  the  actual  c-apacity  of  Jesus  Christ  to
reveal  the  Divine  thought,  or  the  truth,  and
so  the  closing  verse  of  the  prologue  Tindi>


OH.  1. 1—51.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


23


cateB  the  claim  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world
to  be  the  truth  (of.  ch.  xiv.  6).

Ver.  18.— -No  one  hath  ever  yet  seen  God.
Many  visions,  theophanies,  appearances,
angelic  splendours,  in  the  desert,  on  the
mountain,  in  the  temple,  by  the  river  of
Chebar,  had  been  granted  to  the  prophets
of  the  Lord;  but  they  have  all  fallen  short
of  the  direct  intuition  of  God  as  God.
Abraham,  Israel,  Moses,  Manoah,  David,
&aiah,  Bzekiel,  saw  visions,  local  manifesta-
tions, anticipations  of  the  Incarnation;  but
the  apostle  here  talses  the  Lord's  own  word
for  it  (ch.  V.  37),  and  he  elsewhere  repeats  it
(1  John  iv.  12).  These  were  but  forerunners
of  the  ultimate  manifestation  of  the  Logos.
"  The  Glory  of  the  Lord,"  "  the  Angel  of  the
Lord,"  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord,"  were  not  so
revealed  to  patriarchs  that  they  saw  God
as  Go±  They  saw  him  in  the  form  of  light,
or  of  spiritual  agency,  or  of  human  ministries;
but  in  the  deepest  sense  we  must  still  wait
for  the  purity  of  heart  which  will  reveal  to
our  weakened  faculties  the  beatific  vision.
The  only  begotten  Son— or,  (God  mdy  be-
gotten ') — ^who  is  in  (or,  on)  the  boiom  of  the

'  The  reading  iwvo-yev^s  ®i6s,  in  place  of
i  iMvayev))s  m6s,  has  greatly  exercised  modem
critics,  and  the  most  abundant  information
may  he  obtained  against  and  for  the  un-
familiar phrase  in  Dr.  Ezra  Abbott's  dis-
sertation 'Bibliotheca  Sacra'  (1861),  and
Dr.  Hort's  'Two  Dissertations'  (1876).
Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.)  has  finally  adopted
6  novar/fjrifs  vUs  with  the  R.T.  With  them
Godet,  Alford,  Meyer  (who  styles  the  other
reading  a  dogmatic  gloss),  Liicke,  and  a
majority  of  modem  critics  agree.  Treijfelles,
antecedent  to  his  acquaintance  with  the
Sinaitio  manuscript  (K),  called  attention  to
the  reading  ®i6s  without  the  article  before
fiovoyevi]s,  and  chiefly  on  the  ground  of  the
patristic  use  of  the  term,  with  or  without
direct  quotation  from  the  passage  before  us.
Dr.  Hort  has  sustained  it  with  great  learn-
ing, endeavouring  to  refute  the  objections,
(1)  that  the  phrase  is  unfamiliar  to  the
Christian  theologian;  (2)  that  it  is  incon-
sistent with  the  theology  of  the  prologue  or
of  the  New  Testament;  (3)  that  it  could
have  been  foisted  into  the  text  from  its
cunency  in  ancient  Creeds,  although  the
frequency  of  the  use  of  the  term,  apart  from
scriptural  context,  may  have  been  occasioned
by  its  presence  in  some  of  the  early  Creeds
out  of  which  the  phraseology  of  the  Nicene
Creed  wag  fashioned.  He  shows  that,  though
fiomyei/iis  @e6s  was  used  by  the  writers  of
the'fourth  centui  y,  it  was  not  used  to  further
special  dogmatic  conoluoions.  He  proves
that  Alius  himself  was  accustomed  to  it,
and  that  Eunomius  and  the  Apostolical
Coustitutioiis  made  use  of  it.    Hence  it  is


Father,  he  interpreted  (him);  became  the
satisfying  Exposition,  the  Declarer,  drawing
forth  from  the  depths  of  God  all  that  it  is

capable  of  an  Arian  signification,  and  is  by
no  means  needed  as  a  support  of  the  true
Deity  of  the  Son.  The  common  reading  is
sustained  by  A,  C,  E,  X,  and  fourteen  other
uncials,  by  all  known  cursives  except  33,
by  the  Old  Latin,  the  Vulgate,  the  Old  Syriac,
Harclean  Syriac,  the  Jemsalem  Syriac
leotionary,  the  Armenian  and  CEthiopic
Versions,  by  Tertullian  ('  Adv.  Prax.,'  c.  15),
Eusebius  (in  six  places),  Athanasius  (four),
Chrysostom  (eight),  Ambrose,  Augustine,
Hilary  (seven,  though  in  one  place  he  reads,
"unigeiiitus  Deus  in  sinu  Patris,"  'De  Trinit.,'
xii.  24).  Irenaeus,  Origen,  Basil,  Cyril,  can
scarcely  be  claimed  on  either  side,  as  they
make  use  in  this  connection  of  both  @e6s
and  vi6s.  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  and  with
doubtful  context  Alexander  of  Alexandria,
and  Gregory  of  Nnzianzus,  give  the  common
text.  Dr.  Abbott  adils  many  others,  and
enumerates  the  Latin  Fathers,  Hilary,
Phsebadiua,  V.  Afer,  Ambrose  (seven),
Jerome,  Faustin  (three),  Augustine,  and
others.  He  shows  that  Tregelles  has  been
inaccurate  in  his  citations  from  the  Fathers,
and  undervalued  the  testimony  against  the
reading  of  the  ancient  codices.  To  set  over
against  this  very  wide  diffusion  of  evidence,
©E02  is  read  by  N,  B,  C*,  L,  four  of  the
codices  most  trusted  by  the  modern  school,
the  special  cursive  33,  by  the  Memphitic
Version,  by  Peschito  Syriac,  and  the  rtuirgin
of  Harclean  Syriac,  by  the  Valentinians,
by  IrensBus  once  or  twice,  by  Clemens
Alexandrinus,  Origen  ('Ens.'),  Epiphanins,
Gregory  of  Nyssa,  by  Arius  (' Ap.  Ath.'),  and
others.  Fulgentius  repeatedly  adopts  it  as  a
theological  term.  From  this  enumeration  it
would  seem  that  the  question  really  turns
on  the  value  to  be  attributed  to  N  and  B ;
and  with  reference  to  the  former  it  cannot  be
concealed  that  K  omits  the  following  words,
S  ill',  which  detracts  from  the  value  of  its
authority.  The  argument  of  alteration  by
copyists  is  in  favour  of  transposition  from
©C  to  rc,  as  t»  the  more  ordinary  and
customary  phrase,  than  vice  versa.

A  special  reading,  d  fj.ovoyevi)s  ©crfs,  does
not  occur  in  any  ancient  Greek  codex,  though
found  in  Epiphanius.  Some  other  modi-
fications of  the  phrase  occur,  such  as  vths
Tov  ®eov  and  vihs  ©eds.  One  Latin  cojjy
reads  unigenitus  without  either  filius  or
Deui.  Professor  Hort  has  taken  the  whole
of  Dr.  Abbott's  facts  into  consideration,
and  adheres  to  the  originality  of  the  reading
Qehs;  and  Harnack  and  Westcott  agree  with
Tregelles,  and  so  also  Dr.  Plummer  and
Archdeacon  Watkins  regard  the  question  as
settled.    It  will  not  be  generally  regarded


24


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1—51.


possible  that  we  shall  see,  know,  or  realize.
This  lofty  assertion  ii  augmented  by  the
sublime  intensification  of  the  earlier  phrase,
"with  God  (vpbs  i-hv  @e6v),"  by  (eis  rhv
K6\mv), "  in  or  on  the  bosom  of  the  Father;"
i.e.  in  most  intimate  and  loving  fellowship
with  the  Father  as  the  only  begotten.  The
relations  of  fatherhood  and  sonship  within
the  substance  of  the  Godhead  give  new  life,
warmth,  realization,  to  the  vaster,  colder,  more
metaphysical,  metaphenomenal  relations  of
@f6s  and  Aoy6s  (cf.  here  Prov.  viii.  30).
Bengal  here  says,  "  In  lumbis  esse  dicuntur
qui  uasoentur  homines,  in  sinu  sunt  qui  nati
sunt.  In  sinu  Patris  erat  Filius,  quia
nuuquam  non-natus."  In  view  of  the  con-
tention of  Meyer  that  the  language  here
refers  to  no  agelong,  eternal  indwelling  of
the  Logos  with,  or  of  the  Son  (God  only
begotten)  on  the  bosom  of,  the  Father,  but
to  the  exaltation  of  the  Christ  after  his
•soenaion,  we  can  only  refer  to  the  present
tense  (i  Siv),  which  from  the  standpoint  of
the  prologue  docs  not  transfer  itself  to  the
historical  standpoint  of  the  writer  at  the
end  of  the  first  century.  Lange  thinks  that
the  whole  of  this  wonderful  .utterance  is
attributed  by  the  evangelist  to  the  Baptist ;
but  the  standing  of  the  Baptist,  lofty  as  it
is  in  John's  Gospel,  after  the  Baptist  came
into  brief  fellowship  with  the  One  who  was
before  him,  certainly  falls  short  of  this  in-
sight into  his  eternal  Being.  John  the
beloved  disciple  could  thus  speak  of  the
revelation  and  interpretation  of  God  which
was  made  in  the  life,  words,  and  death  of
the  Only  Begotten,  from  whose  fulness  he
had  received  "  grace  for  grace ; "  but  in  this
verse  he  is  speaking  of  the  timeless  con-
dition, the  eternal  fellowship,  of  the  Only
Begotten  with  the  Father,  as  justifying  the
fulness  of  the  revelation  made  in  his  incar-
nation.

The  prologue  formi  •  key  to  the  entire
Gospel.  It  may  have  been  written  after
the  record  of  the  central  principles  involved
in  the  life-work  of  Jesus  had  been  completed.
Every  statement  in  it  may  be  seen  to  be


as  settled  until  the  great  question  of  the
deference  to  be  yielded  to  K  and  B  in  com-
bination is  finally  determined.  Wordsworth,
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.).  Scrivener,  have
adhered  to  the  received  text.

With  reference  to  the  sense  and  legitimacy
or  congruity  of  the  phrnso  with  the  rest  of
the  prologue,  it  is  obvious  that  "  God  only
begotten"  does  but  bring  into  one  statement
what  has  been  already  implied  in  ver.  1 — that
"the  Logos  was  God,"  and  that  his  glory
(ver.  14)  was  "  as  that  of  an  only  begotten
of  the  Father."


derived  from  the  recorded  words  or  aett  of
the  Lord,  the  revelation  of  the  Father  in
time,  the  unveiling  of  the  eternal  heart  of
him  who  made  all  things,  and  by  one  com-
petent to  speak  of  both  eternities.  The
writer  of  the  prologue  speaks  of  himself  as
one  of  d  group  or  society  who  had  had
ocular  evidence  of  the  perfection  and  glory
of  the  manifestation.  This  fellowship  of
men  had  found  themselves  children  of  God,
and  in  the  possession  of  a  life,  a  light,  and
a  hope  which  were  derived  entirely  from
Jesus  Christ,  who  is  undoubtedly  in  a  nnique
sense  declared  (though  not  formally  defined)
to  be  "  the  Word  made  flesh."  In  the  subse-
quent narrative  we  find  a  graduated  series  of
instructions  on  the  powers  of  Christ  and  the
opposition  of  the  world  to  his  self-manifesta-
tion. Thus  (ch.  i.)  the  testimony  of  the
Baptist  (made  after  his  contact  with  Christ)
to  the  Person  and  work  of  the  Lord  attri-
butes to  him,  on  prophetic  authority,  most
itupendous  functions — those  of  baptizing
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  taking  away  the
sin  of  the  world.  He  does  himself  reveal
the  way  to  the  Father.  He  is  hailed  as  the
"  Christ,"  the  "King  of  Israel,"  and  as  the
link  between  heaven  and  earth,  between
the  invisible  and  visible,  the  Divine  and  the
human  (ch.  L  51).  In  ch.  ii.,  with  all  its  other
suggestivenesB,  Christ  displays  his  creative
power,  and  (of.  ch.  vi.)  his  relation  to  the
world  of  things,  as  well  as  his  organic  re-
lation to  the  old  covenant.  In  ch.  ii.  his
"body  "is  the  "temple"  of  God,  where  his
Father  dwelt,  thus  justifying  the  ia-Kiivaxrev
of  ver.  11.  The  pre-existence  of  Christ  as
a  self-conscious  personality  in  the  very
substance  of  Deity  is  asserted  by  himself  in
oh.  vi.  62 ;  viii.  58 ;  xvii.  5,  24.  The  fact
that  he  is  the  Source  of  all  life  (ch.  i.  3),  is
involved  in  the  teaching  of  the  Gospel  from
end  to  end.  Eternal  life  is  ministered
through  him,  to  believers  (ch.  iii.  16,  etc.,
36).  He  claims  to  have  life  in  himself  (ch.  v.
26).  He  is  the  "  Bread  of  life  "  for  starving
humanity  (ch.  vi.  S5,  48).  The  word*  that
he  speaks  are  spirit  and  life  (oh.  tL  63).
In  ch.  viii.  12  the  tpm  Trjs  (uijs  links  the
idea  of  life  and  light  as  they  are  shown  to
cohere  in  the  prologue.  In  ch.  xiv.  6  he
declares  Idmself  to  be  "  the  Truth  and  the
Life,"  thus  sustaining  the  great  generaliza-
tion.    By  raising;  Lazarus  he  is  portrayed


OH.1,1— 5L]       THB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


25


•8  the  Restorer  of  forfeited  life,  as  well  as
the  original  Giver  of  life  to  men  (oh.  xi.  25).
The  ninth  chapter  records  the  symbolio
event  by  which  he  proved  himself  to  be  the
Bun  of  the  spiritual  universe,  "  the  Light  of
the  world  "  (of.  ch.  i.  4  with  viii.  12  ;  of.  oh.
xii.  36,  46).  The  whole  history  of  the  con-
flict with  the  people  whom  he  oame  to  save,
with  "  his  own,"  witli  the  world-power,  and
the  death-doom,  is  the  material  which  is
generalized  in  the  solemn  statements  of  oh.
1.5-10.

The  prologue  says  nothing  in  express
words  of  Christ's  supernatural  conception,
of  his  death,  or  of  his  resurrection  and
eternal  glory  ;  yet  these  objective  facts  are
woven  through,  and  involved  in,  the  entire
context,  for  the  incarnation  of  the  Eternal
Word  is  the  historic  basis  of  the  apostle's
experience  of  such  a  life  as  that  which  he
proceeds  to  sketch.  The  absolute  anta-
gonism of  the  darknesi  to  the  light,  and  the
rejection  of  the  light  and  life  by  the  world,
never  had  such  exposition  as  that  which  the
repudiation  and  crucifixion  of  the  Son  of  God
gave  to  them;  while  the  eternal  nature  of
the  central  life  and  being  of  him  who,  when
incarnate,  was  thus  resisted  by  unbelief
tenders  the  resurrection  and  ultimate  and
eternal  glory  a  necessity  of  thought  even  to
those  who  have  not  yet  seen,  but  yet  have
believed.

Yen.  19— 34.— 2.  The  tettimotty  of  the
Baptist.

Ver.  19.— The  historic  narrative  com-
mences with  the  nineteenth  verse  of  the
chapter.  The  scene  is  laid  after  the  minis-
try of  John  had  reached  its  climax  in  the
baptism  of  Jesus — an  event  presupposed  and
implied,  but  not  described.  John's  ministry
had  produced  the  most  amazing  excitement
among'  the  people.  They  had  flocked  to
his  side  and  to  his  baptism,  confussing  their
sing ;  they  had  heard  his  summons  to  re-
pentance; they  had  trembled  under  his
threats  of  judgment ;  they  had  received  their
appropriate  message  from  the  inspired  feer.
His  prophetic  indignation  against  their
selfishness  and  greed,  their  formalism,  and
their  boast  of  covenanted  immunity  from
the  consequences  of  moral  fault,  had  roused
conscience  into  preternatural  activity.  The
wail  of  concern  and  the  excitement  of
alarmed  inquiry  had  as  yet  only  secured
from  John  the  promise  of  another  Teacher,
of  Another,  mightier  than  he,  whose  fan  was
in  hia  hand,  who  would  test,  divide,  save,


and  punish.  When  the  Christ  came  him-
self to  this  baptism,  came  confessing  the
sins  of  the  whole  world,  came  with  awful
holiness  and  yet  infinite  sympathy  for  the
sorrows  and  perils  of  the  people,  to  fulfil  aU
righteousness,  a  new  revelation  was  made
to  John.  The  voice  from  heaven,  the  sym-
bol of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  descended  and
abode  upon  him,  brought  John  into  a  new
world.  He  was  as  one  dazed  and  bewildered
by  excess  of  light.  The  abundance  of  the
revelations  became  a  new  test  ef  his  own
mission,  and  a  new  explanation  to  him  of
what  his  purpose  in  the  world  had  really
been.  The  contrast  between  the  minis-
try of  John  as  detailed  by  the  synoptista
and  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  explicable  BO
soon  as  we  observe  that  the  latter  takes  up
the  career  of  John  where  the  former  had
laid  it  down.  Here,  consequently,  is  a
chapter  in  John's  history  concerning  which
the  synoptists  are  silent.  When  the  bap-
tism of  Jesus  was  accomplished,  and  the
Spirit  had  led  him  away  into  the  wilder-
ness, John  stood,  much  as  Elisha  might
have  done  (in  the  very  same  region)  when
Elijah  went  heavenwards  in  a  chariot  of
fire.  But  he  proceeded  to  testify  new  and
strange  things  about  his  kinsman.  The
effect  of  his  ministry  was,  for  the  time,
greatly  augmented  by  the  suspense  and  ex-
pectation of  some  rapidly  approaching  mani-
festation. In  the  midst  of  the  excitement
thus  produced  we  learn  from  this  verse ;
And  this  is  the  testimony  of  John,  when  the
Jews  sent  (to  Ti't"  ')  from  Jerusalem  priests
and  levites,  that,  etc.  The  copula  "  and  "
shows  how  the  narrative  roots  itself  in  the
prologue,  and  points  back  to  the  citation
already  made  from  John's  words.  In  ver.
15  they  were  introduced  apart  from  their
historical  connection  as  the  summation  of
the  highest  and  most  fruitful  mission  of
the  Baptisi  Now  the  precise  antecedents
which  give  to  them  special  weight  are  set
forth.  "  This"  is  the  predicate  of  the  sen-
tence. The  occasion  referred  to  is  when
"the  Jews"  sent  their  deputation.  The
evangelist  is  accused  of  always  using  the
term,  "  the  Jews,"  in  a  sense  that  is  hostile
to  them,  and  thus  an  argument  has  been
framed  against  the  authenticity  of  the
Gospel.  It  is  true  that  John  uses  this  term
far  more  frequently  than  the  synoptists
(Matthew  five  times,  Mark  seven  times,
Luke  five  times),  for  it  is  found  more  than
seventy  times  in  his  Gospel;  but  it  is  not
exclusively  used  in  a  depreciatory  sense

'  Tlf>hs  oi/Vftc  is  introduced  by  Lachmann,
Tregelles,  Alford,  E.T.,  and  Westcott  and
Hort,  into  the  text,  on  the  authority  of  B,
C*,  33,  not  by  Tisohendorf  (8th  edit),  Lange,
or  B&le  Bevisen.


26


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1—61.


(see  oh.  ii.  13 ;  iil.  1 ;  it.  22 ;  t.  1 ;  xviii.  33).

For  the  most  part  he  uses  the  term  (now
denotative  of  the  entire  people,  though  for-
merly confined  to  the  tribe  of  Judah)  for
the  theocratic  nation  which  liad  ceased,
when  he  composed  hii  Gospel,  to  have  any
political  existence.  More  than  this,  in  a
vast  number  of  texts  he  uses  the  term  for
the  authoritative  powers  of  the  nation
rather  than  of  the  people.  According  to
the  narrative  of  each  of  the  Gospels,  the
theocratic  people  displayed,  by  its  highest
representatives  and  ruling  powers,  rancorous
hatred  and  calculated  antagonism  to  the
Son  of  God.  (See  Introduction  for  proof
that,  notwithstanding  this  separation  of  the
evangelist's  mind  from  them,  he  must  have
been  a  Palestinian  Jew  himself.)  The
Jews,  the  ecclesiastical  party,  sent  a  depu-
tation of  priests  and  Leyites  from  Jerusa-
lem, which  consisted,  m  we  learn  from  the
twenty-third  Terse,  "of  the  Pharisees."
They  came  to  make  a  legitimate  inquiry
from  the  new  prophet.  There  is  no  trace  of
malignity  or  antagonism  in  this  act.  They
would  learn  from  his  own  lips  who  he  was,
what  character  or  functions  he  was  sustain-
ing. A  similar  deputation  approached  our
Lord  at  a  later  period,  when  all  their
jealousy  and  hatred  had  been  aroused.
There  was,  however,  no  better  way  in  which
they  could  learn  the  facts  of  the  case.  The
Sanhedrin,  or  great  council  of  seventy-one
members,  the  elders,  high  priests  (including
ex-high  priests),  and  scribes,  is  variously
described.  Tiit-re  is  no  early  trace  anterior
to  the  time  of  Antipater  and  Herod  of  this
body  as  thus  constituted,  but  it  was  doubt-
leas  formed  upon  the  basis  of  the  older  in-
stitution of  the  seventy  elders  (Kumb.  xi.
16 ;  Bzek.  viii.  11),  or  of  the  yepovirla  of  the
Books  of  Maccabees  (1  Maec.  xii.  6 ;  2  Maoo.
i.  10).  It  is  probable  (Hengstenberg)  that
the  Levites  here  mentioned  by  Jc^n  re-
present those  who  in  the  other  Gospels  are
described  as  "  scribes,"  or  students  of  the
Law,  belonging  to  the  sacred  tribe,  though
not  to  the  family  of  Aaron.  Tlie  absence
of  any  reference  to  the  Levites  in  Matthew
and  Mark  (Luke  x.  32;  Acts  iv.  36),  and
the  frequent  occurrence  of  "scribes,"  make
it  probable  that  the  profession  of  the  Law
was  specially  followed  by  the  remnant  of
the  tribe  of  Levi  (but  see  Schiirer,  '  Jewish
People  in  Time  of  Christ,"  §§  21,  25).  The
deputation  came  to  receive  and  convey  to
those  that  sent  them  definite  replies  to  cer-
tain questions.  In  Luke  iii.  15  there  is  said
to  haTe  been  a  widespread  impression  that
John  the  Baptist  was  supposed  to  be  the
Clirist  of  their  popular  expectation.  Such  a
portentous  claim  must  be  sifted  by  them  with-
out delay.  They  were  sent  that  they  should
put  the  question  to  him,  Who  art  thoal


John's  profession  of  •  baptizer,  and  hia
implied  teaching  that  "  Pliarisees  and  Sad-
ducees,"  the  covenanted,  sacramental  people,
needed  cleansing  and  admission  by  some
sacred  rite  into  a  fellowship  more  holy  than
that  of  the  theocratic  nation  itself,  demanded
immediate  examination;  and  they  were
justified  by  tlie  letter  of  the  Law  In  making
the  inquiry  (Dent,  xviii.  21).

Vers.  20,  21.— (1)  He  definet  hi§  otta
position,  negatively.

Yer.  20. — And  he  confessed,  and  denied
not.  Perhaps  the  double  form  of  statement,
or  rather  the  introduction  of  the  clause, "  he
denied  not,"  before  the  repetition  of  the
confession  with  its  contents,  was  adopted  to
indicate  that  John  might  have  been  tempted
to  "  deny"  that  he  was  not  the  Christ.  If
he  had  hesitated  at  all,  he  would  have
denied  the  real  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  who
had  been  revealed  to  him  by  special  mesn*.
I  for  my  part — very  empliatic — am '  not  the
Christ.  This  implies,  not  only  that  the  sup-
position over  which  tliey  are  brooding  is
unfounded,  not  only  that  he  is  not  the
Christ,  but  that  be  knows  more,  and  that  he
knows  another  to  be  the  Christ.  If  this
reading  of  the  text  is  correct,  the  Baptist,  by
his  negative  reply,  gave  to  the  priests  more
than  they  asked.

Ver.  21.  —  And  they  asked  him,  What
then  ?  What  is  the  state  of  the  case?  The
Tery  repudiation  of  Messiahship  in  this
form  seems  to  imply  some  association  with
the  Messianic  period  of  which  they  had  so
many  conflicting  ideas.  Malachi  (It.  5)  had
predicted  the  coming  again  from  heaven  of
Elijah  the  prophet,  and  the  LXX.,  by
translating  the  passage  "Elijah  the  Tish-
bite,"  had  strengthened  the  common  mis-
take of  a  metempsychosis,  or  such  an  ab-
normal manifestation  before  the  coming  of
Messiah.  Schottgen  ('  De  Messia,'  H.  H.,  Tol,
ii.  pp.  226,  490,  533—537)  quotes  a  variety
of  proofs  of  this  anticipation,  and  that  Elijah
was  expected  "  three  days  before  Messiah ;
that  he  would  come  in  the  mountains  of
Israel,  weeping  over  the  people,  saying, '  O
land  of  Israel,  how  long  will  you  remain  arid
and  desolate  I ' "  (of.  my  '  John  the  Baptist,'
iii.  §  4).  There  was  a  true  sense  in  which
(as  our  Lord  informed  his  disciples)  John
was  the  fulfilment  of  Malachi's  prediction
and  of  the  language  of  the  angel  to  Zacharias
(Luke  i.  17;  Matt.  xi.  14;  xvii.  12),  and
that  John  came  veritably  in  the  spirit  and
power  of  Elijah.  In  that  sense  "Elijah
hud  come  already,"  just  as  Christ  their
David  had  come,  in  fulfilment  of  Ezekiel's

•  'E,yi>  oiiK  fifii  is  the  better  reading,  and,
with  N,  A,  B,  C*,  X,  is  read  by  Tregellea,
Alford,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Weatoott
and  Hort,  but  not  by  B.T.


oa.1.1— 6L]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


27


vision  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  24 ;  of.  Jer.  xxx.  9 ;
Hoa.  iii.  5),  to  rule  over  them.  In  the  phy-
sical, superstitious  sense,  John  the  son  of
Zaoharias  vras  not  the  reincarnation  of  the
Prophet  Elijah,  and  so  he  holdly  answered
the  inquiry,  Art  thon  Elijah  ? '  with  a  cate-
gorical negative :  I  am  not.  They  press  their
question  once  more.  Art  thou  the  Prophet  t
It  is  doubtful  whether  they  here  take  up
another  popular  expectation  of  the  physical
return  of  one  of  the  old  prophets,  or  whether,
with  an  exeKcais  afterwards  modified  by  the
apostles,  they  point  to  Dent,  xviii.  15,  and
reveal  the  fact  that  they  had  not  identified
the  prediction  of  "the  prophet  like  unto
Moses"  with  their  Messiah.  If  they  had
identified  these  representations,  they  would
not,  of  course,  have  pressed  him  with  an
identical  question.  It  is  higlily  probable
that  thai  prophecy  had,  with  the  predictions
of  Malachi  and  Isaiah,  led  to  numerous  ex-
pectations more  or  leas  identified  with  the
Messianic  cycle  of  i-oming  events.  In  ch.
vL  14;  vii.  40;  Matt.  xvi.  14,  we  see  the
prevalence  of  the  expectation — of  a  longing
for  an  old  prophet.  They  yearned  for  no
upstart,  but  for  one  of  the  mighty  brother-
hood of  departed  men,  in  veritable  fiesh  and
blood.  Now  John  and  now  Jesus  was
crudely  suspected  by  some  to  be  such  a  resus-
citation. The  Baptist,  like  the  Samaritan
woman,  and  subsequently  St.  Peter  when
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  had  sharply  identi-
fied "tho  Propliet  like  unto  Muses"  with
the  Messiah  himself;  and  therefore,  on
either  hypothesis,  he  gives  a  curt  reply  to
this  inquii'y,  and  he  answered,  'So.

Vers.  22,  23.— (2)  He  defines  his  position,
positively.

Ver.  22. — They  Baid  therefore  (note  the
demonstrative  force  of  oSk)  to  him  (as  a  con-
aequenee  of  his  repeated  threefold  negative),
Who  art  thou  1  Explain  yourself,  that  we
may  give  an  answer  to  those  who  sent  us
(see  note,  oh,  xx.  21,  on  tlie  two  verbs  otto-
a-reWa  and  jre/tiroi) ;  What  sayest  thou  oon-
oeming  thyself?  Our  suppositions  about
thee  are  all  repudiated  one  by  one,  hast
thon  any  information  to  render  to  the
supreme  court  of  judicature?

Ver.  23.— He  said,  I  am  a  voice  orying  in
the  wilderness,  Make  straight  the  way  of
the  lord,  as  said  Isaiah  the  prophet.  This
great  utterance  had  been  by  the  synoptists
distinctly  applied  to  the  Bajitist  (Matt.  iii.
3 J  Mark  1.3;  Luke  iii.  4);  here  we  have
the  origin  of  such  application.    The  Baptist

•  T.R.  and  Lachmann  insert  Sii  after
'HXi'or  f?;  but  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)  and
the  Bale  Revisers  omit  it.  Tlie  slight  but
numerous  variations  in  text  and  Latin  ver-
sions seem  to  have  rendered  the  insertion
dubious.


quoted  from  Isa.  zl.  3  two  sentences;  the
synoptists  cite  the  whole  passnge,  as  finding
abundant  realization  in  the  mission  of  John.
The  propliet  felt  that  the  work  he  had  to
perform  entirely  concealed  the  importance
of  his  own  personality.  He  lost  himself  in
his  ofSce  and  in  his  message.  Isaiah,  when
foreseeing  the  revival  of  the  nation,  then
wandering  in  a  spiritual  "  wilderness,"  along
rugged  ridges,  savage  precipices,  stony
gorgBS,  of  a  symbolic  desert,  anticipated  the
return  of  the  Jehovah  to  his  o  ivn  sanctuary,
and  declared  that  ample  pruph^tio  prepara-
tion was  needed,  so  that  the  people,  by
repentance  and  reformation,  might  under-
stand that  Israel  had  received  double  for
all  her  sins.  "  Hark  1 "  says  he,  "  a  crier,
or  a  voice."  The  heiald  has  gone  forth  to
break  the  silence  that  lay  between  the  land
of  captivity  and  the  land  of  promise.  "  In
the  wilderness  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the
Lord."  Israel  was  to  see  that  there  was
neither  self-righteousness  nor  moral  rebel-
lion to  impede  the  approach  of  One  who
was  mighty  to  save.  A  portion  of  this
very  oracle  is  quoted  by  Malachi  when  he
exclaims,  "Behold,  I  send  my  messenger
before  my  face,  who  shall  prepare  the  way
before  me."  This  "messenger  before  the
face  of  the  Lord  "  is  no  other  than  he  who
should  come  in  the  spirit  and  power  of
Elijah.  John,  therefore,  gathered  up  the
significance  of  both  prophecies,  when  he
spoke  of  himself  as  "  a  voice  crying  in  the
wilderness  [actual  and  symbolical].  Make
straight  the  way  of  the  Lord."  The  Hebrew
text,  as  we  have  •  translated  it  above,  asso-
ciates the  words,  "  in  the  wilderness,"  with
"make  straight,"  rather  than  with  "the
voice  orying."  The  quotation  by  the  evan-
gelist from  the  LXX.  will  suffer  either  ar-
rangement of  the  words.

Ver.  24. — And  they '  had  been  sent  from
the  Pharisees,  which  amounts  to  the  same
thing  as  "they  which  were  sent  were  of  the
Pharisees,"  and  it  is  after  the  manner  of
John  to  introduce  explanatory,  retrospective
comment,  which  may  throw  light  on  what
follows  (vers.  41,  45;  oh.  iv.  30;  xi.  5).  The

'  The  article  of  is  omitted  before  iireo-ToX-
n4voi  by  Tregelles,  Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  B.T.,  on  the  authority
of  K*,  A*,  B,  C,  Ij,  and  an  early  quotation
from  Origen,  who  gathers  from  it  the  idea  of  a
second  deputation  of  the  Pharisees.  With-
out the  article,  it  might  be  translated,  "  and
the  Pharisees  were  sent."  Meyer  thinks
this  renders  the  omission  very  suspicious.
Westcott,  however,  translates  it  with  a  sup-
plementary sense,  "they  had  been  sent
from,"  etc.  The  article  has  great  manu-
script authority,  and  i»  preferred  by  Meyei^
Godet,  etc.


28


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1—51.


avr  of  the  following  verse  shows  that  we
have  BtOl  to  do  with  the  same  deputation.
Tlie  Pharisees  were  accustomed  to  lustral
rites,  but  had  legal  points  to  make  as  to  the
authority  of  any  man  who  dared  to  impose
tliem  upon  the  sacred  nation,  and  especially
on  their  own  section,  which  made  its  special
boast  of  ceremonial  exactitude  and  purity.
They  might  justify  an  old  prophet,  or  the
Elijah  of  Malachi,  and  still  more  the  Christ
himself,  should  lie  call  men  to  baptismal
cleansing  Hut  the  dim  mysterious  "  voice
in  the  wilderness,"  even  if  John  could  prove
his  words,  had  no  such  prescriptive  claim.
The  Pharisaic  priests  and  Levites  would
take  strong  views  on  the  baptismal  question,
and  even  exalt  it  into  a  more  eminent  place
in  their  thoughts  than  the  fundamental
question,  "  Art  thou  the  very  Christ  ?  "  The
same  confusion  of  essential  and  accidental
elements  of  religious  truth  and  life  was  not
confined  to  old  Pharisees,

Ver,  25. — ^And  they  asked  him  (put  the
question),  and  said  to  him,  Why  baptizest
thou,  then,  if  thou  be  not'  the  Christ,  not
Xljjeji,  not  the  prophet?  It  would  seem
that,  judging  from  such  expressions  as
Ezek.  XXX vi.  25,  26  and  Zech.  xiii.  1,  the
Jews  expected  some  renewal  of  ceremonial
purification  on  a  grand  scale  at  the  Messianic
appearance,  and  .Tohn's  repudiation  of  every
personal  rank,  which  could,  according  to  their
view,  justify  him  called  for  some  explana-
tion.

Vers.  26,  27, — The  answer  is  not  very
explicit.  John  answered  them  and  said,  I
baptize  with  water ;  not  as  Messiah,  or  Elijah,
oraresuscitated  prophet,  nnt  as  making  prose-
lytes to  the  faith  of  Abraham's  sons,  not  as
an  Bssene  admitting  the  children  of  the
kingdom  to  a  close  spiritual  corporation,  but
because  the  Messiah  has  cnme.  Some  have
laid  great  emphasis  on  the  limitation  which
John  assigns  to  his  baptism.  It  is  said  he
thus  anticipated  the  contrast  afterwards  ex-
pressed between  it  and  the  Spirit-baptism
of  Jesus.  This  is.  however,  reserved  for  a
later  utterance.  The  baptism  vrith  water
inaugurated  the  Messianic  kingdom,  pre-
pared the  people  to  receive  the  Lord.  If,
then,  Messiah  were  reasonably  expected
thus  to  create  a  fellowship  of  those,  who,
substituted  this  simple  lustration  for  a
cumbrous  cycle  of  ceremonial  purifications,
John,  as  the  "voice,"  the  "herald,"  the
'  crier  "  In  tiie  wilderness,  was  justified  in
administering   the    rite.     I   baptise   with

'  The  T.B.  reads  otrt,  oSrt  on  small
authority,  but  obSi,  oiSi  are  found  in
K,  A,  B,  C,  L,  1,  33,  124,  and  in  six  quota>
tions  from  Origen,  and  adopted  by  Tre-
gellea,  Tischendorf  (8lh  edit.),  Westcott  and
Hnrt.  B.T.,  eto.,  and  yield  better  sense.


water,  seeing  that  there  standeth '  in  the
midst  of  yon'  one  (whom  yon  know  not)
who  is  coming  after  me,  whose  shoe's  latohet
I  am  not  worthy  to  loose.  This  standing  in
the  very  crowd  before  him  of  the  Mightier
than  John,  now  being  searciied  out  as  it
were  by  the  glances  of  the  Baptist,  and
recognized  by  him  as  One  over  whom  the
lieavens  had  opened,  gave  ample  support  to
the  Baptist  in  his  baptismal  functions.  The
One  coming  after  John,  i.e.  "  after,"  because
of  John's  chronological  precedence  in  show-
ing himself  to  Israel,  is  yet  of  such  lofty  rank
and  miglity  power  that  John  is  not  fit  in
his  own  opinion  to  be  his  humblest  slave.
This  solemn  assurance  justifies  to  the  San-
hedrin  the  pre  paratory  rite.  This  closes  the
first  great  testimony.  Before  proceeding  to
the  second,  the  evangelist  supplies  a  geogra-

C'  'cal  hint,  which  up  to  the  present  day
not  been  satisfactorily  interpreted.
Ver.  28. — These  things  were  done  in  Beth-
any beyond  the  Jordan,  where   John  was
baptizing,*    The  fact  that  John  the  Baptist,

'  2t<)ic6x  is  read  by  Tregelles,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  H.irt,  with  B,  L,  T ;
in  place  of  eVT^Kci/,  with  Lachmann,  T.E.,
and  margin  of  Tregelles,  and  B&le  Revisers,
on  the  authority  of  A,  0,  X,  r,  and  other
uncials.    'Eo-T^/cei  is  the  reading  of  N,  G.

'  T.E.  and  Laohmann'introduce  IfiirpoaBey
nou  yiyovev  after  tpx^f^^vos,  with  A,  C,  X,
r,  etc. ;  but  Tregelles,  Tisoheudoif,  Alford,
and  Westcott  and  Hort  omit  it,  with  N,  B,
0*,  L,  T,  etc.  The  omission  of  Se  after  fieVo j,
on  the  authority  of  N,  A,  C*,  L,  numerous
cursives  and  versions,  by  modern  editors,
renders  the  omission  of  the  efnrpoa64v  ixov
y4yovev  more  coiupichensible,  and  leaves  a
good  meaning  to  the  verse;  but  the  omis-
sion of  the  clause  creates  an  unnecessary
difiiculty  again  in  ver.  30,  where  John  ap-
pears to  refer  back  to  this  utterance  with
additional  explanation.

'  Little  doubt  now  remains  that  iv  'RiiBaviif
was  the  original  reading  of  the  text.  It  is
found  in  K*,  A,  B,  0*,  E,  F,  G,  H,  X,  and
other  uncials,  both  Syriao  Versions,  Old-
Latin,  Memphitic,  Armenian,  including
several  cursives.  The  reading  Biteafiapi.  was
found  apparently  by  Origen  in  some  copies,
though  he  knew  of  the  reading  ^TtBaviif,  and
distinctly  referred  to  it,  discarding  the  latter
on  geographical  grounds.  He  knew  that
Bethany  was  fifteen  stadia  from  Jerusalem,
was  not  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  and,  not
being  able  to  find  any  place  of  that  name,  he
adopted  the  reading  "  Bethabara."  He  prob-
ably is  the  author  of  the  reading  "Beth-
abara," which  crept  into  seuondary  uncials
and  cursives,  and  was  adopted  by  T.B.  The
latter  name,  however,  occurs  in  several  dif-
ferent forms :  IhiBafiap^,  as  found  in  C*,  K,


OH.  X.  1—61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


2'J


in  the  previous  verses,  tecognizes  the  Messiah,
and  that  in  vers.  31 — 33  he  declares  that
knowledge  to  have  followed  the  baptism  and

T,  U,  A,  n;  BiflBjSop^,  in  Cursive  MSS.  69,
262.  B-nBap^,  Baeap^,  BriBfpaP^,  are  other
forms  that  the  name  assumes  in  some  of
Origen'g  references  to  it.  Eplphanius  called
attention  to  the  two  readings,  as  did  Oliry-
sostom.  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Tregelles,
Alford,  Meyer,  Godet,  AVestoott  and  Hort,
B.T.,  etc.,  have  all  reverted  to  the  best-
attested  reading.  There  was  such  a  place
as  Bethabara,  nnap-no,  s  "  house  of  ford,"
beyond  Jordan.  It  is  found  in  '  Onomas-
ticon'  of  Eusebius,  is  referred  to  in  the
Old  Testament  (Josh.  xv.  6,  61 ;  xviii.  22).
Tlie  suggestion  has  been  made  that,  since
n"3X~JT3  may  mean  "  the  house  of  ship,"  or
ferry,  that  the  two  names  may,  at  different
periods,  have  been  attached  to  the  same
place.  Against  this  it  has  been  said  that
the  true  etymology  of  Bridavla,  equivalent  to
'p;n-n'3,  is  a  "  house  of  dates  "  (Lightfoot).
This  may  be  true.  The  Greek  form  of  tho
name  may  (as  in  other  analogous  instances)
represent  two  Hebrew  words,  just  as  the
"  Abel "  of  Gen.  iv.  2  ie  a  different  Hebrew
word  from  the  "  Abel"  of  2  Sam.  xx.  14.

The  fact  that  there  should  be  two  Betha-
nias  is  no  more  astonishing  than  that  there
should  be  two  Bethsaidas  (Luke  ix.  10;
Mark  vi.  45),  two  Carmels,  two  Csesareas,
two  Antioehs,  two  Oanas.  Bethany  was
doubtless  a  small  place,  the  name  of  which
fastened  itself  on  the  memory  of  John  from
its  resemblance  to  Bethany  near  Jerusalem,
from  which,  in  this  place,  he  carefully  dis-
tinguishes it.  Some  have  placed  it  near
Jericho,  others  near  ScythopoUs,  south  of  the
Sea  of  Galilee.  Oaspari  ('  Olironolog.  Geogr.
Introd.  to  the  Life  of  Christ,'  §  70)  is  vc  ry
confident  that  it  is  identifiable  with  2'eM  or
Beth-Anibje,  on  the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  six
miles  north  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  To  the
blight  resemblance  of  the  names  he  adds
the  remark  that  it  is  the  only  possible  plane
on  the  further  shore  whence  Jesus  could
have  reached  Caua  of  Galilee  in  one  day  (cf.
ch.  i.  44  ;  ii.  1).  He  maintains  that  this  site
throws  light  on  Matt.  xix.  1  and  ch.  x.  40.
He  is  even  disposed  to  read  "Bethany"
for  "  Bethsaida "  in  Mark  viii.  22,  on  the
authority  of  the  solitary  D  and  Italic  and
Gothic  Versions.  Paulus  put  a  period  after
iyevero,  and  then  commenced  a  new  sentence
withTre'poi',  and  maintained  that  the  Bethany
is  the  wellinown  Bethany  of  oh.  xi.  This,
even,  is  preferable  to  the  suggestion  of  the
Tubingen  critics,  that  the  writtr  invented  the
place  in  order  to  make  the  ministry  of  our
Lord  commence  and  terminate  at  the  same
place.    Lieut  Oonder,  '  Tent-Work.'  i.  91 ;


the  sign  then  given  to  him,  make*  it  obvious
that  the  baptism  and  the  forty  days  of  the
temptation  are  now  in  the  past.  Every
day  is  clearly  marked  from  the  day  on
which  the  deputation  from  the  Sanhedrin
approached  him,  till  we  find  Jesus  at  Gaiia,
on  his  way  to  Jerusalem.  Consequently,
the  baptism  of  Christ,  which  was  the  occasion
of  the  higher  knowledge  that  John  acquired
concerning  him,  as  well  as  the  temptation,
had  been  consummated.  Of  this  last  it
would  seem  highly  probable  John  had  re-
ceived, in  subsequent  conversation  with  the
Lord,  a  full  report.  The  Lojd  bad  passed
through  the  fiery  ordeal.  He  had  accepted
the  position  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,  who,
in  the  way  of  privation,  suffering,'  fierce
antagonism  from  world,  flesh,  and  devil,
would  win  the  crown  of  victory  and  prove  .
himself  to  be  the  Life  and  Light  of  the  world.
This  chronological  hint  appears  to  me  to
explain  the  sudden  and  surprising  utterance
of  the  next  verse.

Ver.  29. — On  the  following  day.  Next
after  the  day  on  which  the  Sanhedrin  had
heard  from  John  the  vindication  of  his  own
right  to  baptize  in  virtue  of  the  commence-
ment of  the  Messiah's  ministry,  which  as  yet
was  concealed  from  all  eyes  but  his  own.
He  [John ']  seeth  Jesns  coming  towards  him,
within  reach  of  obserration  (certainly  not,
as  Ewald  and  others  have  imagined,  to  be
baptized  of  him,  for,  as  we  have  seen,  the
statements  of  ver.  33  exclude  the  possibility
of  buch  a  purpose.  The  design  of  Jesus  is
not  stated.  The  evangelist  is  here  occupied
with  the  testimony  of  the  Baptist  to  Christ.
Enough  is  said  to  provide  the  opportunity
for  the  most  wonderful  and  mysterious
utterances  of  the  forerunner.  Behold  (iSe
in  the  singular,  although  several  persons  are
addressed,  is  not  unusual ;  see  Matt.  x.  16
and  ch.  xi.  3)  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh
away  the  sin  of  the  world.  We  should
observe,  from  the  later  context,  that  already
John  had  perceived  by  special  signs  and
Divine  inspiration  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of
God,  and  the  veritable  Baptizer  with  the
Holy  Ghost ;  that  he  was  before  him  in  dig-
nity, honour,  and  by  pre-existence,  although
his  earthly  ministry  had  been  delayed  until

ii.  17,  57,  has  found  an  ab&rah,  or  ford,
further  north  than  the  traditional  place  of
passage  and  much  nearer  to  Oana.  Bethania
may  liave  beeu  the  name  of  a  village  near
suuh  a  ford,  either  there  or  near  Jericho.
Such  a  spot  is  placed  in  the  map  of  the
Palest.  Expl.  Soo.

•  B\eVei  (without  i  'Iftufwijs)  is  the  read-
ing of  K,  B,  C*,  K,  L,  etc.,  and  a  large
number  of  uncials,  and  is  adopted  l)y  Tre-
gelles, Alford,  Westcott  and  Hort,  B.T.,  and
Tischendorf.


30


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  fc  I— «-


after  John's  preparatory  work  had  been
done.  John  had  felt  that  the  "  confesBion
of  eins  "  made  by  the  guilty,  multitude,  by
generations  of  vipers,  was  needful,  rational,
imperative  upon  them;  but  that  in  the
case  of  Jesus  this  confession  was  not  only
Buperflnons,  but  a  kind  of  contrndictioa  in
terms.  The  Lord  over  whom  the  heavens
had  opened,  and  to  whom  the  heavenly  name
had  been  given,  fulfilling  sU  righteousness
by  submitting  to  the  baptism  of  repentance
unto  the  remission  of  sins,  was  a  profound
perplexity  to  the  Baptist.  Strange  was  it
that  he  who  would  have  power  to  deal  with
the  Holy  Ghost  even  as  John  had  been
using  water  should  have  been  called  in  any
real  sense  to  confess  the  sins  of  his  own
nature  or  life.  John  believed  that  Jesus
was  the  Source  of  a.  fiery  purity  and  purify-
ing power,  and  that  according  to  his  own
showing  he  had  rejected  all  proposals  which
might  bring  Israel  to  his  feet  by  assuming
the  rSle  of  their  conquering  Messiah.  He
had  even  treated  these  suggestions  as  temp-
tations of  the  devil.  Not  to  save  his  physical
life  from  etaivation  would  he  use  his
miraculous  energies  for  his  own  personal
ends.  Not  to  bring  the  whole  Sanhediin,
priesthood,  and  temple  guard,  nay,  even  the
Roman  governor  and  court,  to  his  feet,  will
he  utter  a  word  or  wave  a  signal  which  they
could  misunderstand.  His  purpose  was  to
identify  himself.  Son  of  God  though  he  be,
with  the  world — to  "  suffer  all,  that  he  might
succour  all."  Because  John  knew  that
Jesus  was  so  great  he  was  brought  to
apprehend  the  veritable  fact  and  central
reality  of  the  Lord's  person  and  work.  He
saw  by  a  Divine  inspiration  what  Jesus  was,
and  what  he  was  about  to  do.  The  simple
supposition  tliat  Jesus  had  made  John  the
Baptist  his  confidant,  on  his  return  from
the  wilderness  of  temptation  and  victory,  and
that  we  owe  the  story  of  the  temptation  to  the
facts  of  Christ's  experience  which  had  been
communicated  to  John,  do  more  than  any
other  supposition  does  to  expound  the  stand-
point of  John's  remarkable  exclamation.  A
library  of  discussion  and  exposition  has  been
produced  by  the  words  which  John  uttered
on  this  occasion,  and  jiiferent  writers  have
taken  opposite  views,  *hich  in  their  origin
proceed  from  tlie  same  root.  The  early
Greek  interpreters  were  moving  in  a  true
direction  when  they  looked  to  the  celebrated
oracle  of  Isa.  liii.  as  ihe  primary  signification
of  the  great  phra.se,  "  'The  Lamb  of  God."
The  image  used  to  portray  the  suffering
Sin-bearer  is  the  "  Lamb  brought  silently
to  the  slaughter,"  "  a  Sheep  dumb  before  his
shearers."  Doubtless  the  first  implication
of  this  comparison  arose  from  the  prophet's
conception  of  the  patience,  gentleness,  and
submission  of   the  sublime    but   snfferintf


"  Servant  of  God;*  but  the  fourth,  fifth,
sixth,  and  twelfth  verses  of  that  chapter  are
so  char°:ed  with  the  sin-bearing  of  the  great
Victim,  the  vicarious  and  propitiatory  Tirtne
of  his  agony  unto  deatli,  that  we  cannot
separate  the  one  from  the  othcf.  He  who  is
led  as  a  Lamb  to  the  slaughter  bears  our
sins  and  suffers  pain  for  us,  is  wounded  on
account  of  our  transjiressions :  "  The  Lord
has  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  ns  all  .  .  .
it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him,"  etc.
The  Servant  of  God  is  God's  Lamb,  appointed
and  consecrated  for  the  highest  work  of
sacrificial  sufiering  and  death.  The  LXX.
has  certainly  used  the  verb  <pepeiv,  to  bear,
where  John  uses  alpsm,  to  take  away.
Meyer  suggests  that  in  the  idea  of  a&fci;'
the  previous  notion  of  (j>4p€iv  is  involved  and
presuppcsed.  The  Hebrew  formulie,  son  NfefJ
and  f\y  Nfe":,  are  variously  translated  by  the
LXX.,  but  generally  in  the  sense  of  bearing
the  consequences  of  personal  guilt  or  tlie
sin  of  another  (Numb.  xiv.  34 ;  Ley.  v.  17 ;
XX.  17 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  19).  In  Lev.  x.  17  it  is
distinctly  used  of  the  priestly  expiation  for
sin  to  I>e  effected  by  Eleazar.  Here  and
elsewhere  K^3  is  translated  in  the  LXX.  by
i^aipeTv,  where  God  as  the  subject  of  the
verb  is  described  as  lifting  off  sin  from  the
ti'ansgiessor  and  by  bearing  it  himself —
bearing  it  away.  In  several  places  the
LXX.  has  gone  further,  translating  the
word,  when  God  is  the  subject,  by  iupieval,
with  the  idea  of  forgiveness  (Ps,  xxxii.  5 ;
Ixxxv.  3;  Gen.  1.  17;  Isa.  xxxiii.  24).
Hence  the  Baptist,  in  using  the  word  aXpuv,
had  doubtless  in  his  mind  the  large  conno-
tation of  the  Hebrew  word  Hifi  with  the
fundamental  prerequisite  of  the  taking  away,
wliich  the  oracle  of  Isaiah  had  suggested  to
him.  John  knew  that  the  taking  away  of
tin  involved  the  twofold  process :  (1)  the
conference  of  a  new  spiritual  life  by  the
gift  and  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  (2)
such  a  removal  of  the  coubequencos  and
shame  and  peril  of  sin  as  is  involved  by  the
bearing  of  sins  in  his  own  Divine  personality.
Thus  he  not  only  perceived  from  tlie
accompaniments  of  the  baptism  that  Jesus
was  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Baptizer  with
the  Holy  Ghost,  but  that,  being  these,  his
meek  submission  and  his  triumphant  re-
pudiation of  the  temptations  of  the  devil
whinh  were  based  upon  the  fact  of  his  Divine
sonship  proved  that  he  was  the  Divine  sin-
bearing  Lamb  of  Isaiah's  oracle.  Many
commentators  have,  however,  seen  a  special
reference  to  the  Paschal  lamb,  with  which
Christ's  work  was,  without  hesitation,  com-
pared in  later  years  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  There
can  bo  no  doubt  that  the  Passover  lamb
was  a  "  sin  offering "  (Hengstenberg,
•  Christ  of  the  Old  Testament,'  ytH.  W.  351 ;


ea.  L  1—51.]         THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


31


Banr,  •  Uber  die  UrspruTig  und  Bedeiitung
des  Pasflah-Fest,'  quoted  by  LUeke,  i.  404).
It  was  God'e  sacrifice  by  pre-eminence,  and
the  blooil  of  the  Iamb  was  offered  to  God  to
make  atonement,  and  it  freed  Israel  from
the  ourse  that  fell  on  the  firstborn  of  Egypt.
John,  the  son  of  a  sacrificing  priest,  the
Nazarite,  the  stern  prophet  of  the  wilderness,
was  familiiir  with  all  the  ritual  and  the
lessons  of  that  solemn  festival ;  and  might
look  on  the  Son  of  God,  selected  for  this
sacrifice,  as  fulfilling  in  singular  and  unique
fashion  the  function  of  the  Passover  Lamb
for  the  whole  world.  But  John  would  not
be  limited  by  the  Paschal  associations.  Day
by  day  lambs  were  presented  before  God  as
hmml  offerings,  as  expressions  of  the  desire
of  the  offerers  to  accept  absolat»ly  the
■npreme  will  of  God.  Moreover,  the  lamb
of  the  trespass  offering  was  slain  for  atone-
ment (Lev.  iv.  35 ;  xiv.  IX  ;  Nlimb.  vi.  12),
either  when  physical  defilement  excluded
the  sufferer  from  temple-worship,  or  when  a
Nazarite  had  lost  the  advantage  of  his  vow
by  contact  with  the  dead.  Even  the
ceremonial  of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,
though  other  animal  victims  were  used,
suggested  the  same  great  thought  of  pro-
pitiatory sufiering  and  death.  These  various
forms  of  sacrificial  worship  must  have  been
in  the  minds  of  both  Isaiah  and  John.  They
are  the  hey  to  leaiah's  prophecy,  and  this  in
itt  turn  <s  the  baeis  of  the  cry  of  John.  The
New  Testament  apostles  and  evangelists,
whether  accurate  or  not  in  their  exegesis,
did  repeatedly  take  this  oracle  of  Isaiah's  as
descriptive  of  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and
other  early  Christian  writers  treated  the
chapter  as  though  it  were  a  fragment  of
their  contemporaneous  evidence  and  exposi-
tion (Matt.  viii.  17  ;  1  Pet  ii.  22—25 ;  Acts
viii.  28 ;  Luke  xxii.  37 ;  Bev.  v.  6 ;  xiii.  8 ;
Rom.  X.  16 ;  Clement, '  1  Ep.  ad  Cor.,'  xvi.).
John  was  standing  further  back,  and  ou
an  Old  Testament  platform,  but  we  have,
in  his  knowledge  of  Isaiali's  prophecies,  and
his  familiarity  with  the  sacrificial  system
of  which  that  oracle  foreshadowed  the  ful-
filment, quite  enough  to  account  for  the
burning  words  in  which  he  condensed  the
meaning  of  the  ancient  sacrifices,  and  saw
them  all  transcended  in  the  suffering  Son  of
God.  The  author  of  'Bcce  Homo,'  by
identifying  the  "  Lamb  of  God "  with  the
imagery  of  Ps.  xxiii.,  supposed  that  John
saw,  in  the  inward  repose  and  spiritual
joyAilness  of  Jesus,  the  power  he  would
wield  to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world.
"  He  (John)  was  one  of  the  dogs  of  the
flodc  of  Jehovah,  Jesns  was  one  of  the
Lambs  of  the  good  Shepherd."  There  is
no  hint  whatever  of  these  ideas  in  the  psalm.
This  curiosity  of  exegesis  has  not  secured
any  acceptance.     Some  difficulty  has  been


felt  in  the  fact  that  John  should  have  made
such  progress  in  New  Testament  thought ;
but  the  experience  through  which  John  has
passed  during  his  contact  with  Jesus,  the
sentiment  with  which  he  found  the  Lord
whom  he  sought  coming  to  his  baptism,  the
agony  that  he  foresaw  must  follow  the  con-
tact (if  such  a  One  with  the  prejutlices  and
sins  of  tlie  people,  above  all,  the  mode  in
which  our  Lord  was  treating  the  current
expectation  of  Messiah  regarding  its  eagerly
desired  manifestations  as  temptations  of  the
devil,  flashed  the  whole  of  Isaiah's  oracle
into  sudden  splendour.  He  saw  the  Lamb
already  led  to  slaughter,  and  his  blood
upon  the  very  door-posts  of  every  house ;  he
saw  him  lifting,  bearing,  carrying  away,  the
sin  of  the  world,  all  impurity,  transgression,
and  shame.  His  atoning  sacrifice  is  already
going  on.  The  sins  of  mankind  fall  on  the
Holy  One.  He  sees  him  pouring  out  his  soul
unto  death,  and  making  gentle  intercession
for  his  muvrterers ;  so  in  a  glorious  ecstasy
he  cries,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  I "
(see  my  '  John  the  Baptist,'  ch.  vi.  §  2,  pp.
369— 38fi).

Ver.  30. — This  it  he  on  behalf  of  whom  I
said,  After  me  oometh  a  man  {aviip  is  used  as
a  term  of  higher  dignity  than  6.v6pa)-tros,  and
is  made  more  explicit  by  the  positive  appear-
ance of  the  Holy  One  whom  he  had  just
recognized  and  pointed  out  to  his  disciples)
who  hecame  before  me — in  human  and  other
activities  under  the  Old  Testament  cove-
nant— ^becanse  he  was  before  me;  in  the
deepest  sense,  having  an  etKmal  self-con-
sciousness, a  Divine  pre-existence,  apart  from
all  his  dealings  and  doings  with  man  (see
notes  on  vers.  15,  26,  27).  If  the  shorter
reading  of  vers.  26,  27  be  correct,  then  the
occasion  on  which  this  great  utterance  was
first  made  is  not  described.  If  it  be  not
expunged  from  vers.  26,27,  we  may  imagine
that  John  is  now  referring  to  what  he  said
on  the  previous  day  to  the  Sanhedrin.  If
internal  reasons  may  help  to  decide  a  read-
ing, I  should  be  inclined,  with  Godet  as
against  Meyer,  to  say  that  this  is  the  obvious
reference.  Here,  too,  the  Sti  Trpa)T6s  fiov  ?iv
is  added  as  explanation  of  what  was  enig-
matical in  ver.  26.  The  whole  saying  hai
already  found  place  in  the  prologue.  The
threefold  citation  reveals  the  profound  im-
pression which  the  words  of  the  Baptist
had  made  upon  his  most  susceptible  dis-
ciple.

Vers.  31— 34.— (3)  The  purpose  of  Jcku'i


'  Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  B.T.,
read  uire'p  instead  of  itepl,  on  the  authority
of  X,  B,  0,  and  two  quotations  of  Origen,
though  there  are  many  authorities  for  ■wtpl
a£T.B.


32


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  1. 1— «1.


own  mtttion  wa»  to  introduce  to  Iirael  tht
Baptizer  with  the  Soly  Ghost.

Ver.  31. — ^And  I  for  my  part  knew  him
not.  This  is  thought  by  Bome  to  he  incom-
patible with  the  statement  of  Matt.  iii.  14,
where  the  Baptist  displayed  sufficient  know-
ledge of  Jesos  to  have  exclaimed,  "  I  have
need  to  be  baptized  of  thee."  Early  com-
mentators, e.g.  Ammoniua,  quoted  in  '  Catena
Patrum,'  suggested  that  John's  long  resi-
dence in  the  wilderness  had  prevented  his
knowing  his  kinsman ;  Chrysostom, '  Horn.
xvi.  in  Joannein,'  urged  that  he  w»8  not
familiar  with  his  person;  Epiphanius, '  Adv.
Hier.,'  XIX., and  Justin  Martyr,  'Dial.,'  o.  88,
refer  to  a  long  passage  in  the  'Gospel  of
the  Ebionites,'  which,  notwithstanding  nu-
merous perversions,  yet  suggests  a  method
of  conciliation  of  the  two  narratives,  that
the  sign  of  the  opening  heavens  and  the
voice  occasioned  the  consternation  of  John,
and  explains  his  deprecation  of  the  act
which  he  had  already  performed  (see  my
'  John  the  Baptist,'  pp.  313,  31i ;  Nicholson,
'  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebirews,'  pp.  38 —
40).  Neander  has  suggested  the  true  expla-
nation :  "  In  contradistinction  to  that  whioli
John  now  saw  in  the  Divine  light,  all
his  previous  knowledge  appeared  to  be  a
non-knowledge."  John  knew  of  Jems,  as
his  kinsman  ;  he  knew  him  as  One  mightier
than  himself — One  whose  coming,  as  I'oni-
pared  with  his  own,  wa*  as  the  coming  of  the
Lord.  When  Jesus  approached  him  for  bap-
tism, John  therefore  knew  quite  enough  to
make  him  hesitate  to  baptize  the  Christ.
He  knew  more  tlian  enough  to  induce  him
to  say,  "  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,"
Godet  imagines  that,  since  buptism  was  pre-
ceded by  confession,  John  found  that  the
confession  made  by  Jesns  was  of  such  a
lofty,  saintly,  God-like  type  pf  repudiation  of
sin,  as  that  John  himself  had  never  attained
to.  This  representation  tails  from  attribut-
ing to  John  the  function  of  a  sacerdotal
confessor  of  later  days,  and  is  out  of  har-
mony altogether  with  the  meaning  and
potency  of  our  Lord's  confession  of  the  sin
of  the  whole  of  that  human  nature  which  he
had  taken  upon  himself.  The  knowledge
which  John  had  of  Jesus  was  as  nothing  to
the  blaze  of  light  which  burst  upon  him
when  he  realized  the  idea  that  Jesus  was
the  Son  of  God.  Tiie  "  I  knew  him  not "  of
this  verse  was  a  subsequent  reflection  of  the
Baptist  when  the  sul'lime  humility,  the
dovelike  sweetness,  and  the  spiritual  might
of  Jesns  were  revealed  to  him.  A  blind
man  who  had  received  his  sight  during  the
hours  of  darkness  might  imagine,  when  he
saw  the  reflected  glory  of  the  moon  or  morn-
ing star  in  the  eye  of  dawn,  that  he  knew
the  nature  and  had  felt  the  glory  of  light ;
bnt  amidst  the  splendours  of  sunrise  or  of


noon  he  might  jnstJy  say,  "I  knew  It  not"
(compare  the  language  of  Paul,  Phil,  iii,  10,
and  of  this  same  evangelist.  Rev.  i.  17.  See
Archdeacon  Farrar's  '  Life  of  Christ,'  vol.  i
117 ;  my  '  John  the  Baptist,'  p.  315).  Bnt
that  he  should  he  manifested  to  Israel,  for
this  canse  I  came  baptizing  in  (with)  water.
It  was  traditionally  expected  that  Elijah
should  anoint  Messiah.  John  perceives  now
the  transitional  nature  of  his  own  mission.
His  baptism  retires  into  the  background.
He  sees  that  its  whole  meaning  was  the
introduction  of  Messiah,  the  manifestation
of  the  Son  of  God  to  IsraeL  It  may  be  said
that  the  ministry  of  the  wilderness,  with  the
vast  impression  it  produced,  is  represented
by  the  synoptists  as  of  more  essential  im-
portance in  itself.  John's  own  judgment,
however,  here  recorded,  is  the  true  key  to
the  whole  representation.  The  synoptio
narrative  shfiws  very  clearly  that,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  the  Johannine  ministry  culminated
at  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  and  lost  itself  in  the
dawn  of  the  great  day  which  it  inaugurated
and  heralded.  The  Fourth  Gospel  does  but
give  the  rationale  of  such  an  arrangement,
and  refer  the  origin  of  the  idea  to  John
hunself.  If  John  did  not  intensify  the  sense
of  sin  which  Messiah  was  to  soothe  and
take  away  ;  if  John  did  not,  by  baptism  with
water,  excite  a  desire  for  an  infinitely  nobler
and  more  precious  baptism ;  if  John  did  not
prepare  a  way  for  One  of  vastly  more  moment
to  mankiud  and  to  the  kingdom  of  God  than
himself, — his  whole  work  was  a  failure.  In
that  John  saw  his  own  relation  to  the  Christ
—he  saw  his  own  place  in  the  dispenaationi
of  Providence.

Vers.  32,  33. — And  John  bore  testimony,
saying,  I  have  seen  (perfect)  the  Spirit
descending  like  a  dove  out  of  heaven,  and
it  (he)  abode  upon  him.  And  I  knew  >i<Tn
not,  but  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize  with  (in)
water,  he  said  to  me.  Upon  whomsoever  thou
mayest  see  the  Holy  Spirit  descending,  and
abiding  on  him,  this  (one)  is  he  that  bap-
tizeth  with  (in)  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  pre-
paration by  special  teaching  for  a  mysterious
vision  is  the  key  to  the  vi^ion  itself,  which
John  is  here  said  to  have  described.  There
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  evange-
list makes  reference  to  the  synoptic  tradi-
tion of  the  baptism  of  Jesus  by  John,  although
it  may  suit  some  uncompromising  opponents
of  the  Fourth  Gospel  to  say  Ihnt  the  baptism
is  here  omitted.  The  act  of  the  rite  is  not
totidem  verbis  described;  but  the  chief  accom-
paniment and  real  meaning  of  the  baptism
IS  specially  portrayed.  All  the  well-known
cycles  of  criticism  make  their  special  assault
on  the  narratives  at  this  point.  Rationalism
finds  in  a  thunderstorm  and  the  casual  flight
of  a  pigeon  what  John  magnified  into  t
supernatural  portent:  Straussianism  sees  the


CH.  I,  1—51.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHlT.


S?


growth  of  a  legend  from  prepared  sources  of
Hebrew  tradition,  and  endeavours  to  aggra-
vate into  irreconcilable  discrepancy  the
various  accounts ;  Baur  and  Hilgonfeld  ac-
centuate the  objectively  supernatural  portent,
so  as  the  more  easily  to  put  it  into  the  region
of  ignorant  superstition ;  others  find  the  hint
or  sign  of  Gnostic  handling;  and  Keim  sug-
gests that  it  is  the  poetic  colouring  which  a
later  age  unconsciously  attributed  to  the
Baptist  and  the  Christ.    Let  it  be  noticed :

(1)  That  the  present  Gospel  does  not  aug-
ment, but  diminishes,  the  miraculous  element
as  compared  with  the  synoptio  narrative.
The  '  Gcspel  of  the  Hebrews '  added  further
embellishmenta  still.  Gur  Gospel  com-
pels us  to  believe  that  the  mind  of  the
Baptist  was  the  chief  region  of  the  miracle.

(2)  The  author  of  this  Gospel  might,  if  he
had  chosen,  have  selected  his  own  experience
on.  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  in  vindica-
tion of  a  Divine  attestation  of  the  Sonship ;
but  he  preferred  to  fall  back  upon  the  testi-
mony of  his  revered  master.  Peter,  James,
and  John  were  wnprepared  for  what  they  saw
and  heard  on  that  occasion;  and  Peter  knew
not  what  he  said,  so  great  was  the  awful
wonder  that  fell  upon  him  then.  Here,  how-
ever, is  recorded  a  vision  for  which  the  mind
of  the  great  forerunner  was  prepared.  He  ex-
pected to  see  the  Spirit  of  God  in  some  manner
blend  his  energy  with  that  of  the  individual
who  would  prove  to  be  the  Baptizer  with
the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  John  does  not  discri  mi-
naie  the  methods  ofthe  two  communications,
and  fiom  this  narrative  all  that  could  be
inferred  positively  is  that  the  mind  of  John,
by  objective  or  subjective  process,  of  which
we  know  nothing,  received  the  communica-
tion and  the  sacred  impression.  (4)  The
synoptic  narrative,  primd  facie,  differs  from
this  representation.  At  all  events  Luke  iii.
21,  22  speaks  of  "opened  heavens,"  "the
Holy  Spirit  in  bodily  form  as  a  dove,"  and
a  voice  addressed  to  the  Lord,  "Thou  art
my  beloved  Son ;  in  thee  I  am  well  pleased."
This  account  is  taken  by  Strauss  as  the  key
to  the  other  three,  and  he  urges  that  they
must  all  be  interpreted  in  harmony  with  it.
But  from  the  time  of  Origen,  the  exegesis  of
Matthew's  account  no  less  emphatically  states
(i.«.  if  with  De  Wette,  Bleek,  Baur,  and  Keim,
we  take  i  ladvvns  as  the  subject  of  eiSev)  that
John  saw  the  Holy  Spirit  descending  like  a
dove  and  coming  npon  (Christ)  him,  and
that  the  voice  was  addressed  to  John,  *'  This
is  my  beloved  Son,"  eto.  In  Mark's  account
the  elSev  and  avrSr  are  susceptible  of  the
same  interpretation.  It  should  be  observed
that  Luke's  narrative  clearly  implies  that
our  Loril's  baptism  took  place  at  some  un-
specified opportunity,  and  simply  gives  the
summing  up  of  tlie  impression  produced
upon  the  mind  of  John.     It  ia  more  reason-

JOBS.


able  to  interpret  Luke  in  hnrmony  with  the
main  conception  of  Matthew  and  John  than
to  press  the  latter  into  forced  harmony  with
the  former.  (5)  The  great  difficulty  is  the
expression,  iraimriicv  ftSfi.  But  surely  the
prophetic  mind  was  accustomed  to  dwell  in
the  midst  of  similar  visual  shapes  of  spiritual
things.  There  was  (rafiaTmiv  etSos  enough  in
the  cherubim,olive  trees,  horses,  armies,  vials,
and  cities  of  the  Apocalypse,  and  there  were
"voices"  heard, by  Bzekiel,  Hosea,  Elijah,
and  by  John  himself  which  could  be,  were,
and  even  must  be,  described  in  terms  of
physical  facts,  whioli  no  interpreters  have
ever  felt  compelled  to  transfer  into  the  region
of  phenomena.  There  are  still  intensely
vivid  intuitions  of  spiritual  fact  which  tran-
icend  all  sensible  or  logical  proof.  If  John
saw  and  henrd  these  things  so  far  as  his  own
consciousness  was  concerned,  there  is  enough
to  account  for  every  peculiarity  of  the  narra-
tive. He  saw  the  Sheohinah-glory  hovering
over  the  Lord  Jesus,  officially  consecrating
a  human  personality.  The  ioYelike  (i)s
Trepianpav)  form  and  motion  taken  by  the
heavenly  light  reminded  him  of  the  brood-
ing of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  primaeval
waters.  He  looked  into  the  face  of  the  Holy
One  of  God — majesty  and  meekness.  Divine
glory,  human  gentleness,  a  sanctity  as  of  the
holy  place,  a  freedom  as  of  the  birds  of
heaven,  force  like  that  of  the  steeds  of  the
rising  sun,  inward  peace  like  the  calm  of  a
brooding  dove,  transfigured  the  Lord.  This
dovelike  splendour  abode  upon  Yiim,  passed
into  him;  and  the  voice  (the  invincible
conviction,  the  lesistless  consciousness  that
often  can  find  no  other  expression  than
«  Thus  saith  the  Lord")  was  heard,  "  This
is  my  beloved  Son,"  eto.  We  cannot  say
what  John  saw ;  we  know  what  he  said ;
and  it  covered  the  consciousness  of  the  most
stupendous  reality  yet  enacted  on  the  earth.
That  which  John  had  been  taught  to  pre-
dict as  approaching  was  now  seen  to  have
actually  come  about.  He  who  baptizeth
with  tide  Holy  Ghost  has  commenced  his
wondrous  mission.  (6)  The  whole  question
as  to  the  relation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the
Logos — the  relation  between  the  statement
of  ver.  13  and  vers.  31 — 33 — demands  special
consideration.  A  few  words  here  may  suffice.
Baur,  Eiohhom,  and  others  have  urged  that
either  the  Aifyoj  and  Uvevfta  are  identical,
and  that  that  which  John  means  (vers.  1 — 14)
by  the  Logos  he  afterwards  resolves  into
the  pneuma,  or  that  this  scene  and  these
words  are  incompatible  with  the  prologue.
It  is  tine  that  Philo  and  Justin  ('  Apol.,'  i.
33)  do  use  the  two  terms  as  practically
identical.  But  John  has  recorded  our  Lord's
own  woYds  as  to  the  antithesis  of  the  iri/Ei)^a
and  o'dp^  (ch.  iii.),  declaring  in  his  prologue
that  the  Logos  is  the  Source  of  all  the  life


34


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1  — 5^


and  light  of  men,  and  that  the  Logns  came
into  the  world  and  became  flesh.  Now,  if
John  did  not  abide  firmly  in  this  thought,
he  would  have  represented  incarnate  God  as
undergoing  the  process  of  regeneration  at
his  baptism,  than  which  nothing  would  be
more  abhorrent  to  liis  entire  theory  of  the
Christ.  The  relations  of  the  Logos  and  the
Pneuma  to  each  other  and  to  the  Father,
metaphysioaily  considered,  are  profoundly
intricate,  but  the  relatiuns  of  Father,  "Word,
and  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Person  of  the  Lord
Jesus  have  been  several  times  asserted  by
tlie  apostles,  and  cannot  be  interchanged
(see  my  'John  the  Baptist,'  lect.  v.;  Liicke,
'Comm.  fiber  d.  Evang.  Job.,'  vol.  i.  pp
433-443)

Ver.  34. — ^I  for  my  part  have  seen  and
have  borne  testimony  that  this  la  the  Son  of
God.  The  Old  Testament  standpoint  which
John  occupied  enabled  liim  from  the  first
to  identify  the  Messiah  with  the' "Son  of
God ; "  but  surely  this  is  the  record  of  the
first  occasion  when  the  Baptist  recognized
the  tokeni  that  One  who  sustained  such  re-
lation with  the  Father  stood  before  liim.
There  is  much  in  this  Gospel  and  the  sy-
noptic narrative  to  show  that  the  disciples
(Matt.  xvi.  16,  17)  identifiLd  tlie  Christ
with  the  Son  of  God.  Tjie  tempter  and  the
demoniacs  are  familiar  with  the  idea  (Matt.
iv.  1—11;  Mark  iii.  11;  v.  7).  The  high
priest  at  the  trial  and  the  Boman  centurion
(Matt,  xxvi  63 ;  xxvii.  40 ;  Mark  xiv.  61),
Nathanael  (ch.  i.  49),  Martha  (ch.  xi.  27),
hail  him  as  Son  of  God.  Though  the  Lord
for  the  most  part  preferred  to  speak  of  him-
self as  "Son  of  man,"  yet  in  this  Gospel
(ch.  V.  19—23 ;  vi.  40 ;  x.  36)  he  frequently
claims  this  lofty  designation.  Nor  is  it  con-
fined to  this  Gospel,  for  in  Matt.  xi.  25 — 27,
we  have  practically  the  same  confession.
Now,  the  declaration  of  this  verse  is  iu  inti-
mate connection  with  what  precedes.  Neither
the  Baptist  nor  the  evangelist  implies  i  hat,
by  Christ's  baptism,  and  by  that  which  John
saw  of  the  descent  andahiding  of  the  Spirit
upon  the  Lord,  he  was  there  and  then
constituted  "the  Son  of  God."  From  this
mis.ipprehension  of  the  Gospel  arose  the
Guostio-Ebionite  view  of  the  heavenly
Soter  descending  on  Christ,  to  depart  from
him  at  the  Crucifixion.  The  main  signifi-
cance of  the  entire  paragraph  is  the  sjjecial
revelation  given  to  John,  his  consequent  illu-
mination and  momentous  testimony,  one  that
sank  into  the  soul  of  his  most  susceptible
disciples,  and  thus  made  this  declaration  the
"  true  birth-hour  of  Chrutendom  "  (Ewald,
Meyer).  The  narrative  does  not  imply  that
Christ's  own  consciousness  of  Divine  sonship
then  commenced.  He  knew  who  he  was
when  be  Bpoke,  at  twelve  years  of  age,  of
"  the  business  of  my  Father ; "  but  it  would


be  equally  inadequate  exegesis  to  suppose
that  no  communication  was  tlien  made  to  the
sacred  humanity  which  had  been  fashioned
by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  womb  of  the  virgin,
and  by  which  he  became  Jitom  the  first  "  the
Son  of  God."  The  Lord'»  humanity  did
become  alive  to  the  solemn  and  awful  respon-
sibilities of  this  public  recognition.  He
knewthat  the  hour  was  come  for  hisMessianio
activity,  and  the  distinct  admission  of  this
was  the  basis  of  each  of  the  diabolic  temp-
tations from  which  he  immediately  suffered.
There  was  a  unique  glory  in  tlus  lonship
which  differed  from  all  other  usage  of  the
same  phrase.  Many  an  Oriental  mystic  and
Egyptian  pharaoh  and  even  Roman  emperor
had  tlius  described  themselves;  but  the
Baptist  did  not  speak  of  himself  in  this  or
any  other  sense  as  "Son  of  God."  There
was  flashed  into  his  mind  the  light  of  a
Divine  relationship  between  Jesus  and  the
Father  which  convinced  him  of  the  pre-
existing life  of  him  who  was  chronologically
coming  after  him.  It  was  probably  this
momentous  utterance  which  led  to  the  depu-
tation of  the  Sanhedrin,  and  induced  them
to  ask  for  the  explanation  of  a  mystery  tran-
scending all  that  John  had  said  from  "  the
day  of  his  showing  unto  Israel"  (see  my
'  John  the  Baptist,'  lect.  vi.  §  1).  Many  com-
mentators here  encounter  the  unquestionable
difficulty  of  John  the  Baptist's  message  from
the  prison.  I  prefer  to  discuss  it  at  the  close
of  ch.  iii.  (see  my  '  John  the  Baptist,'  lect.
vii. :  "  The  Ministry  of  the  Prison  "  ).  Here
it  is  sufficient  to  observe  that  the  vivid  in-
tuition and  revelation  which  John  obtained
touching  the  deep  things  of  God  in  Christ,
and  the  vast  and  far-reaching  testimonies
which  he  bore  to  the  Son  of  God,  to  the  Bap-
tizer  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  pre-existeut
glory  of  him  that  came  after  him,  ftndto"the
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of
the  world,"  were,  nevertheless,  iu  the  eeange-
list's  mind  Tiistorically  coincident  with  the
fact  that  John  never  did  unite  himself  to  the
circle  of  Christ's  immediate  followers.  The
"John"  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  remained  in
an  independent  position — friendly,  rejoicing
in  the  Bridegroom's  voice,  but  not  one  of
his  followers.  The  preparatory  work  with
which  he  began  his  ministry  he  continued
and  pursued  to  the  tragic  end.

Vers.  35— 51.— 3.  The  first  dUcipUi,  and
ttieir  testimony.

Vers.  85 — 39. — (1)  John  direct*  hi§  oum
disciples  to  Jesut.

Ver.  35. — On  the  morrow,  again  John  was
standing,  and  two  from  his  disoiples ;  imply-
ing that  there  were  many  others  within
hearing  of  his  voice,  or,  at  least,  under  his
influende.  The  imperfect  tense  of  the  verb
flariiKet  suggests  the  idea  that  he  was  waiting
for  some  fresh  announcement,  some  provi-


OH.  1 1—61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


3S


dential  erent,  to  determine  his  course.  The
"again"  refers  back  to  ver.  29.  Much  must
be  read  between  the  lines  as  to  these  dis-
ciples, their  ezuited  interest  in  the  words
already  nttered  by  their  master.

Ver.  36.— And  steadfasUy  regarding  (see
Mark  x.  21,  27 ;  Luke  xx.  17 ;  xxii.  61)—
with  eager  and  penetrating  glance,  as  though
something  might  be  learned  from  his  slightest
movements — Jesns  as  he  walked ;  "  walked,"
not  tpwards  John,  as  on  the  previous  day,
but  in  some  opposite  direction.  This  implies
Ibat  their  relative  functions  were  not  identi-
cal, and  not  to  be  confounded.    This  is  the
last  time  when  th«  Baptist  and  the  Christ
were  together,  and  the  sublime  meekness  of
John,  and  his  surrender  of  all  primary  claims
to  defereuce,  throw  light  on  the  unspeakable
and  gentle  dignity  of  Jesus.      He  saith,
Behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  The  simple  phrase,
without  further  exposition,  implies  that  he
was  recalling  to  their  minds  the  mighty
appellation  which  he  had  bestowed  upon  the
Saviour  on  the  previous  day,  with  all  the
additional  interpretation  of  the  term  with
whioli  it  had  then  been  accompanied.     The
brevity  of  the  cry  here  marks  the  emphasis
which  it  bore,  and  the  riuh  associations  it
already  conveyed.     Tj,e  testimony  to  the
method  by  which  John  had,  at  least  in  part,
arrived  at  the  conclusion  is  very  remarkable.
Jesus  would  not  have  fultilled  in  John's
mind  the  prophetic  oracle  of  the  Divine
Lamb,  or  the  sacrificial  offering  for  the  sin
of  the  world,  if  steps  had  not  been  taken  to
convince  John  that  he  was  the  veritable  Son
of  God.    No  mere  human  nature,  but  only
that  humanity  which  was  an  incarnation  of
the  Eternal  Logos,  and  filled  with  the  abid  ing
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  could  be  God's  Lamb.
Cf.  here  the  remarkable  fact  that  it  was  when
the  diiciples  had  learned  more  clearly  and
grasped  more  firmly  the  idea  of  his  Divine
sonship  that  the  Lord  repeatedly  proceeded
to  explain   to   them  the  approach  of  his
sacrificial  sufferings  and  death.    As  Son  of
God,  he  must  die  for  man  (Matt.  xvi.  21;
Luke  ix.  22,  43,  44 ;  oh.  xvi.  29—32).

Ver.  37. — ^And  the  two  disciples  heard  him
speak,  and  they  followed — became  followers
ot^ — Jesus.  This  event,  if  not  profoundly
symbolic  (as  Godeit  says),  is  typical  of  the
whole  process  which  has  gone  on  in  augment-
ing rapidity  from  that  day  to  this.  If  Jesus
were  what  John  saldt  if  they  were  able  on
his  showing  to  grasp  this  much  concerning
the  Lord,  they  would  find  in  him  what  John
could  never  be  to  them.  John  might  awaken
the  sense  of  sin,  peril,  shame,  and  fear ;  he
had  no  power  to  allay  it.  The  lonely  Christ
has  as  yet  not  called  one  disciple  into  his
fellowship,  but  as  Lamb  of  God  he  has  power
to  draw  all  men  to  himself.  The  word  now
spoken  was  enough.     It  divided  the  bond


which  up  to  this  time  had  united  the  dis-
ciples to  John,  and  made  them  conspicuous
for  ever  in  the  group  which  "  follow  the
Lnmb  whithersoever  he  goeth."  "Primss
origiiies  ecclesiie  Cliiistianss"  (Bengel).

\  er.  38. — Then  Jesus  turned — ^hearing  their
footfall,  he  welcomed  their  sincere  approach,
attentive  as  he  ever  was  to  the  faintest
indication  of  genuine  faith  and  desire  for
his  best  gifts — and  beheld  them  following
(eea(i/»ai  is  used  of  intense  gaze  at  that  which
is  august  and  wonderful,  vers.  14,  32 ;  1  John
i.  1 ;  but  used  also  of  special  and  interested
contemplation,  Matt.  vi.  1 ;  ch.  vi.  5),
and  he  saith  to  them,  What  seek  ye  !  The
first  words  of  Jesus,  as  recorded  in  this
Gospel,  reveal  the  incarnate  Logos,  anointed
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  beginning  to  search  the
heart  and  anticipate  the  unuttered questions
of  humanity.  He  assumes  their  desire  for
that  which  he  alone  can  supply.  They,  on
seeing  their  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  all
humanly  before  them,  do  not  fall  at  his  feet,
but  approach  him  as  a  human  teacher,  and
give  him  the  ordinary  honorific  title  of  a
wise,  competent  instructor.  They  said  unto
him,  Sabbi  (which  is,  being  interpreted,
Teacher).  The  parenthetic  clause  reveals
the  fact  that  the  Gospel  was  written  for  Gen-
tile readers.  The  title  "Babbi"  was  a  modem
one,  only  dating  from  the  days  of  Hillel,
about  B.C.  30,  and  therefore  needing  inter-
pretation. Where  abidest  thou  ?  Renan
founds  on  this  phrase  "  Babbi  "  the  supposi-
tion that,  when  John  and  Jesns  meet,  they
are  both  surrounded  by  groups  of  followers.
The  narrative  is  written  to  convey  a  precisely
opposite  conception.  Christ  did  not  refuse
this  "courtesy  title"  (Matt.  xxiii._8;  ch.
xui.  13),  and  we  can  gather  nothing  else
from  the  narrative.  The  question  itself  re-
veals the  mind  of  the  evangelist.  In  the
opinion  of  all  wi  iters  (favourable  and  hostile),
the  writer,  according  to  a  deliberate  method
adopted  by  him,  wished  to  imply  that  he  was
one  of  the  two  disciples  who  first  left  the
Baptist  to  attach  themsi  Ives  to  Jesus.  The
very  form  of  the  question  ndds  to  the  proba-
bility. It  is  a  characteristic  longing  of  the
disciple,  whom  Jesns  loved  so  weU,  to  be
near  and  with  his  Master.  He  craved  no
laconic  phrase,  no  solitary  word,  but  some
more  prolonged  fellowship,  some  undisturbed
communion  and  instruction.  The  varied
emotions  of  that  day,  moreover,  were  con-
spicuously reproduced  in  the  solemn  title
which  the  son  of  Zebedee  most  persiatently
applied  to  his  glorified  Lord  in  the  Apoca-
lypse. More  than  thirty  times  he  refers  to
him  as  "  the  Lamb."

Ver.  39. — He  saith  to  them.  Come,  and  ye
shall  see. '    "  A  parable  of  the  message  of

'  The  reading  itl/eaSe  is  preferred  to  that


THX  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  8T.  JOHN.        [oh.  1 1—51.


faith  "  (Westcott).  Borne  have  compared  the
expression  with  Ipxov  Ka\  PK4m,  thrice  re-
peated (T.B.)  in  Rev.  vi. ;  but  it  is  unneces-
sary to  do  so.  Faith  precedes  revelation  as
well  as  follows  it  They  came,  and  saw  where
he  was  abiding.  We  cannot  say  where ;  it
may  have  been  some  cave  in  the  rocks,  some
humble  shelter  amid  the  hills,  some  chamber
in  a  caravanserai ;  for  he  had  not  where  to
lay  his  head.  He  Ciilled  no  place  his  home.
And  they  abode  with  him  that  day,  for  it
was  about  the  tenth  honr.  The  extreme
difficulty  of  reconciling  John's  statement  as
to  the  time  of  the  Cruoiflxion  with  that  of
Mark  (see  note  on  eh.  xix.  14)  has  led  very
able  critics,  like  Townson,  McLellaa,  West-
cott, to  argue  that  all  John's  notices  of
time  are  compatible  with  his  having  adopted
the  Roman  method  of  measuring,  i.e,  from
midnight  to  noon,  and  from  noon  to  mid-
night. On  that  hypothesis  the  "tenth  honr  "
would  be  ten  a.m.,  and  the  two  disciples
would  have  remained  with  our  Lord  through-
out the  day.  This  is  not  necessarily  involved
by  our  present  context,  and  we  are  not  sure
that  a  like  supposition  will  free  us  from  all
difficulty  in  eh.  xix.  14.  Meyer  says  that
"the  Jewish  reckoning  is  involved  necessarily
in  ch.  xi.  9;  and  in  ch.  iv.  6,  62  it  is  not
excluded."  The  ordinary  New  Testament
measurement  would  make  the  hour  four  p.m,
and  on  that  understanding  several  houn
might  still  be  open  for  the  sacred  fellowship.
The  personal  witness  shows  himself  by  this
delicate  hint  of  exact  time,  this  special  note
of  remembrance  concerning  the  most  critical
epoch  of  his  life.

Vers.  40 — 49.— (2)  The  naming  and  convio-
tions  of  the  disHples.

Ver.  40. — One  of  the  two  who  heard  from
John  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God  and
the  Lamb  of  God,  and  who,  on  that  astound-
ing intelligence,  and  at  their  teacher's  own
suggestion,  followed  (became  henceforth  fol-
lowers of,  aK6\oueoi)  him,  was  Andrew,  the
brother  of  Simon  Peter  (notice  a  similar
construction  at  ch.  vi.  45,  where  a  clause
commences  with  the  copula).  The  other
disciple,  with  the  studied  reticence  ever
preserved  about  his  own  designation,  is  left
unnamed  by  the  writer.  "  Simon  Peter  "  is
here  spoken  of  as  the  better-known  man.
The  bestowment  of  this  designaticm  on
Andrew  shows  that  the  GTospel  was  written
when  Peter's  greater  name  was  widely
recognized,  and  the  reference  is  made  with-
out the  faintest  touch  of  depreciation.  Simon
Peter's  reputation  gives  force  and  impor-
tance to  the  record  of  Andrew's  faith.    The

of  Were  of  T.R.  and  Lachmann,  by  Tregelles,
Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),  K.T.,  Westcott  and
Hort,  on  the  authority  of  B,  0*,  L,  and  quota-
tions from  Origen  and  numerous  cursives.


evangelist's  Intimate  friend  Andrew  is  thus
lifted  out  of  his  comparative  obscurity
among  the  apostolate,  not  by  his  associ-
ation with  John,  bnt  by  his  relationihip
with  Simon.

Ver.  41.— (a)  The  Messiah,  He  (Andrew)
first'  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon.    Dr.
Plummer  here  observes,  "In  Church  history
St.  Peter  is  everything,  and  St.  Andrew
nothing:   but  would  there  have  been  an
Apostle  Peter  but  for  Andrew  ?  "  Hengsten-
berg,  De  Wette,  and  others  have  explained
the  curious  word  "  first,"  as  though  both  the
nnnamed  disciple  and  Andrew  had  gone
together  to  search    out    Simon,  and   that
Andrew  had  been  the  first  of  the  two  to  be
successful.    This  would  leave  the  ISioy  less
satisfactorily  accounted  for  than  the  simple
supposition  that  each  of  the  disciples  started
in  different  directions  to  find  "his  own"
brother,  and  that  Andrew  was  more  fortunate
than  his    companion.      The   two  pairi  of
brothers  are  frequently  mentioned  as  being
together.      James  and  John,  Andrew  and
Simon,  are  partners  on  the  lake  of  Galilee  in
their  fishing  business,  and  are  finally  called
into  full  disoipleship  and  apostolate  after  the
visit  to  Jerusalem  (see  Mark  i.  19, 11).    The
four  are  specially  mentioned  as  being  to-
gether (Mark  xiii.  3),  so  that  it  is  not  un-
reasonable to  suggest  that  when  Andrew  first
sought  "  his  own  "  brother  Simon,  John  also
sought  for  "  his  own  "  brother  James.     It  is
worthy  of  note  that   the  evangelist  never
mentions  his  own  name,  nor  that  of  James,
nor  that  of  their  mother  Salome,  although  he
does  imply  their  presence.    Andrew  saith  to
him  (Simon),  We  have  found  the  Messias —
the  article  is  omitted,  as  Xpicrr6s  is  merely  the
translation  of  "  Messiah  " — (whioh,  adds  the
evangelist,   is,  being   interpreted,    Christ).
Andrew  is  described  on  two  additional  occa-
sions as  bringing  others  to  Jesus  (ch.  vi  8 ;
xli.  22).    Here  the  rapidity  and  depth  of  his
convictions  are  noted.      The  writer's  own
impression  is  implied  ratlier  than  given.  He
hides  his  own  faith  under  the  bolder  and
more  explicit  utterance  of  his  friend.     This
was  the  result  upon  the  mind  of  two  disciples
of  the  first  conference  with  Jesus.    Marvel-
lous enough  that  such  a  thought  should  have
possessed  them, however  imperfect  their  ideas
were  as   yet  concerning  the  Christ  I    The
elipT^Ka/iiv  implies  that  they  had  long  been
waiting  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel,  looking
for  his  coming,  seeking  his  appearing.    "  We
have  sought,"  they  say, "and  we  have  found."
A  more  wonderful  ES^ijKathan  that  of  Arohi-

'  The  awkward  reading  Trp&Tov  is  pre-
ferred to  jtpaTos  of  T.R.  by  LacUmann,  Tre-
gelles, R.T.,  and  Westcott  and  Mort,  on  the
authority  of  X',  A,  B,  M,  1, 22, 69,  etc. ;  but  not
by  Meyer,  Qodet-  or  Tisohendorf  (8th  editi


sH.  L  1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  8T.  JOHN.


37


medes.  The  plural  does  not  necessitate  the
presence  of  John,  though  it  does  suggest
the  agreement  of  Andrew  and  his  friend  in
the  Slime  august  conclusion.  What  sense
of  Divine  things  must  have  come  from  the
words  nnd  looks  of  Josug  I  He  who  pro-
duced such  impression  on  the  Baptist  as
that  which  the  four  evangelists  report,  had
done  even  more  with  the  susceptible  spirits
of  his  two  disciples.  The  Baptist  never
actually  called  Jesus  "  the  Christ."  But
when  ho  had  testified  to  the  pre-existing
glory,  the  heavenly  origin,  the  sublime  func-
tions of  the  great  epxi/ievo!,  and  by  special
revelation  on  his  forewarned  spirit  had  de-
clared that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  the
Lamb  of  God,  and  the  Baptizer  with  the
Holy  Ghost  and  fire:  what  must  not  the
inference  be  when  his  two  disciples  came
into  yet  closer  and  mure  intimate  relations
with  Jesus  ?  The  Jewish  idea  of  "  Messiah  "
(Mso-o-fo!,  only  occurring  here  and  ch.  iv.  25),
equivalent  to  Kn^e'p,  Aramaized  form,  the  itat.
emphat.  of  n'B'Q  (Hebrew  n'^'o);  cf.  'Uaaal
for'B';(Kautzsch,  'Gram,  des  Bib.  Aram.,'  p.
10),  was  the  term  used  among  all  classes  to  de-
note One  who  should, as  anointed  by  God,  ful-
fil the  functions  of  Prophet,  Priest  and  Kinx,
who  should  realize  the  splendid  visions  of  the
ancient  prophecies,  and  combine  in  himself
»  wonderful  exhibition  of  Divine  majesty
and  even  of  awful  suffering.  We  see  that  the
Baptist  understood  what  was  meant  by  the
title,  but  denied  its  applicability  to  himself.
The  Samaritans  believe  in  a  coming  Prophet
and  Saviour  (ch.  iv.  25,  29).  The  people
believe  that  Messiah  will  work  miracles,
that  he  will  be  bom  in  Bethlehem,  that  he
will  abide  for  ever,  that  ho  would  prove  to
be  the  Son  of  God.  The  King  Messiah  is  a
pre-existing  power  and  presence  in  their
past  history.  He  will  come  in  the  clouils,
and  reign  for  ever  and  ever  (see  ch.  vii.  26,
31  and  42  ;  xii.  34).  According  to  Wilnsche
('  Neue  Beitrage  ziirerlanterung  der  Ev.,  aus
Talmud  und  Midrasch,'  pp.  499,  500),  the
Talmud  ('  Pesaohim,'  54,  and  '  Nedavim,'  39)
declares  that  Messlas,  or  his  Name,  was  one
of  the  seven  things  created  before  the  world ;
and  Midrasch  ('  Scheraoth,'  par.  19)  on  Exod.
iv.  22  declares  that  the  King  Messias  was  tho
Firstborn  of  God.  The  more  spiritual  ideas
of  John  the  Baptist  have  prepared  the  two
disciples  to  see,  even  in  the  travel-stained,
lowly  Man,  "the  Messiah."  Of  course,
their  idea  of  Messiah  and  their  idea  of
Jesua  would  suffer  wonderful  development,
and  be  harmonized  and  blended  into,  a
sublime  unity  by  later  instructions;  but
they  had  made  this  great  discovery,  and
hastened  to  impart  it.
Ver.  tt.— He'  brought  (the  past  tense)

*  The  ml  is  omitted  before  iiyaytv  by


him  to  Jesns ;  as  one  entirely  sympathetic
and  as  eagerly  longing  for  the  Christ,  for
the  Lamb  of  God,  for  the  King  of  Israel.
Seeing  that  Simon  was  found  so  soon — most
probably  on  the  evening  of  the  memorable
day — ^we  gather  that  Simon  also  must  have
been  among  the  hearers  of  John.  He  too
must  have  left  his  fishing  to  listen  to  the
Baptist.  The  entire  group  must  have  been
drawn  away  from  their  ordinary  avocations
by  the  trumpet-call  of  the  preacher  in  the
wilderness.  Jesus  looked — intently,  with
penetrating  glance — ^npou  him,  and  said,  Thou
art  Simon,  the  Son  of  John ' — that  is  the
name  by  which  thou  hast  been  introduced
to  me ;  a  time  is  coming  for  thee  to  receive
a  new  name — ^Thou  shsdt  be  called  Cephas  '
(which  is  interpreted,  Peter).  It  is  perfectly
gratuitous  of  Baur  and  Hilgenfeld  to
imagine  this  to  be  a  fictitious  aJaptiition  of
the  great  scene  recorded  in  Matt.  xvi.  The
solemn  assertions  made  there  proceed  upon
the  assumption  of  the  previous  conference
of  the  name  "Peter."  There  the  Lord
said,  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock,"
etc.  On  this  earlier  occasion  Jesus  said,
"Thou  art  Simon,  thou  shait  be  called
KijiJ>Ss."  The  assumption  of  the  Tubingen
critics,  that  a  desire  to  lower  Peter  from  his
primacy  is  conspicuous  in  this  passage,  can-
not be  sustained.  Though  Andrew  and
John  precede  Peter  in  their  earliest  rela-
tions with  Jesus,  yet  Peter  is  undoubtedly
the  most  conspicuous  character,  to  .whom
the  Lord  from  thf  first  gives  an  honourable
cognomen  (cf.  also  ch.  vi.  67 — 69  and  xxi.  15,
etc.).  (Compare  here,  for  historic  changes  of
name,  Gen.  xvii.5;  xxxii.  28.)  Weiss  ('Life
of  Christ,'  Eng.  trans.,  i.  370)  says  admirably,
"  There  is  no  ground  for  assuming  that  this
is  an  anticipation  of  Matt.  xvi.  18.  Simon
was  not  to  bear  this  name  until  he  was  de-
serving of  it.  Jesus  never  called  hirn  any-
thing but  Simon  (Mark  xiv.  37 ;  Matt.  xvii.
25 ;  Luke  xxii.  31 ;  ch.  xxi.  15—17).  Paul
calls  him  by  the  names  Peter  and  Cephas.
.  .  .  The  evangelist  is  right  when  he  beholds
in  this  scene  a  more  than  human  acumen.

N,  B,  L,  and  other  authorities,  Tregelles.
Tischendorf  (Sth  edit.),  though  Laehmnni)
preserved  it  with  A,  X,  r,  A,  etc.  The
omission  gives  some  additional  dramatic
force  to  the  narrative.

'  'ladvov  ("  John  ")  must  replace  the  fa-
miliar "iMva  ("  Jonah  ")  here  and  oh.  xxi.,  on
the  authority  of  N,  B*,  L,  33.  So  Tregelles
Tischendorf  (Sth  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort
U.T.  'luvS,  is  read  by  A,  B',  X,  r,  A,  and
other  uncials  and  versions.  Lachmann,  Tre-
gelles, and  B&le  Bevisers  all  place  'lura  in
Uie  margin.

*  KS3,  equivalent  to  Kij^r,  an  emphat.
Oat.  to  vfs,  a  lock  (Kantisdi).


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  1. 1— 6L


. .  .  The  history  shows  he  -was  not  deceived
in  Peter."  This  narrative  cannot  be  a
Johannine  setting  forth  of  the  first  call
of  the  fonr  disciples  as  given  in  the
synoptlsts.  If  it  be,  it  is  a  fictitious  modi-
fication. Place,  occasion,  and  immediate
result  are  all  profoundly  different.  Tlie
one  narrative  cannot  be  twisted  into  the
other.  Are  the  anti-harmonists  correct  in
saying  that  they  are  irreconcilable?  Cer-
tainly not.  I'here  is  no  indication  that
before  John  was  cast  into  prison,  before
Jesus  commenced  his  public  ministry  in
Galilee,  he  had  called  disciples  away  from
their  ordinary  duties  to  be  his  apostles.
Some  of  these  four  may  have  returned,  as
Jesus  himself  did,  to  his  family  and  do-
mestic surroundings  (cli.  ii.  12).  John  may
have  accompanied  Jesus  to  Jerusalem  and
through  Samaria.  But  there  is  much  to  make
it  probable  that  Simon,  Andrew,  and  James,
at  least,  were,  during  the  whole  of  that
period,  on  the  lake  pondering  the  future.
Christ's  solemn,  sudden  call  to  them  to  be-
come "fishers  of  men,"  after  a  manifesta-
tion to  them  of  his  supernatural  powers,
presupposes  rather  than  excludes  this  earlier
interview.  Simon,  on  that  occasion,  by  the
exclamation  recorded  (Luke  v.  5),  reveals  an
earlier  acquaintance  with  and  reverence  for
his  ImaTa-nts  (see  an  admirable  vindication  of
this  position  in  Weiss, '  Life  of  Jesus,'  vol.  L).
The  Lord,  in  this  first  interview,  penetrates
and  denominates  the  character  of  the  most
illustrious  of  his  followers.  His  rocklike
fortitude,  which,  though  sorely  assailed  and
chafed  by  the  storms  of  the  great  sea  of
opinion  and  prejudice,  formed  the  central
nucleus  of  that  Church  against  which  the
gates  of  hell  have  not  prevailed.  .Our  Lord
implied  the  strength  of  his  nature,  even  when
he  predicted  his  great  fall  (Luke  xxii.  32).

Vers.  43,  44. — On  the  morrow — i.e.  on  the
fourth  day  after  the  deputation  from  the
Sanhedrin — ^he  willed — or  was  minded — ^to
go  forth  into  Galilee,  to  commence  his  home-
ward journey.  Whether  this  implies  an
actual  beginning  of  his  route,  or  suggests,
before  any  step  was  taken  in  that  direction,
that  the  following  incidents  occurred,  cannot
be  determined,  though  commentators  take
opposite  sides,  as  though  something  impor-
tant depended  upon  it.  The  former  supposi-
tion is.  however,  in  keepingwith  the  consider-
able distance,  on  any  hypothesis  of  the  site
of  Bethany,  between  it  and  Cana.  And  he
(the  Lord  hinjself  "finds ; "  the  two  earliest
disciples  had  sought  and  found  him)  flndeth
Philip;  very  probably  on  the  route  from  the
scene  of  John's  baptism  to  the  Uethsaida
on  the  western  shore  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee.
And  Jesus  saith  to  him,  Follow  me ;  become
one  of  my  i.K6\ovSot.  The  arguments,  the
leasoni;  wbioh  weighed  with  him  are  nut


given  at  first,  but  we  find  that  he  soon
learned  the  same  great  lesson  as  that  which
the  other  disciples  had  aiqnired,  and  he
clothes  them  in  memorable  words.  Now
Philip  was  from  Bethsaida,  of  the  city  of
Andrew  and  Peter.  This  is  a  remark  of  the
evangelist,  who  did  not  consider  it  necessary
to  say  from  what  city  or  neighbourhood  he
had  himself  issued.  This  town  has  utterly
perished  (Matt.  xi.  20),  although  some
travellers  (Robinson,  iii.  35H ;  Wilson  and
Warren)  believe  that  indications  were  found
north  of  Khan  Minyeh,  and  others  have
identified  it  with  TeU-Bim.  Some  writers
('  Picturesque  Palestine,'  vol.  ii  74,  81,  etc.)
discover  it  in  Ain  et  Tdbighah,  where  some
remains  of  a  fountain-reservoir  and  other
buildings  are  found.  It  was  identified  by
Tliomson  with  Abit-Zany,  on  the  west  of
the  entrance  of  Jordan  into  the  lake.  The
two  pairs  of  brothers  must  have  been  fa-
miliar with  Philip.  Some  interesting  hints
of  character  are  attainable  from  ch.  vi.  5,  in
which  an  incident  occurs  where  Philip  re-
vealed a  practical  wisdom  and  confident
purpose,  and  again  in  ch.  xii.  21,  22,  where
Andrew  and  Philip  are  made  the  confidants
of  the  Greeks,  and  Philip  is  the  one  who
seems  able  and  willing  to  introduce  them  to
Jesus.  In  ch.  xiv.  8  Philip  uttered  one  of
the  great  longings  of  the  human  heart — a
passionate  desire  to  solve  all  mysteries,  by
the  vision  of  the  Father ;  but  he  lets  out  the
fact  that  he  had  not  seen  all  that  he  might
have  seen  and  known  in  Jesus  himself.
Subsequent  history  shows  that  Philip  wat
one  of  the  "  great  lights  of  Asia,"  and  was
held  in  the  highest  esteem  (Eusebins,
'  Hist.  Ecol.,'  iii.  31).  He  must  not  be  con-
founded with  Philip  the  evangelist,  whose
daughters  prophesied  (Acts  viii. ;  xxL  8).

Ver.  45. — Further  convictiom  of  the  di$-
eiples.  (6)  The  theme  of  the  Old  Testament.
Philip  findeth  Kathanael.  He  has  no  sooner
accepted  the  Lord  who  found  him,  than  he
is  eager  to  communicate  the  Divine  secret
to  others.  It  seems  widely  accepted,  thongh
without  any  positive  proof,  that  tms  Nathanael
was  identical  with  the  Bartholomew  (Bar
Tolmai,  son  of  Ptolemy)  of  the  four  lists
of  apostles,  on  the  following  grounds:  (1)
In  ch.  xxi.  2  Nathanael  onoe  more  appears
among  the  innermost  circle  of  the  apostles,
and  is  moreover  mentioned  there  in  company
with  Thomas.  In  the  synoptic  Gospels
Bartholomew  is  associated  also  with  Philip,
although  in  Acts,  Luke  ranks  him  with
Matthew.  (2)  It  is  probable  th»t  Nathanael
was  one  of  the  twelve,  and,  this  being  so,  it
is  more  probable  that  he  should  have  been
identical  with  Bartholomew  than  with  any
other.  He  is  distinguished  from  Thomas
and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee  in  oh.  xxi.  2,
and  the  whole  circumstance  of  his  call  sng-


OH.  L  1— 41.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


39


gests  no  resemblance  to  that  of  Matthew.
(3)  His  well-known  name  is  only  that  of  a
patronymio,  and  suggests  the  existence  of
another  and  a  personal  name.    This  identifi-
cation cannot  be  proved,  but  there  is  no  other
that  is  more  probable.   Nathanael  (7N3n:),  as
a  name  in  Hebrew,  is  identical  with  Theo-
dorus,  "  God  is  giver  "  (Numb.  i.  8 ;  I  Ohron.
ii.  14 ;  see  also  I  Badras  i.  9 ;  ix.  22).   Thoma
('  Die  Genesis  des  Johannes-Evangeliums,'  p.
409,  etc.)  endeavours  to  identify  Nathanael
with  Matthew,  and  to  institute  a  series  of
ingenious  comparisons  between  the  synoptic
"Matthew  and  Zacohseus"  and  this  Israelite
without  guile,  and  to  compare  the  mn'rriage-
feast  at  Nathanael's  "Cana"  with  the  feast
in  Matthew's,  or  Levi's,  house.    The  subtle
fancy  and  dramatic  moral  which  he  attributes
to  every  clause  of  the  narrative  render  the
authorship    a    greater    puzzle    than    ever.
Philip  saith  unto  him,  We  have  found— we,
the  group  of  friends  already  illumined  with
the  sublime  hope— him  of  whom  Moses  in
the  Law,  and  the  prophets,  wrote.    This
reveals  the  characteristics  of  the  conversation
which  had  passed  between  the  Lord  and
the  fiivoured  three.     It  corresponds  with
what  occurred  on  the  way  to  Eminaus.    The
Lord  rested  upon  the  germinant  ideas,  and
prophetic  hopes,  suggestive  types,  and  posi-
tive predictions  of  the  Old  Testament,  and
met,  while  he  refined  and  elevated,  the  current
expectations  of  his  time.    There  was  to  be
no  breaJk  vfith  the  old  covenant,  except  by
fulfilling  it,  establishing  its  reality  and  its
vast  place  in  the  revelation  of  the  supreme
will  of  God.    The  question  naturally  arises,
"  Well,  but  who  is  he?  what  is  his  name?
whither  has  he  come?  whence  does  he  hail?  "
The  continuation  of  the  sentence  is  obviously
not  in  apposition  with  the  ir  typa^ev,  but
the  direct  object  of  eip^ica/iec.     We  have
foimd  Jesus  the '  Son  of  Joseph  of  Hazareth.
This  is  the  simple  utterance  of  a  matter  of
fact— a  current  piece  of  intelligence  now
circulating   in   the  group  of   the    earliest
disciples.    The  idea  of  his  being  Joseph's
Son  was  widely  diffused ;  the  fact  that  the
Lord  spent  the  first  thirty  years  of   his
human  life  in  Nazareth,  was  a  commonplace
of  the  synoptic  story.     The  argument  of  the
Tubingen  and  Straussian  criticism,  that  the
fourth  evangelist  was  ignoralit  of  Christ's
birth  from  above,  is  contradicted  by  the
prologue,  with  all  the  assertions  of  the  Lord's
pre-existence,  and  especially  by  ver.  14  with
ch.  ili.  6,  and  13.    That  he  was  ignorant  of
the  birth  in  Bethlehem,  with  the  numberless
proofs  of  his  knowledge  of  Matthew's  and
■juke'B  Gospels,  is  absurd.    The  language

'  Alford  pregerves  the  rhv  with  T.B. ;
Tregelles  brackets;  other  modern  editors
■xclude  it.


put  into  Philip's  lips  does  not  exhaust  the
knowledge  of  the  evangelist  on  this  subject
(cf.  ch.  vii.  42).

Vers.  46— 49.— (c)  The  Son  of  God  and
King  of  Israel.

Ver.  46. — And  Nathanael  said  to  him,  Can
any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  f    The
ordinary  interpretations  of  the  meaning  of
this  question  are  not  satisfactory.    (1)  The
prejudice   against    Nazareth    as    being   a
Galilean  town  cannot  have  weighed  with
Nathanael  of  Cana  in  Galilee  (ch.  xxi.  2),
even  though  he  may  have  shared  the  ignorant
opinion  that  "  out  of   Galilee   ariseth  no
prophet"  (ch.  vii.  52).  He  might  have  known
that  Jonah,  Hosea,  Nahum,  probably  Elijah,
Elisha,  and  Amos,  were  Galileans.    (2)  That
Nazareth  was  a  secluded  and  contemptible
village  seems  disproved  by  the  interesting
papers  of  Dr.  Selah  Meriill,  on  "  GaUlee  in
the  Time  of  our  Lord,"  Amer.  Bibl.  Saera.,
January  and  April,   1874.     (3)  That  the
character  of  its  people  should  have  been
jealous,  turbulent,  capricious,  and  led  to  our
Lord's  subsequent  preference  for  Capernaum,
does  not  explain  the  force  of  the  inquiry.
The  "good  thing"  may,  however,  be  the
contrast  between  the  unimportance  of  the
place  in  the  political  or  religious  history  of
the  people,  as  compared  with  Jerusalem,
Tiberias,  Jericho,  Bethlehem.    It  is  never
mentioned    in    the  Old    Testament   or    in
Josephus.    Nathanael  may  have  known  its
mediocrity,  and  have  been  startled  by  the
possibility  of  a  carpenter's  son,  in  a  spot
utterly  undistiuguished,  being  the  Messiah
of  whom  their  sacred  vrriters  spoke.    "De-
spised Nazareth  "  is  a  phrase  rather  due  to
the  splendour  of  the  flower  that  grew  upon
its  barren  soil,  and  became  contrasted  after-
wards   with    the    unlooked-for   glory   and
claims  of  the  Nazarene.    Philip  saith  unto
him,  Come  and  see.    This  was  his  strongest
argument.    To  look  upon  him  is  to  believe.
He  had  much  more  to  learn  in  after-days
(ch.  xiv.  8,  9).    At  this  moment  he  and
Nathanael  stood  on  ground  consecrated  by
ancient   history,   and    thrilling    with    the
thunder-peals  of  the   Baptist,   mazed  and
wistful  from  much  longing,  thinking  of  the
union  between  heaven  and  earth  which  had
been  revealed  in  the  experience  of  ancient
prophets,  dwelling  on  the  careers  of  Israel,
Moses,  and  Elijah  in  thoir  rapt  transports,
musing  under  fig  trees  or  the   like,  and
longing    for    the    great    King.      He    may
naturally  have  reasoned  on  this  wise :  "  Can
it  be  true  that  the  Christ,  tlie  King  of
Israel,  the  Lord  of  the  temple,  the  Baptizer
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  indistinguishable
from  the  rest  of  mankind  in  this  very  crowd  ?
Would  that  I  too  might  see  in  him,  as  John
j  has  done,  some  vision  of  the  opened  heaven,
j  that  I  too  might  hear  some  unmistakable


40


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHK.        [cm.  1 1-«1.


voieel"  If  these  were  the  musings  of  Na-
tbanael — and  surely  there  is  not  a  trace  of
unreason  in  such  meditations  in  the  ^rcast
of  a  disciple  of  the  Baptist—  the  conversation
which  follows  is  more  easy  to  understand.

Ver.  47. — Jeans  saw  Nathanael  coming  to
Mm — for  Nathanael  at  once  oheyed  the
summons  of  Philip — and  saith  of  ham;  not,
to  Mm — saith  in  the  hearing  of  the  unnamed
disciple,  who  could  not  leave  his  Master's
side.  There  are  numerous  indications  In
ch.  i.  and  ii.  of  a  quiiliflcation  of  Jesus
which,  in  ch.  ii.  25,  is  described  as  knowing
what  was  in  mau.  He  read  the  thought
and  character  of  Simon  and  Philip,  of
Nathanael,  and  of  his  mother ;  and  here  he
makes  use  of  his  Divine  prerogative  and,  as
on  a  multitude  of  other  occasions,  penetrated
the  surface  to  the  inner  motive  and  heart.
Behold,  an  Israelite  indeed ;  one  who  fulfils
the  true  idea  of  Israel,  a  prince  with  God,  a
conqueror  of  God  by  prayer,  and  conqueror
of  man  by  submission,  penitence,  and  restitu-
tion ;  one  who  has  renounced  the  spirit  of
supplanter  and  taken  tliat  of  penitent.
"Confident  in  self-despair,"  he  has  relin-
quislied  his  own  strength,  and  lays  hold  of
the  strength  of  God,  and  is  at  peace.  In
whom  is  no  guile ;  i.e.  no  self-deception.,  and
no  disposition  to  deceive  others.  The  (Ps.
xxxii.  1,  2)  description  of  the  blessedness  of
"the  man  whose  transijreasions  are  forgiven,
.  .  .  and  in  whose  spirit  [LXX., '  mouth ']
there  is  no  guile  (SiJAos),"  is  the  finest  key  to
the  significance  of  this  passage.  Christ  does
not  say  that  this  man  is  sinlesi,  but  guile-
less— free  and  full  in  his  confession,  knowing
himself,  and  sheltering  himself  under  no
devices  or  seeming  shows.  The  publican
(it  has  been  well  said)  was  without  guile
when  he  cried,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a
sinner  I "  The  Pharisee  was  steeped  in  self-
deception  and  guile  when  he  said,  "  God,  I
thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men."
Sincerity,  openness  of  eye,  simplicity  of
speech,  no  wish  to  appear  other  than  what
he  is  tefore  God  and  man,  affirms  his  guile-
lessness.  Alas  I  the  so-called  Israelite  has
widely  departed  from  the  fundamental  idea
of  su<m  a  character,  though  not  more  so  than
Christians  have  become  unlike  the  ideal
disciples  of  Jesus.

Yer.  48.— Nathanael  saith  unto  him,
Whence  knowest  thou  me  I  Without  any
title  of  respect,  or  admission  as  yet  of  any
claims  or  right  in  him  of  whom  Philip  had
spoken.  There  is,  in  this  query,  an  abrupt-
ness of  blunt  sincerity  which  to  some  extent
justifles  the  eulogium  upon  his  innermost
life.  Jesus  answered  and  said  nuto  him.
Before  that  Flulip  called  thee — irrespective
altogether  of  tlie  excitement  he  has  stirred
wltMn  thee — when  thou  wast  under  the  fig
tree,  I  saw  thee.    "  The  fig  tree  "  was  the


type  of  the  Israelite  home  (1  Kings  ir.  29  ;
Zech.  iii.  10).  There,  not  in  the  corners  ol
the  street,  was  he  accustomed  to  meditate
and  pray.  The  Xcto  clause  is  in  apposition
with  (Te,  and  (though  another  translation  is
grammatical)  suggests  that  Christ  saw  him
under  conditions  which  had  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  those  under  which  Philip
called  him.  Eii6i/  is  used  for  the  most  part
of  simple  sight,  and  need  not  necessarily
connote  miraouloua  penetration  and  recog-
nition of  all  that  was  passing  in  his  mind.
And  yet  the  obvious  intention  of  the  evan-
gelist is  to  convey  more  than  casual  obser-
vation. As  Weiss  says, "  What  is  mentioned
is  not  onu  isolated  glance  into  the  depths  of
the  soul,  but  past  events,  along  with  their
outward  circumstances,  are  known  to  Jesus."
"  I  saw  thee  " — I  have  not  been  ignorant  of
thee;  I  watched  and  thought  of  thee.  The
astonishing  efiieot  produced  by  this  saying
of  the  Lord  has  been  variously  conceived.
Some  have  surmised  preternatural  optical
powers  exercised  from  a  distance ;  others  a
simple  observation  without  comment  at  the
time  when  our  Lord  watched  him  in  one  of
the  places  of  retirement  sacred  to  solemn
meditationa  and  instructions.  It  seems  to
me  that  the  oocusion  to  which  our  Lord
referred  must  haxe  been  one  of  extreme
spiritual  interest  and  memorableness  to
Nathanael ;  some  hour  had  passed  of  com-
manding influence  upon  his  mind — one  of
those  periods  of  visitation  from  the  living
God,  when  lives  are  recommenced,  when  an
old  world  passes  away  and  a  new  one  has
been  made,  of  which  the  lips  have  never
spoken,  and  which  are  among  the  deepest
secrets  of  the  soul.  It  was  the  conviction
that  his  secret  meditation  had  been  sur-
prised, that  the  unknown  Stranger  had
fathomed  the  depth  of  his  consciousness,
which  wrought  and  wrung  the  great  confes-
sion of  which  we  have  here  a  crisp  outline.
/  saw  thee ;  and  by,  this  implication  I  can
sympathize  in  all  thy  longings.  [It  is  in-
teresting to  remember  that  Babbi  Akiba  is
described  as  studying  the  Law  under  a  fig
tree  ;  and  Augustine  heard  the  voice  which
ruled  his  subsequent  life  "  under  a  fig  tree  "
('  Conf.,'  viii.  12,  28) ;  and  Buddha's  most
wonderful  convictions  and  resolves  occurred
undtr  the  b&  tree.]

Ver.  49.— Nathanael  was  overcome  by
irresistible  conviction  that  here  was  the
Searcher  of  hearts.  One  gifted  with  strange
powers  of  sympathy,  and  witli  right  to  claim
obedience.    Answered   him' — now  for  the

'  The  omission  of  the  icai  \4yti  oi)t^  is
made  by  Westcutt  and  Hort,  B.T.,  Alford,
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  'J'regelles,  etc.,  on  the
authority  of  B,  L,  33.  The  omitted  clause  is
given  differently  in  i<.  A,  and  other  uncials.


OLi-l— 51.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


41


first  time  with  the  title  of  Rabhi,  or  teacher
— ^Thou  art  the  Sou  of  God,  Nothing  ia
more  obvious  than  that  this  is  the  reflection
of  the  testimony  of  the  Baptist.  "  The  Son
of  God,"  not  "  a  Son  of  God,"  or  •'  a  Man  of
God,"  but  the  Personage  whose  rank  and
glory  my  master  John  had  recognized.  He
miiy  have  doubted  before  whether  the  Bap-
tist had  not  gone  wild  with  hallucination,
and  could  have  meant  what  he  said.  Now
the  reality  has  flashed  upon  his  mind  fiom
the  glance  of  the  Savioiu's  eye  and  the  tones
of  Us  voice  (see  notes  on  Ter.  34).  The
great  term  could  not  have  meant  to  him
what  it  does  now  to  the  Church.  Still  the
truth  involved  in  his  wordi  is  of  priceless  sig-
nificance. Luthaidt  says,  "  Nathanael's  faith
will  never  possess  more  than  it  embraces  at
this  moment."  Godet  adds,  "The  gold-
geeker  puts  his  hand  on  an  ingot ;  when  he
has  coined  it,  he  has  it  better,  but  not  more."
The  idea  of  the  Divine  sonship  comes  from
the  Old  Testament  prophecy,  has  its  root
in  Ps.  ii.  and  Ixxii.,  and  in  all  the  strange
wonderful  literature  which  recognized  in
the  ideal  King  upon  Zion  and  upon  David's
throne  One  who  for  evermore  has  stood  and
will  stand  in  personal  relations  with  the
Father.  The  Divine  sonship  is  the  basis
on  which  Nathanael  rears  his  further  faith
that  he  is  the  King  of  Israel.  He  is
Mesaiah-King,  because  he  is  "  Son  of  God."
Th«  true  Israelite  recognize*  his  King  (cf.
1-uke  1.  32;  Matt.  iL  2;  ch.  xii.  13).  We
are  not  bound  to  believe  that  Nathanael
saw  all  that  Peter  subsequently  confessed
to  be  the  unanimous  conviction  of  the
twelve  (ch.  vi  69;  Matt.  xvi.  16);  but  the
various  symphonies  of  this  great  confession
encompass  the  Lord  from  his  cradle  to  the
cross.  The  synoptic  narrative  is  as  ex-
pressive and  conTincln°;  as  the  Johannine.

Vers.  50,  51.— (d)  The  Son  of  man,  the
link  between  heaven  and  earth.

Yer.  50.— Jesus  answered  and  said  to  him,
Because  I  said  unto  thee,  that  I  saw  thee
underneath  the  fig  tree,  thou  belieyest.
There  is  do  need  to  transform  this  into
a  question,  as  though  Jesus  smiled  a
gentle  reproof  upon  the  rapidity  with  which
Nathanael  espoused  his  cause  (cf.  oh.  xvi.
31 ;  XX.  29).  The  Lord,  on  the  contrary,
congratulates  him  upon  the  sincerity  with
which  hu  had  at  once  admitted  claims
which  had  never  been  more  explicitly  ex-
pressed. Thou  hast  believed  because  I
have  made  thee  feel  that  I  have  sounded
the  depths  of  thy  heart,  by  means  which
pass  understanding.  There  are  profounder
abysses  than  the  human  heart.  There
are  powers  at  my  disposal  calculated  to
create  a  more  tender  and  inspiring  faith,
one  which  shall  carry  thee  into  other  worlds
M  well  M  through  this.     Thoa  shalt  see


greater  things  than  these.  There  shall  be
vouchsafed  a  fuller,  clearer  revelation  of
what  I  am,  which  shall  pour  new  and
deeper  meaning  into  the  confession  thou
hast  made.  Hitherto  the  Lord  was  speak-
ing to  the  one  man ;  but  now  he  says  what
would  be  applicable,  not  only  to  .Nathanael,
but  to  all  who  had  found  him,  and  accepted
that  outline  of  his  funotions  and  claims
which  had  formed  the  substance  of  the
latest  teaching  of  John  the  Baptist.

Ver.  51. — Aki.  he  saith  unto  him,  Verily,
verily,  I  say  unto  you.  The  reduplicated
'Afiijv  occurs  twenty-flve  times  in  John's
Gospel,  and  is  in  this  form  peculiar  to  the
Gospel,  although  in  its  single  form  it  occurs
fifty  times  in  the  three  synoptists.  The
word  is,  strictly  speaking,  an  adjective,
meaning  "firm,"  " trustworthy," correspond-
ing with  the  substantive  )0K,  truth,  and  nmst

and  n:ax,  confidence,  the  coTenant  (Neh.
X.  1).  The  repetition  of  the  word  in  an
adverbial  sense  is  found  in  Numb.  t.  22  and
Neh.  viii.  6.  In  Eev.  iii.  14  "  Amen "  is
the  name  given  to  the  Faithful  Witness.
The  repetition  of  the  word  involvea  a
powerful  asseveration,  made  to  overcome  a
rising  doubt  and  meet  a  possible  objection.
The  "  I  say  unto  you  "  takes,  on  the  lips  of
Jesus,  the  place  which  "Thus  saith  the
Lord"  occupied  on  those  of  the  ancient
prophets.  He  speaks  in  the  fulness  of
conscious  authority,  with  the  certain  know-
ledge that  he  is  therein  making  Divine
revelation.  He  knowi  that  he  saith  true;
his  word  is  truth.  Verily,  verily,  I  say
unto  you,  [7rom>  henceforth]  ye  shall  see
the  heaven  that  has  been  opened,  and  the
angels  of  Uod  ascending  and  descending
upon  the  Son  of  man.  Notwithstanding  the
formidable  superficial  difficulty  in  the  com-
mon reading,  which  declares  that  from  the
moment  when  the  Lord  spake,  Nathanael
should  see  what  there  is  no  other  record
that  he  ever  literally  saw;  yet  a  deeper
pondering  of  the  passage  shows  the  sublime
spiritual  sense  in  which  those  disciples  who
fully  realized  that  they  had  been  brought
into  blessed  relationship  with  the  "  Son  of
man,"  saw  also — thflt  heaven,  the  abode  of
blessedness  and  righteousness,  the  throne
of  God,  had  been  opened  behind  him  and
around  Urn.    The  dream  of  Jacob  is  mani-

'  'Air'  &pTi  is  now  rejected  by  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  TregeUea,  Westcott  and  Hort,
B.T.,  on  the  authority  of  K,  B,  L,  and  several
versions,  quotations  from  Origen,  Epi-
phanius,  Oyril,  although  all  the  secondary
uncials  and  numerous  quotations  can  be
cited  for  it.  The  argument  for  its  retention
is  its  difSoulty,  and  also  the  fact  that  it
could  scarcely  have  been  added  bv  a  copyist.


42


TUB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  8T,  JOHN.


[•H.  L  1 — 61.


festly  referred  to — ^the  union  between  heaven
and  earth,  between  God  and  man,  which
dawned  like  a  vision  of  a  better  time  upon
the  old  patriarchal  life.  That  which  was  the
dream  of  a  troubled  night  may  now  be  the
constant  experience  of  the  disciples  of  the
Lord.  The  ascension  of  the  angelic  ministers
is  here  said  to  precede  their  descent.  This
is  due  to  the  original  form  of  tlie  dream  of
Jacob,  but  must  be  supplemented  by  the
Lord's  own  statement  (ch.  iii.  13),  "No
one  hath  ascended  into  heaven,  but  he  that
descended  out  of  heaven."  The  free  aocesB
to  the  heart  of  the  Father,  and  to  the  centre
of  all  authority  in  heaven  and  earth,  is  due
only  to  those  who  have  come  already  thencb,
who  belong  to  him,  "  who  go  and  return  aa
the  appearance  of  a  ilasli  of  lightning."
They  ascend  with  the  desires  of  the  Son  of
man;  they  descend  with  all  the  faculty
needed  for  the  fulfilment  of  those  desires.
He,  "  the  Son  of  man,"  is  now  on  earth  to
commence  his  ministry  of  reconciliation,
and  IB  thus  now  equipped  with  all  the
powers  needed  for  its  realization.  The
same  truth  is  taught  by  our  Lord,  when  he
said  (of.  notes  on  ch. iii.  13)  that  "the  Son  of
man  is  in  heaven,"  even  when  he  walked  the
earth.  The  angelic  ministry  attendant  upon
our  Lord  is  so  inconspicuous  that  it  does  not
fulfil  the  notable  description  of  this  verse,
nor  fill  out  its  suggestions.  The  miraculous
energies,  the  Divine  revelations,  the  consum-
mate heavenliness  of  bis  life,  the  power
which  his  personality  supplied  to  see  and
believe  in  heaven — ^in  heaven  opened,  heaven
near,  heaven  accessible,  heaven  propitious,
heaven  lavishof  love — answers  to  the  meaning
of  the  mighty  words.  Thoma  ('  Die  Genesis
des  Johannes-Evan.')  sees  the  Johannine
interpretation  of  the  angels  who  ministered
to  Jesus  after  the  conclusion  of  bis  tempta-
tion. But  why  does  he  call  himself  "the
Son  of  man,"  in  sharp  response  to,  or  in
comment  on,  the  ascription  by  John  the
Baptist  and  Nathanael  of  the  greater  title
"Son  of  God"  (see  Matt.  viu.  20;  Mark
ii.  28)?  (1)  The  phrase  is  one  that  our  Lord
currently  used  for  himself,  as  especially
descriptive  of  his  position.  It  has  been  said
that  its  origin  must  be  looked  for  in  the
prophecies  of  Daniel  (vii.  13),  where
angelic  powers  are  seen  in  loving  lowly
attendance  on  "  one  like  to  the  Son  of  man,"
one  whose  human-hearted  force  contrasts
with  the  "beast  forces,"  the  uncouth,
sphynx-liie  blending  of  animal  faculties
which  characterizes  all  the  kingdoms  and
dynasties  which  the  empire  of  the  one  like
the  Son  of  miin  would  supersede.  The  term,
"  Son  of  man,"  is  used  repeatedly  by  Ezekiel
for  humanity  set  over  against  the  Divine
voice  and  power.  There  it  corresponds  with
Jhe  Araniajc  '  BBr-Enosh,"  Son  of  man— a


simple  paraphiBais  for  "man"  in  hla  weak-
ness, and  often  in  his  depression  and  sin.
The  •  Book  of  Henoch,'  in  numerous  places,
identifies  "Son  of  man"  with  the  Messiah
(ch.  xlvi.  and  xlviii.),  but  it  cannot  be
clearly  proved  that  the  term  was  popularly
current  for  the  Messiah.  Christ  seems,  in
one  place,  to  discriminate  the  two  terms  in
popular  expectation  (Matt.  xvi.  13, 16) ;  and
in  Matt.  viii.  20  he  discriminates  his
earthly  ministry  as  that  of  Son  of  man,
from  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
though  the  dispensation  of  his  human  life,
and  of  his  eternal  Spirit,  constitute  that  of
the  one  Christ.  (2)  Another  very  remark-
able fact  is  that,  though  Jesus  calls  himself
"  the  Son  of  man  "  no  fewer  than  seventy
times,  the  apostles  never  attribute  the
favourite  expression  to  him.  The  only
instances  of  its  use  by  other  than  the  Lord
himself,  is  by  the  dying  Stephen,  who  thus
describes  his  power  and  exalted  majesty
(Acts  vii.  56),  and  John  in  the  Apocalypse,
who  .says  the  vision  of  the  Lord  was  of  one
like  unto  the  Son  of  man — a  phrase  clearly
built  upon  the  passage  in  Dan.  vii.  (3)  The
Saviour  did  not  throughout  the  Gospel  of
John  proclaim  himself  openly  to  the  people
as  the  Christ,  avoiding  a  term  which  was  so
miserably  degraded  from  his  own  conception
of  it ;  but  he  used  a  multitude  of  expressions
to  denote  the  spiritual  force  and  significance
of  the  Messianic  dignity.  Thus  he  described
himself  "  as  he  that  came  down  from  heaven ; "
as  the  "  Bread  of  heaven ; "  as  the  "  Light  of
the  world ; "  »g  "  the  good  Shepherd ; "  "  I  am
he;"  "thatwhich  I  said  from  the  beginning,"
etc.;  and  therefore,  when  he  adopted  the
phrase,  "  the  Son  of  man,"  he  attributed  to
it  very  special  powers  and  dignities.  The
word  seems  to  involve  the  Man,  the  perfect
Man,  the  ideal  Man,  the  second  Adam,  the
supreme  Flower  engrafted  on  the  bainen
stock  of  humanity,  the  Bepresentative  of
the  whole  of  human-kind.  Chronologically,
this  must  have  been  the  primary  revelation.
Through  humanity  that  was  archetypal  and
perfect,  answering  God's  idea  of  man,  the
thought  of  the  race  bus  risen  to  a  conception
of  Divine  sonship.  But  metaphysically,
logically,  he  could  only  fulfil  the  functions
of  Son  of  man,  of  the  Man,  because  he  was
essentially  the  Son  of  God.  (4)  The  domi-
nant thought  of  the  term  has  fluctuated
between  that  which  connotes  his  earthly
ministry  and  humiliation,  and  lays  stress  on
the  privations  and  sufferings  of  the  Son  of
man,  and  that  which  recites  his  highest
c'aim  to  reverence  and  homage.  Seeing
that  he  claims  to  be  the  link  between  heaven
and  earth,  Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  the
Head  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  who  will  come
in  his  glory,  with  his  holy  angels,  to  divide
sheep  from  goats,  etc.,  as  Son  of  man;  and


OH.  1. 1— 6L]        THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


43


Beeing  that,  as  Son  of  man,  he  gave  himself
for  a  ransom,  and  was  as  one  that  serveth,
and  presented  bis  flesh  and  blood  as  the
epiritual  food  of  all  that  live ;— the  synthetio
thought  that  iasnes  f^om  the  twofold  survey
Is  thalt  his  highest  glory  is  baaed  upon  his
entire  and  ntter  sympathy  with  man.  His
liumanlty  is  that  which  gives  him  all  his
hold  upon  our  heart;  his  sacrifloe  is  his
title  to  universal  sovereignty.  "  He  humbled
himself  to  the  death  of  the  cross,  wherefore
Qod  also  has  highly  exalted  him,  giving
even  to  him  [humanity  included]  the  Name
that  is  above  every  name."  Archdeacon
Watkins,  tit  hco,  has  called  attention  to  the
faot  that  it  is  not  iw^p,  but  &v6panros,  "  man
as  man,  not  Jew  as  holier  than  Greek,  not
freeman  as  nobler  than  bondman,  not  man
as  distinct  from  woman,  but  humanity.  .  .  .
The  ladder  &om  earth  to  heaven  is  in  the
truth,  'The  Word  was  made  flesh.'  In
that  great  truth  heaven  was  and  baa  i*-


mained  open."  The  cries  of  earth,  the
answers  of  heaven,  are  like  angels  evermore
ascending  and  descending  on  the  Word-
made-flesh.  It  is  perfectly  trae,  though  in
a  different  sense  than  that  which  Thoma
aHopts  it,  that  this  prehistory  (vorge-
mhiehte)  is  the  vorge$chichte  of  Christendom,
as  of  each  soul  becoming  Christian,  the
different  eventualities  which  lead  from  one
revelation  to  another  betoken  the  several
stations  on  the  blessed  pilgrimage  (heik-
weg).  (Of.  Introduction ;  the  excursuses  of
Godet;  Westcott  on  'The  Son  of  Man;'
Orme's  dissertation  on  '  Sin  against  the
Holy  Ghost;'  SchafTs  note  to  Lange,  on
John,  t'n  loeo;  Schmidt, '  Blbl.  Theol.  N.  T.,'
pp.  107,  etc. ;  Weiss, '  Bibl.  Theol.  N.  T.,'  §
144;  Liddon,  '  Divinity  of  Our  Lord,'  lect.
i. ;  Pearson  on  the  Greed,  Oxford  edit.,  p.
122 ;  Andrew  Jukes, '  The  New  Man,'  lect.
ii. :  "  The  Openings  of  Heaven  in  the  Ex-
perience of  Christ  and  of  Christians.")


HOMILETIOa

Yen.  1, 2. — Prologue  of  the  Oospel.  The  prologue  is  in  harmony  with  the  design  of
a  liiographic  history  which  is  to  set  forth  Jesus  Clirist  as  the  Son  of  God.  The  Fourth
Gospel  is  thus  a  distiact  advance,  dogmatically,  upon  the  other  Gospels,  for  Matthew
exhibits  him  in  his  Messianic  royalty  i  Mark,  as  the  Son  of  man  and  the  Servant  of
God;  Luke,  as  the  Son  of  man  and  Saviour  of  the  race  of  man,  without  distinction  of
Jew  or  Qentlle.  The  Apostle  John  exhibits  him  in  the  glorious  activity  of  his  Divine
nature.

L  Thb  bubjkot  of  the  pbolooue.  "  The  Word."  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Word  as  he
is  the  essential  Bevealer  of  the  Divine  Being.  "There  is  in  the  Divine  Essence  a  principle
by  which  God  reveals  himself — the  Logos; 'and  a  principle  by  which  he  communicates
himself — the  Spirit."  Christ  is  "the  express  Image  of  the  Father's  Person"  (Heb.  i.  3),
just  as  a  word  is  an  image  or  picture  of  a  thought.  But  he  is  also  the  Interpreter  of  the
Divine  wilL  "The  only  begotten  Son  hatli  declared  the  Father"  (ch.  i.  18),  through
Creation,  through  propliets,  through  the  Incarnation.  He  was  called  the  Word.  1.  Not
as  man ;  for  as  man  he  was  not  in  the  beginning  with  God,  neither  was  he  Creator.
2.  Ee  was  the  Word  iefort  he  was  man;  for  it  was  as  the  Word  he  became  flesh  (ver.  14).
8.  H«  was  the  Word  as  he  was  the  Son  of  Qod — "  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  Father."
4.  Ytt  he  is  called  here  the  Word  rather  than  the  Son  of  Qod,  because  the  Jews  were
familiar  with  this  name  as  applied  to  the  Messiah,  and,  as  has  been  suggested,  the
apostle  would  not  at  first  alienate  their  hearts  by  the  title  "  Son  of  God,"  which  was
so  offensive  to  the  unbelieving  Jews  (ch.  x.  30,  33).

II.  The  essential  natube  of  the  Wobd.  1.  He  is  an  absolute  Etemai  Being.
"  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word."  (1)  The  beginning  carries  us  back  to  the  initial
point  of  time.  As  the  "  beginning  "  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  starts  from  that  point,  dating
Creation  from  it,  the  apostle  carries  us  still  further  back,  even  beyond  "  the  beginning."
(2)  The  Word  existed  in  the  beginning.  The  word  "  was  "  suggests  a  continuous  state.
The  Word  was  therefore  in  existence  before  time  and  before  Creation.  It  was  "  before
all  things."  It  was  from  all  eternity.  Jesus  spoke  of  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the
Father  "  before  the  world  was "  (ch.  xvii.  5).  (3)  This  passage  condemns  alike  the
Socinian  and  the  Arian  theories ;  for  it  asserts,  against  the  first,  that  Christ  had  an
existence  before  his  birth  at  Bethlehem ;  and,  against  the  second,  that  he  existed  before
the  highest  angels,  who  are  created  beings,  for  he  "  was,"  not  "  be  was  created."  Basil
says,  "These  two  terms,  'beginning'  and  'was,'  are  like  two  anchors,"  which  the  ship
of  a  man's  soul  may  .«afely  rii'.e  at,  whatever  storms  of  heresy  may  come.  Tiiere  never,
therefore,  was  a  time  vvht-u  Christ  was  not.     2.  He  is  a  distinct  Person  from  Qod,  yet


44  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  l  1—51.

one  with  him.  "And  the  Word  was  with  God."  Coleridge  remarks  upon  the  significance
of  the  preposition  (npAs)  as  implying  that  the  Word  was  "  with  God,  not  in  the  sense  of
coexistence,  or  local  proximity,  or  communion,  but  of  mysterious  relation  with  God.
The  preposition  implies  that  the  Word  was  with  God,  before  he  revealed  God.  The
distinct  personality  of  the  Son  is  asserted  against  the  error  of  the  Sabellians,  who  held
that  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are  but  three  Names  of  one  Person.  The  "  life
eternal "  was  not  only  "  manifested  to  men,"  but  it  was  "  with  the  Father  "  (1  John  i.  2).
Not  with  God,  as  if  to  emphasize  the  distinction  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead ;  not  with
men  or  angels,  for  they  were  yet  to  be  created ;  but  with  the  Father  in  eternal  glory.
"  It  was  he,"  says  Pearson, "  to  whom  the  Father  said, '  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image.' "
We  have  no  mental  capacity  to  explain  the  oneness  of  essence,  any  more  than  the  dis-
tinctness of  Perscms,  in  the  Godhead.  The  apostle  does  not  say  that  "God  wai  with
God,"  but  that  the  "  Word  was  with  God."  We  therefore  receive  believingly  the  words
of  our  Lord  himself,  " I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me ; "  "I  and  the  Father
are  one ; "  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father,"  as  different  expressions  of  the
same  Divine  truth.  3.  He  is  Ood.  "And  the  Word  was  God."  The  passage  asserts
the  Divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  in  the  plainest  terms.  It  places  him  within  the
unity  of  the  Godhead.  The  Son  is,  therefore,  not  inferior  to  the  Father.  The  text
refutes  the  Arians,  who  say  he  is  a  super-angelic  Being  inferior  to  God ;  the  Socinians,
who  say  he  is  only  Man ;  and  the  Sabellians,  who  deny  any  distinction  of  Persons  in  the
Trinity.  4.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  a  deep  mystery,  but  it  is  fundamental  in
Christianity.  Therefore  the  apostle  reiterates  the  eternity,  the  personality,  the  oneness
of  the  Word  with  God.  "The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God."  Some  person
might  say  there  was  a  time  when  the  Word  was  not  a  distinct  Person  in  the  Trinity.
The  statement  is  made  that  the  same  Person,  who  was  eternal  and  Divine,  was  from
eternity  a  distinct  Person  of  the  Godhead.  Well  may  we  say  with  Bernard,  "  It  is  rash-
ness to  search  too  far  into  it.    It  is  piety  te  believe  it.    It  is  life  eternal  to  know  it  I "

Vers.  8 — 5. — Jesus  Christ  in  relation  to  creation.  The  apostle  next  shows  the
relation  between  the  finite  and  the  infinite,  the  Divine  and  the  human.

I.  The  Wobd  hade  flesh.  "  All  things  were  made  by  him."  Therefore  he  must
be  God.  "  He  that  built  all  things  is  God  "  (Heb.  iii.  4).  This  creation  has  a  double
aspect.  1.  He  made  the  worlds.  He  made  matter.  (1)  Therefore  it  is  implied  that
matter  exists.  The  existence  of  an  external  world  has  always  been  an  article  in  the
creed  of  men.  (2)  It  has  not  existed  always,  as  the  Gnostics  and  so  many  philosophers
say.  Its  atoms  have  all  the  character  of  "  a  manufactured  article."  Science  can  tell
us  nothing  of  the  time  of  its  creation.  (3)  There  is  a  Person  };reat  enough  to  create
matter  and  form  the  worlds.  He  did  not  share,  with  angels,  in  the  work  of  creation ;
for  "  without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."  Neither  was  the  world
made  by  evil  spirits,  as  the  Gnostics  said.  (4)  This  is  not,  therefore,  a  fatherless  world.
(5)  The  ultimate  fact,  therefore,  is  not  force,  or  any  unknown  power,  but  a  Person,  wise
and  mighty,  who  created  all  things.  (6)  Let  Christians  rejoice  that  the  worlds  are  the
handiwork  of  their  Elder  Brother.  2.  He  made  man,  who  is  the  crown  of  creation ;  for
"  in  him  was  life."

II.  The  Word  is  the  Life  of  the  wobld.  "In  him  was  life."  The  Word  is  Life
in  its  widest  signification — the  life  of  the  body,  the  life  of  the  soul,  the  life  of  the  spirit.
The  world  (including  man),  which  is  represented  here  as  made  by  him,  is  also  represented
as  in  him  as  the  Source  of  its  continued  preservation.  "  After  having  been  the  root  of
the  tree,  the  Logos  was  also  its  sap."  "  For  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our
being "  (Acts  xviL  28)._  There  is  a  perfect  development  of  existence  in  virtue  of  his
being  our  Life.

in.  The  belation  of  the  Life  to  the  Light.  "  And  the  Life  was  the  Light  of
men."  1.  J%is  refers  to  the  period  of  man's  innocence  in  Paradise,  as  the  next  dmtse  to
the  fact  of  his  fall,  2.  Life  developed  in  the  form  of  light.  It  is  iieouliar  to  no  being
on  earth  but  man.  (1)  The  light  did  not  spring  directly  from  the  Word,  but  was  an
emanation  of  the  life  that  man  received  from  the  Word.  (2)  The  light  is  not  (a)  intel-
lectual knowledge  simply,  (h)  nor  holiness,  but  (c)  the  light  of  good  through  the  medium
nf  life.  There  was  a  stea<ly  shining  of  the  light  in  man's  conscience  and  intellect  and
heart  tt  bis  creation.     (3)  It  was  the  light  of  the  whole  race  of  man,  not  that  of  the


OH.  1. 1—61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  48

Jews  only.  (4)  May  there  not  be  an  allusion^  in  the  use  of  the  two  terms  "life"  and
"  light,"  to  the  tree  of  life  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  in  Paradise  ?

IV.  The  conflict  between  light  and  darkness.  "And  the  Light  shineth  in
darkness;  and  the  darkness  apprehended  it  not."  This  points  to  the  period  of  the  fall
of  man.  Life  and  light  suggest  the  contrasted  ideas  of  death  and  darkness.  1.  Light
and  darkness  exist  side  by  side  in  the  spiritual  world.  In  the  natural  world,  light
expels  the  darkness,  or  darkness  expels  the  li.:;ht.  The  Light  has  always  been  shining,
either  in  nature,  providence,  or  revelation.  Christ  has  never  left  himself  without  a  wit-
ness. The  Sun  of  Righteousness  is  still  shining  in  darkness.  Light  is  really  "  come  into
the  world."  2.  The  darkness  neither  apprehended  nor  overcame  the  light.  The  light
•till  shines,  with  an  ever-wideuing  border,  as  the  darkness  is  being  chased  back.  The
darkness  has  not  overpowered  the  light.  But  it  has  not  any  the  better  understood  it
or  assimilated  it.  "This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and
men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil."

Vers.  6 — 8. — HHie  witness  of  th»  Baptist  to  the  true  Light.  We  now  com*  to  the
historic  manifestation  of  the  Word.

I.  The  personality  of  the  Baptist.  "  There  was  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose
name  was  John."  1.  He  was  the  offspring  of  pious  parents,  and  his  birth  was  due  to
miraculous  Divine  interference.  2.  He  was  a  Nazarite  in  the  ascetic  aspect  of  his  life.
3.  He  was  the  last  prophet  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation — the  link  between  the
prophets  of  the  old  and  the  apostles  of  the  new  dis'pensations.  4.  He  was  the  forerunner
of  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come  in  the  power  of  Elias,  to  preach  the  coming  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  He  was,  in  truth,  "  a  man  sent  from  God."  His  forerunnership
ended  with  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  who  then  appeared  visibly  on  the  scene  of  his  ministry.
But  his  testimony  only  ceased  with  his  life.  5.  It  was  by  the  Baptist  that  the  author
of  this  Gospel  was  introduced  to  Christ  (ver.  36).

XL  The  purpose  of  his  testimony.  "  The  same  came  for  witness,  to  bear  witness
of  the  Light,  that  all  men  through  him  might  believe."  1.  The  witness-bearing  was
necessary,  as  the  Word  was  to  appear  "in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  Man  in  his
blindness  could  not  well  discern  him  without  some  testimony.  2.  Witness-bearing  is  a
fundamental  idea  in  Christianity.  It  implies  faith,  and  a  body  of  facts  to  be  believed.
3.  It  marks  a  distinct  place  for  human  instrumentality,  even  in  connection  with  the
conversion  of  souls.  4.  Its  design  is  to  lead  to  belief.  "  That  all  men  through  him
might  believe;"  that  is,  through  John's  witness.  (1)  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing."
As  through  John's  testimony  Andrew  and  John  became  disciples  of  Christ,  so  still
through  the  preaching  of  ministers  are  men  brought  to  the  Saviour.  (2)  The  essence
of  the  message  is  universal.  It  is  no  longer  restricted  in  its  blessings  to  Israel  (Isa.  xlix.  6).
(3)  The  scope  of  the  message  is  not  stated.  But  there  can  be  but  one  Object  of  faith —
the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Bridegroom,  the  Almighty  Saviour.

III.   COBREOTION    OF   A   aBAVE    MISAPPREHENSION    EBSPEOTINO  THE   BAPTIST.        "  He

was  not  the  Light,  but  came  that  he  might  bear  witness  of  the  Light."  1.  Some  of  the
JtwsprobaUy  imagined  that  John  was  the  Christ.  (Comp.  vers.  19, 20  with  Luke  iii.  16.)
2.  He  was,  by  our  LoroPs  own  witness,  "  a  burning  and  a  shining  light ; "  rather,  a  candle,
for  Christ  is  himself  the  true  Fountain  of  all  light — ^the  Light  itself.  3.  It  was  a  sign  of
the  remarkable  humility  as  well  as  sincerity  of  the  Baptists  character,  that  be  himself
once  and  again,  not  only  disclaimed  the  Messiahship,  but  confessed  his  own  complete
inferiority  to  Christ.  He  had  no  inward  struggle  on  effacing  himself.  "  He  must
increase ;  I  must  decrease."

Ver.  9. — The  true  Light  in  its  Tnanifestation.  I.  The  nature  of  this  Liaht.
"  There  was  the  true  Light."  1.  Christ  toos  the  true  Light,  as  opposed  to  false  or
imperfect  lights.  He  was  the  ideal  Light,  not  subject  to  the  vicissitudes  of  time  and
space.  2.  He  was  the  true  Light  in  opposition  to  ceremonial  types  and  shadows.  3.  He
wa»  the  true  Light  in  opposition  to  all  light  that  is  borrowed  from  or  communicated
from  another.

IL  The  extent  of  this  Light  in  its  action.  "  It  lighteth  every  man."  "  The
darkness  is  past :  the  true  Light  now  shineth."  In  a  strict  sense,  all  men  receive  the
light  of  reason,  and  the  consciousness  of  right  and  wrong ;  but,  biblically  coDHdered


46  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  8T.  JOHN.        [oh,  i.  1—61.

Christ  gUnes  sufficiently  for  the  salvation  of  all  men,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  so  as  to
leave  them  without  excuse  if  in  their  blindness  they  refuse  to  see  him.

IIL  Its  fboobebs.  It  was  ever  "  coming  into  the  world."  In  prophecy,  type,  ereed,
judgment.

Vers.  10, 11. — Hu  double  refection  of  the  Light.  L  Thb  fibbt  bejbotioh.  "  He
was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by  him,  and  the  world  knew  him  not."
These  words  describe  the  world's  unbelief  before  his  incarDation.  1.  He  was  here
invisibly,  though  the  world  had  no  eyes  to  see  him.  In  him  "  all  things  live,  and  move,
and  have  their  being."  The  revelation  of  himself  has  been  continuous  since  man  was
made.  The  Life  has  always  been  the  Light  of  men.  He  was  and  has  ever  been  in  the
world.  2.  The  world's  ignorance  is  all  the  more  remarkable  because  "  the  world  was
made  hy  him."  The  world  did  not  see  the  evidences  of  boundless  skill  and  beauty  all
around.  It  is  a  precious  thought  to  the  believer  that  the  Creator  of  the  world  is  his
Friend.  "  It  is  my  Father's  house.  It  is  my  Brother's  handiwork."  3.  Z%e  mystery
of  the  worldPt  ignorance.  "The  world  knew  him  not."  "The  world  by  wisdom  knew
not  God."  The  Apostle  Paul  found  an  altar  to  the  "  Unknown  God  "  at  Athens.  What
a  satire  on  man's  privileges  1  This  darkest  page  in  the  world's  history  may  well  sadden
us  every  time  we  read  it.

II.  The  second  bejbction.   "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."

1.  Israel  was  the  home  of  our  Lord.  Its  land,  its  cities,  its  temple,  were  all  his  own
property,  and   were   originally  granted   by  himself.      Israel  was  "his  inheritance."

2.  Sis  people,  the  Jews,  were  not  left  to  interpret  the  light  of  nature,  conscience,  and
history  as  they  could.  Light  first  broke  upon  them  when  it  broke  upon  Abrabam,  but
it  was  only  a  preparation  for  the  Incarnation,  which  is  the  central  fact  in  the  world's
history — the  pivot  on  which  its  history  turns.  3.  Sis  own  people  rejected  him.  They
"  received  him  not,"  This  is  stronger  than  the  statement  that  the  world  did  not  know
him.  The  Jews  were  more  guilty  than  the  Gentiles  in  their  rejection  of  the  Redeemer,
because  they  were  of  those  "who  see,  and  therefore  their  sin  remaineth"  (ch.'  ix.  41).
"  The  God  invoked  by  the  nation  appears  in  his  temple,  and  is  crucified  by  his  own
worshippers."

Vers.  12, 13. — The  grace  of  adoption.  The  Jews  might  boast  themselvei  of  being
children  of  Abraham,  but  Christ  gives  his  disciples  the  far  higher  privilege  of  being
song  of  God,

1.  Thb  nature  of  the  bioht  ob  pbivileoe:  enjoyed  bt  tbiib  believebs.  "As
many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  the  right  to  become  the  children  of  God."  1.  It
is  more  than  creation — sonship.  It  is  more  than  t'^e  relationship  of  God  as  a  Father  to
all  men  as  rational  and  moral  creatures ;  that  sonship  belongs  to  all  men  by  virtue  of
their  birth.  2.  It  is  more  than  the  restoration  to  man  of  his  original  relation  with  Qod
before  the  Fall.  3.  Jt  is  a  new  relation,  involving  a  new  filial  sta,ndi7ig  and  a  new  filial
character,  and  has  for  its  blessings  freedom  of  access  to  God,  deep  fellowship  with  him,
a  sure  interest  in  his  fatherly  care  and  discipline,  and  a  well-grounded  hope  of  enjoying
the  inheritance  of  sons.  4.  It  originates  in  the  free  grace  of  Qod ;  for  we  are  "  pre-
destinated to  the  adoption  of  sons  "  (Eph.  i.  6).  "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the
Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God  "  (1  John  iii.
1,  2).    We  are  said  to  "  receive  the  adoption  of  sons"  (Gal.  iv.  5).

IL  The  connection  op  adoption  with  the  Pebbon  and  mediation  of  Jesds
Chbibt.  Though  the  Father  adopts  (1  John  iii.  1),  it  is  the  Son  through  whom  we
become  sons  of  God,  In  virtue  of  his  Mediatorship  he  gives  the  right  to  it.  God
predestinates  us  "  to  the  adoption  of  sons  by  Jesus  Christ "  (Eph,  i,  5,  6).

III.  Thb  adoption  is  effected  by  begenebation  on  God's  bidb,  and  by  faith
ON  man's  bide.  Faith  is  the  first  and  immediate  effect  of  regeneration.  Faith  may  be
mentioned  before  regeneration,  because  it  is,  so  to  speak,  that  element  which  is  nearest
to  man,  and  that  element  by  which  man  has  his  first  point  of  contact  with  Christ ;  but
there  can  be  no  faith  till  it  be  given  by  God's  Spirit  in  regeneration  (Phil.  i.  29).
1.  Regeneration  it  necessarily  connected  with  the  entrance  of  sinners  into  evangelical
sonship.  "  Which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the
will  of  man,  but  of  God."    The  Jews  might  believe  that  they  were  sons  of  God  by


OL 1 1—61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  47

dnscent  from  Abraham,  or  from  human  parents  in  direct  descent  from  the  patriarch.
The  apostle  says  that  believers  are  bom :  (1)  "Not  of  blood."  We  speak  of  physical
descent  by  this  term,  as  blood  is  the  seat  of  natural  life.  (2)  "  Nor  of  the  wiU  of  the
flesh,"  as  a  factor  io  natural  birth.  (3)  "  Nor  of  the  will  of  man,*'  as  representing  a
will  more  independent  of  nature.  All  believers  know  that  grace  does  not  run  in  the
blood,  like  the  seeds  of  health  or  disease.  Every  godly  parent  who  has  ungodly
children  has  sad  knowledge  of  the  fact.  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."
(4)  "  But  of  God."  He  is  the  true  Author  of  regeneration.  We  are  born  of  the  Spirit.
This  is  the  first  place  in  which  the  new  birth  is  spoken  of  by  name  in  Scripture.  The
apostle  guards  us  against  errors  from  different  sides  by  showing  what  are  not  the
sources  of  it,  as  well  as  what  is  its  sole  origin.  It  has  no  material  origin ;  it  springs  not
from  human  impulse  or  human  wilL  2.  The  evangelical  sonship  is  effected  on  man's
part  hy  faith  in  Christ.  "  Even  to  as  many  as  believe  in  his  Name."  There  are  other
testimonies  to  the  fact.  Believers  become  "  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  "
(Gal.  iii.  26).  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of  God  "  (1  John
V.  1).  There  is  no  sonship  to  God  without  living  faith  in  the  Son  of  God.  (1)  Con-
sider the  nature  of  faith,  (a)  It  is  not  a  mere  belief  of  the  truth,  though  this  is
essentially  implied  in  it.  (6)  Nor  is  it  a  belief  of  the  fact  that  "  Christ  died  for  me,"
or  any  such  proposition,  (c)  It  is  trusting  in  a  Person.  We  believe  on  Christ  for
salvation.  (2)  Consider  the  object  of  faith.  "  His  Name."  The  name  is  not  merely
that  by  which  a  person  is  known ;  "  it  is  the  inmost  essence  of  the  being  in  opposition
to  external  manifestations."  The  Name  is  here  the  Word,  that  is,  the  Mianifestation  of
the  will  and  love  of  God.

Ver.  14. — 2%e  reality  tf  the  Incarnation,  The  apostle  explains  the  saying  effects
just  recorded  by  the  historic  fact  that  "the  Word  became  flesh."

I.  Thb  nature  op  the  Inoabnation.  "  The  Word  became  flesh."  The  miraculous
conception  is  implied,  though  not  expressed,  in  these  words.  It  is  the  last  time  that
John  uses  the  term  "  Word  "  about  Christ  in  his  Gospel.  Henceforth  the  term  is  "  Jesus,"
or  "  the  Lord."  The  word  "  flesh  "  denotes  human  nature — the  entire  human  person.
1.  It  is  not  said  the  Word  became  "  body ; "  because  the  proper  phrase  would  have  been,
"  The  Word  took  a  body ; "  and  why  should  Jesus  in  that  case  speak  of  his  "  soul "  ?  Yet
the  true  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  is  that  Christ  took  a  human  body  and  a  human
souL  The  word  "  flesh  "  is  not  designed  to  express  his  visibility  among  men,  but  his
entire  human  nature.  2.  It  implies  that  the  Word  did  not  become  a  man  like  Adam
before  the  Fall ;  for  he  was  made  in  "  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  "  (Rom.  viii.  3).  And
"  all  flesh  is  grass."  3.  It  does  not  imply  that  the  Word  took  upon  him  "peccable-
flesh  ;  "  for  "  he  knew  no  sin  "  (2  Cor.  v.  2 1).  4.  It  implies  that  he  assumed  the  human
nature  common  to  aU  Adam's  descendants.  Not  that  of  any  race,  class,  or  family.  He
was  to  be  Saviour  for  "  all  flesh."  6.  It  implies  that  he  became  "flesh  "  in  tuch  a  sense  that
he  still  retains  the  same  nature.  "  Ow r  nature  is  on  the  throne."  6.  It  implies  that,
though  he  "  emptied  himself"  (Phil.  ii.  7),  he  did  not  cease  to  he  God;  for  the  Word  still
existed.  7.  It  implies,  in  a  word,  the  vmion  of  two  perfect  and  distinct  natures  in  one
Person.  This  doctrine  is  a  great  mystery.  But  it  must  be  firmly  held  (1)  against  the
Arians,'wbo  denied  his  Divinity ;  (2)  against  the  Apollinarians,  who  held  that  the  Word
became  only  a  body,  the  Divinity  supplying  the  place  of  a  soul;  (3)  against  the
Nestorians,  who  made  the  Godhead  one  Person,  and  the  manhood  another  person;
(4)  against  the  Eutychians,  who  held  that  in  the  one  Person  there  was  mixture  of  the
natures  so  as  to  produce  a  third.  8.  Consider  the  importance  of  this  doctrine.  If
"  the  Word  became  flesh,"  (1)  the  union  of  the  two  natures  was  designed  to  give
infinite  value  to  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice ;  (2)  it  gives  us  a  Saviour  who  cannot  but  be
touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities  (Heb.  iv.  15) ;  (3)  who  can  give  us  a  perfect
human  example  of  excellence ;  (4)  who  dignifies  the  'human  body,  and  places  his
disciples  under  the  most  awful  obligations  not  to  defile  or  dishonour  it.

IL  Thb  historical  visibility  of  the  Inoabnation.  "And  dwelt  among  us."
The  Word  not  merely  entered  human  life,  but  remained  in  it  for  a  time.  The  ori^nal
word  signifies  "  tabernacled,"  or  •'  dwelt  in  a  tent,"  implying :  1.  The  transient  natwre
of  his  visit  to  earth.  2.  His  detached  existence  among  men.  Yet  his  visit  lasted  for
tiuM  and  thirty  yean.


«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  1. 1—61.

IIL  The  persohaIi  witnesb  to  his  qlobt,  "  We  beheW  his  glory .''  The  apostle
was  amoDg  those  who  beheld  it  with  wondering  awe,  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration
and  at  the  various  scenes  of  miracle  in  his  life  of  service  and  suffering.  He  beheld  it ;
for  he  speaks  in  his  First  Epistle  of  having  heard  and  seen  and  handled  the  Word  of  life
(1  Johni.  1)

IV.  The  character  of  the  incarnate  Word.  1.  It  is  that  of  the  Only  Begotten
of  ih»  Father.  The  " glory  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father."  This  expiession
implies  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son  from  the  Father ;  for  if  the  Father  was  Father
from  all  eternity,  tlie  Son  must  have  been  Son  from  all  eternity.  He  spoke  of  "  a  glory
which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was"  (eh.  xvii.  6).  There  is  no
inferiority  involved  in  this  sonship.  There  is  a  necessary  defectiveness  in  all  analogies
taken  from  human  parentage.  Augustine  said,  "  Show  me  and  explain  to  me  an
eternal  Father,  and  I  will  show  to  you  and  explain  to  you  an  eternal  Son."  2.  It  is
theftdness  of  grace  and  truth.  "  Full  of  grace  and  truth."  This  does  not  signify  that
his  own  life  was  filled  with  grace  and  truth,  but  that  he  is  the  Author  of  these  two
blessings,  as  we  may  infer  from  ver.  17,  where  "  grace  and  truth  "  are  said  to  have  come
"by  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  Grace  is  the  revelation  of  God's  love  (1  John  iv.  8,  16),  and
the  gospel  of  Christ  is  full  of  grace  to  lost  sinners  of  mankind.  (2)  Truth  is  the  reve-
lation of  God's  light  (1  John  L  5),  for  Christ  made  known  to  ub  the  way  of  acceptance
and  salvation.

Ver.  16. — 7%e  testimony  of  John  the  Baptist.  I.  The  identieioatiov  of  the
Messiah.  "This  was  he  of  whom  I  spake."  Thus  he  was  the  true  forerunner  of
Christ.

IL  The  true  position  of  the  Messiah  in  relation  to  the  Baptist.  "  He
that  Cometh  after  me  is  preferred  before  me :  for  he  was  before  me."  1.  There  it  here
a  recognition  of  the  pre-existence  of  Christ,  as  well  as  of  his  higher  dignity.  (Ch.  iii.  33.)

2.  It  is  a  testimony  that  bespeaks  the  sincere  humility  of  the  Baptist.  Though  "amongst
them  that  were  born  of  women  the,re  was  not  a  greater  than  Juhn  the  Baptist,"  he  took
his  true  place  of  inferiority  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  To  exalt  Christ  was  his  mission.  He
never  thinks  of  himself.

Vers.  16 — 18. — Christ  th»  Fulness  of  graoe  and  truth.  We  next  have  the  testimony
of  the  entire  Church.

L  The  fulness  op  Christ  realized  in  the  Chdbch.  "  And  of  his  fulness  have
all  we  received,  even  grace  for  grace."  1.  2%e  fulness  of  Christ.  It  is  the  plenitude
of  Divine  attributes  and  graces.  (1)  It  is  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  indwelling
bodily  in  him  (Col.  ii.  9).  (2)  It  is  that  fulness  out  of  which  the  Christian  draws  for
the  needs  of  his  spiritual  life.  "  Ye  are  in  him  filled  to  the  full "  (Col.  ii.  9),  It  is  the
fulness,  not  of  a  vessel,  but  of  a  fountain.  All  our  spiritual  wants  are  supplied  out  ol
Christ  by  virtue  of  our  union  with  him.  His  Spirit  conveys  the  sap  of  grace  through
all  the  branches  of  the  vine  from  liim  as  its  Boot.  (3)  It  finds  its  ultimate  embodi-
ment in  the  "  body  of  Christ,"  which  is  "  the  fulness  of  him  who  fiUeth  all  in  all "  (Eph.
i.  23).  2.  The  wide  extent  of  its  reception.  "  We  have  all  received."  There  may  be
an  allusion  to  the  Gnostic  idea  that  only  a  certain  spiritual  class  would  be  received  into
this  fulness.  The  fulness  of  Christ  is  for  all  believers  of  both  dispensations.  Its  blessed
universality  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  esoteric  exclusiveness  of  Gnnstio  spiritualism.

3.  Ihe  measure  of  the  reception,  "  Even  grace  for  grace."  (1)  This  does  not  merely
imply  the  abundance  of  the  supply.  (2)  But  the  principle  on  which  the  supply  is
made.  Grace  makes  way  for  grace.  The  power  to  receive  it  increases  or  diminishes
according  to  the  use  we  make  of  it.  Therefore  we  must  not  "  receive  the  grace  of  God
in  vain  "  (2  Cor.  Ti.  1).  "  Whosoever  hath  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have
more  abundance  "  (Matt.  xiii.  12).  "  Under  the  Law  a  grace  is  received  in  exchange  for
some  desert.  But  in  the  new  order  of  things  it  is  a  grace  received  which  becomes  our
title  to  receive  a  new  grace."

IL  The  bssbktul  globt  of  Christianity  as  DiSTiNomsHBD  from  Judaism.
"  For  the  Law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  1.  Mark
the  superioritff  of  the  gospel  to  thr  Law.  (1)  Each  is  Divine ;  for  the  Law  given  by
Moses  was  Gk>d's,  as  well  as  the  gospel.    But  (a)  Moses  was  "a  servant,"  Christ  •


OH,  L 1—51.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  St.  JOSN.  41

Sou  (Heb.  iii.  5);  (b)  the  Law  could  not  justify, — it  "  worked  wrath"  (Rom.  iv.  15);
(c)  the  inferiority  of  the  Law  is  implied  in  its  useful  pedagogic  function,  for  "  it  was
the  schoolmaster  to  lead  us  to  Christ"  (Gal.  iii.  24);  (d)  it  imposed  a  heavy  yoke  of
service.  (2)  Yet  we  are  not  to  infer  that,  under  the  dispensation  of  Law,  there  was  no
grace  or  truth  for  Old  Testament  saints.  They  were  justified  by  grace  like  New  Testa-
ment saints  (Bom.  iv.),  and  their  spiritual  experience  showed,  especially  in  the  Psalter,
their  experience  of  both  grace  and  truth.  But  the  characteristic  spirit  of  the  two
dispensations  is  different.  The  one  had  a  twilight  duskiness,  which  disappeared  before
the  noonday  radiance  of  the  other.  2.  Mark  the  distinguishing  glory  of  the  gospel.
"  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  the  first  mention  of  this  name  in
the  Gospel,  and  it  seems  fitly  to  link  together  the  two  dispensations;  for  Jesus  is  the
name  of  the  humanity,  and  Christ  is  the  name  that  marks  his  relation  to  the  old  dis-
pensation. (1)  The  treasury  of  grace  is  in  Christ.  Take  away  Moses  from  the  Law,
and  yet  the  Law  abides  in  all  its  authority ;  but  take  away  Christ  from  the  gospel,
and  there  is  no  more  grace  or  truth  for  man.  (a)  He  gives  the  gospel  of  grace.  (6)  His
salvation  is  entirely  by  grace,  (c)  He  plants  grace  in  the  hearts  of  men.  f2)  The
treasury  of  truth  is  in  Christ,  (a)  He  is  the  Truth  itself,  as  he  is  the  Light  (ver.  4).
(i)  The  gospel  reveals  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  (c)  He  is  the  fulfilment  of  aU
the  types  of  the  old  dispensation.

III.  Christ  the  only  Ebvbaleb  of  the  Fatheb.  "No  man  hath  ever  yet
seen  God ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared
him,"  The  apostle  intends  here  to  develop  the  idea  of  the  fulness  of  truth  as  it  is  in
Christ.  1.  Ood  is  invisible  to  man  in  this  life.  The  eye  of  mortal  man  could  not
bear  the  sight  of  God.     "  There  shall  no  man  see  me  and  live "  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20).

(1)  The  theophanies  of  the  Old  Testament  were  those  of  the  Son,  not  of  the  Father.

(2)  It  is  a  useless  question  to  discuss  whether  man  will  ever  see  God  even  in  heaven.
A.U  the  allusions  to  God's  invisibility  in  Scripture  apply  to  man's  mortal  condition  on
earth.  It  is  implied  that  the  next  life  will  bring  to  us  the  sight  of  God  (1  John  iii,  2).
2.  Ood  is  revealed  to  us  iy  his  Son.  (1)  As  he  is  "  the  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,
the  express  Image  of  his  Person  "  (Heb.  i.  3\  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the
Father."  "  Gori  was  manifest  in  the  flesh.  (2)  He  is  the  Eevealer  of  the  Father's
truth,  wisdom,  love,  holiness,  and  power.  He  is,  above  all,  the  Eevealer  of  the  way  of
salvation.  (3)  He  is  the  Eevealer,  because  he  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  (o)  The
Son  reveals  God,  not  simply  as  God,  but  as  the  Father,  (ft^  Because  he  is  the  only
begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  dwelling  in  his  bosom,  (a)  implying  ouenoss  ot  essence,
()3)  oneness  of  counsel,  (7)  oneness  of  affection.

IT.  Conclusion.  1.  We  ought  to  give  due  honour  to  the  Son.  We  cannot  think  too
highly  of  him.  2.  We  ought  to  listen  to  his  words  with  holy  awe,  and  obey  him  with
all  the  sincerity  of  our  hearts.

Vers.  19 — 28. — The  second  testimony  of  John  the  Baptist.  A  deputation,  consisting
of  the  priests  and  Levites  from  Jerusalem,  the  ecclesiastical  centre  of  Judaism,  visited
the  Baptist  as  he  was  baptizing  disciples  at  Bethany  beyond  Jordan,  for  the  purpose  of
ascertaining  whether  he  was  the  Messiah  or  the  forerunner,  of  ancient  prophecy.  The
scene  is  interesting  as  the  place  where  the  first  disciples  were  made  and  the  foundation
of  the  Christian  Church  laid.  The  interview  occurred  after  the  baptism  and  the  temp-
tation.   We  now  come  to  the  properly  historical  part  of  the  Gospel.

I.  Tee  position  assebted  fob  hiuself  by  John.  It  is  one  which  displays  his
true  humility.  He  is  clear,  frank,  and  unambiguous.  "  He  confessed,  and  denied  not."
He  asserts  his  position :  1.  Negatively.  (1)  "  I  am  not  the  Christ."  Some  mistakenly
thought  he  was.  "  All  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  John,  whether  he  were  the  Christ,
or  not"  (Luke  iii.  15).  The  members  of  the  deputation  may  have  known  that  John
was  the  son  of  Zacharias,  a  priest,  and  therefore  a  Levite  himself,  and  remembered  the
incident  in  the  temple ;  but,  as  his  mother  was  of  the  house  of  David,  from  whom
the  Messiah  was  to  spring,  they  might  be  led  to  suspect  that  John  was  himself
the  Messiah.  They  gave  John  more  honour  than  Jesus :  they  esteemed  the  one  for  his
priestly  lineage ;  the  other  was  only  "  the  carpenter's  Son."  The  answer  of  John  is  per-
fectly explicit.  He  cl.iims  honour,  not  for  himself,  but  for  Christ.  (2)  He  is  not  Elias.
"Art  thou  Elias?"  The  question  was  suggested  by  Malachi's  prophecy  concerning
JOHH.  I


50  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1—61.

"  God  sending  Elijah  the  prophet  before  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  "  (Mai.
iv.  6).  The  deputies  thought,  "  If  this  is  not  the  Christ,  perhaps  he  is  his  forerunner,
Elijah."  How  could  he  say  he  was  not  Elias,  when  Christ  himself  says  elsewhere,
"This  is  Elias"  (Matt.  xi.  14)?  The  answer  of  John  is,  "I  am  not  the  Elias  who
was  personally  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  whose  return  to  earth  is  expected  by  you."
But  John  was  Elias  in  the  sense  of  being  clothed  "  with  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias*
(Luke  i.  17).  Elias  was  the  antitype  of  John.  The  typical  resemblance  between  the
two  is  remarkable.  (3)  He  is  not  the  prophet — neither  the  prophet  spoken  of  by  Moses
(Deut.  xviii.  15,  18),  nor  "Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  prophets"  (Matt.  xiv.  14).  2.
Fositivdy.  He  is  a  voice — "  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Make  straight
the  way  of  the  Lord."  He  points  to  Isaiah's  prophecy  concerning  himself.  He  was
but  a  voice  to  be  heard,  not  a  great  personage  to  receive  the  homage  of  men.

II.  The  office  op  the  Baptist.  It  was  simply  to  baptize  as  a  preparation  for
the  recognition  of  Christ.  The  deputies  qttestioned  his  authority  to  baptize.  "  Why
baptizest  thou,  then,  if  thou  be  not  that  Christ,  or  Elias,  or  one  of  the  prophets  ?  "  (1)
They  evidently  expected  the  Messiah  or  his  forerunner  to  baptize,  probably  from  the
language  of  Ezek.  xxxvi.  24,  "  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you."  (2)
Besides,  the  baptism  of  John  was  an  innovation.  The  Gentiles  had  hitherto  been  bap-
tized on  their  acceptance  of  Judaism,  but  it  had  been  unusual  to  baptize  Jews.  The
action  of  John,  therefore,  had  the  appearance  of  inaugurating  a  new  religion.  There-
fore they  demanded  his  authority.  (3)  His  answer  was  practically,  "My  baptism
with  water  is  subordinate  to  a  higher  baptism.  I  baptize  for  another,  not  for  myself;  to
make  disciples  for  Christ,  the  Mighty  One,  who  was  before  me ;  not  for  myself."  (4)
He  points  to  Christ  as  a  Person  standing  among  them  whom  they  knew  not.  He  him-
self was  not  worthy  to  unloose  the  latchet  of  his  shoes ;  but  the  Pharisees  from  Jerusa-
lem, so  ultra-conservative  of  ordinances  and  usages,  could  neither  see,  nor  acknowledge,
nor  believe  in  him.  How  natural  it  was  that  "  they  should  reject  the  counsel  of  Goii,
not  being  baptized  of  John"  (Luke  vii.  30)1  How  true  it  still  is  that  Christ  is  still
standing  among  thousands  who  will  neither  see,  nor  reverence,  nor  trust  him  I

Vers.  29 — 34. — Ultird  testimony  home  hy  the  Baptist  to  Jetus.  This  incident,  which
occurred  on  the  following  day,  must  have  been  immediately  after  the  temptation.  The
Baptist  identifies  Christ  by  implication,  not  by  name.

1.  The  Bedeemeb  is  identified  by  his  work.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  1"  This  title  is  taken  from  Isa.  liii.,  which  the
Jewish  commentators  themselves  originally  ap^ied  to  the  Messiah.  The  passage  sets
forth :  1.  The  Object  offered  in  sacrifice.  "  The  Lamb  of  God."  (1)  It  applies  to  Christ
on  account  of  his  personal  character — on  account  of  (a)  the  innocence  and  holiness  of
his  life;  (b)  his  meekness  and  lowliness;  (c)  his  patience  in  suffering.  (2)  It  applies
to  Christ  as  the  great  Sacrifice  for  sin.  There  is  but  one  sacrifice  that  could  correspond
to  the  Paschal  sacrifice,  and  that,  as  we  know,  was  the  basis  of  the  whole  sacrificial
system  of  the  Jews,  (a)  He  is  God's  Lamb ;  (a)  because  God  claims  him  as  his  own ;
(iS)  because  God  provides  him.  (6)  He  is  "the  Lamb " — ^the  only  one,  not  one  out
of  many.  Many  lambs  were  sacrificed  in  Old  Testament  times.  All  the  shadows
disappeared,  when  Christ,  as  the  Substance,  came.  It  is  an  advantage  to  have  the
whole  attention  concentrated  upon  one  glorious  spectacle — the  Lamb  of  Godl  2.  The
olfject  or  effect  of  the  sacri/ite,  "Which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  The  word
signifies  bearing  as  well  as  taking  away.  Christ  takes  aw«y  sin  by  bearing  it.  (1)  He
bears  sin.  The  phrase  implies  the  idea  of  a  heavy  burden  or  of  penal  endurancejpoint-
ing  inevitably  to  the  penal  consequences  inseparable  from  the  sins  of  mankind.  He  was
"  made  sin  " — the  world's  sin — and  bore  it,  thus  enduring  the  penalty  due  to  the  sins  of
the  world,  (a)  The  word  "  beareth  sin,"  in  the  present  tense,  is  not  a  mere  prophecy
as  to  what  would  occur  at  Calvary ;  (6)  nor  does  it  imply  merely  the  constant  efficacy  of
the  sacrifice ;  (c)  but  the  fact  that  he  was  even  then  the  actual  Bearer  of  the  world's
sin.  Thus  there  is  no  foundation  for  the  notion  that  he  was  not  a  Sin-bearer  except  on
the  cross.  He  bore  sin  all  through  his  life.  (2)  "  He  taketh  away  "  sin.  He  does  it  by
bearing  it.  "  We  know  that  Jesus  Christ  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins "
(1  John  iii.  6).  Therefore  we  may  say  that  Christ  is  (a)  a  Saviour,  not  a  mere  Prophet ;
(¥)  a  perfect  Saviour  (Heb.  vii.  25);  (e)  an  unwearying  Saviour.    3.  The  lurden


at  1. 1—51.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  61

removed  by  the  sacrifice.  "  The  sin  of  the  world."  (1)  It  is  the  sin,  not  the  sini.  (o)
This  does  not  signify  original  sin  as  the  root-sia  of  the  world ;  but  sin  in  the  mass,
regarded  in  its  unity  as  the  common  guilt  and  corruption  of  the  world.  (6)  It  does
not  refer  merely  to  the  punishment  of  sin,  for  the  Lamb  of  God  secures  by  his  sacrifice
the  complete  extirpation  of  sin.  (2)  It  is  the  sin  of  the  world,  (a)  Not  the  sin  of  the
Jews,  but  of  the  Gentiles  also ;  for  it  had  been  said  long  before  to  Abraham,  "  In  thy
seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed  "  (Gen.  sii.  3).  (b)  The  Baptist,  in
using  the  singular  number,  thought,  not  so  much  of  the  extent,  as  of  the  nature  of  sin.
The  sin  of  the  world  is  the  sin  that  belongs  to  the  world  as  such — which  is  of  the  world,
from  the  world.  On  the  world's  side  there  is  nothing  but  sin;  on  God's  side  nothing
but  the  Lamb  of  God.    See  how  God  overcomes  with  good  the  evil  of  the  world.

II.  Thb  Bedeemer  is  cleably  identified  in  his  Person.  "  This  is  he  of  whom
I  said,  After  me  cometh  a  man  which  is  become  before  me :  for  he  was  before  me."
These  words  now  meet  us  for  the  third  time.  The  human  and  Divine  natures  are
exhibited  in  one  sentence.    The  Baptist  believed  in  the  pre-existence  of  the  Messiah.

III.  The  bxtbaobdinart  mode  in  which  the  Eedeemeb  was  identified  bt
John  himself.  1.  "  /  knew  him  not."  Yet  John  must  have  known  him,  for  else  he
could  not  have  hesitated  as  he  did  about  baptizing  our  Lord.  "  I  have  need  to  be  bap-
tized of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  Ti;e  ?  "  (Matt.  iii.  14).  The  son  of  Elisabeth  must
have  personally  known  the  Son  of  Mary.  The  Baptist  means  that  he  did  not  know  him
as  Messiah,  and  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  upon  Jesus,  which  he  immediately  records,
points  to  the  method  and  circumstances  of  the  revelation.  2.  Jesus  was  revealed  to  the
Baptist  by  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  vpon  him  as  a  dove.  (1)  The  sign — the  descent  and
abiding  of  the  dove  upon  Jesus — was  seen  by  the  Baptist  as  an  actual  fact,  and  signi-
fied the  actual  consecration  of  the  Eedoemer  to  his  .Divine  work.  (2)  The  two  bap-
tisms— the  baptism  in  water,  and  the  baptism  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  (o)  John's  baptism
was  (a)  "  that  he  might  be  made  manifest  in  Israel ;  ".(/S)  it  was  "unto  repentance  for
remission  of  sins  " — ^not  that  it  eifected  such  a  remission,  for  John  had  no  such  power,
and  never  claimed  it — but  it  pointed  to  that  which  could  alone  take  away  sin.  (Z>)
Christ's  baptism  was  not  (a)  the  baptism  which  he  was  to  institute  for  the  Christian
Church, — it  was  not  a  baptism  of  water ;  (/3)  nor  was  it  a  baptism  which  any  man  can
give,  whether  priest  or  minister ;  (7)  nor  was  it  a  baptism  for  miraculous  gifts  at  Pente-
cost ;  (S)  but  it  was  a  baptism  of  regenerating  grace — such  a  baptism  as  the  dying  thief
leceived,  though  not  baptized  with  water,  such  a  baptism  as  Simon  Magus  never
/eceived,  though  he  was  admitted  into  the  communion  of  the  Church  by  the  ministers
of  Christ.

IV.  The  impobtancb  of  the  record  just  made  bt  the  Baptist.  "And  I
have  seen,  and  I  have  bbime  witness  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God."  The  vision  is
regarded  as  still  present  and  remaining  in  its  blessed  results.  He  sets  forth  the  abiding
record  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  as  well  as  the  Son  of  man,  therefore  •  Divine
Being.

Vers.  35 — 40. — The  first  gathering  of  disciples  to  Jesus.  We  trace  in  these  words
the  first  beginnings  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  began  with  two  disciples,  Andrew
and  John ;  and  the  first  disciples  became  the  first  preachers.

I.  The  Baptist's  benewed  testimony  to  Christ.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God ! "
1.  John  and.  the  Eedeemer  had  now  met  for  the  last  time;  and  the  Baptist  was  already
preparing  for  the  change  in  their  relative  positions  implied  in  the  entrance  of  Jesus
upon  public  life.  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease."  2.  His  last  testimony  was
hut  a  repetition  of  his  fi,rst  testimony.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  1  "  (1)  This  was
but  a  little  seed,  but  it  had  a  mighty  growth.  (2)  The  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified  is
for  every  age  the  power  of  God  to  salvation.  (3)  We  need  to  repeat  the  same  truth,
perhaps  in  a  different  form,  to  produce  the  due  effect  of  the  gospel.

II.  The  effect  of  this  renewed  testimony.  The  two  disciples  of  John  "followed"
Jesus.  This  was  the  decisive  act  that  determined  their  destiny  for  ever.  The  words
of  John  excited  their  wonder,  their  admiration,  their  desire  for  further  knowleds;e.  1.
They  seek  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  Jesus.  The  Saviour,  seeing  them  follow  him,
asked  them,  "What  seek  ye?"  As  he  knew  their  hearts,  the  words  were  evidently
gpoken  both  to  encourage  and  to  stimulate  to  fiirtber  inquiry.    They  answer,  "  Whei«


53  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [<«•  »•  1— 61.

dwellest  thou?"  They  desired  a  private  interview  that  they  m'ght  have  a  deeper
insight  into  his  character  and  mission.  They  sought  a  Person  rather  than  a  gift.  2.
The  Lord  fully  gratifies  their  desire,  and  satisfies  all  their  hopes.  "  Come  and  see."
(1)  The  interview  was  not  postponed  till  the  day  after.  The  Lord  bids  them  come  at
once.  His  salvation  is  a  present  blessing.  (2)  It  was  a  protracted  interview.  "  They
came  and  saw  where  he  dwelt,  and  abode  with  him  that  day  ;  for  it  was  the  tenth  hour ; "
that  is,  ten  in  the  forenoon,  (a)  There  was  full  time  to  satisfy  all  their  doubts  and
answer  all  their  questious.  (6)  The  day  was  a  turning-point  in  their  lives ;  and  there-
fore they  fix  with  exactness  the  very  limits  of  their  stay  with  Jesus.  (3)  The  inter-
view had  a  satisfactory  result.  The  exclamation  of  Andrew  to  his  brother  Simon,
"We  have  found  the  Messiah,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the  Christ,"  attests  the
blessed  discovery,  (a)  The  discovery  of  Jesus  implied  a  previous  seeking,  (b)  It  was
■inexpected.    (c)  It  was  joyful,    (d)  It  was  final.

III.  The  intekest  and  impoktanob  or  Andrew's  Cheistian  discipleship.  "One
of  the  two  which  heard  John  speak,  and  followed  him,  was  Andrew,  Simon  Peter's
brother."  1.  He  was  among  thefint  called  to  be  Chrisfs  disciples.  He  is  therefore  ono
"f  the  two  first  member?  of  the  Christian  Church.  2.  Mark  his  priority  to  Peter.
That  apostle  to  whom  the  Church  of  Borne  assigns  the  primacy,  was  not  the  first  to
accept  or  follow  Christ.

Vers.  41,  42. — The  reception  of  Peter  by  Christ.  Andrew's  first  action  is  to  make  his
discovery  of  the  Messiah  known  to  his  brother.

I.  Mark  the  pbompt  zeal,  the  quiet  helpfulness,  the  ybabnino  faith,  op
Andrew.  "  He  first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon  " — implying  that  he  afterwards  found
John's  brother,  James,  for  a  like  object — "  and  brought  him  to  Jesus."  1.  Andrew  foUows
a  natural  instinct  in  carrying  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  his  brother.  Simon  was
one  of  the  nearest  and  the  dearest  in  life.  It  was  an  instinct  of  grace  likewise  that
Andrew  should  desire  his  brother  to  share  in  the  blessings  of  the  common  salvation.
2.  How  much  good  is  often  done  by  the  private  suggestion  or  inquiry  of  a  Christian
friend  I  3.  What  momentous  cmisequences  flowed  from  Andrew's  loving  act!  He  was
not  (1)  the  writer  of  an  Epistle,  (2)  nor  the  founder  of  a  Church,  (3)  but  the  opener  of
a  new  career  to  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  apostles.  He  was  the  instrument  by  whom
Peter  was  first  led  into  the  paths  of  truth,  and  on  that  account  is  to  be  held  in  "  ever-
lasting remembrance."  (4)  Our  last  notice  of  Andrew  is  equally  characteristic  of  him,
for,  if  he  found  Peter  first,  he  found  others  afterwards.  It  was  he  and  Philip  who
introduced  the  Greek  strangers  to  Christ  (ch.  xii.  20).

IL  Mark  the  mode  op  our  Lord's  reception  of  Peter.  "Thou  art  Simon,  the
son  of  Jona:  thou  shalt  be  called  Cephas,  which  is  by  interpretation,  A  stone."  1.
Our  Lord  knew  Peter's  character.  The  Juws  regarded  the  knowledge  of  the  hearts  of
men  as  an  attribute  of  the  Messiah.  2.  The  change  of  name  implies  a  change  of  cha-
racter or  position.  So  it  was  in  the  cases  of  Abraham,  Sarah,  aud  Jacob.  The  Master
here  takes  possession  of  his  servant,  and  consecrates  him  at  once  and  wholly  to  his
service.  3.  The  name  Cephas — by  which  Peter  was  exclusively  known  to  the  Corin-
thians, and,  perhaps,  to  other  Churches — implies  strength  of  character,  vigour  of
resolution,  and  the  power  of  aggression,  which  had  their  place  side  by  side  with  an
honest-hearted  impulsiveness.  4.  The  selection  of  disciples,  like  Peter  and  Andrew,
for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel,  unlearned  as  they  were  in  the  worlcFs  scholarship,
is  a  powerful  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.

Vers.  43, 44. — The  calling  of  Philip.  Jesus  was  now  leaving  Bethany  beyond  Jrardan
for  Galilee ;  and  as  he  was  about  to  set  out,  he  summoned  Philip,  a  Galilnan,  to
discipleship.

I.  Thk  oalIi  op  Christ  to  Philip.  "  He  findeth  Philip,  and  Jesus  saith  unto  him,
Follow  me."  1.  The  birthplace  of  Philip.  He  was  a  native  of  the  district  of  Beth-
saiua,  and  belonged  to  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Peter,  and  must  therefore  have  been
acquainted  with  them.  Probably  through  them  was  lie  first  brought  within  the  sphere
of  Christ's  influence.  It  was  natural  that  our  Lord  should  seek  his  first  disciples  from
the  district  which  was  to  become  the  scene  of  bis  fullest  ministry.  Philip  is  a  Jew,
though  he  bean  a  Greek  name.    2.  Mark  in  what  different  ways  our  Lard  draws


OH.  1. 1—61.]        THE  OOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  63

di8<^les  to  himself.  While  Peter  was  drawn  to  him  by  Andrew,  Philip  was  "  found  "
by  Christ  himself  without  any  human  intervention,  just  as  he  finds  alt  wlio  are  honestly
seeking  after  the  way  of  life.  3.  J%e  command  of  Christ  is  uryent.  "  Follow  me."
There  is  no  preface,  or  promise,  or  explanation.  The  command  implie>i :  (1)  That  Philip
was  to  throw  in  his  lot  with  Christ,  as  Ruth  did  with  Naomi.  (2)  That  he  was  to
follow  him  as  a  servant  obeys  a  master,  "  doing  his  will  from  tlie  heart,"  as  a  learner
follows  a  teacher ;  lilse  Mary  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  (3)  That  he  was  to  walk  in
his  steps  and  conform  to  his  example.

II.  Philip's  answer  to  thb  call.  1.  There  is  no  recorded  answer  in  words.  But
his  obedience  was  very  prompt.  There  was  a  slowness  of  apprehension  in  Philip
observable  in  later  times,  which  shows  that  he  needed  a  prompt  and  sudden  call.
2.  His  response  to  the  call  is  implied  in  the  words  he  addresses  irmnediately  after  to
Nathanael.  "  We  have  found  him,  of  whom  Moses  in  the  Law,  and  the  prophets,  did
write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  Joseph."  (1)  This  implies  that  he  was  an  habitual
student  of  the  Old  Testament,  for  he  quite  understood  that  the  Redeemer  was  foretold
by  Moses  and  the  prophets.  "  They  are  they,"  says  Jesus  himself,  "  which  testify  ol
me."  We  ought  not  to  despise  the  Old  Testament,  for  there  is  much  of  Christ  in  it.
(2)  It  implies  that  he  had  some  personal  knowledge  of  Christ,  for,  as  a  native  of  the
Bethsaida  district,  he  must  have  known  Nazareth,  and,  perhaps,  had  often  seen  "  the
Son  of  Joseph."  (3)  It  was  the  instinct  of  grace  that  led  him  to  bring  Nathanael  to
Christ,  Perhaps  Nathanael  was  a  relative ;  he  was  at  least  a  neighbour,  for  Cana  was
near  to  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Peter.

Vers.  46 — 51. — Hie  calling  of  Nathanael,  After  Jesus  finds  Philip,  Philip  finds
Nathwiael.     "  One  lighted  torch  serves  to  light  another,  and  thus  faith  is  propagated."

I.  The  ciiabacter  op  Nathanael,  ob  Bartholomew.  He  was  a  devout  Jew,  a
student  of  Scripture,  of  a  thoughtful  temper,  and  of  prayerful  habits.  He  was  above  all
a  guileless  Israelite :  "  An  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile."

II.  The  difficulties  of  Nathanael.  "Can  any  good  thingcomeoutofNazareth?"
1.  A  guileless  man  may  have  prejudice*  as  well  as  difficulties ;  but  in  this  case  the
difficulties  were  of  more  account  than  the  prejudices,  because  they  may  have  been
grounded  upon  the  fact  that  there  was  no  prediction  of  a  Messiah  issuing  from  Naza-
reth. 2.  It  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  guileless'  character  that  he  should  refuse  to  be
satisfied  without  sufficient  reason.  Nathanael  was  not  a  simpleton,  to  be  carried  about
by  every  wind  of  doctrine  or  by  every  false  Christ.  3.  It  is  a  proof  of  a  genuinely
sincere  and  straightforward  nature  that  sufficient  evidence  brings  full  persuasion  to  his  ■
mind.  It  is  not  enough  that  Jesus[unveils  his  character;  he  must  also  give  him  evidence
of  a  power  to  know  all  that  Nathanael  did  as  well  as  thought.  "  Before  that  Philip
called  thee,  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig  tree,  I  saw  thee."

III.  CoNSiDEE  HOW  Christ  DEALS  WITH  A  GUILELESS  MAN.  Our  Lord  uses  many
tests  according  to  the  difi'ereut  characters  of  men.  1.  There  is  no  test  like  that  of
personal  experience.  "  Come  and  see,"  said  Philip.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  of
wiser  counsel.  Few  doubters  are  influenced  by  reasoning  and  argument.  Philip  says
to  Nathanael,  "  I  have  found  a  Saviour :  come  and  see  him  for  yourself."  2.  Christ
welcomes  the  guiltless  inquirer.  This  is  evident  from  the  encouraging  insight  expressed,
in  the  words,  "  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed  1 "  3.  Christ  satisfies  him,  for  he  wins  hit
faith,  Nathanael  utters  the  emphatic  testimony :  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God ;  thou  art
the  King  of  Israel " — a  testimony  at  onco  to  Christ's  Divinity  and  his  Messiahship.  4.
Christ  promises  a  still  fuller  satisfaction  to  the  intellect  and  heart  of  all  disciples.
"  From  henceforth  ye  shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  ang(4s  of  God  ascending  and
descending  upon  the  Son  of  man."  (1)  This  does  not  refer  to  the  Transfiguration,  which
was  not  witnessed  by  all  to  whom  these  words  were  addressed ;  (2)  nor  to  the  Ascension,
for  the  heavens  were  not  opened  and  angels  were  not  seen  on  that  occasion ;  (3)  nor  to
the  ministry  of  angels  as  they  waited  on  .Jesus  at  the  various  stages  of  his  trial;  (4)
it  refers  to  Jacob's  ladder,  which  signified  the  opening  up  of  a  new  and  living  way  into
the  holiest  of  all  "  by  Christ's  flesh,"  in  virtue  of  which  not  only  greater  proofs,  in  the
shape  of  miracle  and  signs,  would  be  given  to  the  sonship  of  Jesus  than  any  they  had
yet  witnessed,  but  a  constant  communication  would  be  kept  up  between  heaven  and
earth,  eTsu  after  the  Son  of  man  should  have  left  the  world,  through  virtue  of  hia


54  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  1. 1—61.

MediatorsMp.  The  angels  are  the  messengers  of  the  Redeemer's  will,  constantly  ascend-
ing and  descending  in  their  errands  of  mercy  and  love.  5.  Christ  reveals  himself  to.  the
whole  race  of  man  as  the  Son  of  man.  This  chapter  is  singularly  rich  in  the  names
that  are  ascribed  to  Christ.  It  contains  no  less  than  twenty-one  names  or  titles  of  him.
But  the  most  precious  to  the  believer's  heart,  in  the  longing  for  sympathy,  ia  that  which
Christ  only  applies  to  himself,  "  the  Son  of  man."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  9. —  The  Divine  daybreak.  The  evangelist  writes  as  one  who  lovesj  sdmires,  and
venerates  him  of  whom  it  is  his  ofBce  to  inform  his  fellow-men.  He  has  one  great
figure  to  portray,  one  great  name  to  exalt,  one  great  heart  to  unfold.  His  language
is  such  as  would  not  be  befitting  were  he  heralding  the  advent  even  of  a  prophet  or  a
saint.  How  bold,  how  beautiful,  how  impressive  are  his  figures  1  John  speaks  of  the
Divine  Word,  uttering  forth  the  thought  and  will  of  God  in  the  hearing  of  mankind;
of  the  Divine  Life,  quickening  the  world  from  spiritual  death ;  of  the  Divine  Light,
scattering  human  darkness,  and  bringing  in  the  morning  of  an  immortal  day.  No
terms  can  be  too  lofty  in  which  to  welcome  the  advent  of  the  Son  of  God — a  theme
worthy  of  praise  for  ever  ardent,  of  a  song  for  ever  new.

L  Chkist  is  m  himself  the  teue  Light.  1.  As  distinguished  from,  though  sym-
bolized by,  physical  light.  When  you  watch  for  the  morning,  and  see  the  crimson
dawn  fill  all  the  east  with  promise  of  the  coming  day;  when  from  the  hill-top  at  noon
you  scan  the  landscape  where  valley,  grove,  and  river  are  lit  up  by  the  splendour  of  the
summer  sun ;  when  you  "  almost  think  you  gaze  through  golden  sunsets  into  heaven ;  "
when  you  watch  the  lovely  afterglow  lingering  on  snow-clad  Alpine  summits ;  when  by
night  you  watch  the  lustrous  moon  emerge  from  a  veil  of  clouds,  or  trace  the  fiaming
constellations; — then,  remember  this,  Christ  is  the  true  Light.  2.  As  contrasting  with
false  lights.  It  is  said  that  upon  some  coasts  wreckers  have  been  known  to  kindle
misleading  lights  in  order  to  lure  confiding  seamen  to  their  destruction.  Emblem  of
teachers  and  of  systems  that  deceive  men  by  representing  his  bodily  and  earthly  interests
as  of  supreme  importance — that  bound  his  horizon  by  the  narrow  limits  of  time,  that  tell
him  that  God  is  unknowable.  Opposed  to  such  is  that  heavenly  light  which  never
leads  astray,  and  never  pales  or  sets.  3.  As  distinct  from  the  imperfect  lights,  in  which
there  was  Divine  truth,  although  but  dim.  There  were  in  such  philosophy  as  the  wise
and  lofty-minded  heathen  produced,  rays  of  truth  which  came  from  Grod;  but  these  were
mingled  with  the  smoke  and  mists  of  human  error.  The  Hebrew  prophets  proclaimed
Divine  truth  and  inculcated  Divine  righteousness;  yet  they  were  lost  in  the  Christ
who  fulfilled  them,  as  the  stars  are  quenched  before  the  rising  sun.  4.  Christ  was  the
true  Light,  as  revealing  the  truth  concerning  God  and  his  character  and  purposes  of
mercy;  as  pouring  the  lustre  of  moral  purity  over  a  sin-darkened  world;  as  diffusing
abroad  spiritual  life,  and  with  it  spiritual  brightness,  gladness,  and  hope.  He  is  both
luminous  and  illuminating.

11.  Chbibt  is  tee  Light  coming  into  the  wobld.  In  himself  he  was  and  is  the  true
Light ;  but  we  have  reason  to  be  grateful,  because,  as  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  he  has
arisen  upon  the  world  with  healing  in  his  wings.  1.  This  light  came  into  the  world
even  before  the  advent — has  always  been  streaming  into  human  nature  and  human
society.  Reason  and  conscience  are  "  the  candle  of  the  Lord,"  by  which  he  lights  up
our  inmost  being.  He  who  first  said,  "  Let  there  be  light  1 "  having  provided  that
which  is  natural,  did  not  withhold  that  which  is  spiritual.  2.  Yet  this  "  coming  "  was
especially  in  the  earthly  ministry  of  our  Redeemer.  Conversing  with  Nicodemus,  Jesus
said,  "The  Light  is  come  into  the  world;"  and  before  the  close  of  his  ministry  he  cried,
"  I  am  come  a  Light  into  the  world  " — expressions  exactly  corresponding  with  the  lan-
guage here  used  by  John.  It  was  to  a  world  which  needed  him,  which  was  in  darkness
and  the  shadow  of  death  for  want  of  him,  that  the  Saviour  came.  His  whole  ministry
was  a  holy,  gracious  shining ;  and  in  his  light  there  were  many  who  loved  to  walk.
3.  The  Divine  light  did  not  cease  to  come  into  the  world  when  Christ  ascended.  In
fact,  at  first,  the  world  generally  neither  welcomed  nor  even  recognized  its  Divine
Enlightener.    Only  after  the  vain  attempt  to  quench  the  heavenly  light  did  men  learn


OH.  L  I— 51.]        THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  55

its  preciousnesa  and  power.  From  the  celestial  sphere  this  glorioug  and  unquenchable
Luminary  casts  its  illumining  and  vivifying  rays  in  a  wider  sweep.  Christ  has  by  his
Spirit  been  constantly  "  coming  "  into  the  world,  and  with  ever-extending  beneficence,
and  has  thus  been  delivering  men  from  the  horrors  of  "a  moral  midnight  gloom.

III.  Christ  is  the  Light  that  liqhteth  evebt  man.  The  largeness  of  this  lan-
guage quite  accords  with  the  teachiog  of  the  New  Testament  generally.  1.  There  is  in
every  human  breast  a  Divine  light — the  light  of  the  Word — not  dependent  upon  human
forms  of  doctrine.  A  ray  from  heaven  will  guide  all  those  who  look  for  it,  and  who
are  ready  to  be  led  by  it.  2.  The  purpose  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world  was  that
all  men  might  through  him  enjoy  spiritual  illumination.  The  need  of  such  enlighten-
ment is  apparent  to  all  who  consider  the  ignorance  and  sinfulness  of  mankind,  calling
for  both  a  revelation  of  truth  and  supernatural  motives  to  obedience.  Jews  and  Gentiles
both,  if  in  different  measure,  required  a  new  and  spiritual  daybreak.  Christ  came  "  a
Light  for  revelation  to  the  Gentiles,  and  the  Glory  of  God's  people  Israel."  Not  merely
all  the  nations  of  men,  but  all  classes  and  conditions,  and  even  all  characters,  needed
this  Divine  shining.  Those  whose  eyes  were  tui'ned  to  the  light  found  in  him  the
fulfilment  of  their  desires.  Those  who  had  been  trying  to  content  themselves  with
darkness,  in  many  cases  learned  to  cherish  a  better  hope,  and  came  to  enjoy  a  purer
satisfaction.

Pbaotioal  appeal.  The  day  has  broken,  the  sun  shines ;  Christ,  the  true  Light,
lighteth  ever}'  man.  Yet  it  is  for  each  hearer  of  the  gospi-l  to  decide  whether  he  will
accept  the  light  and  walk  in  it,  or  not.  The  mere  shining  abroad  of  spiritual  light
is  not  enough ;  there  must  be  an  eye  to  behold  the  celestial  rays,  and  that  eye  must  be
opened  by  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  it  may  welcome  the  sacred  sunlight.
There  are  still  those  who  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil.
For  such,  until  their  hatred  or  indifference  towards  Christ  be  changed,  the  day  has
dawned,  and  the  Sun  has  risen,  in  vain. — T.

Vers,  10 — 13. — Christ  rejected  and  aaxptei.  It  b  related  by  an  ancient  historian
that  an  Eastern  tribe  were  so  afflicted  by  the  blazing  and  intolerable  heat  of  the  sun,
ihat  they  were  accustomed,  when  the  great  luminary  arose  in  the  morning,  to  assail
him  with  their  united  and  vehement  curses.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that,  the  benefits  of
sunlight  being  so  obvious  as  they  are,  any  should  be  found  other  than  glad  and  grateful
for  the  shining  of  the  orb  of  day.  "  The  light  is  sweet,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for
the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun."  The  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  however,  was,  we
know,  hailed  in  very  different  manners  by  different  classes  or  men ;  as  in  these  verses
is  very  strikingly  pointed  out  by  the  inspired  evangelist.  The  same  diversity  obtains
to  this  day  among  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  There  are  still  those  who  reject
and  those  who  receive  the  Saviour.

I.  Chbist  bejected.  1.  By  whomt  The  evangelist  speaks,  first  generally,  and
then  specially,  upon  this  point.  (1)  The  world  at  large  is  said  to  have  refused  the
offered  blessing — to  have  been  insensible  to  the  character,  and  incredulous  as  to  the
claims,  of  Immanuel.  This  is  the  more  surprising  because  the  world  is  full  of  witnesses
to  the  Divine  Word ;  because  it  was  actually  made  by  him  ;  because  his  natural  attri-
butes are  displayed  in  the  physical  universe,  his  moral  purposes  in  providence,  his
righteous  law  in  conscience.  (2)  More  particularly  it  is  said  that  his  own  people,  i.e.
the  Jewish  nation,  disclaimed  their  Messiah.  This  is  the  more  surprising  because
the  Hebrew  race  was,  as  it  were,  a  Chuich,  based  upon  the  expectation  of  his  coming  ;
because  they  possessed  prophecies  regarding  him;  because  they  were  familiar  with
sacrifices,  types,  and  institutions,  all  of  which  in  some  way  witnessed  to  him.  Especially
it  is  surprising  when  we  remember  that  the  Jews  were  entrusted  with  the  oracles  ot
God,  which  might  have  prepared  them  to  r«ceive  the  perfect  Divine  revelation.  2.  In
what  wayl  (1)  They  "knew  him  not."  Some — both  Jews  and  Gentiles — never  paid
any  attention  to  Jesus,  to  bis  discourses,  his  mighty  works,  his  holy  and  benevolent
character.  Some  simply  indulged  an  idle  curiosity,  in  gazing  upon  his  works  or
listening  to  his  discourses.  And  others,  less  inattentive,  yet  never  really  comprehended
the  sjaritual  purpose  of  his  mission,  the  spiritual  significance  of  his  teaching.  (2)  They
"received  him  not;"  e.g.  the  inhabitants  of  Nazareth  thrust  him  out  of  their  city!
The  Gergasenes  besought  him  to  depart  from  thoir  borders !   A  certain  village  in  Samaria


B6  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.        [oh.  1. 1—61.

refused  to  receive  Um  I  Chorazia  and  Bethsaida  were  upbraided  by  him  because  of
their  unbelief  and  their  rejection  of  his  claims  I  Over  Jerusalem  Jesus  wept,  oa  account
of  the  inattention  of  the  people  of  the  metropolis  to  his  solemn  warnings  and  gracious
entreaties  1  3.  For  what  reasons  ?  (1)  His  humility  was  an  offence  to  their  worldliness
and  pride.  (2)  His  holy  character  was  a  rebuke  to  their  sin.  (3)  His  spiritual  teaching
was  a  rebuke  to  their  formality.  (4)  His  life  of  benevolence  was  a  rebuke  to  their
selfishness  and  haughtiness.  4.  With  what  results  f  (1)  Their  guilt  was  aggravated
by  their  rejection  of  his  mission.  (2)  They  were  speedily  deprived  of  the  privileges
they  despised  and  abused,    (3)  The  impenitent  incurred  spiritual  disaster  and  ruin,

II.  Christ  accepted.  John  states  first,  what  must  have  been  the  general  impres-
sion during  our  Lord's  ministry,  that  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike  rejected  him.  Indeed,
his  unjust,  cruel,  and  violent  death  was  sufiScient  proof  of  this.  But  there  was  another
side  to  this  picture.  1,  Observe  by  whom  the  Son  of  Ood  was  gratefully  and  cordially
received.  This  very  chapter  witnesses  to  the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  over  individual
souls ;  for  it  tells  of  the  adhesion  of  Andrew  and  Simon,  of  Philip  and  Nathanael.  The
Gospels  relate  the  call  of  the  twelve  and  of  the  seventy.  They  afford  us  a  passing
glimpse  into  the  soul-history  of  such  men  as  Nicodcmus  and  Joseph,  of  such  families
as  that  of  Lazarus  at  Bethany.  And  they  exhibit  Christ's  attractive  power  over  very
different  characters,  such  as  Zacchsus  and  the  penitent  thief  upon  the  cross.  After
the  Ascension,  Christ's  converts  were  reckoned,  not  by  individuals,  but  by  thousands.
And  throughout  the  Christian  centuries,  men  from  every  clime  and  of  every  race  have
been  led  by  the  Spirit  to  receive  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Observe  the  description
given  of  their  reception  of  Christ.  They  "  believed  on  his  Name."  The  "  Name  "  is  full
of  significance.  Whether  we  examine  the  name  "  Jesus,"  or  "  Christ,"  or  "  Immanuel,"
the  Name  sets  before  us  the  object  of  our  faith.  Those  who  receive  the  Saviour  who  is
thus  designated,  believe  what  prophecy  foretold  of  him  and  what  he  declared  concerning
his  own  person,  character,  and  work.  They  trust  in  him  as  in  an  all-su£Bcient  Mediator,
and  obey  him  as  their  Lord.  3.  Observe  the  privilege  accruing  to  those  who  receive  Christ.
(1)  They  partake  a  spiritual  and  Divine  birth.  The  new  relation  begins  a  new  spiritual
life.  This  is  further  explained  in  our  Lord's  conversation  with  Nicodemus,  where
Jesus  refers  this  spiritual  birth  to  the  Holy  Spirit  himself.  (2)  They  become  children
of  God,  taking  by  "  right "  a  place  in  the  Divine  family.  This  exalted  and  happy
position  involves  participation  in  Divine  favour  and  love,  in  the  moral  image  of  the
heavenly  Father,  in  all  the  society  and  the  immunities  of  this  glorious  kindred,  in  the
eterrial  inheritance  and  home.

Application.  Our  treatment  of  the  Lord  Christ  makes  the  decisive  turning-point
in  our  spiritual  history.  Those  who  are  once  brought  into  contact  with  him,  by  hearing
his  gospel,  are  by  that  fact  placed  in  a  new  and  solemn  position  of  responsibility.  To
reject  him  is  to  reject  pardun,  righteousness,  and  life.  To  accept  him  is  to  enter  the
Divine  family,  to  enjoy  the  Divine  favour,  to  live  the  Divine,  the  spiritual,  the  immortal
life,— T.

Ver.  14. — The  inference  from  the  human  to  the  Divine.  The  parenthesis  in  this  verse
is  remarkable  as  written  in  the  first  person.  There  must  be  a  reason  for  the  evangelist's
departure  from  his  ordinaiy  practice  of  writing  in  the  narrative  style.  It  seems  that
John  was  so  impressed  by  tlje  solemnity  and  value  of  the  witness  he  was  bearing,  that
lie  was  constrained  to  break  his  own  rule,  and  to  speak  explicitly  of  what  he  himself
had  actually  seen,  and  of  what  he  himself  had  come  firmly  to  believe.  Regarding  this
parenthesis  only,  we  find  here  the  record  of  personal  observation,  and,  in  closest  con-
nection therewith,  the  declaration  of  personal  conviction.

I.  The  statbmekt  of  the  witness.  "We  beheld  his  glory."  1.  John  and  his
fellow-apostles  knew  Christ  in  his  humanity — in  the  "  flesh,"  as  the  expression  is  in  this
passage.  2.  They  knew  him  as  he  "tabernacled"  among  them.  John  and  Andrew,
when  the  Baptist  directed  their  attention  to  Jesus,  inquired  of  him,  "  Where  dwellest
thou  ?  "  and  at  bis  invitation  visited  him  and  abode  with  him.  The  writer  of  this
Gospel  enjoyed  peculiar  opportunities  of  acquaintance,  nay,  of  intimacy,  with  the
Prophet  of  Nazareth,  whose  beloved  disciple  he  became.  If  one  human  being  ever
knew  another,  John  knew  Jesus;  he  not  only  was  constantly  with  him,  his  dispo-
sition and  character  rendered  him  specially  fit  for  judging  and  appreciating  him.    3,


OH.  1. 1—51.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  57


John  and  his  colleagues  bore  witness  that  they  recognized  their  Master's  "glory."
Why  is  such  language  used  ?  Why  his  "  glory  "  ?  He  was  a  peasant  woman's  Son,
and  remained  in  the  condition  of  life  to  which  he  was  born.  There  was  nothing  in  his
garb,  his  appearance,  his  associations,  the  outward  circumstances  of  his  lot,  which,  in
tlie  view  of  men  generally,  could  justify  such  an  expression.  These  men  must  have
had  their  own  conception  of  "glory."  As  spiritual  Hebrews,  they  had  a  noble  idea  of
the  majesty,  the  righteousness,  the  purity  of  God,  and  also  of  the  moral  splendour  of
the  Divin?  Law.  Thus  it  came  to  pass  that,  enlightened  l)y  the  Spirit,  they  discerned
glory  where  to  the  eyes  of  others  there  was  only  humiliation.  They  saw  the  moral
glory  of  purity  and  benevolence  in  the  Lord's  Person  and  character,  in  the  "  grace  "
which  be  displayed  in  dealing  with  suppliants  and  penitents,  in  the  "  truth  "  which  he
uttered  and  embodied.  Tliey  could  not  fail  to  remark  the  glory  of  his  miracles,  of  his
transfiguration,  of  his  victory  over  death,  of  the  manner  in  which  he  quitted  the  earth
in  which  he  had  sojourned.  AU  this,  as  intelligent  and  sympathetic  witnesses,  John
and  his  companions  beheld,  and  to  this  they  testified.

II.  Thb  inference  of  the  Chkibtian.  The  glory  was  "  of  the  Only  Begotten  of
the  Father."  They  knew  well  that  the  world  to  which  Jesus  came  needed  a  Divine
Saviour.  Such  a  Saviour  they  were  encouraged  by  the  word  of  prophecy  to  expect.
And  their  familiarity  with  the  character  and  the  mission  of  Jesus  led  them  to  hail  the
Son  of  man  as  Son  of  God.  If  Jesus  were  not  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father,  how
could  they  account  for  the  facts  of  his  ministry,  for  the  authority  he  wielded,  the  claims
he  made  ?  He  had  called  himself  the  Son  of  God ;  he  had  lived  like  the  Son  of  God ;
he  had  wrought  the  works  of  God.  He  had  been  addressed  as  the  Son  of  the  living
God,  and  had  accepted  the  appellation.  Were  the  disciples  to  forget  all  this ;  to  persuade
themselves  that  they  had  been  in  a  mist  of  bewilderment ;  to  give  up  their  deepest
convictions,  their  purest  and  most  ennobling  beliefs?  If  not,  then  they  must  needs
assert  their  belief  that  the  glory  they  had  seen  was  that  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the
Father.  The  same  inference  is  binding  upon  us.  To  deny  of  Jesus  what  John  here
affirms  of  him  is  to  leave  the  Church  without  a  foundation,  the  heart  without  a  refuge,
the  world  without  a  hope.  If  Christ  be  not  what  John  represents  him  as  being,  then
the  world  can  never  know  and  rejoice  in  a  full  and  personal  revelation  of  the  supreme
mind  and  heart  and  will.  It  may  be  said  that  this  is  the  misfortune  of  humanity,  and
that  it  must  be  accepted  as  inevitable.  But  the  text  points  out  to  us  a  better  way.
The  sincere  and  impressive  language  of  John  encourages  us  first  to  realize  to  ourselves
the  unique  moral  majesty  of  Jesus,  and  then  to  draw  from  this  the  inference  which  he
and  other  witnesses  of  Jesus'  character  and  life  drew  so  firmly  and  conclusively — the
inference,  namely,  that  he  was  none  other  than  the  Son  of  God,  deserving  of  human
reverence  and  faith,  love  and  devotion.  The  witness  of  Christ's  companions  we  cannot
reject.  Their  convictions  concerning  their  Master  and  Friend  we  are  abundantly  justified
in  sharing.  If  we  have  a  heart  capable  of  appreciating  the  Saviour's  moral  glory,  we
shall  not  be  without  guidance  in  estimating  the  justice  of  his  claim  io  •uperhumtn
dignity — to  Divine  authority. — T.

Vers.  19 — 28. — A  disclaimer  and  a  claim.  When  our  Lord  Jesus  came  into  this
world,  he  did  not  come  as  one  isolated  from  the  race  he  designed  to  save.  He  conde-
scended to  take  his  place — the  most  honourable  place — in  a  long  and  illustrious
succession.  He  superseded  the  last  prophet  of  the  old  dispensation ;  he  commissioned
the  first  prophets  of  the  new.  The  herald  and  forerunner  of  our  Lord  perfectly
comprehended  his  own  relation  to  his  Master,  and  felt  it  a  dignity  to  occupy  a  position
of  Divino  appointment,  although  a  position  of  inferiority,  in  respect  to  him.  The
query  ]iut  to  John  by  the  leaders  of  the  Jewish  Church  at  Jerusalem  was  natural  and
proper ;  it  was  evidence  of  the  interest  which  John's  mission  was  exciting  in  the  land ;  and
it  gave  the  Baptist  an  opportunity  of  both  declaring  himself  and  witnessing  to  his  Lord.

I.  John's  disclaimer.  No  doubt  there  was  an  expectation,  general  and  eager,  of
One  who,  in  accordance  with  Hebrew  prophecy,  should  be  the  Deliverer  and  Buler
of  God's  people  Israel.  From  varying  motives — in  some  cases  with  spiritual  yearning,
in  other  cases  with  political  expectation — the  Jews  turned  anxiously  towards  every
personage  of  distinction  and  influence  who  arose  among  the  people.  Thus  they  turned
to  John,  whose  character  was  austere  and  inflexible  as  that  of   a  Hebrew  seer,  and


58  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [ob.  1. 1— 61.

whose  popular  power  was  manifest  from  the  multitude  of  his  adherents  and  admirers.
In  these  circumstances,  John's  first  duty  was  to  give  an  unequivocal  answer  to  the
inquiry  of  the  Jews.  This  inquiry  was  pointed  and  particular.  Was  John  Elias,
again  visiting  the  people  who  revered  him  as  one  of  their  holiest  and  mightiest  saints  ?
There  was  something  in  his  appearance,  his  habits,  his  speech,  that  suggested  this
possibility.  Or  was  he  "  the  prophet,"  less  definitely  designated  ?  Or  could  it  be  that  be
WH8  none  other  than  the  Messiah  ?  The  times  were  ripe  for  the  advent  of  the  promised
Deliverer;  John  evidently  possessed  a  spiritual  authority,  a  popular  power,  such  as
Israel  had  not  seen  for  many  a  generation.  To  every  such  inquiry  John  had  only  one
answer:  "I  am  not."  In  tiiis  disclaimer  we  recognize  both  the  intelligence  and  the
candour  of  the  forerunner.  A  weak  mind  might  have  been  overpowered  by  interest
so  profoimd  and  widespread.  A  self-seeking  and  ambitious  mind  might  have  taken
advantage  of  such  an  opportunity  to  assert  a  personal  authority  and  to  climb  to  the
throne  of  power.  John  was  superior  to  such  temptations.  Though  greater  than  others
bom  of  women,  he  did  not  aspire  to  a  position  for  which  God  had  not  destined  him.
In  fact,  he  was  too  great  to  wi^  to  be  aught  but  the  herald  and  the  servant  of  him  who
was  to  come.

II.  John's  cl  aih.  A  just  and  admirable  modesty  was  not,  indeed  never  is,  inconsistent
with  a  due  assertion  of  position  and  duties  assigued  by  Gbd.  He  who  knows  what  Gh>d
has  sent  him  into  the  world  to  do,  will  neither  depreciate  his  own  work  nor  envy
another's.  The  claim  made  by  John  was  very  remarkable.  He  affirmed  himself  to  be :
1.  A  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  The  circumstances  of  his  birth  and  education,  taken  is
conjunction  with  certain  declarations  of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  must  have  suggested
to  John  that  he  held  a  place  in  the  revealed  counsels  of  eternal  wisdom.  2.  A  voice.
Often  had  God  spoken  to  Israel.  In  John  he  spake  yet  again.  To  him  it  was  given
to  utter  by  human  lips  the  thoughts  of  the  Divine  mind.  Not  that  this  was  a
mechanical  function;  John's  whole  soul  was  inflamed  with  the  grandeur  and  the
burning  necessity  of  that  message  of  repentance  which  he  was  called  upon  to  deliver  to
his  fellow-countrymen.  Nothing  but  the  conviction  that  his  voice  was  the  expression
of  Divine  thought,  that  he  was  summoning  men  in  God's  Name  to  a  higher  life  of
righteousness  and  faith,  could  have  animated  him  to  discharge  his  ministry  with  such
amazing  boldness.  Nor  could  any  other  conviction  have  overcome  the  difficulty  he
must  at  first  have  felt  in  publicly  witnessing  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Christ.
3.  A  herald,  and  one  preparing  the  way  of  a  great  Successor.  It  was  his  to  make
straight  the  Lord's  way.  It  was  his  to  announce  the  Messiah's  approach,  and  to
direct  the  attention  of  Israel  to  the  coming  in  lowly  guise  of  Israel's  King.  It  was  his
to  subside  into  comparative  insignificance,  to  withdraw  from  publicity,  in  order  that  he
might  make  room  for  One  whose  presence  would  bring  the  realization  of  the  brightest
hopes  and  the  most  fervent  prayers.  It  was  his  to  administer  the  humbhr  bapiism
with  water — the  symbol  of  a  better  baptism  to  be  conferred  by  Christ,  even  that  with
the  Holy  Spirit.

Apflioation.  1.  Learn  the  completeness  and  harmony  of  the  Divine  plan.  The
revelation  of  Qoi  proceeds  upon  an  order  which  may  be  recognized  both  by  the  intellect
and  by  the  heart  of  man.  The  wisdom  of  the  Eternal  arranges  that  all  preparation
shall  be  made  for  the  appearance  of  the  world's  Saviour ;  the  morning  star  heralds  the
rising  of  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness.  God's  ways  in  grace  are  as  regular  and  as  orderly
as  his  ways  in  providence.  2.  Learn  the  dignity  and  preciousness  of  Immanuel.  One
so  honourable  as  the  Baptist  yet  deemed  himself  tmworthy  to  serve  the  meek  and  lowly
Jesus — ^to  act  as  his  meanest  attendant.  Lowly  was  his  attitude,  and  reverent  his  words,
when  the  Son  of  God  drew  near.  Surely  he,  who  was  so  regarded  and  so  heralded,
demands  our  homage  and  deserves  our  love. — T.

Vers.  35 — 42. — Quests  of  Jesus.  Although  our  Lord  had  not,  during  any  period  ol
his  ministry,  a  settled  abode,  a  temporary  home  was  provided  for  him,  now  in  ona
place  and  anon  in  other,  where  he  could  rest  and  njeditate,  ami  where  he  could  receive
his  friends.  For  Jesus  was  neither  an  ascetic  nor  a  recluse;  he  did  not  disdain  the
tranquil  pleasures  of  domestic  retirement,  nor  did  he  withdraw  himself  from  the
fellowship  of  those  whose  nature  he  deigned  to  share.  Of  our  Lord's  social  disposition
this  passage  furnishes  an  illustration.


CH.  1. 1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  59

I.  The  oiecumstanoes  which  led  to  this  interview.  1.  The  educational  and
spiritual  preparation  of  these  guests.  Andrew  and  John  were  disciples  of  the  fore-
runner, the  Baptist.  Like  many  of  the  susceptible  and  ardent  spirits  of  the  period,
they  had  been  attracted  by  John's  remarkable  and  impressive  personality,  and  by  his
stern  and'  author  tative  ministry.  la  the  school  of  the  herald  they  were  prepared  for
the  service  of  the  King.  2,  The  emphatic  testimony  borne  by  the  forerunner  to  tbe
Lord.  This  testimony  was  undoubtedly  intended  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  two
young  men  to  him  "who  was  to  come;"  and  it  is  a  proof  of  John's  humility  and
disinterestedness  that  he  should  be  content  to  hand  over  his  disciples  to  One  greater
than  himself.  3.  The  sacred  wonder  of  the  two,  and  their  laudable  desire  for  advanced
teaching.  It  was  a  proof  that  they  had  profited  by  the  lessons  of  their  master  John,
when  they  evinced  a  yearning  for  the  still  higher  society  of  Christ,

II.  The  interview  between  the  Divine  Host  and  his  guests.  1.  On  the  part
of  the  disciples,  we  observe  modesty  of  demeanour  in  their  silently  .following  Jesus,
and  reverence  of  spirit  and  language  in  their  inquiry,  "  Rabbi,  where  dwellest  thou  ?  "
All  who  repair  to  Christ  in  this  temper  and  attitude  may  be  assured  of  a  kind
reception.  2.  For  we  remark  on  the  part  of  Jesus  the  response  of  encouragement  and
invitation.  Observing  tliat  the  two  disciples  were  too  timid  to  address  him  first,  he
opened  up  the  way  for  conversation ;  and,  when  they  expressed,  though  indirectly,  a
desire  to  visit  him,  he  gave  a  cordial  invitation.  3.  Part  of  a  day  was  devoted  to
hallowed  intercourse.  The  grace  and  condescension  of  the  Lord  are  thus  apparent  from
the  very  commencement  of  his  ministry.  We  cannot  doubt  that  he  was  already
resolving  upon  methods  of  Messianic  ministry,  and  was  planning  the  means  of
evangelization  afterwards  adopted.  And  he  foresaw  that  these  two  ardent  young
disciples  were  to  become  able  ministers  of  his  gospel  to  their  fellow-men.  This
antieipation  doubtless  gave  a  colour  to  the  conversation  that  took  place  during  those
memorable  hours.

III.  The  results  which  followed  this  interview.  Such  a  visit  could  not  but
be  fruitful  of  much  good.  When  natures  so  prepared  by  the  Spirit  of  God  came  intff
contact  with  the  Son  of  God,  no  wonder  that  the  consequences  were  signal  and  precious.
1.  The  conviction  was  formed  in  the  minds  of  the  two  guests  that  their  Host  was  none
other  thau  the  Christ  foretold  in  Hebrew  prophecy,  and  desired  by  devout  and  waiting
expectant  spirits.  2.  The  conviction  which  they  formed  they  hastened  to  communicate
to  their  kindred  and  companions.  They  had  learned  good  news,  and  could  not  keep
it  to  themselves.  At  once  they  became  preachers  of  Christ,  and  their  conduct  was
an  earnest  of  their  subsequent  apostleship.  3.  They  seem  to  have  lost  no  time  in
transferring  themselves  from  the  school  and  following  of  John,  whose  ministry  was
now  drawing  to  a  close,  to  the  school  and  following  of  Jesus,  whose  official  ministerial
work  was  now  beginning.  What  they  saw  and  heard  on  this  memorable  day  led  them
to  wish  to  see  and  to  hear  yet  more.  And  in  following  Christ  they  had  the  opportunity
of  satisfying  their  heart's  desire.

Application.  1.  The  society  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  still  to  be  sought  as  the  means  of
spiritual  good.  His  direction  is  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you."  This  is  feasible  even
to  us  who  see  him  not  with  the  bodily  eye.  2.  Jesus  ever  welcomes  to  his  society  all
who  truly  desire  it,  and  especially  the  young  and  those  with  spiritual  aspirations.
None  are  rejected  who  approach  him  in  a  spirit  of  humility,  of  reverence,  of  faith.
3.  To  be  much  with  Jesus  is  the  best  preparation  for  serving  him.  Those  who  would
publish  his  love  and  grace  must  first  make  acquaintance  with  him,  and  allow  his
chai^acter,  his  ministry,  his  sacrifice,  to  produce  their  own  impression  upon  the  heart.
As  at  the  first,  so  now,  his  dearest  friends  become  his  most  efflcient  servants. — T,

Vers.  40 — i2. — A  brother's  love  and  service.  Little  as  we  know  of  Andrew,  that
little  presents  him  in  a  most  interesting  and  attractive  light.  The  record  of  his  conduct
upon  the  occasion  of  his  attaching  himself  to  Jesus  is  especially  full  of  instruction  and
of  inspiration.  The  opportunity  which  family  relationships  afford  to  spiritual  useful-
ness, and  the  employment  of  the  feelings  peculiar  to  human  kinship,  are  brought  out  in
this  brief  narrative  with  exquisite  beauty.     We  have  revealed  in  this  incident—

I.  The  impulse  of  a  brother's  heart.  Andrew  found  in  Jesus  the  Messiah  for
whom  he  was  looking  and  hoping.    Rejoicing  in  the  great  discovery,  his  earliest


60  THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [ch.  i.  1—61.

impulM  wag  to  make  those  dearest  to  him  partake  his  joy. '  He  thought  of  his  hrother
Simon — that  noble,  eager,  affectionate  nature,  that  came  afterwards  to  be  consecrated
to  the  friendship  and  the  service  of  the  Christ.  A  brother's  insight  divined  that  news
such  B8  that  he  had  to  communicate  would  awaken  emotions  in  Simon's  breast  similar
to  those  enkindled  in  his  own.  Sympathy  and  love  urged  him  to  hasten  to  his  brother,
the  companion  of  his  boyhood  and  youth,  the  sharer  of  his  interests  and  occupations.
Love  is  never  so  admirable  as  when  it  aims  unselfishly  at  another's  good,  and  especially
at  bis  spiritual  enlightenment  and  happiness.  Christianity  presses  into  its  service  all
the  beautiful  emotions  belonging  to  our  humanity.

II.  The  tidings  fbou  a  brother's  lips.  The  words  which  Andrew  addressed  to  his
brother  seem  to  have  been  few ;  but  this  brevity  was  the  fit  expression  of  the  ardent
affection  of  the  speaker  and  the  fit  vehicle  for  tidings  so  momentous.  Andrew's  feelings
would  admit  of  no  delay.  His  eager,  almost  blunt,  communication  must  have  awakened
surprise  in  Simon's  mind.  "We  have  found  the  Messiah."  Did  brother  ever  convey
to  brother  tidings  bo  interesting,  so  heart-stirring?  Surely  we  have  here  a  lesson  upon
the  duty  we  owe  to  those  nearest  akin  and  nearest  in  affection  to  ourselves.  In  the
Church  of  Christ  ia  room  for  luch  services— alas  I  how  often  neglected  through  either
carelessness  or  reserve  I

IIL  Thb  action  of  a  bbothsr'b  enebot.  Andrew  was  not  content  simply  to  tell
the  news.  He  would  have  Simon  see  for  himself  who  Jesus  was.  "  He  brought  him
to  Jesus."  In  this  record  we  have  the  principle  of  Christian  missions  condensed  into  a
few  words.  It  leems  a  small  thing  to  have  done,  yet  more  than  this  man  cannot  do  for
his  hrother  man.  A  happy  exercise  of  Christian  sympathy  and  enterprise.  To  wish
our  dear  ones  well  is  good;  yet  it  is  not  enough.  It  is  for  us  to  exert  ourselves  to
secure  their  welfare.  And  how  could  this  end  be  promoted  so  surely  as  by  bringing
them  to  Jesus— under  the  influence  of  his  sacred  presence  and  his  winning  love?

IV.  The  bewakd  of  a  begtheb's  devotion.  The  sympathy,  benevolence,  and
brotherly  friendship  of  Andrew  were  not  in  vain.  When  Simon  was  brought  by
Andrew  to  Jesus,  Jesus  lool^ed  upon  him  with  favour,  appreciated,  by  the  exercise  of
his  spiritual  insight,  the  good  qualities  of  the  new  disciple,  designated  him  by  an
appropriate  name,  and  implicitly  predicted  his  future  eminence  and  service.  This  was
indeed  a  rich  return  I

"  Who  art  thou,  that  wouldst  grave  thy  nam*
Thus  deeply  in  a  brother's  heart  ?
Look  on  this  saint,  and  learn  to  frame
Thy  love-charm  with  true  Christian  art.

*  First  Beek  thy  Saviour  out,  and  dwell
Beneath  the  shadow  of  hii  roof.
Till  thou  have  scann'd  bis  features  well,
And  known  him  for  the  Christ  by  proof)

•  Then,  potent  with  the  spell  of  Heaven,

Go,  and  thine  erring  brother  gain,
Entice  him  home  to  be  forgiven,
Till  he,  too,  sees  his  Saviour  plain."

(Eebla.)

T.

Yer.  41.— 1%<  greeA  di*eovery.  Universal  interest  and  pleasure  are  connected  with
all  striking  discoveries ;  t.g,  in  geographical  knowledge,  in  physical  science,  in  the  arts
of  life.  A  new  possession,  either  material  or  intellectual,  is  thus  acquired.  But  all
discoveries  pale  before  that  described  in  the  simple  language  of  the  text.  To  find
Christ  is  better  than  to  find  a  gold-mine,  a  continent,  a  faithful  wife,  a  happy  home.

L  Tbk  pbooebs  of  this  discovery.  There  is  here  no  chance,  no  accident,  no
caprice.  There  are  involved:  1.  The  teeking  sold.  The  soul  that  is  satisfied  with
itself  and  its  state  is  not  in  the  way  to  the  great  discovery ;  but  the  soul  that  is  con-
scious of  destitution,  ignorance,  and  sinfulness  is  in  the  right  direction.  The  soul  that
feels  how  insufficient  is  the  discovery  and  acquisition  of  earthly  goods  and  human
friends  is  prepared  to  appreciate  a  Divine  revelation.  2.  The  self-discovering  Saviour.
It  is  often  represented  tliat  the  mere  desire  and  aspiration  of  the  soul  is  sufficient  to


OH.  L 1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  61

secnre  its  highest  good.  But  hunger  is  not  enough  to  secure  onr  satisfaction ;  there
must  be  bread  to  correspond  with,  to  supply,  the  want.  So  the  heart  may  yearn  to
little  purpose'  unless  the  Divine  heart  of  the  Saviour  respond  to  the  yearning.  Now,
Jesus  is  willing  to  be  found,  and,  indeed,  came  to  earth  in  order  that  in  Ikim  the  favour,
fellowship,  and  life  of  God  might  be  made  accessible  to  man.  From  the  beginning  of
his  ministry  he  welcomed  all  who  sought  him.  And  still  his  promise  is,  "  Seek,  and  ye
shall  find ; "  "  Come  unto  me, . . .  and  ye  shall  find  rest."  3.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  the
Divine  Guide  that  leads  the  soul  to  the  Saviour.  A  Divine  influence  prompts  the
spiritual  quest,  sets  the  glorious  Object  of  that  quest  before  the  vision,  and  urges  to  a
fervent  and  immediate  application  for  blessing.

II.  The  taldg  of  this  discotebt.  Christ  is  the  Treasure  hidden,  the  Pearl  of
price.  1.  They  who  find  him  find  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  God  in  whom  "  we  live
and  move  and  have  our  being."  As  Simon  and  Nathanael  soon  found  thut  the  Rabbi  of
Nazareth  was  the  Son  of  God ;  so  many  who  have  been  prejudiced  against  Jesus  have
learned  how  unjust  were  their  prejudices.  Time  has  revealed  to  them  the  fulness  from
which  they  have  received  grace  for  grace.  2.  They  find  in  Christ  supply  for  all  their
wants  and  satisfaction  for  all  their  cravings.  Be  becomes  to  those  who  find  him,  not
only  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  but  also  Counsellor,  Friend,  and  Brother.

III.  The  bbsult  of  this  discovbkt.  1.  Joy.  Finding  Christ  is  being  found  by
Christ ;  and,  as  he  rejoices  over  the  lost  ones  who  are  found,  so  they  rejoice  in  him  whom
to  find  is  life  eternal.  2.  Proclamation.  It  is  a  discovery  which  the  discoverer  cannot
keep  to  himself.  In  this  narrative  we  observe  the  happy  finders  of  the  Messiah  com-
municating to  kindred  and  to  friends  their  unspeakable  happiness.  The  impulse  of
glowing  benevolence  urges  to  the  spiritual  ministry  of  compassion,  and  thus  soul  after
soul  is  brought  to  enter  upon  that  pursuit  which  is  ever  rewarded  by  success  and
satisfaction. — T.

Vers.  45 — 51.— 3%e  candid  ditevpU.  Nathanael  is  a  person  of  whom  we  know  but
very  little.  That  he  was  of  Cana,that  he  was  probably  the  same  as  Bartholomew,  that,
after  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  he  was  in  company  with  Peter  upon  the  Lake  of  Genne-
sareth, — this  is  all  we  are  told  concerning  him,  except  what  we  learn  from  this  passage.
Our  chief  interest  in  him,  therefore,  lies  in  his  call  to  the  discipleship  of  the  Lord.

I.  Moral  fbeparation  foe  discipleship.  Like  many  of  Christ's  friends,  Nathanael
w«s  disciplined  and  fitted  beforehand  for  the  new  fellowship.  1.  He  was  devout,  medi-
tative, and  prayerful.  It  seems  likely  that, "  under  the  fig  tree,"  he  was  engaged  in  the
study  of  the  Scriptures  and  in  prayer.  2.  A  true  and  spiritual,  and  nut  merely  a
nominal,  a  national,  Israelite.  There  were  many  descended  from  Abraham  who  weie
not  Abraham's  children  spiritually.  This  man  was  a  true  "prince  with  God" — one
worthy  uf  bis  privileges  and  his  name.  3.  Guileless;  not  indeed  free  from  sin,  but
transparent  in  character — candid,  open  to  the  light,  anxious  to  be  holy  and  to  find  God.
Such  training  as  this  was  the  best  preparative  for  Christian  discipleship,

II.  Intellectual  prejudice  against  discipleship.  This  state  of  mind  is  not
incompatible  with  that  already  described.  Nathanael  was  not  eager  to  welcome  the
new  Teacher  and  Leader  of  men.  Morally  cultured  though  he  was,  he  resented  the
supposition  that  the  Messiah  could  spring  out  of  a  town  to  email,  insignificant,  and
despised  as  Nazareth.  His  first  inclination  was  to  discredit  the  witness,  and  to  smile  at
the  sudden  enthusiasm  of  his  friend  Andiew.  And  in  this  Nathanael  did  but  antici-
pate the  action  of  the  Jews,  who  were  offended  at  what  they  deemed  the  weakness  of
the  cross,  and  of  the  Gentiles,  who  were  offeniled  at  what  they  deemed  its  folly.  It  is
not  only  bad  men  whose  prejudices  keep  them  from  Christ;  good  men  have  their  pre-
judices— prejndices  not  to  be  overcome  by  reasoning,  but  which  will  yield  to  the
demonstration  of  personal  experience.

III.  Decisive  ueanb  SBiNOiNa  about  discipleship.  Several  steps  are  here  taken,
which  deserve  to  be  carefully  followed,  1,  The  mediation  and  testimony  of  a  friend.
2.  The  invitation  to  a  personal  interview  with  Jesus,  accepted  as  readily  as  it  was
wisely  suggested.  3,  The  evident  insight  possessed  by  Jesus  into  human  character.
He  needed  not  that  any  man  should  tell  him;  he  knew  immediately  what  was  the
character  of  him  who  was  introduced  to  him,  4.  The  revelation  of  the  man's  heart  to
himself  by  the  authority  of  the  Divine  Babbi,    Others  standing  by  could  not  fathom


62  TOE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        Joh.  l  1—61.

all  the  depths  of  this  interview  anil  couvursation.    But  Jesus  knew  all,  and  Nathanae)
fult  the  omniscience  of  the  Being  he  now  began  to  understand.

IV.  Bold  avowal  of  discipleship.  The  process  in  the  scholar's  mind  Was  swift,  but
not  rash  or  unwarranted.  His  confession  was  lull  und  rich,  but  not  extravagant.  To
Nathanael,  over  whose  mind  there  flashed  a  flood  of  revelation,  Jesus  was  (1)  the
Kabbi,  (2)  the  Son  of  Gud,  (3)  the  King  of  Israel.  This  witness  seems  incapable  o1
expansion.  All  his  after-life  was  to  Nathanael  an  opportunity  for  filling  up  the  outline
which  his  faith  thus  sketched  in  a  few  bold  strokes.  He  never  went  beyond  these  first
convictions.

V.  Recompense  op  discipleship.  Such  spiritual  sympathy,  such  courageous  con-
fession, was  not  unrewarded.  In  response,  the  Messiah :  1.  Accepted  the  new  and
ardent  pupil  as  one  of  his  own  att.iched  and  privileged  companions.  2.  Assured  him
of  progressive  illumination  and  experience.  3.  Promised  him  participation  in  the
glorious  vision  of  the  future,  in  the  celestial  exaltation  of  the  Son  of  man. — T.

Ver.  46. — "  Come  and  see  I "  This  was  the  proper  counsel  for  Philip  to  give  to
Nathanael,  and  for  every  true  friend  to  give  to  the  man  whose  mind  is  possessed  with
incredulity,  or  with  prejudice  regarding  Chri.st  and  his  claims.  Keasoning  is  very  well ;
but  an  appeal  to  personal  exptrience  is  in  many  cases  far  better.  Many  a  man  will
draw  a  just  inference  for  himself,  which  he  will  not  allow  another  man  to  draw  for  him.
In  giving  this  advice  Philip  showed  his  knowledge  of  human  nature.

I.  Comb  and  see  what  Christ  is.  1'here  are  many  persons  who  are  indifferent
to  the  Saviour  only  because  they  do  not  know  him — because  he  is  to  them  nothing  but
a  name.  1.  Study  the  record  of  his  earthly  ministry,  and  you  will  find  that  his  clia-
racter  and  life  possess  a  peerless  interest.  Few  have  really  read  and  studied  the  four
Gospels  without  feeling  themselves  brought  into  contact  with  a  Being  altogether
unrivalled  in  human  history  for  qualities  of  the  spiritual  nature,  for  profundity  uf  moral
teaching,  for  self-sacrificing  benevolence.  And  many  have,  by  such  study,  been  brought
under  a  spell  for  which  no  ordinary  principles  could  account,  and  have  felt,  not  only
that  no  personage  in  human  history  can  rank  with  Christ,  but  that  none  can  even  be
compared  with  him.  2.  Ponder  the  character,  the  claims,  the  acknowledged  work,  of
Christ,  and  you  will  be  convinced  of  his  Divine  nature  and  authority.  Men  who  judge
of  him  by  hearsay,  or  by  tlieir  own  preconce|itions,  may  think  of  Jesus  as  of  an  ordi-
nary man  ;  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  those  who  "  come  and  see,"  who  allow  him  to
make  his  own  impression  upon  their  minds.  Such  are  found  exclaiming,  with  the
uflicers,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man  I  "  with  the  disciples, "  What  manner  of  Mm  ,
is  this!"  with  Peter,  "Thou  art  the  Christ!"  with  this  very  Nathanael,  to  whom  the
words  of  the  text  were  addressed,  "Thou  art  the  Son  of  God;  thou  an  the  King  of
Israel ! "  with  the  centurion  at  the  Crucifixion,  "  Truly  this  was  a  righteous  Man,  this
was  the  Son  of  Godl"

II.  Come  and  see  what  Christ  has  done.  1.  This  test — a  very  reisonable  one
— may  be  applied  in  individual  cases.  What  did  Christ  effect  for  Saul  of  Tarsus  ?  Did
he  not  change  him  from  a  zealous  and  narrow  formalist  into  a  man  whose  name  has
become  the  synonym  for  spirituality  of  religion,  for  breadth  and  catholicity  of  doctrine,
for  grandeur  of  plan  and  of  hope  with  regard  to  this  ransomed  humanity  ?  Did  he
nut  find  Augustine  a  wilful  and  pleasure-seeking  young  man,  who  almost  broke  a  pious
inotliei's  heart?  and  diil  he  not  transform  him  into  a  penitent,  a  saint,  a  mighty  theo-
logian, a  holy  power  in  the  realm  of  human  thought?  What  did  Christ  do  for
Luther  ?  He  visited  him  when  he  was  depressed  ami  hopeless  because  of  the  conscience
of  sin,  spoke  to  him  the  word  of  peace,  called  and  strengthened  him  to  become  the
Reformer  of  half  Christendom,  the  founder  of  an  epoch  of  light  and  lilierty  for  man-
kind. Such  instances,  to  be  found  in  the  annals  of  the  illustrious  and  influential
among  men,  might  be  multiplied.  But  it  is  not  only  over  the  great  and  famous  that
the  Divine  Jesus  has  exercised  his  power.  Among  the  poorest,  the  meanest,  the
feeblest,  nay,  the  vilest,  he  has  proved  himself  to  be  the  Friend  of  sinners  and  the
Brother  of  man.  There  is  no  circle  of  society  in  any  Chri^tian  land  where  evidences
of  this  kind  do  not  abound.  You  need  not  go  far  to  see  what  the  Lord  Christ  can  do;
this  you  may  learn  at  your  own  doors,  and  every  day.  2.  But  the  educated  and  well-
informed  have  within  their  reach  a  wider  range  of  proof.     Tlie  history  of  Christendoin


ca.  I.  1—61.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  G3

w  written  in  a  vast,  an  open  bonk — a  book  which  the  ijitelligent,  and  those  capable  of
taking  a  wide  survey  of  human  affairs,  are  at  liberty  to  read.  Secular  historians  have
traced  the  influence  of  Christianity  upon  society,  upon  the  code  of  morals,  upon
slavery,  upon  war,  upon  the  position  of  woman  in  society,  upon  the  education  of  the
young,  upon  the  treatment  of  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  afBicted.  No  doubt,  exaggeration
has  often  distinguished  the  treatment  of  these  matters  by  Christian  advocates.  Yet,  in
all  fairness  and  candour,  it  must  be  admitted  that  a  contrast  between  unchristian
anil  Christian  society  yields  results  immensely  in  favour  of  our  religion.  Christ  has
been  the  chief  Benefactor  of  the  human  race,  has  done  more  than  any  beside  to
ameliorate  and  to  improve  the  conditions  and  to  brighten  the  prospects  of  mankind.

in.  Comb  and  see  what  Cubist  will  do  foe  yo0.  This  is  not  a  matter  of
speculation,  but  of  practical  moment  and  interest.  It  is  well  to  form  a  just  estimate
of  the  character,  the  mission,  the  work,  of  the  Son  of  God.  But  it  is  better  to  take
the  benefit  which  he  offers  to  every  believing  heaier  of  his  gospel.  1.  See  whetlier  he
can  give  you  peace  of  conscience,  by  securing  to  you  the  parJon  of  sin,  and  acceptance
with  the  God  against  whom  you  have  sinned.  This  he  professes  to  do;  this  multitudes
will  assure,  you  he  has  done  for  them.  If  this  is  with  you  an  urgent  need,  will  it  not
be  reasonable  to  put  Christ  to  that  test  of  experience  to  which  he  invites  you?  2.  See
whether  he  can  supply  you  with  the  highest  law  and  the  most  sacred  motive  for  the  moral
life.  All  human  standards  are  imperfect,  and  no  human  iirincijle  is  sufficient  to  ensure
obedience.  What  no  other  can  ofler,  the  Saviour  claims  to  impart,  and  it  is  reasonaMe
to  test  his  ability  and  his  willingness  to  fulfil  his  promises.  3.  See  whether  his
fellowship  and  friendship  can  ujihold  and  cheer  you  amidst  the  sorrows,  temptations,
and  uncertainties  of  this  earthly  life.  He  says,  "My  grace  is  sufEcii'nt  for  you."
Verify  the  assertion  in  your  own  experience.  If  he  cannot  supply  this  want,  certain  it
is  that  none  else  can  do  so.  4.  See  whether  the  Lord  Christ  can  vanquish  death  for
you,  and  give  you  the  assurance  of  a  blessed  immortality.  Apart  from  him,  the  future
is  very  dark  ;  try  his  power  to  illumine  that  daikness  with  rays  of  heavenly  light.

Application.  1.  Defenders  and  promulgatois  of  Chiistianity  will  do  well  to  address
to  their  fellow-men  the  invitation  Philip  addressed  to  Nathan'ael.  If  they  cannot
always  answer  men's  cavils  and  objections,  and  satisfy  men's  intellectual  difficulties,
they  can  bring  men  face  to  face  with  Christ  himself,  and  leave  the  interview  to  produce
its  own  effects.  Let  men  be  encouraged  to  come,  to  see,  and  to  judge  for  themselves.
2,  The  undecided  hearers  of  the  gospel  may  well  accept  the  challenge  here  given.
Why  should  they  shrink  from  it?  It  is  an  opportunity  which  should  not  be  neglecteil,
an  invitaiion  which  should  not  be  refused. — T.

Ver.  10. — The  unrecognized  Creator,  We  have  here  three  facts  briefly  stated  in  the
history  of  our  Lord,  which  are  full  of  interest  and  significance.

I.  His  appearance  in  this  world.  This  involves  :  1.  The  greatest  wonder.  "  lie
was  in  the  world."  But  was  he  not  ever  in  the  world  since  its  creation  ?  Yes ;  in  its
laws,  order,  and  beauty ;  in  its  conscience,  reason,  and  religion  ;  by  his  Word,  Sjiirit,  and
revelations.  But  these  words  announce  his  special  presence.  He  was  in  the  world  as  one
of  its  inhabitants,  under  its  laws  and  necessities,  in  human  nature,  as  "  the  Word  made
flesh."  This  is  most  wonderfuL  Think,  who  was  he?  More  than  human,  else  hia
having  been  in  the  world  would  not  be  a  matter  of  surprise.  He  was  the  Son  of  God —
the  Word,  which  was  in  the  beginning  with  God,  and  was  God;  therelore  God  was  in  the
world  in  human  form.  This  is  the  most  wonderful  fact  in  the  history  of  this  world,
and",  perhaps,  in  that  of  any  other.  So  wonderful  iliat  it  has  engager  the  interest  and
attention  of  good  men  of  all  ages,  and  even  of  angels.  One  element  of  its  wonder  is
iis  mysteriousness  and  apparent  impossibility.  We  are  ready  to  ask  with  Nicodemus,
"  How  can  these  ihings  be?"  But,  although  wonderful  and  mysterious,  "he  was  in
the  world."  2.  The  greatest  condescension.  We  see  this  when  we  consider  who  he
was,  and  what  is  the  world  in  which  he  was.  Compared  with  his  mansion,  it  is  but
a  poor  cot.  In  size  it  is  but  a  particle  of  dust ;  in  glory,  but  a  flitting  ray  of  the
creative  sun.  And  when  we  look  at  it  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  as  fallen,  our
estimate  is  much  lower  still — a  territory  in  rebellion,  a  valley  of  dry  bones,  full  of
desolation,  disease,  and  death.  It  would  bo  a  great  conde-scension  in  an  angel  to  come
and  live  ia  such  a  world,  but  how  much  greater  in  him  who  is  the  Lord  of  angels  I    It


^  Ttltl  GOSPEL  ACCOKbliJG  TO  ST.  JOUN.        [ck.  i.  1-61.

would  be  great  condescension  on  hk  part  to  look  even  with  any  delight  on  such  a  worM
as  ours,  but  infinitely  more  to  live  in  it,  and  live  under  the  poorest  and  most  harassing
conditions :  not  in  a  palace,  rolling  in  wealth  and  luxury,  but  born  in  a  stable ;
wandering  from  place  to  place,  weary  and  homeless ;  poorer  than  the  foxes  of  tbe  field.
What  a  condescension  I  3.  The  greatest  love.  No  other  principle  will  account  for  the
wonderful  fact  but  love.  For  in  the  world  there  were  no  attractions  for  him.  In  a  monil
stnse  its  sceneries  were  frightful,  its  air  pestilential,  and  its  inhabitants,  not  merely
unfriendly  but  hostile — hostile  to  each  other,  and  bitterly  hostile  to  him  their  Saviour.
In  this  sense  the  world  was  to  him  repelling.  But  that  which  was  repelling  to  his  holiuesa,
simply  considered,  was  attractive  to  his  love  and  mercy.  Sin  is  repelling  to  holiness;
but  the  distress  and  danger  of  sinners  in  consequence  are  mighty  attractions  to  Divine
pity.  Such  is  the  wrecked  ship  to  the  lifeboat  crew  ;  such  are  the  wounded  soldiers  on
the  battle-field  to  the  philanthropic  heart,  and  such  was  this  ruined  world  to  infinite
luve.  So  that  he  was  in  it.  4.  The  greatest  importance.  That  he  was  in  the  world.  So
important,  that  it  was  foretold  by  prophets,  foreshadowed  by  priests,  kept  before  the
world  by  Divine  ritualism,  expected  by  the  world  from  time  to  time;  and  nothing
would  satisfy  the  wants  and  cravings  of  human  nature  but  the  appearance  of  God
among  men.  So  that  the  fact  of  his  having  been  in  the  world  is  most  important  to
tiuth — to  the  Divine  fidelity  as  well  as  to  human  want  and  happiness.  The  absence  of
all  besides  would  be  ot  infinitely  less  consequence  than  his.  If  he  had  not  been  in  the
wurld,  the  foundation-stone  of  the  Divine  temple  would  be  wanting.  The  central  fact
of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth  would  be  absent,  and  the  world  itself  could  not  stand.
5.  The  greatest  benefit  and  honow  to  the  world.  (1)  The  greatest  6ene/?f.  The  benefit
which  the  world  has  derived  is  salvation.  This  could  not  be  effected  without  his
incarnate  life :  nothing  else  would  answer  the  purpose.  Hence,  what  a  benefit  to  the
world  that  he  was  in  it  I  (2)  The  greatest  honour.  This  was  the  greatest  honour
ever  conferred  on  the  world.  And  is  there  any  other  world  which  has  been  so
honoured?  What  is  ours  compared  with  many  of  God's  worlds?  It  is  but  as  Beth-
lehem-ICphrata — "the  least  among  the  thousands  of  Judah."  And  does  the  leasi
attract  him  ?  Does  he  specially  help  the  most  helpless,  the  weakest,  the  most  miser-
able, and  leave  the  strong  to  some  extent  to  themselves?  Many  a  spot  is  sacred  as  the
birthplace  or  residence  of  a  groat  man — of  great  poet  or  statesman ;  his  presence  has
honoured  the  place  and  made  it  sacred.  If  so,  is  not  this  world  holy  and  sacred  to  us ;
for  ho  was  in  it?  This  world  will  ever  be  remembered  and  distinguished  as  the  world
in  which  God  was  in  human  flesh.  In  the  great  conflagration,  will  it  be  burnt?  or  will
it  be  the  last?  Or,  if  some  of  it  shall  perish,  shall  not  Bethlehem,  Gethsemane,  and
Calvary  be  preserved,  as  parts  of  the  new  earth,  in  commemoration  of  the  great  fact
that  he  was  in  the  world?  6.  This  fad  is  well  attested.  Was  he  really  in  the  world?
1  n  answer  to  this  question  there  is  a  most  emphatic  "  Yes  "  coming  from  heaven  and
earth.  The  life  of  Christ  on  earth  is  an  incontrovertible  fact,  and  nothing  can  explain  it
but  that  he  really  was  what  he  himself  claimed  to  be,  and  what  his  fiiends  and  even  his
foes  represented  him  to  be :  the  Son  of  God — God  manifested  in  the  flesh.  "  He  was  in
the  world."  For  proof  of  this  we  are  not  entirely  dependent  on  the  distant  past,  for  on
"  the  sands  of  time  "  we  find  footprints  which  no  one  but  an  incarnate  God  could  make.
He  has  left  behind  him  glorious  and  undeniable  proofs  of  his  having  been  here,  in  tbe
gracious  system  of  redemption  and  its  ever-growing  and  mighty  effects  in  the  moral
restoration  of  the  world.

II.  The  cbeation  of  the  wobld  by  him.  "And  the  world  was  made  by  him."
This  implies :  1.  His  Divinity.  If  he  made  the  world,  he  was  God,  for  creative  power
is  the  sole  prerogative  of  Divinity.  "  The  world  was  made,"  etc.  This  is  saying  much ;
but,  after  all,  it  is  saying  but  little  of  him  of  whom  it  was  previously  said  that  "  all
things  were  created  by  him,"  etc.  It  is  not  much  to  say  that  he  created  a  drop  after
saying  that  he  had  created  the  ocean.  Here  is  a  descent  from  the  whole  to  a  very  small
part.  But  still,  in  connection  with  the  previous  fact  that  he  was  in  the  world,  it  is
quite  natural  to  be  reminded  that  the  world  was  made  by  him.  2.  That  he  had  a
perfect  right  to  come  as  he  did  into  the  world.  For  "  the  world  was  made  by  him."
Thus  he  was  in  his  own  world  absolutely.  Although  he  had  let  it  to  the  children  ol
men  as  his  tenants,  yet  he  reserved  the  right  to  visit  when  and  how  he  pleased.  And
vvlicn  he  came  he  was  not  an  intruder,  not  an  infringer  of  any  right,  nor  a  tmnsgressoi


OH.1. 1— 61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  «8

of  any  law;  for  "  the  world  was  made,"  eto.  8.  This  fact  accounts  to  some  extent  for  his
visit.  In  every  world,  as  the  production  of  his  creative  power  and  wisdom,  he  takes
the  deepest  interest,  and  he  is  responsible  for  all  the  possible  results  of  its  existence,
and  all  its  possible  requirements  were  talien  into  account  when  made,  and  doubtless  his
incarnate  life  in  this  world  was  involved  in  its  creation.  We  find  that  he  felt  a  deep
interest  in  this  world,  and  took  an  early  delight  in  the  visit,  being  in  the  original  plan.
Not  every  world  is  made  on  this  plan;  but  such  was  the  plan  of  our  world,  that  it  was
necessary,  in  "  the  fulness  of  time,"  for  God  to  be  manifested  in  the  flesh,  and  live  for
a  short  time  on  earth  as  one  of  its  tenants.  God  will  carry  out  the  original  plan  of
every  world  he  made  at  any  cost,  though  it  may  involve  the  greatest  condescension  and
sacrifice.

III.  Hxs  UNHKOooNinoN  BY  THS  WORLD.  "  And  the  world  knew  him  not."  This
is  not  asserted  of  the  material  world,  for  this  knew  him ;  all  its  laws,  elements,  and
forces  knew  him  at  once,  and  signified  their  recognition.  But  it  is  sadly  true  of  the
world's  iahabitants.  " They  knew  him  not."  This  indicates:  1.  Great  gutlt.  They
ought  to  know  him ;  for  "  he  was  in  the  world  " — ^in  their  nature  and  in  their  midst.
They  could  not  plead  riistauoe  and  disadvantages  of  recognition.  They  ought  to  know
liim;  "  the  world  was  made  by  him ;"  and  before  their  very  eyes  he  proved  the  author-
ship beyond  any  doubt,  by  touching  its  laws  and  forces,  and  they  were  pliant  to  his
touch,  his  word,  and  even  to  bis  will.  The  world  of  matter  knew  him,  but  that  of
intelligence,  etc.,  which  ought  to  know  him,  knew  him  not.  He  came  to  be  known—
gave  every  opportunity  to  this  world  to  know  him;  but  in  spite  of  all,  "the  world  knew
him  not."  2.  Oreat  moral  perversion.  There  is  great  neglect,  great  inattention,  terrible
blindness,  and  wilful  resistance.  It  was  not  that  they  could  not,  but  they  would  not.
3.  A  great  loss.  For  he  was  their  Creator  and  Friend,  their  Messiah  and  Redeemer,
He  was  in  the  world  to  save  and  bless  it.  The  condition  on  which  his  blessings  could  be
imparted  and  appropriated  was  to  know  and  accept  him.  The  condition  was  disregrirded
and  the  blessings  lost.  This  is  the  greatest  loss  ever  sustained  by  the  world,  the  greatest
blunder  the  world  ever  committed,  the  greatest  oversight, — to  let  its  incarnate  Creator
and  ReJeemer  be  in  it  unknown  and  unrecognized.  4.  This  is  not  exceptional  in  the
history  of  the  world.  How  many  of  the  world's  greatest  benefactors  have  been  unrecog-
nized by  the  age  in  which  they  lived,  and  which  they  benefited !  But  this  is  not  to
be  wondered  at — ^the  world  began  badly  with  its  best  and  greatest  Friend.  This  was  the
fate  of  the  Son  of  God.  If  he  had  a  tombstone,  it  could  be  appropriately  written  on  if,
"  He  was  in  the  world,"  etc.  This  is  true  of  all  who  live  before,  above,  and  for  their
age.     It  takes  ages  in  such  a  world  as  this  to  know  them  fully.

Lessons.  1.  That  the  brightest  fact  in  the  history  of  this  world  it  that  Ood  was  in  it
in  the  flesh.  Let  it  be  well  published  and  believed;  it  is  full  of  significance,  comfort,
and  hope.  2.  It  is  one  of  the  blackest  spots  in  the  character  of  the  world,  that  it  left  him
unrecognized  when  here.  This  led  to  terrible  results — the  Crucifixion,  etc.  3.  The  world
should  be  sorry  for  not  recognizing  him — should  make  an  ample  apology.  The  world
has  made  an  apology,  but  not  to  the  extent  it  ought  to  yet.  It  is  a  source  of  great
comfort  that  he  did  not  leave  in  anger,  but  is  willing  and  ready  to  receive  our  apolngv
in  repentance  and  sorrow.  4.  While  we  blame  the  world  for  its  unrecognition  of  the
Son  of  God,  let  us  beware  lest  we  commit  the  same  tin.  He  is  in  the  world  now.  l)o
we  really  know  him  ?  and  to  what  extent  ? — B.  T.

Vers.  H,  12. — 2%e  rejected  and  received  Saviour,  These  words  bring  under  our
notice  a  most  interesting  subject — the  great  subject  of  the  first  fifteen  verses  of  this
chapter,  viz.  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  manifestation  of  the  Eternal  Word  in
the  flesh.  We  have  here  one  of  the  peculiar  aspects  of  his  coming  in  order  to  carry
out  the  great  scheme  of  human  redemption.    We  have  Jesus  here—

I.  As  COME  TO  HIS  OWN.  1.  This  it  a  special  coming.  He  was  in  the  world  before
and  after  his  Incarnation.  But  here  we  have  a  special  description  of  his  manifestation.
"  He  came."  He  had  to  do  with  the  Jewish  nation  for  ages,  but  no  previous  movement
of  his  could  be  accurately  described  in  this  language.  He  came  now  physically,  person-
ally, and  visibly.  2.  I'his  is  a  special  coming  to  his  own.  His  own  land — the  land  of
Palestine;  his  own  people— the  Jewish  nation.  He  came  to  the  world  at  large,  but
came  through  a  particular  locality.    ITe  came  to  humanity  generally,  but  came  through


66  THE  GOSPEL   ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i,  1—51.

a  particular  nation.  This  was  a  necessity,  and  according  to  pre-arrangcment.  The
Jewish  nation  were  his  own  people :  (1)  B7  a  Divine  and  sovereign  choice.  They  were
chosen  out  of  the  nations  of  the  earth  to  he  the  recipients  of  God's  special  revelations
of  his  will,  the  objects  of  his  special  care  and  protection,  and  the  special  medium  of
his  great  redemptive  thoughts  and  purposes.  There  was  a  mutual  engagement.  (2)  By
a  special  covenant.  God  entered  into  a  covenant  with  them  by  which  they  were  his
people,  to  obey  and  serve  him;  and  he  was  their  God,  to  bless  and  save  them.
(3)  By  special  promises.  The  central  one  of  which  was  the  promise  of  the  Messiah
and  the  blessings  of  his  reign.  This  promise  permeated  eveiy  fibre  of  their  constitution,
and  became  the  soul  of  their  national  and  religious  life.  (4)  By  a  special  training.
They  were  divinely  disciplined  for  ages  for  his  advent.  They  were  taught  to  expect
him,  and  trained  to  receive  him,  and,  under  this  training,  their  expectation  grew  into
a  passion.  The  Messianic  idea  was  fostered  among  them  by  a  long  and  careful  training,
by  promises,  by  the  occasional  appearance  of  "  the  Angel  of  Jehovah,"  who  was  doubt-
less no  other  than  the  Eternal  Word  himaelf.  They  were  trained  by  special  privileges,
revelations,  and  protection;  by  an  economy  of  ceremonial  rites  and  sacrifices,  which  all
pointed  to  the  Messiah  as  coming.  In  the  light  of  these  facts  he  was  their  own
Messiah,  and  they  were  his  own  people ;  and  it  was  necessary,  as  well  as  natural,  that
he  should  come  to  his  own.  There  was  a  special  attraction  and  afiSoity  felt  on  his  part,
and  there  ought  to  be  on  theirs.  Had  he  appeared  in  any  other  land  than  that  of  Israel,
or  identified  himself  with  any  other  nation  than  the  Jewish,  he  would  not  have  come
according  to  the  volume  of  the  book  written  of  him.  But  there  were  the  most  cogent
reasons,  the  fittest  propriety,  and  the  most  absolute  necessity  that  he  should  come  to
his  own,  and  he  came.  3.  This  was  a  special  coming  to  all  his  own.  Not  to  sonie,  but
to  alL  Not  to  a  favoured  class,  but  to  all  classes — rich  and  poor,  learned  and  unlearned.
The  unlearned  and  poor  being  the  large  majority  of  the  nation  as  well  as  the  world,  he
identified  himself  rather  with  them;  for  he  could  reach  the  higher  clnsses  better  from
below,  than  the  lower  classes  from  above.  He  taught  all  without  distiiicticn,  offered
the  blessings  of  hig  coming  to  all  without  the  least  partiality,  and  invited  aU  to  kia
kingdom  by  the  same  road,  viz.  repentance  and  faith.

II.  As  REJECTED  BY  THE  MAJORITY.  "  And  his  owD  received  him  not."  A  few
received  him;  but  they  were  exceptions,  and  they  received  him  individually,  not
nationally ;  as  sinners  and  aliens,  and  not  as  his  own.  So  complete  was  the  rejection  that
it  is  a  sad  truth,  "  his  own  received  him  not."  Their  rejection  of  him :  1.  Was  a  sad
dereliction  of  duty.  A  duty  they  owed  to  their  God  and  Defender ;  a  duty  most  sacred,
important,  and  obligatory.  A  duty  for  the  performance  of  which  they  had  been  chiefly
chosen,  specially  blessed,  preserved,  and  prepared  for  ages ;  but  when  the  time  came,
they  sadly  failed  to  perform  it.  "His  own  received  him  not."  2.  Was  most  inexcusable.
It  is  true  that  they  knew  him  not  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  the  promised  Messiah.  This
is  stated  by  the  apostle.  But  this  is  not  a  legitimate  excuse;  they  ought  to  know  him.
They  had  the  most  ample  advantages ;  they  were  familiar  with  his  portraits  as  drawn  by
the  prophets,  and  he  exactly  corresponded.  His  holy  character,  his  mighty  deeds,  and
his  Divine  kindness  were  well  known,  and  even  confessed  hy  them.  They  bad  the
mightiest  proofs  of  his  Messiahship  and.  Divinity.  So  that  they  had  no  excuse  for
their  ignorance,  and  consequently  no  excuse  for  their  rejecuon.  3.  Was  entdly  ungrate-
ful. Ingratitude  is  too  mild  a  term  to  describe  their  conduct.  It  was  cruel.  Think
who  he  was — the  Son  of  God,  the  Prince  of  Life,  their  rightful  King,  their  promised  and
long-expected  Messiah,  come  to  them  all  the  way  from  heaven,  not  on  a  message  of
vengeance  as  might  be  expected,  but  on  a  message  of  peace  and  universal  good  will,
to  fulfil  his  gracious  engagement  and  carry  out  the  Divine  purposes  of  redeeming
grace.  Leaving  out  the  graver  charge  of  his  crucifixion,  his  rejection  was  cruelly
ungrateful  and  ungratefully  cruel  "  His  own  received  him  not."  4.  Was  most  fatal
to  them.  They  rejected  their  best  and  only  Friend  and  Deliverer,  who  had  most  bene-
volently come  to  warn  and  save  them — come  for  the  last  time,  and  their  leception
of  him  was  the  only  thing  that  could  deliver  them  socially  and  spiritually ;  but  "  his
own  received  him  not."  This  proved  fatal  to  them.  There  was  nothing  left  but  national
dissolution  and  ruin,  and  that  was  soun  tlie  case ;  and  they  are  the  victims  of  their  own
conduct  to  this  day.  To  reject  Jesus  is  ultimately  fatal  to  nations  as  well  as  to
individuals.  6.  Was  most  discouraging  t«  him.  To  be  rejected,  and  to  be  rejected  by  nig


OH.  1. 1—51.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  «■

own— by  those  who  it  might  be  expected  would  receive  him  with  untold  enthusiasm.
Better  be  rejected  by  strangers  and  spurned  by  professed  foes, — thiswoiili  be  expected  ;
but  to  be  "rejected  by  his  own  is  apparently  more  than  he  can  bear.  And  not  satisfied
with  leaving  him  an  outcast  in  his  own  world,  they  banish  him  hence  by  a  cruel  death.
What  will  he  do?  Will  he  be  disheartened,  leave  with  disgust,  and  hurl  on  the  world
the  thunderbolts  of  vengeance?  No;  hut  stands  his  ground,  and  tries  his  fortune
among  strangers,  according  to  ancient  prophecy,  "  He  shall  not  fail,  nor  be  dis-
couraged," etc.

ni.  As  RECEIVED  BT  SOME.  "  But  as  many  as  received  him,"  etc.  He  was  received
by  a  minority — a  small  but  noble  minority.  With  regard  to  the  few  who  receive  d
him  we  see:  1.  The  independency  and  courage  of  their  conduct.  Tliey  received  him,
though  rejected  by  the  majority,  which  included  the  most  educated  and  influenlial.  It
is  one  thing  to  swim  with  the  tide,  but  another  to  swim  asainst  it.  It  is  easy  to  go
with  the  popular  currerit,  hut  difficult  to  go  against  it.  This  requires  a  great  inde-
pendency of  action  and  decision  of  character.  Those  who  received  Jesus  at  this  time
did  this — they  received  "  the  Despised  and  Rejected  of  men."  They  accepted  the  Stone
rejected,  and  rejected  of  tht  builders.  This  involved  admirable  independency  of  conduct
and  courage  of  conviction.  2.  The  reward  of  their  conduct.  "  But  as  many  as
received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power,"  etc.  (1)  Tlie  closest  relationship  to  God.  His
children:  children  first,  then  sons;  the  seed  first,  then  the  ripe  fruit.  (2)  The  hiyhest
hiinour  that  men  can  enjoy.  Children  of  God.  (3)  This  is  the  gift  of  Christ.  "  To
them  gave  he  power,"  etc.  This  word  means  more  than  power;  it  means  right  as  well
— power  first,  then  right.  Men  had  neither  to  sonship,  but  Christ  gave  both.  The  fact
is  patent — he  gave  the  power.  The  title  is  good — he  gave  the  right.  (4)  This  is  the
gift  of  Christ  consequent  upon  receiving  him.  "  But  as  many  as  received  liira,  to  them,"
etc.  And  to  none  else.  But  to  as  many  as  received  him  he  gave  the  power.  There
was  not  a  single  failure,  not  a  single  exception.  They  received  the  Son  of  God,  and
became  themselves  the  children  of  God  in  consequence.  They  were  not  disappointed,
but  had  reasons  to  be  more  than  satisfied  with  their  choice,  and  more  than  proud  of
their  unexpected  and  Divine  fortune.  If  Jesus  were  disappointed  in  his  own,  those
who  received  him  were  not  disappointed  in  Jesus — only  on  the  best  side;  for  "  to  them
gave  he  power,"  etc.  3.  The  explanalion  of  their  conduct.  How  did  they  receive  him
while  the  majority  rejected  him  ?  How  came  they  possessed  of  such  a  liigh  honour —
to  become  the  children  of  God  ?  The  answer  is,  "  They  believed  on  his  Name."  It
washy  laith.  We  see:  (1)  The  discerning  power  of  faith.  Faith  has  a  discerning
power;  it  can  see  through  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  through  ihe  immediate  presenj
to  the  distant  future.  In  this  instance,  faitli  saw  through  the  outward  the  inward,
through  the  physical  it  saw  the  Divine ;  through  the  outward  humiliation  and  povert\
it  discovered  a  Divine  presence.  In  "the  Man  of  sorrows"  faith  saw  the  Son  of  Gud,
and  in  "  the  Despised  and  Eeji  cted  of  men  "  the  Saviour  of  the  wurld.  (2)  The  receptivi
power  of  faith.  Jesus  was  received  by  faith.  Faith  saw,  recognized,  and  consequently
received,  him  as  the  Messiah.      God  speaks,  faith  listens;  God  offers,  faith  accepts.

(3)  The  regenerative  and  transforming  power  of  faith.  "They  became  the  sons  of
God."  How?  By  the  given  power  of  Jesus  in  connection  with  faith.  Ciirist  gave
himself  as  a  Divine  Seed;  faith  received,  appropriated,  and  nursed  him  so  as  to  result  in
a  Divine  regeneration  and  birth.  Faith  transforms  its  objrot  into  its  possessor;  so  th  .t
the  believer  in  the  Son  of  God  becomes  the  son  of  Gud  himself.  This  is  a  Divine
process  from  beginning  to  end,  in  which  faith — a  Divine  gift — plays  a  prominent  part.

(4)  Faith  in  Christ  produced  the  same  result  in  all.  "  As  many  as  received  him,"  etc.
No  matter  as  to  position,  education,  or  character.

Conclusions.  1.  The  minority  are  often  right,  and  the  majority  wrong.  It  was
so  on  the  plain  of  Dura,  in  Babylon,  and  so  here.  2.  The  minority,  generally,  are  the
first  to  accept  great  truths ;  the  majority  reject  them.  Think  of.  scientific,  reforming
and  redemptive  tiuths.  The  Jewish  nation  rejected  the  Saviour;  a  few  received  him.
3.  It  is  better  to  be  with  the  minority  when  right,  than  with  the  majority  when
wrong.  They  have  truth  and  right,  and  will  ultimately  win  all  to  their  way  of  think-
ing. The  few  that  received  Jesus  are  fast  gaining  ground.  The  Saviour  of  the
minority  will  soon  be  the  Saviour  of  all.  4.  We  should  be  very  thankful  to  the
minwiiy  fw  receiving  the  Saviour.    Humanly  speaking,  they  saved  the  world  from


68  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOSS.       [oh.  l  1—61

eternal  disgrace  and  ruin — from  sharing  the  fate  of  those  who  rejected  him.  6.  W*
should  be  infinitely  more  tfumkftU  to  the  Saviour  that  he  did  not  leave  the  world  in
disgust  and  vengeance  when  rejected  by  his  own.  But  inspired  by  infinite  lore,  he
turned  his  face  to  the  world  at  large,  stood  hy  the  minority,  and  the  minority  stood  by
.  him.  The  rirer  of  God's  eternal  purjDoses  cannot  be  ultimately  checked.  If  checked
in  one  direction,  it  will  take  another,  and  the  result  will  be  more  glorious.  Christ  comes
to  us  every  day.    Do  we  receive  him  ?    Our  obligations  are  infinite. — B.  T.

Ver.  18. — I%e  Divine  Revealer.    We  have  here—

I.  Christ  as  tee  Revealeb  or  God.  "  He  hath  declared  him."  1.  He  brought
much  that  was  known  of  Qod  into  a  dearer  light.  In  this  respect  his  revelation  (1)
was  confirmative,  confirming  people  in  their  notions  of  God  as  far  as  they  were  right.
(2)  It  was  corrective — correcting  the  false  notions  of  heathenism  and  Judaism,  so  that
the  God  of  Christ  is  very  diifeient  from  and  far  superior  to  that  of  the  heathen  and
even  that  of  the  Jews.  2.  He  revealed  much  that  was  new,  which  was  not  known  before.
Such  as :  (1)  Thie  spirituality  of  God.  (2)  His  fatherhood.  (3)  His  gracious  will  to
fallen  humanity  in  the  great  scheme  of  redemption  which  Christ  came,  not  only  to
reveal,  but  to  work  out  in  his  Divine-human  life  and  death.  (4)  The  way  of  access
to  and  reconciliation  with  Qod.  (5)  His  spiritual  reign  in  hie  people  on  earth,  and
they  with  and  in  him  for  over  in  heaven.

II.  Christ  as  a  perfect  Revealeb  of  God.  "He  hath  declared  him."  1.
Perfect  in  the  character  of  his  knowledge.  (1)  His  knowledge  was  direct.  Not  borrowed
or  derived ;  but  as  the  Sou  of  God,  and  God  himself,  it  was  relationally  direct  and
personally  intuitive.  He  was  notonly  the  Channel, but  the  Fountain.  (2)  His  know-
ledge was  absolute  and  exact.  In  this  respect  he  was  the  truth  itself.  He  could  speak,  not
about  something  he  had  seen  some  time, but  about  what  was  actually  present  to  him  then;
was  not  dependent  upon  memory  and  association,  but  on  his  present  vision  and  personal
consciousness.  (3)  His  knowledge  was  full,  covering  his  subject  in  all  its  vastness  and
meaning,  its  fathomless  depths,  its  dizzy  heights,  and  boundless  breadth.  2.  Ferfecl
in  his  revealing  qualifications.  In  a  perfect  revealer  of  God  to  man  there  must  be ;
(1)  Oneness  of  nature  with  both  parties.  Mere  man  or  angel  would  be  deficient.  But
Christ  is  perfectly  qualified  in  this  respect,  being  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Sou  of  man,
the  Eternal  Word  which  was  God,  but  which  "  became  flesh,"  An  inferior  mind
cannot  interpret  a  superior  one.  The  bed  of  a  brook  cannot  contain  the  Amazon.
Christ  being  equal  with  God,  and  having  assumed  human  nature,  was  in  a  position  to
reveal  God  perfectly  to  the  human  race ;  being  God-Man,  he  could  apeak  of  God  as  man
to  men,  in  their  nature  and  language.  (2)  Intimate  fellowship  with  both  parties.
Christ  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father — a  position  of  the  most  intimate  fellowship ;  and
not  merely  "  he  became  fiesh,"  but  also  "  dwelt  among  us,"  lived  in  the  closest  fellow-
ship with  the  human  family,  and  was  most  intimately  acquainted  with  all  their  wants,
weaknesses,  peculiarities,  and  difficulties.  (3)  Thorough  sympathy  with  both  parties.
This  Jesus  pre-eminently  possessed.  Being  "  the  only  begotten  Son  in  the  bosom  of
the  Father " — a  position,  not  merely  of  the  closest  fellowship,  but  also  of  tenderest
affection  and  mutual  sympathy — his  heart  and  will  were  tenderly  sympathetic  with  the
heart  of  God,  and  with  the  saying  purposes  of  his  love  with  regard  to  the  human  family.
And  as  the  "  Word  made  flesh,"  he  was  in  tenderest  sympathy  with  mankind — with  all
their  spiritual  wants  and  aspirations ;  the  faintest  sigh  for  God  would  find  in  him  a
most  ready  and  helpful  response.  3.  Perfect  in  his  mode  of  revelation.  Think  of;
(1)  Its  clearness.  It  is  clearly  simple  and  simply  clear,  so  that  a  child  can  understand
it,  and  the  blind  almost  see  it.  He  would  talk  of  God  with  the  same  ease  and  simplicity
as  he  would  talk  of  an  object  really  present  to  him.  (2)  Its  suggestiveness.  it  stirs
up  the  latent  aspirations  and  powers  of  man  to  seek  for  and  receive  the  knowledge  of
God.  (3)  The  prominertoe  he  gave  to  his  subject.  He  declared  God  in  all  he  said,  kept
him  continually  before  the  minds  of  his  hearers ;  he  kept  himself  in  the  background,
and,  as  a  Teacher,  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  that  God  his  Father  and  our  Father
might  be  known.  (4)  Its  exemplification.  He  declared  God,  not  only  by  precept,  but
by  example.  He  used  homely  illustrations  from  nature,  but  found  the  homeliest
illustration  of  G«d  in  his  own  Person  and  life,  so  that  he  could  say,  "  He  that  hath  seen
me,"  etc.    And  he  shirked  not  even  from  dyina  in  order  to  declare  God,  so  that  in  hit


CH.!.!— 6i.]       THE  GOSPfiL  ACCORDIiia  TO  ST.  JOHlJ.  69

tragic  death  on  the  cross  we  have  the  most  striking  and  convincing  illustration  uf  the
love  of  God  to  a  guilty  world.  4.  Perfect  in  the  icope  of  his  revelation.  "  He  declared
God  " — as  much  as  God  wished  and  man  required.  Leas  would  not  do;  more  would  be
unnecessary  and  perhaps  injurious.  While  curiosity  is  not  satisfied,  the  wants  of  faith
are  met ;  so  that  God  can  now  be  known,  "  which  is  life  eternal."

III.  Christ  as  the  only  perfect  Revealeb  op  God.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God,"
etc.  1.  To  declare  God  fully  he  must  be  seen.  A  full  vision  of  him  no  man  ever
had,  not  even  Moses,  therefore  could  not  fully  declare  him,  Man's  knowledge  of  Qod
»t  best  is  limited  and  imperfect,  and  therefore  incapable  of  being  the  medium  of  the
full  and  essential  revelation  of  God  to  the  world.  2.  Christ  alone  saw  God,  and  he  is
the  only  perfect  Revealer  of  him.  His  position  is  unique.  He  stands  alone.  He  occupied
a  position  in  relation  to  God  which  no  other  one  could  occupy — "  the  Only  Begotten,"
etc.  3.  His  revelation  is  infinitely  valuable.  Because :  (1)  Supremely  important.  All
knowledge  is  valuable,  but,  compared  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  every  other  knowledge
falls  into  insiguificance.  Our  eternal  well-being  hangs  upon  it.  (2)  Most  reliahle.  It
comes  from  the  highest  source,  through  the  highest  and  most  suitable  medium,  and  in
the  most  intelligible  and  convincing  manner.  (3)  It  is  most  rare.  It  is  a  revelation
which  we  could  never  get  in  any  other  way  or  from  any  other  source — a  revelation  which
God  alone  could  give,  and  could  only  give  through  his  Son.

Lbbsons.  1.  We  should  hold  Jesus  in  the  highest  esteem  as  the  Revealer  of  Qod  to  us.
No  one  else  could  reveal  him  as  he  did.  We  should  magnify  his  grace  in  making
known  to  us,  at  an  infinite  sacrifice,  his  Father's  character,  will,  and  purposes.  2.  The
gospel  is  an  absolute  truth.  For  what  is  it  but  the  Son's  revelation  of  the  Father? —
what  he  had  seen  and  heard  and  experienced  of  him,  and  been  sent  to  declare :  his  gracious
purposes  of  grace  towards  the  fallen  human  family  ?  3.  As  such  the  gospel  should  be
accepted  in  implicit  faith  and  burning  gratitude.  To  reject  is  the  greatest  sin,  to
receive  is  the  most  urgent  duty.  "  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  accepta-
tion," etc.— B.  T.

Vers.  19 — 23. — The  Jewish  deputation  and  the  Baptist.  Notice —
L  The  deputation's  question.  "  Who  art  thou  ?  "  This  implies :  1.  That  a  spirit
of  inquiry  had  been  awakened.  Whether  from  curiosity,  officialism,  or  jealousy,  it  was
there.  It  is  better  to  be  questioned  from  any  motive  than  not  to  be  questioned  at  all.
It  is  better  for  the  questioners  themselves.  That  is  a  very  dull  age  or  person  that  asks
no  questions.  Asking  is  the  condition  of  receiving.  It  is  better  for  the  one  questioned,
especially  if  he  be  a  public  man — a  teacher  with  a  truth,  or  a  herald  with  a  message.
It  proves  that  his  presence  and  efibrta  awake  attention.  This  was  the  case  with  the
Baptist  now.  It  gladdened  his  heart  that  a  deputation  came  and  questioned  him.  It
proved  that  his  voice  had  begun  to  stir  the  land  and  awake  the  spirit  of  inquiry.  2.  That
there  was  a  prevalent  expectation  at  the  time  for  the  appearance  of  a  great  personage.
Some  expecting  the  Messiah,  some  Elijah,  some  the  prophet,  and  all  expecting  some
great  one  to  appear.  Time  somehow  had  reached  its  fulness ;  it  Iiad'been  in  travail  for
some  time,  and  a  birth  was  naturally  expected.  Ancient  prophecy  also  nursed  the
expectation,  and  there  was  a  deeply  felt  need  for  the  fulfilment  and  for  the  appearance  of
a  Deliverer.  There  is  a  close  connection  between  want  and  expectation,  and  between
both  and  inquiry.  So  that  when  the  Baptist  began  to  burn  in  the  wilderness,  the  spirit
of  the  age  soon  caught  the  flame,  and  the  country  was  ablaze  with  inquiry  from  differen  t
motives.  3.  A  high  compliment  is  paid  to  John  and  his  ministry,  whether  meant  or
not.  Especially  by  the  first  form  of  the  inquiry,  "Art  thou  the  Christ?"  No  one
would  ask  a  taper,  "Art  thou  the  sun?"  but  one  would  be  tempted  to  ask  the  question
of  the  moon  or  the  morning  star.  John  would  doubtless  be  satisfied  with  the  simple
question,  "  Who  art  thou  ?  "  and  drop  it  there  and  listen  to  the  reply ;  for  how  many
come  and  go  and  act  on  the  stage  of  time  without  exciting  the  simple  question,  "  Who
art  thou?"  But  John  succeeded  soon  in  eliciting  this  question,  not  from  the  thought-
less crowd,  but  from  the  mental  and  moral  princes  of  the  nation,  and  they  ask  him,
"  Art  thou  the  Christ  ? "  John  was  such  a  shining  light  that  it  was  pardonable  to
mistake  him  for  a  moment  for  the  Light  of  the  world.  The  herald  partook  so  much
if  the  majesty  of  the  coming  King  that  it  was  natural  to  suspect  that  he  might  be  the
King  himself.     All  this  was  befitting  and  natural.    4.  Chreat  persistency  and  demand


10  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [ch.  l  1—51

in  {heir  inquiry.  They  ask  in  every  shape  and  form,  and  ask  again  and  again ;  and  in
this  they  are  worthy  of  imitation  by  all  inquirers  for  truth.  If  your  first  question  fails,
ask  again  and  again.  How  many  have  not  been  admitted  to  the  temple  of  truth  and
the  heaven  of  life  because  they  only  timidly  knocked  at  the  door  once  and  then  ran
away  I  But  this  deputation  were  persistent  and  demanding.  And  in  this  they  were
neither  wrong,  intrusive,  nor  unwelcome.  The  ministry  of  John  was  such  as  to  deserve
and  demand  inquiry.  The  public  had  a  ri^ht  to  demand  his  testimonials,  and  he  was
ready  to  furnish  them.  Truth  suffers  not  by  inquiry,  but  gains.  This  inquiry  in  its
persistency  and  demand  was  as  pleasing  to  John  as  it  ought  to  be  profitable  to  the
deputation.  5.  The  inquiry  is  made  of  the  proper  party.  Many  ask  for  information
everywhere  but  where  they  are  likely  to  get  it.  They  try  to  gather  knowledge  of  a
person  of  everybody  but  of  the  person  himself.  They  try  to  find  a  risen  Saviour  in  an
empty  grave,  find  tine  stars  in  the  day,  and  the  sun  in  the  night.  But  this  deputation
act  wisely  and  intelligently  in  their  search  for  knowledge  concerning  John  by  cominsj
to  John  himself,  and  asking  him, "  Who  art  thou  ?  "  And  who  was  so  likely  to  know  and
reply  ?  If  you  want  water,  go  to  the  fountain.  If  you  want  to  know  something  about
the  rose,  do  not  go  to  the  oak  or  even  the  lily,  but  go  to  the  rose  itself;  look  at  its
delicate  beauty,  and  inhale  its  sweet  perfume.  If  you  want  truth,  go  to  him  who  is  the
Truth.  Do  not  accept  things  at  second  hand  when  you  can  get  them  new  and  fresh.
So  far  as  the  formality  of  this  inquiry  goes,  it  is  wise  and  intelligent.

II.  John's  answer.  Negatively.  To  the  form  of  the  inquiry  which  implied  that  he
might  be  the  Christ,  Elijah,  or  the  prophet,  he  gave  a  firm  denial.  This  proves  his
strict  honesty  as  an  herald.  The  temptation  would  be  too  strong  for  an  impostor  or  an
ambitious  upstart ;  he  would  likely  reply  affirmatively  or  evasively.  These  are  questions
which  no  one  but  John  had  to  answer.  His  position  was  unique.  He  had  strong
individuality  and  trans|  arent  honesty.  He  would  be  no  other  than  himself.  His
only  ambition  was  to  occupy  his  own  place,  and  work  out  hia  own  mission  in  life.
Affirmatively.  He  was  glad  to  deny  in  order  to  affirm ;  to  say  something  about  himself
in  order  to  introduce  the  great  subject  of  his  mission — the  coming  Messiah.  He  refers
to  himself  as  a  subject  of  ancient  prophecy,  and  therefore  a  divinely  appointed  herald
(Isa.  xl.).  "  Now,  I  am  that  voice."  We  have  here :  1.  The  import  of  his  mission.
"  Make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord."  This  implies :  (1)  That  the  Lord  vxu  coining.
He  was  coming  in  his  Son — their  long-expected  Messiah.  He  was  chise  at  hand ;  in  fact,
in  their  midst,  although  they  knew  him  not.  (2)  That  his  way  had  btcome  crooked.
The  way  of  the  Lord,  as  opened  by  himself  through  Moses,  was  straight,  leading  directly
to  the  Messiah ;  but  they  had  made  it  crooked  and  uneven  with  their  traditions  and
wicked  conduct,  (8)  That  it  should  he  immediately  straiyhtened.  This  was  their
solemn  duty,  and  this  they  were  called  to  do  by  suitable  preparation — by  repentance,  by
a  radical  reformation  and  mward  cleansing,  'i'he  King  was  at  hand,  and  the  way  should
be  worthy  of  the  distinguished  traveller.  Let  every  barrier  to  the  piogress  of  his
chariot  be  removed ;  and,  that  his  march  may  be  triumphant  and  men  be  blessed,  his
way  should  be  straightened.  2.  His  characteristics  aa  a  messenger.  In  addition  to
those  indicated,  we  have :  (1)  Mysteriousness.  "  The  voice."  He  was  a  mystery  to
himself  as  well  as  to  others.  Born  and  bred  in  the  desert,  holding  closer  communion  with
heaven  than  with  earth,  with  God  than  with  men,  with  ancient  p  ophets  and  seers  than
with  his  own  family,  having  dreams  from  early  youth  of  a  Divine  mission  which
suddenly  burst  out  into  a  voice  like  a  peal  of  thunder  upon  the  wilderness,  people
listened,  wondered,  and  were  stirred  to  inquiry;  and  in  this  whirlwind  of  excitement  be
was  lalf  a  mystery  to  himself  as  well  as  to  others,  (2)  Self-ohliviousness  and  devotion  to
his  misHon.  As  if  he  were  to  say,  "  You  have  suspected  me  of  beins  the  Christ,  Elijah,
or  the  prophet:  I  am  neither,  only  the  voice  of  one  crying,"  etc.  The  voice  is  that  of
some  one  ;  but  never  mind  that  some  one,  but  attend  to  the  voice  and  its  contents  :  your
Messiah  is  in  it."  With  John  it  was  not  the  messenger,  but  the  mission ;  not  the  herald,
but  the  'coming  King.  And  it  should  ever  be  so.  The  minister  is  but  the  voice — the
herald  of  the  King,  the  auial  expression  of  Divine  thought,  to  be  heard  rather  than
seen,  (3)  There  is  a  striking  adaptation.  His  work  was  crying,  and  he  was  the  voice.
He  was  a  herald  with  a  Divine  message,  and  he  had  a  voice  to  publish  it.  We  should
not  grumble  because  we  have  not  some  gifts,  if  we  have  the  necessary  gifts  for  our  special
calling;  if  we  have  not,  we  have  made   a   mistake.     When   our  land  was  •  moral


en.  i.  1—51.]         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  71

wilderness,  God's  old  pioneering  heralds  had  voices  like  thunder.  Now  the  wilderness
to  a  great  extent  is  transformed  into  a  garden,  and  the  voice  becomes  naturally  more
suppressed.  The  Baptist  was  a  special  herald  with  a  speciil  message  in  the  world's
wilderness,  and  he  had  a  voice  like  a  trumpet.  (4)  Awful  loneliness.  "  The  voice  ol
one  crying  in  the  wilderness."  Here  is  a  vast  wilderness,  ami  only  one  crying  in  it.
John  was  literally  so,  and  morally  to  a  greater  extent.  He  had  scarcely  any  one  to
sympathize  with  him,  no  responsive  voice  but  the  echo  of  his,  no  inspiration  but  that
from  within  and  from  above.  The  Messiah  he  heralded  was  personally  unknown  to
him.  Great  reformations  have  commenced  with  a  few — with  one— and  that  one  alone
beariijg  a  lonely  torch  through  a  scene  of  dense  darkness.  Let  those  who  labour  almost
alone  in  foreign  lands  remember  the  lonely  crier  of  the  Judsean  wilderness,  the  sources  of
his  inspiration,  and  the  ultimate  results.  (5)  Terrible  earnestness.  "  The  voice  of  one  cry-
ing." Nut  moaning,  or  muttering,  or  whispering,  but  crying.  John  was  terribly  earnest.
His  message  burned  like  fire  in  his  soul,  quivered  on  his  lips,  and  thundered  forth  in  his
voice.  His  whole  being  was  merged  into  speech — his  head  and  feet,  his  face,  his  eyes,
especially  his  trumpet-voice,  and  even  his  strange  garment  spoke  ;  so  that  he  could  not
give  a  better  account  of  himself  than  by  saying,  "  I  am  the  voice."  He  almost  felt  all
voice.  And  it  should  ever  be  so.  The  observer  should  be  all  eyes,  the  listener  all  ears,
but  the  herald  all  voice.  Let  the  preacher  be  all  mind  in  the  study,  but  all  voice  in  the
pulpit.  (6)  Great  power  and  effect.  Tiier«  is  a  great  power  in  a  voice,  even  the  mere
sound  of  material  forces — the  peals  of  the  thumler,  the  sweeping  blast  of  the  storm,  the
mighty  tones  of  the  ocean,  or  the  terrible  roar  of  the  cataract ;  but  what  is  all  this
sound  to  the  human  voice  in  its  various  cadences  and  modulations,  as  the  expression
of  thought,  the  flaming  chariot  of  passion  and  enthusiasm,  and  the  stately  vehicle  of
intelligence  ?  In  the  thunder  and  the  storm  matter  only  speaks  ;  but  in  the  human  voice
mind  syeaks;  and  in  that  of  a  Divme  herald  God  himself  speaks.  So  that  in  the  voice
of  John  could  be  heard  the  want  of  the  world  and  the  will  of  God.  The  thunder  is  not
much  without  the  lightning.  The  Baptist  had  a  messa'j;e  of  lightning  and  a  voice  of
thunder,  so  that  it  was  very  powerful  and  effective.  Its  first  notes  were  stern  and
terrible  as  he  came  in  contact  with  the  awful  hypocrisy,  infidelity,  and  vice  of  the  age.
Tlien  bis  voice  burst  forth  into  thunders  of  invective  and  whirlwinds  of  condemnation,
"  0  grn:  ration  of  vipers,"  etc.  1  But  towards  the  close  of  his  ministry  his  voice  grew
more  tender  and  mellow,  so  that  we  cannot  imagine  even  the  stem  Baptist's  voice  to
be  otheiwise  than  soft  and  musical  as  he  uttered  the  words,  the  climax  of  his  ministry,
"Behold  the  Lamb,"  etc.!  The  ministry  of  John  terrified  and  charmed,  stirred  society
to  its  very  core,  answered  its  purposes,  and  drove  all  nearer  to  or  further  from  God,
{T)  Evanescence.  "  I  am  the  voice,"  etc.  Notice  the  difference  between  the  description
of  Christ  and  that  of  John.  One  is  the  "  Word,"  abiding  and  permanent ;  the  other
is  the  "  voice,"  transient  and  evaporating.  John  and  his  ministry  were  the  voice — like
the  report  of  a  cannon,  soon  to  die  away,  but  not  before  the  shot  is  sent  home.  John's
voice  was  soon  hushed,  but  hushed  in  the  music  of  fulfilment,  and  in  the  sweeter  voice
of  the  already-piesent  King.

Lessons.  1.  Many  inquire  while  they  ought  to  know.  This  deputation  and  those
that  sent  them  weie  masters  in  Israel,  and  ought  to  know  the  coming  of  their  Lord  and
Messiah.  2.  Many  inquire  in  proper  f>rm,  hut  in  a  wrong  spirit.  This  deputation
were  outwardly  proper,  but  iuwarilly  hollow  and  insincere.  3.  Many  inquirers  at
first  raise  hiyh  hopes,  but  they  are  soon  blighted.     Doubtless  John  at  first  was  elated

1  ith  such  a  respectable  and  apparently  genuine  deputation ;  but  his  hopi-s  were  soon
blighted  by  the  hoar-frost  of  bigotry  and  pride.     It  came  to  nothing,  at  least  with  regard

i>  the  majoiity  of  them.  4.  The  faithful  herald  should  publish  his  message  irrespective
■)f  consequences,  treat  all  with  respect,  answer  questions.  Some  may  benefit  by  others'
failures,  ai;d  drink  the  water  drawn  but  left  by  some  one  else. — B.  T.

Vers.  45 — 51. — The  guileless  inquirer.     Notice —

I.  The  charactek  of  Nathanael  in  its  DiBTorcroiSHiNo  featuebs.  "  An
Israelite  indeed."  This  title  was  partly  given  to  Jacob,  and  assumed  by  his  descendants.
But  many  of  them  w  re  Israelites  only  in  name,  not  in  deed.  Hereditary  titles  are  often
hollow  and  unreal.  They  were  genuine  when  bestowed  at  first  as  tokens  and  rewards
of  courage  and  service,  but  when  assumed  on  account  of  birth  merely,  they  often  lack


72  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDLNQ  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  i.  1— fit

reality.  Nathanael  was  a  true  descendant  of  Jacob,  and  even  superior  to  his  illustrious
epiritual  ancestors — "an  Israelite  indeed,"  His  cliaracter  was  distinguished  by:
L.  Oenrtine  devotion.  This  made  him  an  Israelite  indeed,  a  genuine  heir  of  the  title
conferred  on  his  illustrious  ancestor — "  a  prince  of  God,"  one  who  could  in  prayer  be
victorious  with  the  Almighty.  What  was  he  doing  underneath  the  fig  tree  alone?
One  thing,  doubtless,  was  struggling,  wrestling  with  God  in  prayer;  and  he  was  success-
ful. The  shady  fig  tree  was  his  Peniel.  Every  Israelite  inileed  has  his  Peniel  and  fig  tree
somewhere.  Genuine  devotion  Is  retiring.  The  most  successful  victories  are  won  in
^ic'clusion.  Very  different  was  Nathanael  from  Israelites  alone  in  name,  who  loved  to
[iray  standing  in  public  places  in  order  to  be  seen.  The  Israelite  indeed  retires  in  order
not  to  be  seen  by  any  but  by  the  Father  of  spirits.  Every  true  character  is  devotional,
and  the  truest  devotion  is  retiring  and  almost  shy.  It  is  the  courtship  of  the  souL  It
is  to  be  feared  that  much  of  the  devotion  of  the  present  day  is  mere  empty  parade.  Let
others  have  the  rostrum  and  the  comers  of  the  streets;  give  me  the  fig  tree.  2.  Trans-
parent sincerity.  "  In  whom  there  is  no  guile."  (1)  No  guile  of  intellect.  There  is
a  guile  of  intellect,  the  prolific  parent  of  sophistry,  the  mental  devil  of  poor  humanity.

(2)  No  gmie  of  heart — the  parent  and  refuge  of  deceit  and  secret  vice.  (3)  No  guile  of
conduct.  If  absent  inwardly,  it  will  be  absent  outwardly.  Guile  is  peculiarly  an  inward
vice.  It  shuns  publicity,  it  inhabits  the  inward  recesses  of  the  mind  and  heart;  but
when  there,  it  must  come  to  the  surface  sometimes  for  breath,  occasionally  seen  by
men,  always  by  God.  Nathanael  was  free  from  this.  It  is  not  said  that  he  bad  no  sin,
no  fault,  no  weakness ;  he  had,  as  indicated  by  his  question  to  Philip,  "Can  any  good
thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ? "  He  was  tainted  with  the  prejudices  of  his  age,  and
with  doubt  in  consequence ;  but  it  was  an  outward  pimple  rather  than  an  inward  cancer.
He  bad  no  guile,  else  it  would  remain  within.  Sincerity  or  guilelessness  is  au  elemen-
tary and  essential  principle  of  Christian  character.  Without  it  Christ  was  helpless  even
with  regard  to  the  outwardly  proper, — he  had  to  leave  them  with  a  "  woe ; "  but  with
it  he  was  triumphantly  merciful  and  saving.  Even  with  regard  to  the  outwardly
rebellious  and  sinful,  he  was  their  Friend  and  Saviour,  and  they  became  his  followers.

3.  Honest  and  earnest  inquiry  after  saving  truth.  (1)  He  was  meditative.  He  retired
regularly  under  the  fig  tree,  not  merely  for  prayer,  but  also  for  holy  meditation  and
honest  search  for  Divine  truth.  He  lived  not  by  bread  alone,  but  felt  that  his  soul
must  have  suitable  food  as  well  as  his  body.  He  hungered  after  truth,  and  made  a
diligent  search  for  it.  (2)  He  madethebest  use  of  the  advantages  he  possessed.  He  had
Mosea  and  the  prophets,  and  he  was  an  earnest  student  of  them.  He  had  fully  grasped
the  central  truth  of  their  teaching — the  promised  Messiah;  he  studied  his  character  and
gazed  with  delight  at  bis  portrait  as  drawn  by  their  inspired  pen.  Doubtless  he  had
been  a  spell-bound  listener  of  the  great  herald  of  the  wilderness,  and  his  soul  was  stirred
into  burning  expectation.  In  this  respect  he  was  an  "Israelite  indeed,"  being  the
genuine  growth  of  the  Messianic  promises,  and  waiting  for  "  the  Consolation  of  Israel."

(3)  He  welcomed  every  new  light.  No  sooner  Philip  said,  "Come  and  see,"  than  he  ai
once  came  to  Jesus.    He  "  proved  all  things,"  and  "  held  fast  that  which  was  good."

4.  Intelligence  and  readiness  of  faith.  1.  He  was  ready  to  lelieve.  He  had  a  believinj;
soul.  He  had  lived  by  faith  in  the  coming  Kedeemer.  There  were  Christians  before  the
appearance  of  Christ,  looking  forward  by  faith  to  him ;  there  were  Israelites  indeed;  and
Nathanael  was  one  of  them.  (2)  His  faith  was  discerning.  He  saw  the  Son  of  God
in  the  Son  of  Joseph,  the  King  of  Israel  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  and  the  mist  of  pre-
judice and  doubt  vanished  before  the  gaze  of  his  faith  and  the  sight  of  Jesus.  (8)
His  faith  was  intelligent.  He  believed  because  he  was  convinced,  and  was  convinced
because  Christ  gave  an  unmistakable  proof  of  his  superhuman  knowledge  so  peculiar
to  the  Messiah.  His  faith  and  reason  went  hand-in-hand,  and  were  mutually  helpful ;
so  that  his  faith  was  intelligent  and  his  intelligence  faithful.  5.  A  confession  of
conviction.  (1)  His  confession  is  respoAfvl.  "  Kabbi " — a  title  of  honour  and  respect.
(2)  His  confession  is  pron^t.  No  sooner  was  he  convinced  than  he  confessed — another
proof  of  his  guilelessness.  Many  of  the  Pharisees  believed,  but  on  account  of  guile  did
not  confess.  The  "  Israelite  indeed  "  promptly  confessed  him.  (3)  His  confession  is
fuU,  and  given  in  an  intelligent  manner,  "  'i'hou  art  the  Son  of  God  ;  thou  art  the  King
of  Israel"  His  conceptions  of  Jesus  are  worthy  of  him  and  of  the  "Israelite  indeed."
The  chuacter  of  Nathanael  was  altogether  so  transparent  that  Jesus  could  in  it  see  his


CH.  L 1—61.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  73

own  image  as  in  a  glass,  and  Nathanael  could  see  in  Jesus  the  Son  of  Qod  and  tlie  King
of  men.

II.  His  cbabacter  in  relation  to  Jesitb.  1.  It  was  stich  at  to  atlraetthe  admiring
attention  qf  Jesus.  Philip  was  quick  in  thought  and  motion  with  regard  to  Nathanael.
He  rah  to  inform  and  invite  him;  hut  Jesus  was  bffore  him.  "Before  Philip  called
thee,.  .  .  I  saw  thee."  There  is  a  law  of  attraction  in  the  spiritual  world — Natbanael
was  attracted  by  Jesus,  and  Jesus  by  Nathanael.  The  pure  are  attracted  by  the  pure ;
the  sincere  by  the  sincere ;  and  Israel's  King  was  attracted  by  the  "  Israelite  indeed."

2.  It  was  such  as  to  cause  Jesus  to  point  it  out  to  others.  Jesus  was  frank  and  open,
and  loved  to  reveal  his  moral  taste  and  likings.  "  Behold  1 "  he  exclaimed ;  "  look  at  it,
it  is  worth  seeing."  (1)  It  is  rare.  Comparatively  rare  in  every  age,  especially  in
that  age  of  unbelief,  hypocrisy,  and  sham.  It  was  a  lonely  fruit  on  the  almost  barren
fig.  tree  of  Judaism.  It  was  like  a  lonely  star  in  a  sky  of  almost  universal  gloom,  like
a  field  of  corn  in  a  continent  of  barrenness,  or  like  a  lonely  well  in  a  burning  dcseit —
a  treat  to  Jesus  and  to  his  disciples  then  and  now.  (2)  It  is  very  valuable.  A  genuine
coin,  a  pearl.  Most  valuable  because  real  and  useful.  Jesns  was  going  to  cultivate
the  world,  plough  and  sow  it ;  it  was  most  important  to  have  good  grain  for  seed — it
was  scarce.  Jesus  could  only  have  a  handful,  but  quality  was  more  important  than
quantity.  Nathanael  had  the  right  quality — a  genuine  seed  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
a  pillar  of  the  new  temple  of  truth,  and  a  model  of  character  for  all  aijea.  (3)  It  was
very  beautiful.  Beauty  is  ever  attractive  and  worthy  of  notice,  especially  spiritual
beauty — ^beauty  of  character,  beauty  of  soul;  and  of  all  beautiful  things  a  beautiful
character,  a  beautiful  soul,  is  the  most  attractive  and  most  worthy  of  attention.  Jesus
points  to  it,  and  thus  directs  the  moral  taste  of  the  world.  The  world  says, "  Behold
this  or  that ; "  but  Jesus,  "  Behold  an  Israelite  "indeed,"  etc.  Nathanael's  character  was
beautiful,  especially  in  that  age  of  moral  deformity.     It  was  like  a  lily  among  thorns.

3.  It  is  such  as  introduces  its  possessor  to  a  closer  acquaintance  with  Jesus,  and  to
brighter  visions  of  his  Person,  character,  and  position.  "  Thou  shalt  see  greater  tldnus
than  these."  (1)  Chreater  proof  s  of  his  Divinity  and  Messiahship.  Clearer  proofs  of  his
superhuman  knowledge,  especially  of  his  power  in  his  mir.aoles — his  miracles  of  power
and  love ;  new  manifestations  of  the  beauty  of  his  Divine  and  human  character.  (2)  A
dear  view  of  the  communicittion  between  heaven  and  earth  of  which  Jesus  is  the  Medium.
"  Ye  shall  see  heaven  open,"  etc.  The  heaven  was  not  merely  open,  but  it  was
opened,  and  opened  by  Christ.  This  was  one  of  the  first  acts  of  his  redeeming  inter-
vention. It  was  closed  by  man's  gin,  opened  by  the  Son  of  man's  ^race.  Heaven  is
ever  open  to  the  "  Son  of  man,"  and  ever  open  to  faith  in  him.  Jacob  saw  the  com-
munication between  heaven  and  earth  in  the  ladder.  Jesus  is  the  reality  of  his  vision.
Angels  ascend  and  descend  on  and  through  him.  Every  prayer  goes  up  and  every
blessing  comes  down  from  heaven  through  him.  Through  him  there  is  a  free  trade
carried  on  between  heaven  and  earth.  "  Angels  ascend  and  descend,"  etc.  They  are
very  fond  of  him.  As  soon  as  he  left  heaven  for  earth  they  were  after  him,  singing  the
hymns  of  his  advent  and  the  anthems  of  his  loving  mission ;  they  were  ready  to  serve
him  in  his  temptation,  his  agonies,  and  his  ascension ;  they  were  ever  surrounding  his
Person.  And  they  are  fond  of  all  who  by  faith  are  related  to  him ;  they  become  "  minis-
tering spirits."  The  descent  from  and  ascent  to  heaven  would  be  too  deep  and  high  for
angels  but  on  the  Son  of  man.

Lessons.  1.  Many  of  the  most  beautiful  characters  are  comparatively  private,  like
Nathanael — rather  felt  than  seen  and  heard,  characterized  by  quiet  usefulness,  moral
beauty,  ti-ansparency  and  sunshine  of  soul,  ratiier  retiring,  and  to  be  found  under  the
Hg  tree  rather  than  on  the  branches.  2.  Tou  mutt  have  the  Saviour  to  appreciate  them
fully  and  point  them  out.  At  the  last  day  he  shall  exhibit  many  of  these  retiring  but
specially  beautiful  ones.  They  are  only  fully  known  and  valued  by  him.  They  shall
appear  with  him  in  glory.  3.  Faith  is  rewarded  here  and  hereafter.  Its  reward  is
seeing  great  things,  and  ever  greater  things.  It  is  vision  of  the  spiritual  and  the  Divine,
and  its  visions  are  increasingly  grand.  Believe  in  Christ,  and  heaven  is  opened ;  and,  once
opened,  the  privileges  are  great,  and  the  outlook  glorious  and  illimitable. — ^B.  T.

Ter.  4. — 2%e  life  that  gives  light  to  men.  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven
and  the  earth : "  so  runs  the  first  verse  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.    "  In  the  beginning  win-


74  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDma  TO  ST.  JOHU.       [oh.  l  1—51.

the  Word : "  so  runs  the  first  verse  in  the  Gospel  of  John.  This  resemblance  prompts
us  to  look  for  other  resemblances.  "  God  said,  Let  there  be  light :  and  there  was  light : "
so  nins  the  third  verse  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.  And  then  we  perceive  that  John,
correspondingly,  would  lead  his  readers  to  tliink  of  the  greatest  of  all  lights  which
come  from  God.  He  speaks  of  the  Word  that  he  may  tell  us  of  the  Life  in  it,  and  of
the  Life  that  he  may  tell  us  of  the  Light  in  it.  The  Word  is  a  living  and  light-givinf;
one.  What  are  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  and  all  lamps  compared  with  this  light?  John
is  speaking  here  for  the  eye  of  the  heart.

1.  The  darkness  this  light  is  meant  to  iLnrMiNATE.  Be  thankful  for  the
lights  forming  part  of  the  physical  creation.  There  is  sunlight  even  when  there  is  not
sunshine.  Be  ihankful  for  the  higher  lights  of  civilization.  Also  the  increasing  light
coming  with  every  new  discovery  and  invention.  Each  new  generation  finds  the  world
better  to  live  in,  in  many  respects.  Magnify  what  light  you  have  outside  of  Christ ;
then  you  will  better  understand  how  small  it  is  compared  with  what  he  has  to  give.
For  a  while  we  may  not  at  all  feel  the  need  of  Christ's  light.  But  the  world  becomes
gloomy  and  cheerless  enough  to  many  who  once  reckoned  it  constantly  radiant  with
brightness.  The  world  very  soon  puzzles  and  perplexes  those  who  are  thoroughly  in
earnest.  Life  is  such  a  short  and  broken  thing  to  many.  The  longest  life  is  like  a
candle;  it  burns  and  burns  till  it  burns  down  to  the  socket,  but  it  burns  irone  the
less;  and  then  what  is  there  left  to  show?  God  has  noticed  whatever  darkness  there
may  be  in  your  heart.  " God  is  light,  and  in  him  there  is  no  darkuess  at  all ; "  and  he
wants  us  to  be  the  same — ^wants  to  lead  us  into  ttie  light  of  constant  peace,  joy,  and
purity,

IL  The  bbason  this  light  is  so  powerpui.  to  take  the  darkness  away.
The  light  that  God  sends  is  a  life.  What  power  often  dwells  in  a  word — a.  true  and  fitting
word,  coming  from  the  heart,  giving  just  the  information  and  encouragement  needed  !
But  then  the  kindest  and  wisest  human  speakers  cannot  be  always  present.  And  so
God  has  a  word  for  us  in  a  life  that  can  never  pass  away.  Think  of  the  power  in  his
life;  of  the  things  he  did,  and  did  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  he  could  do  a  great  deal
more.  Think  of  the  goodness  of  bis  life — ^goodness  whereby  he  did  good,  and  goodness
whereby  he  resisted  temptation.  Think  of  the  joy  abounding  in  his  life,  even  in  the
midst  of  straits  and  sufferings.  Think  of  the  confidence  he  carried  through  everything,
never  doubting  whence  he  had  come  or  what  he  could  do.  Think  especi;illy  of  the
Resurrection  and  life  in  heaven.  It  is  from  a  world  of  life  and  light  that  this  luminous
life  shines  down  upon  us.

IIL  How  this  light  becomes  available  to  us.  He  who  told  his  disciples  to
shine,  does  his  very  best  to  shine  himself.  But  then  we  must  open  our  eyes  to  see  this
liu;ht.  Lamps  are  nothing  save  as  men  are  willing  to  use  them.  It  is  light  we  have  to
seek  for;  the  darkness  comes  without  seeking.  Let  Jesus  shine  in  our  hearts  for
spiritual  blessings  corresponding  to  those  natural  ones  which  come  through  ordinary
lights.  Let  us  aim  to  look  back  from  the  safety  and  fulness  of  the  perfect  day,  saying,
"  Christ  has  indeed  been  a  Light  to  me." — Y.

Veri,  10 — 12. — Seceiving  Christ,  and  the  result  of  it,  I,  Christ  ignored.  "  The
world  knew  him  not."  This  statement  is  humiliating  to  the  world,  not  to  Christ,  The
world  makes  a  great  parade  of  its  insight  and  its  power  to  give  deciding  verdicts;  but
here  is  its  very  Maker  in  its  midst,  yet  it  knows  him  not.  Here  surely  is  the  crowning
sin  of  the  world,  that  it  knows  not  him  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all  its  boasted  powers.
Were  the  world  what  it  ought  to  be,  it  would  welcome  its  Maker,  rejoicing  in  the
presence  of  him  who  gave  its  intellect  and  all  the  material  on  which  that  intellect  is  so
busy.  In  the  face  of  this  statement  of  John,  it  should  not  trouble  us"  that  so  much  of
the  world's  intellect  and  grandeur  ignores  Christ,  A  man  with  the  worldlj  spirit  strong
in  him  is  contented  with  his  own  infallibility  and  certainty.  Bather  let  us,  when  we
see  the  world's  complacent  ignoring  of  Christ,  contrast  it  with  the  Christian's  substantial
knowledge  of  him.  And  seemg  that  the  world,  with  all  its  knowledge,  knows  not
Christ,  let  us  bear  in  mind  how  many  things  the  Christian  himself  does  not  yet  know.

IL  Christ  ignored  where  most  op  ai-l  he  should  have  been  received.
The  reference  is  doubtless  to  Christ's  coming  into  the  land  of  Israel.  He  was  not  only
the  world's  Maker,  but  Israel's  Messiah,  and  Israel  failed  to  recognize  him  in  either


CH.  1. 1— 51,]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.  75

capacity.  They  did  not  give  him  even  a  provisional  reception  till  such  time  as  hig  claim
could  be  examined;  for  such  seems  the  force  of  wap4\a0oy.  They  were  prejudiced
against  him  from  the  very  first.  Every  word  and  act  were  twisted  against  him.  What
candour  there  is  in  these  admissions  of  John !  Christianity  fears  no  statement  of  facts.
The  more  emphatic  and  bitter  human  rejections  became  the  more  clearly  the  necessity
of  a  Christ  was  proved.

m.  RsoEiviNa  Christ,  and  its  result.  Here  is  the  whole  truth.  The  world
cannot  receive  Christ,  but  always  there  are  some  who  go  out  from  the  world  because
they  are  not  of  the  world.  Among  the  children  of  men  there  is  a  rejecting  spirit  and  a
receiving  spirit.  He  who  receives  Christ  must  be  all  the  more  determined  and  cordial
in  his  reception,  because  he  sees  so  many  rejecting ;  and  he  who  is  at  all  inclined  to
consider  the  claims  of  Christ  must  be  careful  not  to  be  turned  aside  because  so  many
are  indifferent.  See  with  your  own  eyes.  All  true  things  have  met  with  scorn  and
persecution  at  first.  But  what  is  it  to  receive  Christ  ?  Evidently  to  deliver  ourselves
over  to  his  rule  and  authority.  If  a  man  should  receive  a  traveller  Into  his  hoiise,  and
give  him  henceforth  the  disposition  of  everything  there,  that  would  give  the  analogy
Bg  to  how  we  should  receive  Christ;  and  so  receiving  Christ,  we  gain  the  right  to
become  sons  of  God.  We  have  our  part  in  the  natural  world's  existence  through
Christ,  and  that  comes  without  our  willing;  but  a  part  in  the  highest  attainment
belonging  to  human  life,  even  sonship  towards  God,  can  only  come  through  our
voluntary  submission  to  Christ.  Jesus  gives  true  and  humble  disciples  the  right  to
become  sons  of  Qod ;  and  teaching  them  to  say,  "  Our  Father,  who  art  in  heaven,"  he
involves  the  constant  remembrance  of  this  right  in  every  true  prayer. — Y.

Yer.  17. — Moses  and  Christ,  Let  us  proceed  at  once  to  particular  instances  of  the
Law  given  through  Moses,  and  of  the  grace  and  truth  coming  through  Jesus  Christ.
Thus  W3  shall  better  see  how  Moses  is  brought  into  connection  with  Christ,  and  Law
into  connection  with  grace  and  truth.  Look,  then,  at  Exod.  xx.,  where  the  great
principles  of  the  Law  given  through  Moses  are  stated.

I.  CoNSiDBB  THB  BASIS  OF  Jehovah's  OI.AIH.  "  I  am  Jchovah  thy  God,  which
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  The  fact  of
deliverance  was  indisputable,  and  just  as  indisputable  the  fact  that  the  people  had  not
delivered  themselves;  and  for  a  while  the  delivered  people  hardly  knew  why  they  were
delivered.  Left  to  themselves,  they  might  have  scattered ;  but  there  was  a  compulsion
on  them  ali  the  time— ^a  compulsion  into  liberty,  a  compulsion  to  go  through  the  Bed  Sea,
a  compulsion  towards  the  awful  soUtudes  of  Sinai.  Then  at  last  Jehovah  tells  them
\yhat  he  expects.  He  who  has  done  great  things  for  them  wants  to  know  what  they
will  do  for  him ;  and,  lest  they  be  inattentive,  he  states,  to  begin  with,  the  solid  basis
of  his  claim.  Then  turn  from  Moses  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  we  have  but  another  aspect
of  the  same  Jehovah.  Jehovah  was  really  gracious  in  the  giving  of  the  Law ;  but  the
grace  got  hidden.  In  Jesus  Christ  grace  is  manifest  to  all.  There  is  the  basis  of  a
claim  on  you.  You  have  but  to  look  back  on  the  experiences  of  others,  human  beings
like  yourselves — like  in  infirmity,  like  in  manifold  needs,  like  in  the  pollution  of  an  evil
heart,  like  in  suffering  and  sorrow,  like  in  sickness  and  mortality.  As  Jesus  in  the  flesh
actually  dealt  with  men  in  various  positions,  so  now,  in  the  spirit  according  to  his  view
of  your  needs,  will  he  deal  with  you. .  Jesus  turned  no  water  to  blood,  smote  no  cattle
with  pestilence,  bruised  no  fields  with  hail,  gathered  no  clouds  of  locusts,  wrapt  no  land
in  gross  darkness,  robbed  no  parents  of  their  firstborn,  Overwhelmed  no  armies  in  the
sea.    A  little  child  can  see  that  grace  and  truth  are  in  Jesus  Christ.

IL  Consider  the  claim  op  Jehovah  itself.  Take  the  first  item.  •  Thou  shalt
have  no  other  gods  before  me."  Look  at  all  that  is  involved  in  thisclaim.  It  means
that  we  are  to  worship  Jehovah  alone,  and  that,  of  course,  assumes  that  we  are  actually
worshippers  of  the  one  God  to  begin  with.  What  if  we  are  deluding  ourselves  with
mere  outward  performances  before  a  name  ?  Do  we  know  what  we  worship  ?  Labelling
the  unknown  with  the  name  of  God  does  not  make  it  better  known.  And  Moses  gave  no
help  in  revealing  the  nature  of  God.  He  uttered  bare  law.  But  Jesus  comes  with  a
grace  and  truth  which  are  strangely  self-revealing.  He  winds  gently  into  the  hearts  of
men,  by  every  entrance  he  can  find.  He  quietly  accepts  as  his  right  the  reverence  and
adoration  of  every  heart  willing  to  render  them.    No  long  elucidations  sre  needed  to


76  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [en  l  1—51.

ma^e  it  plain  that  he  is  a  gracious  Being.  We  need  no  formal  command  to  worship
him.  We  are  instinctively  drawn  to  our  knees  in  his  presence.  He  carries  the  essence
of  his  commandments  charactered  in  his  gracious  face.  Thus  hy  considering  all  the  ten
commandments,  we  should  get  illustrations  of  the  grace  and  truth  in  Jesus  Christ.  The
tea  commandmeuts,  just  by  themselves,  however  often  repeated,  can  bring  comfort  to
no  human  being,  only  a  deeper  conviction  of  one's  sin  and  misery.  Jesus  brings  the
Law  just  as  vigonmsly  as  Moses ;  but  he  brings  more  than  Law.  Through  his  demands
there  shine  forth  gloriously  grace  and  truth,  favour  and  reality.  Not  simply' good
wishes  on  the  one  side,  or  bare  reality  on  the  other,  Christ  brings  a  grace  that  is
truthful,  and  a  truth  that  is  gracious.  He  comes  as  both  the  kindest  and  ablest  of
physicians.  He  gives  strength  before  he  asks  service.  Grace  and  truth  flovr  &om  him
to  us,  and  then  in  due  time  grace  and  truth  flow  forth  from  us  also. — Y.

Ver.  38. — A  question  for  seekers.  L  A  FIKST  mebtino  with  some  of  the  disciples.
Interesting  to  look  back  from  the  concluding  to  the  beginning  chapters  of  this  Gospel
— from  the  days  when  the  apostles  were  trusted  friends  to  the  days  when  Jesus  and
they  were  but  as  strangers.  Here  we  have  a  record  of  the  first  meeting  with  some  of
them.  Jesus  is  walking  by  the  banks  of  the  Jordan — a  Teacher  who  has  been  made  fit
to  teach,  waiting  now  for  scholars ;  and  some  of  the  schulais,  all  unknoHH  to  them-
selves, have  been  becoming  fit  for  Jesus  in  the  preparatory  school  of  John.  To  them
John  must  often  have  spoken  of  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  the  appointed  Lamb  of  God
who  was  to  take  it  away.  What  wonder,  then,  that  the  Lamb  of  God,  really  set  before
their  gaze,  should  draw  their  footsteps  towards  him  ?

IL  The  evident  strong  interest  which  Jesus  had  excited  in  the  minds  of
THESE  two  men.  They  could  not  help  following  him.  We  cannot  but  contrast  this
overmastering  interest  on  their  part  with  the  absence  of  interest  in  Jesus  on  our  part.
Surely,  if  such  an  interest  was  possible  to  them,  it  must  in  some  way  be  possible  to  us.
As  we  read  the  Gospels  we  ought  to  feel  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  most  important
Person  in  the  world  at  that  time,  far  more  important  than  the  greatest  of  rulers  and  the
wisest  of  men  ;  far  moi'e  important  to  each  person  who  came  in  contact  with  him  than
the  nearest  of  his  kindred  could  be — ^far  more  important  to  John  the  Baptist  than  his
parents,  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth;  far  more  important  to  John  the  disciple  than  Zebedee
his  father;  far  more  important  to  Andrew  than  Simon  his  brother;  far  more  important
to  Philip  than  Nathanael  his  friend.  If  we  are  not  more  interested  in  the  domgs  and
claims  of  Jesus  than  in  the  doings  and  claims  of  any  one  else,  we  shall  fail  to  appre-
ciate Jesus  as  he  ought  to  be  appreciated.

III.  How  CAME  THIS  STBONQ  INTEEE8T  TO  BE  EXCITED?  The  men  had  been  amply
pupared.  They  had  been  impressively  told  of  the  need  Jesus  came  to  supply.  Ofteu
must  John  and  Andrew  have  heard  the  Baptist  calling  the  crowd  to  repentance.  Doubt-
less the  Baptist  had  often  led  his  disciples  to  meditate  very  earnestly  on  the  wickedness,
the  wants,  and  the  woes  of  the  great  world  around  them,  with  its  Pharisees  and  Saddu-
cees,  its  publicans  and  sinners,  its  blind  and  lame,  lepers  and  demoniacs,  poor  and  desti-
tute. How  could  earnest  and  pitying  men  be  otherwise  than  interested  in  him  who
was  to  sweep  the  sin-caused  troubles  of  the  world  away  ?  And  our  interest  must  come
in  the  same  way.

IV.  The  QUESTION  Jebus  asks  these  interested  ones.  Fe  seeks  to  give  direction
and  depth  to  this  interest.  He  seeks  to  eliminate  all  mere  curiosity  and  wonder-seeking.
Jesus  himself  was  a  Seeker  having  definite  and  most  decided  aims.  Such  a  question  as
met  these  disciples  should  meet  us  in  all  our  formal  approaches  to  God.  Are  we  really
seeking  anything?  and  if  so,  what  is  it  ?  Only  those  who  are  evidently  real  seekers  can
ever  get  anything  out  of  Christ.  Such  persons  will  soon  be  able  to  answer  Ohrist's
question.    He  helps  the  intent  seeker  to  find  all  he  wants  in  him. — T,

Ver.  •42. — Bringing  men  to  Jesus.  Jesus  asks  Andrew,  "  What  seek  ye?"  and  the
question  soon  shows  fruit  in  Andrew  seeking  out  his  own  brother  Simon.  The  New
Testament  deals  with  spiritual  things,  but  that  does  not  prevent  it  from  being  fiill  of
natural  touches.  What  Andrew  did  is  just  the  very  thing  which  in  like  circumstances
we  might  have  been  expected  to  do.  And  surely  it  is  the  most  reasonable  of  conjec-
tures that  Andrew,  who  began  b^  bringing  his  own  brother,  must  have  betn  the  bringef


Ofl.1.1— 51.J        THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  77

also  of  many  \tho  were  mere  strangers.  Interest  in  natural  kinsmen  would  soon  be
merged  in  the  wider  interest  a  Christian  must  feel  in  himianity  at  large.  Peter  was
Andrew's  first  gift  to  Jesus,  and  he  may  have  been  the  easiest.  To  bring  a  human
being  into  real,  loving  contact  with  Jesus  is  not  an  easy  thing ;  but  what  a  service,  what
a  blessing  and  a  joy,  to  every  one  concerned  I

I.  Andrew  was  able  to  bring  Peter  to  Jesus  because  he  had  fiust  op  all  been
BKOUGHT  HIMSELF.  Andrew  had  first  of  all  been  himself  the  subject  of  spiritual  illumi-
nation. (>od  must  have  shined  in  his  heart  to  give  the  light  of  the  linowledge  of  the
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  had  been  brought  to  Jesus  as  the  Cliriot,
the  Messiah.  The  acquaintance  had  been  very  short,  but  a  great  deal  may  be  done  in  a
short  time  when  the  human  heart  has  been  getting  ready  to  meet  with  Christ,  when
there  is  perfect  openness  and  simjilicity  of  mind — truth  on  one  side  and  an  eager  seelcer
after  it  on  the  other.  To  t;et  other  people  as  far  as  Peter,  we  must  first  of  all  have  got
as  far  as  Andrew  ourselves.  How  should  the  blind  lead  tlie  blind?  We  must  not  wait
for  an  Andrew.  God  has  his  own  agency  for  us.  He  may  send  some  John  the  Baptist,
saying,  "  Behold  1 "  to  us.  We  must  consider  well  the  obstacles  in  our  way  to  Jesus,
which  none  can  remove  but  ourselves — procrastination,  bosom  sins,  spiritual  indolence,
neglect  of  the  Scriptures.

II.  Consider  who  it  was  that  Andrew  brought.  His  own  brother  Simon.  So
natural  brotherhood  is  distinguislied  from  that  sjiiritual  brotherhood  which  afterwards
sprang  into  existence  as  regenerated  believers  in  Christ  felt  the  sirong  tie  binding  them
together.  Wlrat  brother  ought  not  to  be  to  brother,  and  yet  what  he  may  very  easily
become,  is  shown  from  Cain  and  Abel,  and  Josiph  and  his  brethren.  What  brother
ought  to  be  to  brother  is  shown  in  this  seeking  of  Simon  by  Andrew.  Great  oppor-
tunities are  given  by  natural  brutherhood,  mutually  cherished.  Give  every  good  thing
in  nature  a  chance  to  become  also  a  minister  of  grace.

III.  Consider  what  Andrew  said  to  Peter.  "  We  have  found  the  Messiah."  This
is  as  much  good  news  for  us  as  it  was  for  Peter.  What  Andrew  said  he  said  at  first,
after  a  very  brief  acquaintance ;  but  he  would  go  on  saying  it  all  the  more  as  day  after
day  opened  up  the  riclies  of  Messiah's  mission  and  power.  Observe  the  plural  form  of
the  announcement.  The  other  disciple  agreed  with  Andrew  in  his  judgment.  Look
out  for  those  and  listen  to  them  who  bear  the  same  message  as  Andrew,  though  not  in
quite  the  same  form.  We  have  words  and  acts  of  Jesus  constantly  forced  on  our  atten-
tion. If  we  cannot  be  brought  to  Jesus,  Jesus  is  brought  to  us.  All  bringing  of  men
to  Jesus  must  be  preceded,  more  or  less,  by  bringing  of  Jesus  to  men.  Andrew  must
have  brought  such  a  vivid  and  powerful  account  of  his  talk  with  Jesus  as  would  amount
practically  to  a  bringing  of  Jesus. — Y.

Vers.  45 — 51. — Jesus  and  Kathanael,  Jesus  praises  Nathanael  both  in  what  he  says
to  others  conoeming  him,  and  what  he  says  directly  to  himself.  Whatever  Jesus  may
have  found  praiseworthy  in  the  other  four  disciples,  he  said  nothing.  Nathanael  stan  a
out  very  distinctly  as  having  in  him  elements  of  character  needing  to  be  puhlisbed  to
all  disciples.  Jesus  meant  to  say  to  others,  "  Be  ye  as  this  man.  Be  ye  also  Israelites
indeed,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile.  Be  ye  those  who  have  peculiar  individual  experiences
under  the  fig  tree."  And  so  we  must  try  to  discover  what  it  is  to  be  "an  Ismelite  indeed,"
aud  what  it  was  Jesus  specially  observed  when  Nathanael  was  under  the  fig  tree.

L  Begin  with  the  most  definite  word,  an  Israelite  indeed.  Some  are  Israelites
only  in  appearance — Israelites  according  to  the  fiesh,  perhaps,  yet  not  therefore  Israel-
it  s  indeed.  An  Israelite  indeed  is  one  like  Israel.  Israel  is  the  man  ol  two  names^-
■  l.icob  to  begin  with,  Israel  afterwards.  We  must  look  at  him  in  all  the  scenes  of  his
life.  Jacob  at  Bethel  must  be  specially  considered,  also  that  later  wrestling  till  the
breaking  of  the  day.  On  that  occasion  Jacob  was  resolved.  With  him  it  was  now  or
never.  He  had  a  blessing  to  get  that  meant  salvation  and  prosperity,  and  theri-fore,  as
a  drowning  man  grasps  the  rope,  he  grasped  the  only  Being  who  could  give  that  blessing.
That  was  how  Israel  got  his  name,  entered  into  his  privilege,  and  became  an  example  to
us.  An  Israelite  indeed  is  one  who  wrestles  with  tiie  Giver  of  spiritual  blessings ;  one
who  has  known  long  agonies  of  the  heart;  one  who  has  toiled  with  strong  cryina  and
tears,  if  only  he  might  get  the  blessing  of  a  conscience  undefileil,  and  a  heart  perfectly
subjected  to  the  will  of  God.


78


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [<«•  n.  1— 26.


n.  Thk  lioht  thus  oast  on  the  ouaracteb  of  Nathanabl.  He  was  an  Tsraelite
indeed.  Therefore  he  had  known  inteuse  spiritual  struggles.  His  bosom  had  been  the
seat  of  some  great  searching  influence  akin  to  that  which  Israel  passed  through  when
he  wrestled  to  the  breaking  of  the  day.  Nathanael  must  have  had  his  time  of  wrestling
under  the  fig  tree.  Something  was  resolved,  something  attained.  What  the  something
was  we  know  not,  for  Jesus  perfectly  respects  Nathanael's  secret,  even  while  he  makes
Nathanael  feel  that  he  knows  it.

III.  We  all  should  have  cub  time  under  the  fio  tree.  Seek  a  season  wherein
the  underlying;  realities  of  life  shall  meet  us  face  to  face.  Struggles  like  those  of
Nathanae^.  are  indicated  again  and  again  in  the  Book  of  Psalms.  If  you  would  under-
stand Ps.  cxxxix.,  you  must  have  had  your  time  under  the  fig  tree.  Till  you  have  had
such  a  time  you  are  vrithout  a  key  to  the  deepest,  most  precious  utterances  of  Scripture.
The  thought  of  Nathanael  should  stir  us  up  to  that  struggle  which  makes  a  spiritual
man  so  rich  and  stron?,  and,  above  all,  so  satisfying  a  si^ht  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

IV.  When  we  abb  under  the  fig  tree  Jesus  knows  about  it.  Nathanael  knows
that  Jesus  has  gazed  upon  his  heart  and  seen  its  most  hidden  thoughts.  He  is  not
dependent  upon  the  exactness  of  our  recollections,  or  the  fulness  of  our  descriptions.
He  sees  the  fulness  of  the  inward  life  just  as  it  is.  Nathanael  knew  that  hence-
forth to  one  Being  in  the  universe  at  least  secrets  were  not  secrets.  Not  merely  that
Nathanael  wa^i  seen,  but  seen  by  the  eye  of  Jesus,  that  made  the  discovery  so  important.
"  /saw  thee."    Put  all  the  fulness  of  meaning  you  can  into  that  "  L" — Y.


E.XPOSITIOI?.


CHAPTER  n.


Ver.  1 — oh.  iii.  2. — 4.  The  tetUmony  of
tignt  to  the  glory  of  the  Word  made  flesh.

Vers.  1 — 12.^1)  The  first  sign,  the  hegin-
ning  of  signs.  Mastery  over  the  old  creation.
Sign  of  love  and  power.  The  description  of
the  preceding  narrative,  given  in  ver.  11,  is
the  true  key  to  it.  It  is  impressive  on
several  accounts.  Christ  liad  not  yet  given
any  "  sign "  of  the  invisible  and  eternal
glory  which  the  evangelist  in  his  prologue
had  claimed  for  him.  He  had  not  in  hia
own  person  "  manifested "  the  unique
majesty  of  his  will,  nor  revealed  the  direc-
tion in  which  the  power  he  wielded  would
most  freely  move.  John,  by  this  statement,
(1)  puts  down  a  positive  disclaimer  of  the
whole  cycle  of  portents  which,  when  he
wrote,  had  begun  to  hover  in  romantic  and
exaggerated  fashion  around  the  infancy  and
minority  of  Jesus.  (2)  He  shows  that  his
purpose  is  to  bring  back  from  forgetfulness
tlie  primary  aiid  most  impressive  events
which  did  in  reality  characterize  the  earliest
ministry  of  Christ.  (3)  He  emphasizes  the
scene  of  some  of  these  manifestations  as
restricted  to  a  spot  which,  however  difScult
actually  to  identify,  was  nevertheless  in
Gtalilee,  in  which  propheoy  had  foretold  a
great  manifestation  of  Divine  light.  (4)
Ue  lays  itrais  on  the  fact  that  the  prine


object  of  it  was  to  oonrey  to  his  dUelples,  to
men  who  knew  that  he  was  the  Messiah,
the  Son  of  God,  the  Lamb  of  God,  some-
thing of  the  power  which  he  had  for  meet-
ing any  emergency  that  might  arise.  He
did  not  seek  to  promote,  nor  did  he  succeed
in  exciting,  the  village  wonder  at  a  magical
entertainment;  nor  did  the  bridegroom,  nor
the  governor  of  the  feast,  nor  so  far  as  we
know  even  Mary  herself,  fully  apprehend  in
the  event  what  "  the  disciples  "  saw.  These
disciples  were  probably  acting  the  part  of
the  Siaicofoi.  They  were  admitted  to  a  great
sign  of  superhuman  power.  They  believed
on  him.  This  is  all  we  are  told  of  tlie
effect  of  the  "  sign."  (5)  The  entire  ori-
ginality of  the  sign,  one  for  wliich  the
previous  narrative  and  prologue  do  not  in
the  least  prepare  us,  is  one  of  the  continual
surprises  of  this  Gospel.  The  introductory
notes  of  this  great  symphony  are  such  that
we  might  be  disposed  to  conjecture  before-
hand that  One  who  is  the  Logos  made  flesh,
whose  glory  is  that  of  an  only  begotten  Son
of  God,  who  is  the  predestined  Baptizer
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  Lamb  of
God  that  takes  away  the  sin  of  the  world,
and  the  Link  and  Ladder  between  heaven
and  earth,  the  predicted  Messiah  and  Son
of  Man,  will  with  Divine  aloofness  scarce
touch  with  his  feet  this  common  earth.
Human  homes  and  love  and  festal  rejoicings


OH,  n.  1-25.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


n


are  bo  immeasurablj  beQeath  him  that  he
can  neither  augment  their  earthly  exhila-
ration nor  take  part  in  such  carnal -and
mundane  considerations.  Such  ideas  may
have  crowded  the  imagination  of  the  sons  of
Zebedee,  of  Philip  too  and  of  Nathanael.
Already  they  may  have  been  losing  in  a  maze
of  mystery  the  Divine  humanity,  the  intpnse
and  tender  sympathy  of  Jesus  with  our
everyday  life,  the  profound  interest  felt  in
our  earthly  career.  They  may  have  needed
to  be  taugl  it  some  great  lesson  of  the  blending
of  the  sacred  with  tlie  secular,  of  the  water  of
purification  with  the  true,  strong,  fragrant
wine  of  the  kingdom.  They  may  have
needed,  at  this  moment,  the  prosaic  return
to  ordinary  life  over  which  their  new  Lord
would  preside,  and  from  which  he  would
never  stand  aloof.  (6)  All  this  is,  more-
over, highly  accentuated  by  the  peculiar
character  of  this  sign.  It  was  a  creative
act.  The  idea  that  it  was  merely  a  hasten-
ing by  his  will  of  the  natural  processes  by
which  water  is  always  being  transformed
into  wine  by  the  vine,  seems  contradicted
by  the  fact  that  the  vine  does  not  trans-
form water  into  wine,  but  combines  with
the  water  other  substances,  cunningly  and
wondrously  mixing  with  it  tlie  organic
compounds  which  it  subtracts  from  the  air
and  soil,  and  which  are  necessary  for  the
purpose.  Water  which  has  become  wine
is  not  transubstantiated  into  wine.  The
water  is  still  there ;  but  there  are  added  to  it
other  elements  and  compounds.  The  lesson
is  undoubtedly  taught  that  he  who  performed
this  prodigy  called  certain  elements  and
forces  into  being  by  the  simple  fiat  of  his
will.  Evolutionary  hastening  of  natural
processes  do  not  in  the  least  apply.  If  that
took  place  which  the  disciples  (John  among
them)  saw  and  handled  and  tasted,  then  we
have  an  undeniable  act  of  creation.  Thew
was  then  no  other  antecedent  to  this  new
category  of  exiitence  except  the  will  of  Christ.
This  is  the  obvious  intention  of  the  historian.
Other  explanations  are  offered.  The  ra-
tionalistic hypothesis  of  a  quiet  and  pious
fraud  on  the  part  of  Mary  is  too  gross  for
belief.  The  mere  magic,  or  sleight  of  hand,
is  10  utterly  foreign  to  tlie  narrative  tliat,
though  Benan  seems  to  favour  it,  the  entire
place  assigned  to  the  "  miracle  "  renders  it
ntterly  inconceivable.    Some  have  gone  so


far  as  to  say  that  the  interesting  discourse
of  Jesus  during  the  repast  inclined  the
guests  to  believe  that,  though  their  thirst
had  been  quenched  vrith  pure  water,  it  was
veritable  and  precious  wine.  This  Beuss
call  un  suroroit  d'absurditA  To  suppose,
with  Ewald  and  Lange,  that  it  was  a  miracle
upon  the  minds  of  the  guests,  who  believed
they  had  drunk  wine,  when  in  reality  they
had  only  tasted  water,  is,  as  Weiss  admits,
another  form  of  the  natural  explanation.
Why,  moreover,  should  the  didactic  energy  of
Jesus  not  more  frequently  have  produced  a
like  impression  ?  The  hypothesis  of  Strauss
is  far  more  rational,  viz.  that  we  have  here
the  mythopoeic  tendency  at  full  work.
Seeing  that  Moses  sweetened  the  bitter
waters,  and  transformed  the  Nile  into  blood,
and  that  Elijah  multiplied  the  oil  in  the
widow's  cruse,  so  Strauss  contended  that
the  Messiah  must  have  done  the  like,  and
that  tills  "  miiacle  of  luxury  "  ii  one  of  the
glorifying  myths  by  which  Jesus  is  supposed
to  have  transformed  the  water  of  Jewish
ceremonial  into  the  wine  of  the  kingdom  of
grace.  This  theory  is  refuted  by  the  enor-
mous difficulty  of  finding  any  party  in  the
Church,  or  of  discovering  any  tendency  in
the  Christian  community  or  outside  in  the
Hellenic  schools,  which  could  have  evolved
such  an  event — so  capable  of  being  misin-
terpreted— and  that  too  out  of  a  moral
consciousness  diametrically  opposed  to  such
an  idea  of  Messiah.  Certainly  a  vastly
preponderating  element  of  the  gospel  is
clean  contrary  to  such  an  idea  of  the  Christ.
Apart  from  there  being  some  historic  fact
underlying  the  story,  it  seems  incredible  that
it  should  have  been  invented  by  Christian,
or  Gnostic,  or  Hebrew  tradition.  The  same
may  be  said  of  Baur's  hypothesis  and  of
Keim's,  (1)  that  the  pseudo-John  invented
the  miracle  to  embody  the  idea  of  contrast
between  the  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist  and
of  Christ ;  or  (2)  that  the  saying  of  Jesus,
"  Shall  the  children  of  the  bridechamber
fast -while  the  Bridegroom  is  with  them?"
needed  embodiment  in  some  concrete  fact ;
or  that  of  Reuss,  who  supposes  that  the
author,  having  invented  a  series  of  imagi-
nary interviews  and  testimonies,  must  need
cap  them  with  a  miracle.  Thoma  sees  in  the
representation  the  evangelist's  sublimation
of  the  banquet  in  the  house  of  Levi,  under


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDIiJG  TO  ST.  JOHN.        toH.n.1— 2S.


the  fonn  of  the  ■Wigdom  or  Logos  festival  of
Prov.  ix.  and  Ecclua.  i.  16 — 18  and  xxiv.
1 — 25.  The  Logos  is  here  the  symposi-
arch,  and  the  feast  correspondg  with  the
bridal  festival  of  the  Apocalypse.  Several
hypotheses  have  been  fashioned,  in  order  to
explain  the  forgery  of  the  narrative,  and
they  are  quite  as  numerous  as  the  attempted
solutions  by  orthodox  expositors  of  the  pur-
pose or  significance  of  the  miracle.  It  is
perfectly  gratuitous  and  arbitrary  on  the
pavt  of  Baur  to  condemn  the  narrative
because  he  could  not  find  support  for  it  in
the  synoptic  Gospels.  We  have  seen  (see
lu  I  roduction)  that  each  evangelist,  and
especially  Matthew  and  Lnke,  had  sepaiate
access  to  a  group  of  facts  and  sayings  peculiar
to  himself,  and  nearly  as  numerous  and
memorable  as  those  which  characterize  the
Fourth  Gospel.  Baumgarten-Cruaius  is
wrong  in  placing  this  event  at  the  lowest
point  of  the  series  of  miracles  of  this  Gospel.
It  is  necessary  to  complete  the  view  which
tlie  evangelist  formed  oi  the  miraculous
P'lwer  of  Christ,  for  him  to  demonstrate
autlifirity  over  the  matter  (KArj)  of  the
created  universe.  In  ch.  vi.  he  illustrates
Clirist's  rtlatioa  to  the  forces  of  nature,
when  the  Lord  hushed  the  storm  and
walked  on  the  sea ;  in  ch.  xxi.,  by  narrating
a  miiaculous  drauglit  of  fishes,  he  exhi-
bits the  Lord's  control  over  the  animate
creation ;  and  in  other  instances,  the  like
mastery  over  the  human  body,  over  its
diseases,  necessities,  and  death  (see  ch.  iv.,
v.,  vi.,  xi.).  If  the  other  evangelists  have
passed  it  by,  we  must  remember  that  they
ignore  the  entire  period  of  our  Lord's
activity  which  intervened  between  the
temptation  and  the  impiisonment  of  John
the  Baptist.  The  disciple  to  whom  Jesus
on  the  cross  entrusted  the  care  of  his  mother
might  have  special  reasons  for  recording
almost  the  only  scene  in  which  that  mother
playpd  any  part.  The  most  impressive  cir-
cumstance is  that  the  ditciplos  of  John,  who
had  learned  his  stern  denunciation  of  'Bin
and  his  call  to  repentance,  were  to  be  taught
that  the  highest  life  was  not  to  be  secured
by  abjuring  marriage,  nnd  throwing  a  tragic
gloom  over  human  life,  but  by  hallowing  and
consecrating  the  home,  the  source  and  nurse
of  the  natural  life.  Christ  first  purities  the
hone,  then  the  temple,  then  the  individual.


Ver,  I. — On  the  third  day  there  v/ea  a
marriage  in  Cana '  of  Galilee,  and  the
mother  of  Jesus  was  there.  Should  the  sup-
posed discovery  of  Bethabara  or  Bethany
beyond  Jordan,  at  a  spot  n  short  distance
south  of  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,  be  veri-
fied, then  there  is  no  difficulty  in  accepting
the  view  of  Banr  as  to  the  identity  of  the
"  third  day,"  reckoning  it  as  the  morrow  of
the  day  on  which  Nathanael  was  called  to  be
a  disciple.  The  first  day  mentioned  would  be
ch.  i.  29 ;  the  second  day,  ch.  i.  85 ;  and  the
third  identicul  with  the  day  mentioned  in  ch.
i.  43, 45.  There  would  be  time  for  the  rapid
journey  from  the  Jordan  to  Cana.  But  if
the  third  day  be  interpreted  more  naturally,
as  the  third  after  the  day  mentioned  in  oh.
i.  44 — 51,  time  is  given  for  the  journey  from
the  traditional  site  near  Jericho  to  either  of
the  sites  which  claim  to  be  the  scene  of  this
earliest  miracle.  It  is  a  march  of  twenty
hours,  which  would  occupy  two  or  three
days.  Moreover,  as  wedding-feasts  often
occupied  in  Palestine  seven  or  even  fourteen
days  (Gen.  xxix.  27 ;  Judg.  xiv.  15  ;  Tobit
viii.  19 ;  ix.  4 ;  x.  1),  the  festivities  may  have
been  advanced,  and  some  explanation  be  thus
given  of  the  exhaustion  of  the  supply  ot
wine.  Consequently,  there  are  several
justifications  and  explanations  of  that  which
is  condemned  by  Baur  and  others  as  an  un-
historical  element.  If  the  first  day  was  that
on  which  John  bore  his  testimony  befcire
the  Sanhedrin;  the  second,  ch.  i.  29;  the
third,  oh.  i.  35 ;  the  fourth,  oh.  i.  43,  45  ; —
the  day  of  the  wedding  at  Cana  would  be  the
seventh,  and  thus  a  sacred  week,  correspond-
ing with  the  solemn  week  that  terminated
with  Easter  Day,  would  be  seen  to  have
found  place  in  the  earliest  periods  of  the
ministry.  The  mother  of  Jesus  was  there.
Since  Nathanael  of  Cana  was  summoned  as
a  friend,  and  since  the  first  group  of  the  dis-
ciples were  familiar  with  each  other  and  him,
the  inference  is  that  the  bride  or  bridegroom
was  an  intimate  friend  of  the  entire  party.
Weiss  claims  the  reference  to  the  little  town
of  Cana  "  as  another  of  those  recollections,
which  testify  indubitably  to  the  historical
character  of  the  Gospel"  ('Life  of  Christ,'  vol.
i.  p.  377).  The  presence  of  the  mother  of  the
Lord  at  Cana  makes  it  also  probable  that  slie
had,  after  the  death  of  Joseph,  removed  from
Nazareth  to  Cana.  This  is  confirmed  by
the  casual  remark  in  Mark  vi.  3  that  his
sisters  only  were  still  resident  in  their  for-
mer home.  Moreover,  it  would  explain  the
return  of  Jesus  from  the  scene  of  his  bap-
tism to  his  temporary  home  (but  see  ver.  12).
The  traditional  Kefr  Kenneh  is  situated  on

'  Alford,  K,T.,  and  T.R.  spell  Kav^;
Westoott  and  Hort,  Kora :  Tischendorf  (Sth
edit.)  and  Weym.,  Kwi.


OH.  11. 1—26.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACtJOEDlNG  TO  ST.  JOHN.


81


rising  grooDd  four  miles  and  a  half  north-
east of  Nazareth,  and  the  remains  of  a
Greek  church  are  still  to  be  seen  there.
The  Bite  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  con-
ditions. We  may  suppose  it  to  be  called
"  of  Galilee  "  to  distinguish  it  from  a  Oana
in  Persia  mentioned  by  Josephus  ('Vita,'
xvi.  1) ;  but  more  probably  from  the  Kanah
in  the  tribe  of  Asher,  mentioned  in  Josh,
six.  28.  The  situation  of  this  town  in
Phoenicia  may  have  been  so  far  from  Gali-
lee proper  as  to  have  rendered  the  expres-
sion desirable.  Dr.  Robinson  believed  that
he  had  hit  more  certainly  upon  the  site  by
finding  a  small  village  bearing  the  name
Cana  el  DjeUl,  or  Khurbet  Eana,  which  lies
some  seven  miles  north-east  from  Nazareth
beyond  Sepphoris.  The  adjunct,  el  DjeUl,
suggested  tlie  preservation  of  the  old  desig-
nation drawn  from  this  very  narrative.  This
identification  was  accepted  by  Bitter  and
Meyer ;  Stanley  considered  it  very  doubtful,
and  so  do  Westoott  ('Oomm.,'  in  ioc.)  and
Dr.  Sclah  Merrill,  in  'Piot.  Palestine,'  ii.  pp.
59 — 63.  The  more  recent  investigations  of
the  Palest.  Expl.  Society  have  led  once  more
to  the  recognition  of  the  traditional  site,
independently  maintained  by  Hengstenberg,
Godet,  Moulton,  and  others.  Its  site  is  pic-
turesque, and  resembles  the  position  of  many
Italian  towns  perched  on  the  slope  of  a  low
hill  at  the  head  of  valleys  forming  road-
ways to  the  coast  and  to  the  lake.  Its
Greek  name,  Cana,  meaning  "  a  reed,"  was
probably  derived  from  the  reeds  which  grow
in  the  marshy  plain  below  it  (compare  Cannes,
Canossa,  Cannes.    So  Hugh  Macmillan).

Ver.  2. — And  both  Jesus  was  called  (eVA^jflTj,
aorist,  not  pluperfect,  and  contrasted  with
the  ^p  of  ver.  1) — after  his  return  from  Beth-
any— and  his  disciples  to  the  marriage.
Jesus  hud  no  disciples  before  the  events
recorded  in  the  previous  chapter.  These  men
may  have  been  friends  of  each  other  and  of
the  bridal  party,  and  received  such  an  invi-
tation before  their  visit  to  the  banks  of  the
Jordan ;  but  it  is  far  more  probable  that  these
inilividuals  already  mentioned,  or  that  some
of  them,  and  tliat  most  certainly  John  his
near  relative  (see  Introduction),  were  in-
vited, because  they  were  in  the  society  of
Jesus.

Ver.  3. — A  large  accession  of  guests  in
such  a  humble  home  might  easily  be  sup-
posed to  make  a  famine  in  the  provisions,
and  so  we  read.  And  when  the  wine  failed '

'  N*  and  Vet.  Lat.  here  add  oTmv  oiK
etx^v  ^"^^  TvveT^KeffBTi  b  olvos  tov  yAfiov,  efro,
"  They  had  no  wine,  because  the  wine  of  the
marriage  was  consumed."  Westcott  and
Hort  have  placed  the  gloss  in  the  margin,
and  Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.)  has  introduced
it  into  his  text.  See  Hugh  Macmillan's
joaH.


— either  from  this  cause,  or  from  the  poverty
of  the  hosts,  whose  willingness  and  welcome
were  larger  than  their  means,  or  by  reason
of  an  advanced  stage  in  the  festival — ^the
mother  of  Jesus  saith  to  him,  They  have  no
wine.*  The  simple  presence  of  the  Lord
and  of  his  mother,  of  snch  guests  as  these,
at  a  wedding-feast,  is  a  Divine  rebuke  of  all
that  morbid  asceticism  which  crept  from
Essenism  and  Orientalism  into  the  Christian
Church,  of  all  that  false  pietism  and  fancied
purity  which  made  marriage  a  contamina-
tion, and  exalted  virginity  to  an  unnatural
elevation.  The  tender-hearted  interest  felt
by  the  blessed  mother  of  the  Lord  in  the
condition  of  the  hosts,  and  her  tone  of  au-
thority towards  the  Staxovoi,  are  eminently
natural ;  her  tacit  request  for  help,  though
she  does  not  specify  the  way  in  which  the
help  should  be  given,  implies  on  her  part
something  of  presumption  in  indicating  to
our  Lord  the  course  he  should  adopt.  A
question  of  great  interest  arises — ^Wliat  did
she  mean  by  her  appeal  1  Bengel  suggested
that  Mary  simply  intended :  "  Let  us  depart
before  the  poverty  of  our  hosts  reveals  itself ."
This  makes  Christ's  reply  an  acceptance  of
her  hint;  but  along  other  lines  the  rabbis
were  accustomed  to  say  that  wine  and  life
were  in  the  mouth  of  a  rabbi  (see  Geikie'a
'  Life  of  Christ,'  i.  475 ;  Wunsuiio,  in  he.).
We  are  expressly  told  that  this  is  the  begin-
ning of  signs,  and  therefore  we  have  no
riglit  to  conclude  that,  previous  to  this,  in
the  home  at  Nazareth,  Jesus  had  been  ac-
customed to.conquer  fate  and  master  poverty
and  compel  circumstances  by  miraculoua'
powers  for  his  own  or  for  his  mother's
support.  We  know  that  it  was  a  temptation
of  the  devil  that  he  should  perform  some
such  miracle  for  his  own  sustenance,  and  that
he  had  sternly  suppressed  the  suggestion  of
the  evil  one.  The  mother  must  have  known
his  powers,  and  must  have  known  his  mind
on  this  very  matter.  What  did  she  suggest  ?
Was  she  thinking  mainly  of  the  need  of
wine,  or  firstly  and  chiefly  of  tlie  honour  and
glory  of  her  Son?  She  supposed  that  a
moment  had  arrived  when  he  should  by  some
royal  act  assert  his  imperial  rights,  and  give
an  order  which  would  be  obeyed  as  that  of
Sovereign  Prince.  Precisely  the  same  spirit
prevailed  always  in  his  home  and  amonghis
disciples — an  eager  desire  that  he  should
manifest  himself  to  the  world  (cf.  oh.  vii.
4 — 6).  The  disciples  did  not  lose  it  on  the
night  of  the  Passion,  or  the  eve  of  the  Ascen-
sion (oh.  xiv.  22;  Acts  i.  6).  If  this  was
the  real  meaning  of  the  remark,  "They  have

discourse  on  "They  have  no  Wine,"  in  his
work  entitled, '  The  True  Vine.'

'  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  with  N»  and
little  other  autliority,  reads,  oTvos  oix  iim,

0


82


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  h.  1—26.


no  wine,"  it  becomes  singularly  intereating
to  observe  the  method  of  our  Lord.  The
request  for  a  supply  of  additional  aolace  and
refreshment  was  complied  with.  The  sug-
gestion to  show  himself  to  the  world  was  as
resolutely  withheld.  There  was  no  pomp,
no  claim,  no  self-assertion  ;  there  was  quiet,
boundless,  affluent  love.  The  glory  of  Divine
love  was  manifested,  the  need  was  satisfied;
but  the  impiession  was  not  intended  to  go
beyond  the  hearts  of  those  beings  who  would
partially  understand  it,  at  the  right  time.

Ver.  4. — With  this  tiiought,  the  reply  of
Jesus  to  the  premature  suggestion  of  the
mother  becomes  perfectly  comprehensible.
What  is  there  to  me  and  thee,  0  woman?
Mine  honr  has  not  yet  oome.  The  appella-
tion "  woman  "  was  used  by  him  upon  the
cross,  when  he  was  concerned  most  humanly
and  tenderly  with  her  great  grief  and  desola-
tion, and  therefore  had  no  breath  of  unfilial
harEJiness  in  it  (cf.  ch.  xiz.  26 ;  Dio  Cassius,
'  Hist.,'  U.  12,  where  Augustus  addresses
Cleopatra,  OapaeT  S  7i$j'ai.  Maldonatus  ad-
mits that  Catholics  "in  varias  tamen  de
sensu  hujus  loci  sententias  distract!  sunt ").
But  the  proverbial  T(  4fu>l  Kal  aoi;  whereso-
ever tlie  words  occur,  imply,  if  not  personal
estrangement,  yet  as  to  the  matter  in  hand
some  divergence  of  feeling  (see  Matt.  viii.
29 ;  Hark  i.  24 ;  Luke  viii.  28 ;  see  also
2  Sam.  xvi.  10;  1  Kings  xvii.  18  ;  2  Chron.
XXXV.  21).  Almost  all  commentators  seem
to  suggest  that  our  Lord  refused  to  be  guided
by  a  mother's  direction ;  that  he  wished  her
to  understand  that  he  was  breaking  off  from
her  oontrol  and  from  that  silent  submission
which  he  had  hitherto  vrillingly  yielded
(so  Meyer,  Hengstenberg,  Godet,  Westcott,
Tholuck,  Ebrard,  and  Lange).  Soliafl'  ha«
quoted  from  the  Fathers  before  the  Nestorian
controversy  clear  proof  that  they  admitted
censure,  and  therefore  blame,  in  the  blessed
"Virgin  Mary.  Still,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
cause  of  the  censure,  coupled  with  an  imme-
diate response  to  her  special  request  about
the  vrine,  has  not  been  sufBoiently  appre-
ciated. He  said,  "Mine  hour  is  not  yet
come."  It  would  have  come  if  the  provision
of  wine  was  the  ground  of  divergence  of  sen-
timent; if  the  moment  for  the  supply  of  these
temporal  wants  were  the  point  of  difference
between  them.  The  "hour"  for  Christ  to
tell  the  world  all  that  Mary  knew  had  not
come.  The  hour  of  the  full  reVelation  of
his  Messianic  claims  had  not  come,  nor  did
it  oome  in  the  temple,  or  by  the  lake,  or  in
the  feast-day ;  not  till  the  awful  moment  of
rejection,  when  death  was  hovering  over
him,  and  the  blow  WM  about  to  fall,  did
he  aay,  "  The  hour  has  come "  (see  ch.
xii.  23;  xvli.  1)— the  hour  of  his  greatest
glory.  "  The  hour  had  not  yet  come."  The
hour    would  oome    when   nvers  of  living


water  would  be  supplied  to  all  those  who
come  to  him ;  when  the  blood  he  would  shed
would  be  a  Divine  stream,  clear  as  crystal,
for  the  refreshment  of  all  nations ;  when  at
another  marriage-supper  of  a  saved  humanity
the  precious  blood  should  be  an  ample  supply
of  costly  wine  for  all  the  world.  Moreover,
the  link  at  the  present  moment  between
our  Lord  and  his  mother  must  begin  to
■hade  into  something  more  spiritual.  It
was  not  possible  that  he  should  be  hold  en
by  it.  A  sword  would  pierce  thiough  her
maternal  heart  when  she  became  gradually
alive  to  the  fact  that  they  that  do  the  will
of  his  Father,  the  same  were  his  "  brothers,
sisters,  and  mother."

Ver.  5. — His  mother  saith  onto  the  ser-
vants (SufKOfoi,  not  vTTTipiTcu,  not  SovKol).
The  habits  of  Oriental  life  at  the  present
day  make  it  extremely  probable  that  the
disciples  of  Jebus  were  themiselves  takino;
the  place  of  those  who  graciously  waited
upon  the  guests.  If  so,  the  language  of
Mary  to  them,  and  the  special  effect  of  the
whole  scene  upon  their  minds,  become
marked  and  suggestive.  Be  that  as  it  may,
the  mother  of  Jesus  clearly  imderstood  by
the  gentle  rebuke  she  receired,  that  Christ,
her  Son,  had  read  her  heart,  and  was  going
in  some  way,  not  to  gratify  her  darling  wish,
but  at  least  to  take  her  hint  for  the  eonsola-
tion  of  her  young  friends,  and  to  attend  to
her  suggestion.  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto
yon,  do  it.  Though  in  some  sense  slighted
or  reproved,  she  exhibits  the  most  entire
confidence  in  her  Son  and  Lord.  She
encourages  the  servants  to  do  whatever  he
might  command.  More  may  have  passed
between  them  than  is  reported.  Tlie  evan-
gelist often  suggests  omitted  details  (as  in
ch.  xi.  28;  iii.  1,  2;  and  elsewhere).  The
faith  of  Mary  was  not  depressed  by  the
discovery  that  there  were  depths  of  cha-
racter iu  her  Son  which  she  could  not
fathom.  Obedience  to  Christ  wiU  always
be  our  duty,  even  though  we  cannot  pene-
trate the  reasons  of  his  command.  An
interesting  illustration  of  Mary's  words  may
be  seen  in  Gen.  xli.  55,  where  Pharaoh
gives  the  like  injunction  to  his  servants
concerning  Joseph.  Archdeacon  Watkins
records  a  curious  tradition,  mentioned  by
Jerome  in  his  Prologue  to  the  Gospel,  that
John  was  himself  the  bridegroom,  but  that,
guided  by  the  miracle,  he  left  all  and  fol-
lowed Christ  (see  Sears'  'Heart  of  Jesus,'
Trench, '  Miracles,'  p.  98).

Ver.  6. — Now  there  were  ($et,  or)  placed
there  six  water-pots  of  stone,  after  the  Jews'
manner  of  purifying,  oontaining  two  or  three
firkins  apieoe.  Stone  was  often  used  for
these  receptacles,  as  more  oalcnlated  to  pre-
serve the  purity  of  the  water  (WUasche
refers  to '  Beza,'  ii.  2 ;  Westoott  quotes '  S<^'


on.  n.  1—26.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.


83


i  J  Barclay,  in  Mb  translation  of  '  Mishna,'
S  17,  enumerates  earthenware  and  otlier
material  as  lawful).  It  is  interesting  that
these  stone  jars  are  still  used  in  this  very
neighbourhood  for  like  purposes  ('Piot.
Palestine').  This  large. number  of  jars  of
considerable  magnitude  was  doubtless  due
in  part  to  the  numlier  of  the  guests,  and  to
the  scrupulous  attention  to  ceremonial
purity  that  was  enjoined  by  the  oral  law
(see  '  Mishna,'  §  17 ;  and  Lightfoot,  in  Zoo.).
They  were  accustomed  to  wash,  not  only  the
bands,  but  "cups,  brazen  vessels,  and
tables"  (see  IMatt.  xv'.  2  and  parallel
passages).  (For  this  use  of  xard,  see  2  Tim.
i.  1,  in  which  "  according  to "  easily  passes
into  the  sense  of  "  for  the  sake  of,"  "  after
the  manner  of.")  The  Attic  measure  me-
tretes  was  equal  to  the  Hebrew  hath
(Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  viii.  2.  9),  and  stands  for
it  in  the  LXX.  of  2  Chron.  It.  5,  and  this
equalled  1^  Roman  amphorae,  8  gallons  -f  7J
pints.  So  that  six  jars  containing  2  or  3
metretes,  say  2J  =  6  x  2-5  x  8  gallons  +
7-5  pints  =  6  X  25  x  71-5  pints  =  134
gallons  and  a  fraction.  The  jars  may  have
differed  in  shape,  according  as  they  were
adapted  for  different  purposes ;  but  avi  must
be  translated  distributively,  and  we  cannot
evade  the  enormous  capacity  of  the  jars,  and
therefore  the  abundance  of  the  gift  thus  pro-
vided. Various  efforts  have  been  made  to
reduce  the  extent  of  the  provision ;  but  the
obvious  implication  of  the  narrative  is  that
the  six  jars  were  the  locale  of  the  miracle.
Dr.'Moulton  and  Dr.  Westcott  suggest  that
these  water-pots  were  filled  with  pure
water,  but  that  the  wine  was  "drawn"
from  the  water-supply  to  which  the  servants
had  access,  and  tliat  no  more  wine  was  pro-
vided than  that  which  was  borne  to  the
governor  of  the  feast.  Others  have  supposed
that  simply  the  water  drawn  from  the  jars
was  transformed  in  the  process.  These  sup-
positions make  the  entire  reference  to  the
water-pots  extremely  obscure  and  unneces-
sary. The  large  quantity  of  wine  thus
offered  to  these  humble  folks  corresnonds
with  the  affluence  of  Nature  in  all  her
moods — the  munificence  of  spring  blostoms,
the  harvest  of  the  sea,  the  exuberance  of
sunlight,  the  superfluity  of  rain  that  falls
on  the  oceans,  tlie  copiousness  of  all  God's
ways.  When,  on  other  occasions,  the  Lord
added  to  the  supplies  of  food  in  fishes  and
bread,  liis  lavish  abundance  corresponds
with  the  riches  of  his  loving-kindness  on
this  occasion.  There  was  provided,  not
the  material  for  a  meal,  but  an  ample  dowry
for  sudi  a  bride.  No  mere  magical  change,
momentarily  confounding  perception  and
leaving  no  trace  behind,  but  a  supply  which
would  be  a  standing  proof  of  the  reality  of
what  h*d  been  done.


Yor.  7. — JesuB  saith  to  them,  Till  the
water-pots  with  water.  And  they  filled  them
to  the  brim.  They  had,  therefore,  been
emptied  already  for  the  purifying  purposes
and  processes  of  the  large  party,  probably
suggesting  that  the  friends  of  the  bride-
groom were  solicitous  to  obey  the  religious
discipline  which  was  believed  to  be  in
harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  The  ex-
pression, eas  &»a,  seems  added  to  emphasize
the  quantity  of  wine  thus  provided.  The
miracle  took  place  between  the  filling  of  the
jars  and  their  being  drawn  upon.  We  are
not  permitted  to  look  more  closely  into  this
mystery.  The  finger  of  God,  the  wUl  of  the
Creator,  determines  the  result.  The  servants
knew  that  they  had  filled  the  jars  with
water.  The  next  thing,  and  all  that  we
know,  is  that  the  Lord  said —

Ver.  8. — Draw  forth  (the  object  of  the
verb  is  not  in  the  sentence.  He  did  not  say
the  "water"  which  you  placed  there,  nor
the  "wine"  into  which  it  has  been  trans-
formed, but  simply,  "Draw  forth"),  and
bear  to  the  governor  of  the  feast.  The
traditional  interpretation,  that  the  water-
jars  were  the  source  of  the  unwonted
supply,  and  the  measure  of  it,  strongly
commends  itself  in  preference  to  the  sug-
gestions of  Westcott,  Moulton,  as  well  as
Barnes,  Olshauseu,  and  others.  The  apx'-
TpUXivos,  the  "master  of  the  table,"  is  the
chief  servant  presiding  over  the  arrange-
ments of  the  feast.  This  was  an  Attic
official,  referred  to  by  Athenssus  (iv.  c.  70)
as  TpaTreQoiroi6s  (cf.  Heliodor.,  vii.  27).  The
"symposiarcli,"  arbiter  bibendi,  is  not  to  be
confounded  with  him.  The  latter  was  one
of  the  guests  chosen  to  taste  the  wine,  etc.
(see  Ecelus.  xxxii.  1,  where  he  is  called
riyoiixems').  The  "governor"  is  one  who
occupies  a  still  higher  position  of  importance
in  Greek  feasts.  There  is  no  other  trace  of
the  Attic  usiige  among  the  Jews.  As  the
passage  in  Ecclosiasticus  indicates  a  different
custom,  and  the  references  to  something
similar  describe  the  oficer  by  different
names,  no  very  sure  conclusion  can  be
drawn.  Wiinsche  says  that,  ordinarily,  the
master  of  the  house  was  bound  to  serve  his
guests,  and  preside  over  the  distribution  of
fond  and  presents.  Thus,  at  tlie  marriage
of  his  son,  Babbi  Gamaliel  served  all  his
invited  guests.  Trench,  Alford,  and  Words-
worth think  that  the  governor  here  was  one
of  the  invited  guests,  from  the  freedom  with
which  he  addressed  the  bridegroom.  Meyer,
Godet,  take  the  view  that  he  was  not.  And
they  bear  it,'  conscious  of  a  wondrous  fact,
which  must   have   filled  them  with  con-

>  The  T.E.  reads  ral ;  the  E.T,  TiBchen.
dorf  (8th  eilit.),  Tregelles,  with  N,  B,  K,  L,
1,  33,  and  numerous  other  authorities,  oi  5«,


84


TilE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   JOHN.        [ch.  ii.  i— 26.


sternation.  At  first  the  orrler  must  have
Beamed  like  folly,  as  when  Moses  called  on
istafil  to  "  go  forward  "  into  the  Bed  Sea,
or  as  when  Jesus  said  to  the  paralytic,
"Take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk"  "They
bear  it."

Ver.  9. — ^When  the  governor  of  the  feast
tasted  the  water  which  had  become  wine.
Luther  translated,  "  Den  Wein  der  Wasser
gewesen  war" — "The  wine  which  had  been
water."  No  other  explanation  is  possible
than  one  that  asserts  an  astounding  contra-
vention of  the  oidinary  evolutions  and
sequences  of  nature.  If  wine  has  taken  the
place  of  water,  there  has  been  added  to  the
water  that  which  was  not  there  befoi  e.  TJie
vine,  with  all  its  wondrous  processes — the
vineyard,  the  wine-press,  and  other  ap-
pliances— ^have  all  been  dispensed  with,  and
tlie  same  power  which  said,  "  Let  there  be
light,"  called  these  additional  elements  to-
gether, originated  them  by  his  will.  The
new  properties  presented  themselves  te  the
percipient  senses.  In  this  respect  the  trans-
formation is  profoundly  different  from  the
supposed  change  which  occurs  in  the  Holy
Eucharist.  There  the  accidents  and  ele-
ments all  remain ;  tlie  substantia  underlying
them  is  supposed  to  be  replaced  by  another
substantia ;  but  neither  the  one  nor  the  other
substance  has  ever  been  present  to  the
senses.  Here  a  new  substance,  with  pre-
viously undiscovered  attributes,  presenti
itself.  The  uncomprnmising  opponents  of
the  supernatural  will  accept  almost  any
interpretation  but  that  which  lies  on  the
surface.  The  rationalistic,  mythical,  poetic
mystic  explanations  all  alike  are  encum-
bered with  special  difficulties.  The  evan-
gelist who  held  Christ  to  be  the  Logos
incarnate  saw  nothing  inconceivable  in  the
event.  It  was  one  of  many  phenomena
which  accompanied  liis  life  as  the  "  Son  of
man,"  which  helped  to  create  the  under-
lying presupposition  on  which  the  Gospel
was  written.  Like  the  testimony  of  the  last
of  the  prophets  and  the  earliest  of  the  dis-
ciples, it  is  part  of  the  evidence  that  the
Logos  dwelt  among  us.  When  the  governor
tasted  wine  drawn  from  these  water-pots,
and  knew  not  whence  it  was.  He  had
known  all  the  resources  of  the'  feast,  but
this  puzzled  him  by  its  novelty.  "  Whence
has  it  come?  Where  has  it  been  stored?
Whose  is  it?"  An  interesting  parenthesis
is  here  introduced,  to  contrast  the  ignorance
of  the  ruler  of  the  feast  wilh  the  over-
whelming mystery  of  knowledge  given  to
the  servants  (the  disciples  of  Jesus  himself),
[But  the  servants  (SidKovoi)  who  drew  the
water  knew]  j  knew,  i.e.,  whence  it  was
and,  it  seems  to  me,  what  it  was.  Meyer
and  others  say  they  did  not  know  tliat  they
had  brought  wine.    It  is  impossible  to  assert


as  mucli  as  tliis.  They  knew  the  plain  fact
that  it  was  not  a  wine-vat  or  wine-cask,  but
a  water-jar,  from  which  they  had  drawn  in
order  to  fill  the  chalices  in  their  bands.
They  became,  therefore,  guarantors  of  the
mysterious  sign.  How-  much  more  than
*'  whence  "  it  was  had  dawned  on  their  mind
we  cannot  say.  The  governor  of  the  feast
oalleth  the  bridegroom.  We  mayjudge  from
this  that  this  responsible  person  was  not  in  the
room  where  the  six  water-jars  were  placed,
and  that  he  either  approached  the  bride-
groom in  his  seat  of  honour,  or  called  to  him
from  his  own,  and  expressed,  by  a  convivial
boast  and  equivocal  compliment,  his  sense  of
the  excellence  of  the  wine  which  had  thus,
at  tlie  end  of  the  feast,  been  lavished  on
the  guests,  who  had  been  hitherto  kept
strangely  ignorant  of  the  resources  of  the
liost.  It  is  unnecessary  to  put  into  the
words  any  meaning  deeper  than  the  epi-
grammatic humour  in  which  he  revealed  Ms
sense  of  the  reality  of  the  objective  fact
which  had  been  brought  to  his  knowledge.

Ver.  10. — And  saith,  Every  man  at  the
first  setteth  on  the  good  wine,  and  when  men
have  drunk  deeply,  then  that  which  is  worse
(literally,  smaller):  thou  hast  kept  (gmareZed)
the  good  wine  nntU  now.  The  classical
passages  supposed  to  illustrate  this  jovial
saying  throw  little  light  upon  it.  The
meaning  is  obvious  enough,  and  there  is  no
need  to  search  in  ancient  wit  for  the  original
of  a  speech  which  is  not  too  recondite  to  have
been  originated  on  this  occasion.  The  best
wine  is  appropriately  given  when  the  senses
are  keenest,  but  when  the  climax  of  the
festival  has  come,  when  they  have  drunk
too  deeply,  or  are  intoxicated,  then  the
weaker,  poorer,  and  less  fragrant  wine  is
acceptable.  There  need  be  no  reference
whatever  to  the  present  company.  Tholuck
and  the  Revised  Version  modify  the  force
of  ii(Bv(r6a<rt ;  Meyer,  Godet,  and  others  see
no  difficulty  in  assigning  to  the  word  its
proper  meaning  (cf.  Luke  xii.  45  ;  1  Thess.
v.  7;  Eph.  V.  18;  Rev.  xvii.  2).  The  whole
sayiu;;  simply  asserts,  by  an  outsider,  the
concrete  reality  of  a  wonderful  change  that
had  occurred.  He  knew  nothing  of  a  miracle.
He  merely  guaranteed  unwittingly  the  phe-
nomena that  came  within  the  range  of  his
senses.  This  becomes  more  impressive  be-
cause he  knew  nothing  of  the  cause,  and  was
profoimdly  ignorant  of  the  claims  of  his
strange  and  wonderful  Guest.  No  further
remark  is  offered.  We  are  not  told  how  the
fact  was  referred  to  the  will  or  authority  of
Jesus,  to  the  kindness  or  generosity  of  the
mother ;  or  whether  the  company  generally
learned  the  mysterious  powers  of  their  fellow-
Guest.  The  bridegroom  thus  honoured
made  no  reply  that  is  recorded;  and,  by
emphatic  silence,  the  impression  is  conveyed


ck.  n.  1—25.]       Hie  GOSPEL  ACCORtDlKO  fO  ST.  JOflN.


is


that  thii  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the
Lord  was  not,  in  Ijis  opinion,  the  coming  of
his  "hour."  Stiaage  reticence  is  ohserved,
but  this  ia  added —

Ver.  11. — Jesus  made  this  heginning  of
signs  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  maiufested  his
glory.  The  beginning,  the  earliest  of  the
tokens  which  be  gave  of  his  higher  nature
and  lofty  claims  and  faculties.  The  word
<rriiiem,  con  eaponding  with  the  Hebrew
nix,  is  generally,  in  the  Acts  as  well  as  in
tlie  LXX.,  associated  with  Tepara,  or  "  por-
tents ; "  when  it  occurs  iu  the  synoptists  it
is  translated  "  signs."  The  word  by  itself
does  not  connote  miraculous  energies,  but
any  event,  natural  or  liumaii,  which  becomes
a  token  or  witness  to  unseen  or  Divine  ener-
gies. When  Christ's  wonderful  actions  (often
called  Swdfieis  by  the  synoptists)  are  referred
ti>  by  John,  he  calls  them  simply  epya  ;  so
that  operations  which,  if  wrought  by  other
persons,  might  have  been  portents,  miracles,
or  marvels,  are  to  him  perfectly  normal,  and
are  called  simply  "  works."  Weiss  leaves
the  question  of  the  manner  in  which  this
supply  of  wine  was  provided  entirely  un-
settled, but  declares  that,  whether  by  some
fortunateproviilentialopportunity,by  the  fore-
cast of  the  mother,  or  by  concealed  methods
of  meeting  the  exigency,  this  great  gift  was
brought  about  by  the  Son  of  Mary,  the  effect
was  the  same  as  if  it  had  been  wrought  by
the  Creator's  hand.  The  glory  of  his  power
and  love  and  sympathy  was  manifested.
This  appeals  to  us  utterly  inconsistent  with
the  intention  or  idea  of  tlie  evangelist.  The
impression  previously  made  upon  John  the
Baptist  was  of  his  supreme  submission  to
the  Divine  will,  his  sacrificial  yiilding  to
that  will  for  the  taking  away  of  sin ;  further,
that  in  some  sense  he  was  Son  of  Grod,  and
Minister  and  Organ  for  the  dispensation  of
the  Spirit  of  God.  The  few  disciples  ad-
mitted that,  by  his  penetration  of  their  clia-
racter  and  hidden  inner  life,  his  wisdom  was
of  a  different  kind  from  that  of  men.  Now,
however,  they  see  a  manifestation  of  his
glory  as  power.  He  has  unlimited  resources
at  liis  disposal,  and  his  disciples  believed  on
him  to  that  extent.  This  expression  asserts
the  truth  of  the  selective  and  discriminating
force  of  the  mission  of  Christ,  and  the  nega-
tive fact  that  the  company  assembled  received
no  religious  impression  beyond  the  most
superficial  one.  "The  disciples  "  who  came
with  him  "  believed  "  more  than  they  had
(lone  before.  It  may  be  that  they,  especially
John  and  Nathanael  of  Cana,  were  among
the  honorary  dLaiwvot  who  were  alone  fully
conscious  of  what  happened  on  the  occasion.
They  apprehend  the  "  glory,"  and  entirely
trust  themselves  tls  air6v,  to  Mm,  and  follow
him  with  an  added  momentum.  There  are
new  and  wonderful  auggestions  made  in  this


passage  which  unveil  the  glory  of  the  Divine
love  and  power  now  wrought  In  man.  A
point  of  connection  with  the  aynoptio
Gospels  is  that  they  too  record  Christ's
own  description  of  the  contrast  between  tliu
austere  prophet  and  the  Son  of  man  (Matt,
xi.  18, 19)  in  terms  almost  taken  from  thit-
very  scene.  Compare  also  the  mode  in  wliicli
Christ  vindicated  his  own  social  freedom
from  Pharisaic  exclusiveness,  and  the  con-
duct of  his  own  disciples  from  that  of  John
the  Baptist's  disciples  in  the  matter  of  cere-
monial purifications,  by  his  parable  of  the
old  wine-skins  bursting  with  the  new  and
potent  fluid  put  into  them  (Matt.  ix.  14 — 17
and  parallel  passages).  John  gives  here  a
deeper  apprehension  of  the  mystery,  a  key-
note to  a  whole  cycle  of  instrtictions,  on  the
"glory"  of  his  love.  By  manifesting  his
Divine  sympathy  with  marriage,  with  human
life  and  fellowship,  with  innocent  gladness,
he  proves  himself  to  be  the  same  Christ  of
whom  the  synoptic  tradition  speaks,  the
same  Jesns  who  took  the  children  to  his
arms,  and  constituted  a  "marriage-supper"
the  great  type  of  the  eternal  union  between
God  and  man  in  the  gospel  of  his  love  (cf.
Matt.  xxii.  2,  etc.).  But  this  same  evange-
list is  filled  with  the  same  imagery  dating
back  to  experiences  of  Cana,  when  he
describes  the  final  victory  of  the  "  Lamb  of
God  "  (Eev.  xix.  7 ;  xxi.  2).

Ver.  12. — After  this  he  went  down — from
the  high  lands  of  Galilee  to  the  borders  of
the  Sea  of  Galilee,  depressed  as  we  now  know
it  to  be  below  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean
— to  Capernaum.'  Three  competing  sites  for
this  small  town  have  been  advocated  by
Eastern  travellers ;  all  of  them  on  the  shore
of  the  lake,  all  near  to  Bethsaida  and
Chorazin,  in  "  the  way  of  the  sea,"  combin-
ing more  or  less  the  characteristics  required
by  the  New  Testament  narrative  and  the
references  in  Josephus('Bell.  Jud.,'iii.  10.8).
Keim  is  in  favour  of  Khan  Minyeh;  but  there
is  no  abundant  spring  such  as  Josephus
describes,  nor  are  there  any  ruins  which
indicate  an  extensive  town.  Caspari  has
argued  in  favour  of  Ain  Mudawarah,  a  mile
and  a  half  to  the  west  of  Khan  Mityeh,  in
which,  though  water  is  abundant,  there  are
no  remains  of  buildings.  The  old  travellers,
and  the  most  recent  explorations,  have  coin-
cided in  fixing  on  Tell-Hum  as  the  site;  and
Dr.  Farrar,  Dr.  Westcott,  Major  Wilson,  in-
cline to  this  conclusion.  Abundant  ruins  are
found  there,  and,  what  is  more  than  probable,

'  K,  B,  X,  etc.,  read  Kafapvaoi/i  (so  Tisch-
endorf  (8th  edit.)  and  Tregellcs);  but  the
Bevised  Version  has  retained  tlie  familiar
spelling.  It  is  probably  its  original  form,
answering  to  Arabic  Kepher,  equivalent  t«
"  hamlet '


86


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1— 26.


the  remBina  of  the  very  synagogue  built  by
the  Boman  centurion,  and  one  certaiuly
iating  back  to  the  Herodian  age.  Tell-Sum,
at  "  the  Mound  of  Uftm,"  is  an  easy  corrup-
tion of  the  Cuphar,  or  village  of  Nahum.  He,
and  his  mother,  and  his  brethreSi  and  his
disciples.  They  may  have  returned  home  to
.Vuzureth,  though  some  recent  commeiitatoig
uuggcst  that  Cana  had  become  the  home  of
bis  family  in  late  years.  This  is  contra-
dicted by  the  express  statement  of  oh.  i.  45,
and  the  utter  obliteration  of  the  name  of
Cana  from  the  synoptic  narrative.  We  can-
nnt  identify  this  possible  return  to  Nazareth
with  the  account  in  Luke  iv.  16 — 20,  because
it  assumes  a  previous  period  of  activity  in
Capernaum,  and  further,  because  the  com-
mencement of  Christ's  public  ministry  is
expressly  made  synchronous  with  the  im-
prisonment of  the  baptist  (Matt.  iv.  12 —
15),  which  did  not  take  pliice  till  weeks
or  months  afterwards  (ch.  iii.  24).  Conse-
quently, this  journey  to  Capernaum  preceded
tue  journey  to  Jerusfilem  and  the  return  to
Nazareth,  of  which  Matthew  speaks.  The
fact  that  "the  mother  and'  brethren"  of
Jesus  accompanied  him,  but  not  "  the
■ititers,"  suggests  what  is  implied  in  Mark
vi.  3  that  the  sisters  were  married  in  Naza-
reth and  in  Murk  iii.  21—23  that  they  did
not  accompany  the  non-believing  brothers  in
their  endeavour  "  to  lay  bold  of  him."  The
fact  tliat  Joseph  is  not  mentioned  induces
the  common  assumption  that  he  was  already
dead.  Volumes  have  been  written  on  "  the
brethren  of  Jesus."  The  determination  of
their  parentage  is  one  of  the  most  perplexing
points  in  the  evangelic  history.'  There  are
three  hypotheses,  which  are  alike  beset  with
difBculties.  (1)  The, view  propounded  by
Helvidlus  in  Borne,  in  the  fourth  century,
and  to  which  Jerome  replied,  that  the
"brothers"  are  brothers  in  the  ordinary
sense,  children  of  Jo^ph  and  Mary.  This
supposition  is  sustiiined  by  the  statement  of
Matt.  i.  25  and  Luke  ii.  7,  each  of  which
implies  that  the  mother  of  our  Lord  had
other  children.  The  sentiment  of  the  Church
in  favour  of  Mary's  perpetual  virginity,  and
in  favour  of  the  uniqueness  of  her  maternity,
has  powerfully  contested  this  bupposition.
Further,  apait  from  any  sentiment,  it  bas
Uen  said  tliat  the  Lord  would  not  have
'onimeuded  the  mother  to  the  beloved  dis-
'iplc,  if  he  had  living'  brothers  who  had  a

'  llie  most  exhaustive  essfty  on  the  subjeot
is  Bishop  Lightfbot's,  in  his  '  Oumnientary
on  the  Epistle  to  Galatians ; '  comp.  Pro-
fessor W.  H.  Mill,  in  bis  '  Observations ; '
Alford's  'Prolegomena  to  the  Epistle  of
James;'  Archdeacon  Farrar,  'Early  Days
of  Christianity,'  vol.  U, ;  Wieseler,  in  '  Stud.
■nd  Krit.'  (Iii40>


previous  claim.  To  this,  however,  it  is  re-
plied that  John,  the  son  of  Zebedee  and
Salome,  may  have  been  his  near  rehitive,  if
Salome  were  the  sister  of  the  Virgin;  and
also  that,  up  to  the  time  of  the  Ascension,
there  is  no  proof  that  the  brethren  believed
in  him,  but  the  contrary.  The  effect  of  a
special  manifestation  to  James  (1  Cor.  xv.)
may  have  led  to  a  general  admission  of  the
brethren,  who  are  distinguished  from,  but  yet
with,  the  eleven  apo->tles  and  the  mother  on
the  eve  of  the  Ascension  (Acts  1. 14).  (2)  To
obviate  the  difficulties  of  a  sentimental  kind,
it  was  suggested  by  Jerome,  and  it  has  been
often  assumed  since,  that  these  brothers  were
in  reality  first  cousins,  not  the  children  of
Salome  the  sister  of  the  Virgin,  but  of  Mary
the  wife  of  Cleophas,  who  is  supposed  to  be
the  sister  of  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus  (see  oh.
zx.  25,  note),  and  further  that  this  Cleophas
=  Clopas  =  'B^ri  =  Alphieus  =  Chalph;ii
for  the  Aramaic  guttural  might  be  omitted
as  in  Alpliteus,  or  turned  into  k  or  x  in
Clopas,  found  in  John's  text.  Jerome,  how-
ever (Lightfoot),  never  referred  to  this
confirmation  of  his  theory ;  but  it  has  been
hence  conjectured  that  James  tl'e  son  of
AlphiBus  was  identical  with  tlie  c.  lebrated
"  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord,"  mentiom-d
in  Acts  xii.  17;  xv.  13;  xxi.  18;  in  Gel.  i.
19 ;  ii.  9,  12 ;  and  in  ecclesiastical  history.
If,  however,  this  James  were  the  "  son  of
Alphgsus,"  then  Judas  (oh.  xiv.  22)  (not
Iscariot)—"  Judas  of  James"  (Jude  1 ;  Acts
i.  13)^was  also  one  of  the  "brethren  ;  "  also
Joses  and  Simon,  sons  of  Cleophas,  wnre
of  their  number;  and  some  have  gone
further,  and  made  Simon  the  Canaanite  ^h  e
other  brother.  This  might  possibly  be  the
solution  of  the  puzzle,  if  the  entire  theory
did  not  break  down  under  the  clear  distinc-
tion drawn  in  evangelic  narrative  between
the  twelve  apostles  and  the  brethren.  E.g.  in
this  passage  they  are  discriminated  from
"  disciples."  In  oh.  vii.  5  the  "  brethren  "
are  said  not  to  believe  on  the  Lord.  In
Acts  i.  14  they  are  mentioned  in  addition  to
the  apostles.  Though  in  Gal.  i  and  ii.
James  might  seem  from  his  great  eminence
to  be  classed  with  apostles  in  some  wider
tense,  yet  in  Acts  xv.  13 ;  xxi.  18 ;  Gal.  ii,
12  he  seems  to  take  precedence  of  all  the
apostles,  at  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  and
in  presidency  of  the  Church  there.  More-
over, the  identification  of  Cleophas  with
Alphseus  is  very  duubtfuL  Clopas  is  Ara-
maic, Cleuphaa  a  Greek  name ;  and  the  iden-
tification of  his  wife  Mary  with  the  sister  of
the  Virgin  is  alas  very  doubtful ;  while  to
have  two  sisters  of  the  same  name  in  the
same  family  is  highly  improbable.  We
cannot  believe,  furtnei,.that  so  distinguished
k  man  as  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord
oould  have  b«en  designated  m  "James  th«


OH.  n.  1—26.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.


87


Leas"  in  the  evangelio  narrative  (Mark  xr.
40).  If  the  "cousin  theory"  holds,  this
muBt  have  been  the  case.  Finally, "  oonsins  "
would  hardly  so  persistently  have  been
spoken  of  as  brothers,  and  this  would  be  still
less  likely  if  their  mother  was  living.  (3)
The  third  hypothesis,  which  is  the  sugges-
tion of  Epiphanius,  is  that  these  brothers  were
the  children  of  Joseph  by  a  i)revious  marriage,
to  whom  the  blessed  Virgin  liad  acted  the
part  of  mother.  This  is  based  on  a  legund
of  the  apocryphal '  Protevang.  of  James '  (cli.
ix.  and  xvii.),  where  Joseph  speaks  of  his
"  sons."  The  theory  saves  the  virginity  of
Mury,  but  saoriflces  that  of  Joseph.  Such
a  conclusion,  in  some  ecclesiastio  circles,  is
almost  as  unwelcome  as  the  former.  Against
Jerome's  hypothesis  the  greatest  number  of
difiSculties  present  themselves,  and  it  must
be  abandoned.  Therefore  the  choice  really
lies  between  that  of  Helvldius  (1)  and  that
of  Epiphanius  (3).  These  are  alike  en-
cumbered by  the  perplexity  that  among  the
twelve  apostles  there  were  two  Jameses,  two
Jndages,  and  two  Simons;  and  among  the
"  brethren "  there  must  have  been  also  a
James,  Judas,  Joses,  and  Simon,  with  sisters.
Moreover,  there  was  a  Joses  or  Joseph,  who
was  son  of  AlphGBUB,and  therefore  a  brother
of  James.  This  is  cot  an  insuperable  dif-
ficulty, because  of  the  frequency  with  which
personal  names  recur  in  Oriental  families.
Whether  this  multiplicity  be  true  or  not,
there  are,  at  least,  ten  other  Simons  in  the
New  Testament,  and  nearly  as  many  Josephs
31  Joses ;  and  Judas  Barsabas  (Acts  xv.  22)
must  be  discriminated  from  the  two  Judases
here  supposed.  We  must,  however,  choose  be-
tween suppositions  (1)  and  (3).  On  the  one
side,  it  is  said,  if  the  brethren  of  Jesus  were
not  the  own  sons  of  Mary,  the  language  of
Jesus  on  the  cross  would  be  entirely  expli-
cable. This  is  true ;  but,  on  the  other  side,
if  John  were  indeed  a  blood-relation  and
beloved  disciple  (even  if  James  was  so  also,
hut  did  not  believe  on  him),  the  difficulty
of  the  language  is  reduced  to  a  minimum.
There  is  no  scriptural  authority  for  the
Epiphanian  theory,  but  it  is  made  plau-
sible by  the  '  Gospel  according  to  St.  Peter'
and  the  '  Protevang.  Jaoobi,'  which  refer  to
Joseph's  sons.  The  whole  history  of  its  re-
ception In  the  Church  may  be  seen  in  the
masterly  essay  of  Bishop  Lightfout.  The
view  of  Alford,-  Mill,  Farrar,  Godet,  and
many  others  is  in  favour  of  a  plain  common-
sense  interpretation  of  the  letter  of  Scripture,
Christ,  who  honoured  marriage  by  his  first
display  of  miraculous  power,  and  this  at  the
suggestion  of  his  own  mother,  and  in  the
society  of  those  who  passed  undoubtedly  as
his  brothers,  would  not  feel  that  the  faintest
shadow  of  a  shade  fell  on  the  lofty  purity  of
his  mother  by  this  hypothesis.    Certainly


the  Evangelist  Matthew  had  not  a  vestige  in
him  of  that  adoration  of  virginity,  or  Mari-
olatry,  which  has  led  ecclesiastical  historians
and  commentators  to  reject  the  Helvidian
hypothesis.  Godet  and  some  other  har-
monists endeavour  to  find,  during  the  resi-
dence in  Capernaum,  the  occasion  for  the
first  miraculous  draught  of  fishes,  and  the
final  call  of  the  two  pairs  of  brothers ;  but  it
is  excluded  by  the  notes  of  time  subsequently
given.

Vers.  12 — 22. — (2)  Thesecotidsign.  Sapre-
maoy  over  the  theoeratio  house.  Illustrations
of  righteousness,  reverenoe,  power,  and  aaerifi-
eial  ministry.

Vers.  12, 13, — ^They  abode  there  not  many
days.  And  the  Fassorer  of  the  Jews  was  at
hand,  and  Jesns  went  up  to  Jerosalem.  The
narrative  at  ver.  22 ;  ch.  iii.  22 ;  ir,  1,  27,
etc.,  shows,  that  some  disciples  were  with
him ;  but  there  is  no  reason  for  believing  that
the  whole  group  were  there.  The  fact  is  im-
portant that  Jesus  personally  is  said  (kvi^-q)
to  have  gone  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  that  no
reference  is  made  to  his  disciples,  mother,  or
brethren  doing  so.  This  undoubtedly  as-
sumes that  he  was  not  attended  by  any  com-
pact group  of  followers.  It  is  more  than
probable  that  Simon  and  James,  if  not
Nathanael  and  Philip,  remained  in  Galilee
to  receive  their  final  call  in  due  season.  One
cannot  doubt  that  John  and  Andrew  were
his  auditors  and  witnesses.  He  went  up  to
utter  his  prophetic  summons  to  the  metro-
polis of  the  nation,  to  taltO  his  place  in  the
palace-temple  of  his  Father,  in  the  centre
of  the  old  theocracy.  After  showing  his
perfect  human  sympathy,  his  power  over
physical  nature,  his  abounding  resources,  and
the  glory  of  his  love,  he  resolved  that  there
should  be  no  misunderstanding  of  his  moral
mission,  and  proceeded  to  institute  a  publio
demonstration  of  bis  loyalty  to  the  theocracy,
to  the  temple,  and  to  its  worship.  Just  at  the
moment  when  the  One  who,  greater  than  the
temple,  was  about  todisplay  his  unique  claims
to  a  service  which  would  outlive  all  the
pomp  of  temple-worship,  it  was  profoundly
significant  that  he  should  demand  from  it  a
right  presentation,  and  not  a  corrupt  defile-
ment, of  its  true  significance.  Modem  criti-
cism refuses  to  accept  the  statements  of  the
synoptists  and  of  John  as  alike  true,  and
endeavours  to  explain  away  one  or  the  other
account.  We  are  content  to  say  here  that  a
repetition  of  the  Christ's  claim  to  sanctify
the  temple  was  again  made  on  the  eve  of
that  awful  day  when  that  blood  should  be
shed  which  would  exhaust  all  the  signifi-
cance of  the  hecatombs  of  victims  slain  in
its  precincts,  and  when  the  veil  of  the
teOiple  should  be  rent  in  twain.  Weiss  hero
shows  that  Baur  and  Hilgenfeld  are  incon-
sistent in  repudiating  the  historical  character


88


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  u.  1—26.


of  an  early  conflict  of  Jesus  with  the  autho-
rities at  Jerusalem,  and  that  they  forget,  in
their  eagerness  to  demonstrate  the  anti-
Jewish  character  of  the  Johaimine  Christ,
that  he  here  is  represented  as  a  ^jious  Jew,
attending  the  national  festivals  and  jealous
for  the  honour  of  the  temple.  The  chrono-
logical difficulties  that  arise  if  the  two
cleansings  are  identified  amount  to  the
grossest  inaccuracy  on  the  part  either  of  the
synoptists  or  John.  Liicke,  De  Wette,
J<}wald,  treat  the  synoptists  as  inaccurate,  and
John's  account,  being  that  of  an  ej  e-witness,
a-i  the  reduction  of  the  event  to  its  proper
place  in  the  history.  It  is  obvious  tliat  the
synoptists  (Matfc.  xxvi.  61 ;  Mark  xiv.  58)
knew  that  words  which  John  recounts  iiad,
at  an  earlier  period,  made  a  dc  p  impression
upon  the  multitude.  Tlie  thief  on  the  cross
(Matt,  xxvii.  38 — 44),  and  the  insulting
crowds  (Mark  xv.  27 — 29),  and  Steplieu  after-
wards (Acts  vi.  14),  reveal  familiarity  with
an  utterance  which  John  alone  recounts,
but  which  had  been  misunderstood.  An
ingenious  writer  in  tlie  National  Review,  1857
(Mr.  R.  H.  Hntton,  "  Theological  Essays  "),
believes,  not  only  tliat  the  entire  scene  in  the
temple,  but  that  Christ's  claim  to  be  the  Head
of  the  kingdom,  the  parables  of  "  wicked
husbandmen  "  and  "  two  sons,"  and  the  re-
feience  to  the  "  baptism  of  John,"  should  all
be  transferred,  together  with  the  triumphal
entry,  to  the  period  in  wliich  Jolin  has  placed
I  he  first  temple-cleansing.  He  thinks  that
the  reference  to  the  "  baptism  of  John  "  was
more  reasonable  at  that  period  than  two
years  after  the  death  of  John,  and  that  (Matt.
xxi.ll)  the  reference  to  "Jesus of  Nazareth"
was  more  appropriate  at  the  beginning  than
at  the. close  of  the  ministry.  But,  on  the
other  band,  the  inscription  on  the  cross,
"  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  and  the  numerous  re-
ferences to  the  "  baptism  of  John"  at  a  much
later  date,  quite  refute  this  argument.  There
are  those  w  ho  strenuously  assail  the  histori-
city of  St.  John's  account,  and  plead  for  the
greater  accuracy  of  the  synoptists  (Strausa,
Baur,  Hilgenfeld,  etc.).  But,  seeing  that  the
synoptic  tradition  takes  no  notice  of  this
preliminary  ministiy,  in  which  our  Lord
gives  specimens  of  all  his  powers  and  glory,
no  reason  presents  itself  why  Ihey  should
have  singled  out  one  narrative  and  misplaced
it.  So  loug  as  John's  Gospel  is  held  to  have
I  genuine  historicity,  his  narrative  cannot
lie  suffered  to  be  a  romantic  transposition  to
meet  a  preconceived  idea  of  chronologiciil
development.  The  early  foreshadowing  of
the  Lord's  death  and  resurrection,  coupled
with  the  reference  to  his  being  "  lifted  up  "
like  the  serpent  of  brass,  and  the  cruel  treat-
ment received  from  the  people  at  Nazareth
and  from  scribes  and  Pharisees  at  Caper-
naum,   V^   in    living   harmony  with  one


another,  and  combine  to  refute  the  idyllic
reproduction  of  the  public  ministry,  which
Benan  and  many  others  have  attempted  to
fashion,  by  which  the  early  life  is  represented
as  enacted  in  one  blaze  of  sunshine,  and  that
its  close  alone  was  siirouded  in  clouds  ami
darkened  by  the  Lord's  reckless  and  suicidal
rushing  on  his  fate.  We  therefore  conclude,
with  numerous  critics,  that  there  is  (1)  no
reason  to  believe  that  John  mis^ilaced  the
temple  cleansing;  and  (2)  thtit  he  does  not
preclude  the  second  act  of  the  like  kind  re-
corded in  the  synoptists;  (3)  while  the
syiioptists  imply  occurrences  which  are
detailed  in  John,  but  omitted  in  their  narra-
tive, jet  the  character  of  the  proceeding
differs  on  both  occasions.

Ver.  14. — He  found  in  the  temple  {l(p6v) ;
the  vast  enclosure,  surrounded  by  colonnades,
where  the  courts  of  the  Gentiles  were  situ-
ated beyond  and  outside  the  courts  of  "  the
women"  and  "the  priests."  Witliin  the
latter  was  the  sanctuary  (va6s),  or  sacred
adytum,  where  the  altars  of  sacrifice  and  in-
cense faced  the  veil  of  the  holiest  of  all.  In
the  court  of- the  temple  had  been  allowed  a
secular  market  for  sacrificial  beasts.  An  ex-
change for  money  was  also  set  up,  where  Jews
were  ready  to  furnish,  on  usurious  terms,  the
proper  coin,  the  sacred  half-shekel  (value,
one  shilling  and  tljreepence),  in  which  form
alone  was  the  temple-tax  received  from  the
piovincial  visllois  or  pilgrims  from  distant
lands.  No  coin  beariug  the  injage  of  CiB;,ar,
or  any  foreign  prince,  or  any  idolatrous  sym-
bol then  so  common,  would  be  allowed  in  the
sacred  treasury.  So  the  Lord  found  those
that  sold  oxen  and  sheep  and  doves,  and  the
exchangers  of  money  sitting  ;  a  busy  bazaar,
deteriorating  the  idea  of  the  temple  with
ai  I  verse  associations.  The  three  sacrificial
aniraalsmentioned  were  those  most  frequently
required.  The  strangers,  doubtless,  needed
some  market  where  these  coulil  be  obtained,
and  where  the  sufficient  guarantee  uf  their
freedom  from  blemish  could  be  secured.  It
was  also  indispensable  tliat  excliange~  of
coins  should  iinve  been  made  feasible  for  the
host  of  strangers.  The  profimalion  efiected
by  transacting  those  measures  in  the  temple
courts  WHS  symptomatic  of  widespread  se-
cularism, an  outward  indication  of  the
corruption  of  the  entire  idea  of  worship,  and
of  the  selfishness  and  pride  which  had
vitiated  the  solemnity  and  spirituality  of  the
sacrificial  ritual.  Geikie  has  given  a  very
brilliant  description  of  this  scene;  so  also
Edersheim,  '  Life  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.'
The  money  (nep/ua)  was  probably  d^ived
from  a  word  (jciifo)  meaning  "  to  cut,"  and
referred  to  the  minute  coins  which  were
required  for  convenient  excliange.  The
Kii\Aui8oi, which  gives  itsnametOKo\Xi;/3iff7-^j
of  the  following  verse,  is  also  the  name  of  «


CH.  II,  1—25.]       THE  UOSPBL  ACOOEDlNa  TO  ST,  JOHN.


89


Bmall  (ko\o3i>s, equivalent  to  "mutilated")
coin  used  for  purposes  of  exchange.  The
smaller  the  coin  tlie  better,  as  the  minute
differences  of  weight  of  the  foreign  coins
would  thus  be  more  easily  measured.

Yer.  15. — And  when  he  had  made  a  scourge
of  small  cords  ((rxoivta  of  twisted  rushes  from
t,l  e  scattered  fodder  or  litter  of  the  cattle).
This  feature  of  the  Lord's  action  was  not
re|)eated  at  the  close  of  the  ministry.  Observe
that  John  singles  out  this  punitive  element
in  the  first  public  appearance  of  the  Lord
for  especial  notice,  and  adds  it  to  the  other-
wise resistless  force  which  he  was  accustomed
to  wield  by  the  glance  of  his  eye  or  the
tones  of  his  voice.  The  "scourge,"  as  Qodet
says,  is  a  symbol,  not  an  instrument.  It
was  in  Christ's  hands  a  conspicuous  method
of  expressing  his  indignation,  and  augment-
ing tlie  force  of  his  command,  by  an  indica-
tion that  he  meant  to  be  obeyed  there  and
then.  He  drove  them  all  out  of  the  temple
court  iUpiv) ;  that  is,  the  intrusive  sellers  of
the  sacrificial  beasts,  the  herdsmen,  and  traf-
fickers. Also  (rcb  re)  the  sheep  and  the  oxen,
which  moved  at  once  in  a  vast  group,  turning,
fleeing  to  the  great  exits;  and  he  poured
out  on  the  ground,  and  with  his  own  hand,
the  coins '  of  the  exchangers  (KoWvPtaTuv),
and  overthrew  the  tables.  "Christ  had,"
as  Hengsti  nberg  says,  "  a  powerful  confede-
rate in  the  consciences  of  the  offenders."
The  presentiment  of  coming  revolution  and
overthrow  aided  the  impression  produced
by  that  majestic  countenance  and  command-
ing glance,  manner,  and  voice,  that  so  often
made  men  feel  that  they  were  utterly  and
absolutely  in  his  power  (cf.  oh.  xviii.  6,
note).

Yer.  16. — ^And  he  said  to  those  that  sold
the  doves.  The  vendors  of  tethered  or  caged
birds  were  as  guilty  of  profanation  as  the
rest.  Some  sentimental  comments  have
gathered  round  this  verse,  as  though  the
Lord  were  more  tender  in  his  treatment  of
the  turtle-doves  than  in  that  of  the  oxen  or
sheep.  But  there  would  be  no  meaning  in
such  a  distinction.  No  other  way  of  scatter-
ing the  doves  was  so  simple  as  to  command
their  removal.  At  "the  Ammergau  Pas-
sion-play," the  doves  are  let  loose,  fly  away
over  the  heads  of  the  audience,  and  dis-
appear. The  lifting  of  the  scourge,  accom-
panied, doubtless,  with  words  of  solemn
warning  and  command,  said  in  effect  what
he  now  put  into  words.  Take  these  things
hence,  Kake  not  the  house  of  my  Father
a  house  of  merchandise.     In  this  act  our

'  The  T.B.  reads  tA  K^pfia,  with  N,  A,  P,
r,  etc.,  Tischendrirf  (8th  edit.),  and  Bale
Bevisers;  but  B.T,  and  Tregelles  have
adopted  rd  xtpfiaTo,  with  B.  and  some  other
manuscripts.


Lord  simply  assumed  the  rSle  of  any  ant!
every  Hebrew  prophet.  The  Talmud  enjoins
the  sanctity  for  which  the  Saviour  pleads
He  called  the  temple  "  my  Father's  house  '•
(cf.  Luke  ii.  49),  and  therefore  claims
especially  to  be  the  Son  of  God  Most  High.
The  Eternal,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  stands
in  this  mysterious  relationship  to  him.  He
does  not  say,  "our  Father's  house."  When,
however,  alter  the  second  cleansing  of  the
temple,  he  spake  of  tlie  temple,  from  which
he  finally  withdrew  (Matt,  xxiii.  38),  ho
called  it  by  no  other  name  than  "your
house,"  "  left  unto  you  desolate."  Moreover,
on  that  subsequent  occasion,  he  used,  in
place  of  "  house  of  merchandise,"  the  bitter
description,  "den of  robbers"  (Matt.  xii.  13).
This  first  act  was  reformatory  of  a  gross
abuse;  the  latter  was  judicial  and  condemna-
tory (see  Heugstenberg,  '  Chris  tolngy '  and
'Comm.,' Zeoh.  xiv.21;  Zeph.  i.  11 ;  Mai.  iii.
1).  Arohrleacon  Watkins  has  wisely  called
attention  to  tlie  contrast  between  this  scene
and  sign  and  that  given  at  Cana.  Here
we  see  how  true  it  was  that  his  hour  had
not  yet  come.

Yer.  17. — His  disciples  remembered  that
it  was  written,  The  zeal  of  thy  house  will
consume '  me.  The  future  tense,  affirmed
by  the  best  manuscripts,  never  (Meyer)  bears
the  present  meaning.  The  disciples,  familiar
with  the  Old  Testament,  remembered  at
the  time  the  words  of  Ps.  Ixix.  9.  In  tliat
psalm  the  theocratic  Sufferer  approached  the
climax  of  his  sorrows,  and  admitted  that
a  holy  zeal  for  God's  house  will  ultimately
consume  him — eat  him  up.  The  word  is
used  for  consuming  emotions  (cf.  Aristopli.,
'  Vespse,'  287),  and  there  is  a  foreshadowing
of  the  reproach  and  agony  which  will  befall
the  righteous  Servant  of  God  in  his  passion
for  God's  honour.  The  parallelism  of  the
second  clause  of  the  verse,  "  The  reproaches
of  them  that  reproached  thee  have  fallen
upon  me,"  confirui  the  application,  though
the  words  are  not  cited.  Several  other
citations  are  made  in  the  New  Testament
from  this  psalm,  which,  whether  it  be
Messianic  in  the  oracular  sense  or  not,  is
clearly  one  that  furnished  the  mind  of  the
early  Church  with  abundant  illustration  of
the  suffering  of  the  Christ  (Bom.  iv.  3,
xi.  9,  10 ;  Acts  i.  20 ;  cf.  also  Ps.  Ixix.  21
with  the  narrative  of  the  Crucifixion).  Thoma
labours  to  find  in  the  Old  Testament  pro-
phecies generally  the  true  source  of  the
Johannine  narrative.  He  points  to  Hos
Ti.  5 ;  Mai.  iii.  11 ;  Jer.  xxv.  29.

Yers.  18, 19. — The  Jews  therefore  answered

'  KaTafiyerai  -/ie  is  read  by  recent  editors,
Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),  Meyer,  Westcott  and
Hnrt,  E.T.,  with  all  the  uncial  manuscripts,
8'  igaiust  Kdrffayi  -fit  of  T.Pk.


90


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1—26.


and  said  to  him.  That  which  the  disciples
thouglit  at  the  rery  time  is  here  reooided
by  one  who  affects  at  least  to  know  their
inmost  minds  and  most  confidential  medita-
tions and  talk  with  one  another.  John,  at
least,  saw  the  rising  storm  of  enmity  already
hurtling,  but  says  nothing.  Nevertheless,
as  if  In  reply  to  the  imperial  prophetic  act
(which  corresponded  with  John  the  Baptist's
prediction  of  One  who  would  come  axe  in
hand),  the  Jews  approached  with  answer
(cf.,  for  this  use  of  the  word  "answer,"
Matt.  xi.  25 ;  Acts  iii  12 ;  Mark  xi.  14).
The  "answer"  here  is  in  the  form  of  a
question,  which  shows  that  they  had  not
recognized  the  sign  he  had  already  given,
that  this  temple  was  his  "  Father's  house,"
and  tliat  he  had  solemnly  claimed  the
authority  of  "  Son  "  over  the  house.  What
sign  showest  thou,  because  (or,  seeing  that)
thou  doest  these  things  t  (cf.  Matt.  xii.  38, etc.;
ch.  vi.  30).  Thou  art  bound  to  give  us  some
"  sign  "  that  tliou  hast  a  right  to  deal  thus
with  established  customs  and  to  assume  the
position  of  a  public  reformer.  Upon  what
does  thine  (ejouff/a)  authority  rest  ?  Give  us
some  miraculous  proof  of  these  high  as-
sumptions, "  seeing  that  ^quatenus)  thou  art
doing  these  things,"  whose  consequences  are
now  ao  conspicuous.  It  might  be  supposed
that  the  extraordinary  effect  just  produced
upon  the  crowd  of  traflSckers  was  sufficient
proof  of  power,  if  not  of  authority.  The
Jews  were  witliin  their  right  in  aamng  for
these  authentications ;  but  their  continuous
demand  for  outward  signs  is  one  of  the
conspicuous  features  of  their  character
(Matt.  xii.  38 ;  1  Cor.  i.  22).  In  the  funda-
mental nature  of  a  "  sign  "  there  is  a  hint
of  the  true  solution  of  the  enigmatical  saying
which  is  the  first  public  utterance  of  our
Lord.  He  gave  to  the  act  which  he  was
about  to  perform  the  characteristic  of  a
"  sign."  It  would  be  an  outward  and  visible
manifestation  of  a  stupendous  spiritual  event.
This,  among  other  reasons,  refutes  the
modem  speculation  of  Herder,  Bwald,Luoke,
Benan,  and  even  of  Neander,  Greikie,  and
others,  that  the  evangelist  was  wrong  in  the
explanation  of  this  remarkable  saying  which
he  offered-iu  the  twenty-first  veree.  John,
who,  batter  tliau  modern  commentators  can
do,  ought  to  have  known  what  the  Lord
meant,  declares  that  Jesus  was  speaking  of
"  the  temple  of  his  body "  when,  as  the
context  shows,  he  was  vindicating  his  right
(o  cleanse  the  existing  temple ;  and  by  tAv
vail/  TovTov, "  this  sanctuary,"  he  was  also
pointing  to  and  referring  in  some  sense  to
the  temple  structure  in  the  midst  of  which
he  and  the  Jews  were  standing.  The  com-
mentators have  said,  "  John  was  wrong,  and
was  led  astray  by  his  own  fancies.  There
was  no  reference  to  the  death  or  resurrection


of  Christ.  The  Iiord  meant,"  say  they,  "m
follows :  'Persist  in  your  lawless,  irreverent,
unbelieving  treatment  of  the  temple,  and  so
destroy  it.  Let  it  cease  by  this  handling  of
yours  from  being  a  temple,  and  I  will  prove
my  right  to  cleanse  it,  and  to  reform,  rebuke,
or  condemn  your  immoral  practices  in  it,
by  building  it  again,  or  rather  erecting  a
spiritual  temple,  a  temple  without  hands,
and  in  three  days,  t.g.  in  a  short  time  after
you  have  consummated  your  impiety,  I  will
complete  my  restorative  work^I  will  build
a  new  temple  and  fill  it  with  my  glory.' "
If  John  had  not  appended  the  twenty-first
verse,  "  Howbeit  he  spake  eonoeming  the
temple  of  his  body,"  the  above  interpretation
would  deserve  very  close  attention  and  per-
haps acceptance.  But  there  are  sundry  dif-
ficulties in  it,  even  if  the  evangelist  had  not
■upplied  the  true  key : — e.g.  Christ  does  not
say,  "  I  will  raise  up  'another'  temple  or  a
'spiritual'  temple  on  the  ruins  of  the  old;"
but  "I  will  raise  it  up,"  viz.  the  temple
which  I  challenge  you  to  "  destroy."  Though
ill  Tpuriv  rifiepais,  "  in  three  days,"  is  used  in
this  indefinite  sense,  in  Hosea  (vi.  2,  LXX.),
yet  it  is  the  accepted  term  for  the  period  of
three  days,  which  counted  from  the  death
to  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord,  and  which
in  tlie  synoptic  Gospels  (Matt.  xii.  40)  is
distinctly  foretold  to  be  the  great  "  sign  "
given  to  that  generation.  Moreover,  from
the  Jewish  misunderstanding  of  the  words
which  appear  in  the  synoptic  narrative,
viz.  Sii  rpiav  riiiepav,  "  during  three  days,"
the  literal  character  of  the  time  specified
had  laid  hold,  not  only  of  the  disciples,  but
of  the  multitude.  Again,  the  erection  of
the  spiritual  temple  would  not  be  an  out-
ward aiid  visible  sign  of  the  grace  and
authority  of  the  Lord ;  but  rather  the  great
spiritual  reality  itself— invisible  indeed,  and
requiring  signs  to  manifest  and  demonstrate
its  own  occurrence  and  existence.  We  con-
clude, then,  that  the  apostle  knew  better  than
his  critics,  and  that  we  are  to  believe  that,
when  the  Lord  said  to  the  Jews,  Destroy  (Ai5-
aare,  dissolve,  break  up)  this  temple,  "  he  was
speaking  of  the  temple  of  his  body,"  and  at
the  same  time  linking  and  identifying  the
two  temples,  relating  the  one  to  the  other  so
closely  that  the  destruction  of  his  body  be-
came ipso  facto  the  demolition  of  the  temple
character  of  the  building  where  they  then
stood.  The  temple  of  stone  and  gold,  of
stately  decoration  and  ceremonial,  derived  all
its  true  meaning  from  its  being  the  gorgeous
crystallization  of  a  Divine  idea  embodied
in  his  life.  The  temple  had  no  value  save
as  a  meeting-place  for  God  and  man,  where
by  sacrifice  and  worship  man  might  approach
the  Father,  who  declared  himself  to  bo
reconciled,  long-suffering,  and  yet  just..  The
Lord  has  cume  to  the  temple,  but  was  himself


OH.  n.  1—26.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


91


One  holier  and  "  greater  than  the  temple."
God  ie  manifested  in  the  glory  of  that  holy
life,  and  man  is  set  forth  also  in  Christ's
perfect  high-priestly  approach  to  and  com-
merce with  the  excellent  glory.  The  Lord
knows  that  he  is  the  Lamh,  and  the  only
begotten  Son  of  God,  and  he  knows  also  that
his  death  is  part  of  the  awful  method  in
which  the  vast  designs  of  his  righteous  love
will  be  secured.  He  has  a  baptism  to  be
baptized  with,  and  he  is  straitened  until  it
be  accomplished.  He  anticipates  the  end.
As  he  said  afterwards  to  Judas,  "  That  thou
doest  do  quickly;"  so  at  this  moment  he
said,  Destroy  this  temple  (of  my  body),  and
you  will  destroy  therein  the  temple  character
of  this  historic  embodiment  of  a  grand
prophetic  hope ;  and  I  will  raise  it  up,  viz. —
the  temple  of  my  body — in  three  days  (not,
I  wiU  raise  it  by  quiet,  unobserved,  spirit-
processes  in  the  souls  of  men,  but)  the  very
temple  which  you  will  bring  down  shall
henceforth  be  the  living  and  eternal  temple
of  all  the  glory  of  God  and  all  the  possibili-
ties of  man.  The  great  bulk  of  expositors
of  many  types,  who  do  not  repudiate  St,  John's
own  wprds,  see  thus  (with  more  or  less  of  a
double  reference  in  it)  the  first  main  signifi-
cance of  the  enigma.  Whether  our  Lord
pointed  to  his  own  Person  as  he  uttered
these  words  cannot  be  determined.  It  is
said  by  some — If  he  had  done  so,  all  ambiguity
would  have  been  removed,  and  the  misunder-
standing which  followed  would  have  been
impossible!  Surely  the  Jews  were  not
usually  ready  to  receive  parabolic  truth  of
this  kind  so  readily,  and  after  their  fashion
were  almost  sure  to  misconceive  and  falsely
to  misrepresent  it.  Even  the  disciples  did
not  see  into  its  meaning  until  after  the
Eesurrection  (ver.  22).  How  could  they  ?
Verily,  then,  and  not  till  then,  was  it  seen
that  the  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonas  had  been
given  to  that  generation.

Vers.  20,  21. — The  immediate  reference  of
the  words  to  the  building  before  them  was
only  one  of  a  thousand  misapplications  of
the  words  of  Jesus.  The  seeds  of  truth
which  his  words  contain  would  take  root  in
after-daya.  Meanwhile  the  Jews  answered
and  said — taking  the  obvious  and  literal
sense  of  the  words,  and  treating  them  with
an  ill-concealed  irony,  if  not  scoff,  to  which
our  Lord  made  no  reply — In  forty  and  six
years  was  this  temple  buUt  as  we  see  it  to-
day. This  is  one  of  the  most  important
chronological  data  for  the  life  of  our  Lord.
Herod  the  Great,  according  to  Josephus
('Ant,'  XV.  11.  1),  commenced  the  rebuild-
ing of  the  second  temple  in  the  autumn
of  .the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign.  We
find  that  his  first  year  reckoned  from  Nisan,
A.TJ.o.  717 — 718.  Consequently,  the  eigh-
teenth year  must  have  eonunenced  between


Kisan,  a.u.o.  734—735  and  735—736.    The

forty-sixth  year  after  this  would  make
the  Passover  at  which  this  speech  was
delivered — the  spring  of  A.u.o.  781  (Wie-
seler,  '  Chron.  Synopsis  of  the  Four  Gospels,'
translation ;  and  Herzog,  '  Encyo.,'  xxi.
546.  The  fact  that  josephus,  in  his
'Bell.  Jud.,'  i.  21,  gives  the  fifteenth  year
of  Herod's  reign  instead  of  the  eighteenth,
is  shown  by  Wieseler  to  be  an  error  of  the
transcriber,  see  p.  152,  note),  which,  if  we
compare  with  the  other  hints,  is  a  fixed
point  from  which  to  reckon  the  birth-year
and  death-year  of  our  Lord.  The  "about
thirty  years  old  "  of  the  Lord  at  his  baptism
throws  us  to  about  A.u.o.  751,  b.o.  2,  for  the
year  of  his  birth,  and  if  there  be  only  one
Passover  mentioned  in  John's  Gospel  be-
tween this  and  the  last  Passover,  it  gives
A.u.o.  783  for  the  year  of  his  death.  This  date
IS  at  least  coincident  with  the  date  derived
from  the  fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius  Ctesar,  as
that  of  the  commencement  of  the  mission  of
John  (see  my  examination  of  these  dates
in  appendix  to  'John  the  Baptist').  The
temple  which  Herod  began  to  repair  in  the
eighteenth  year  of  his  reign  was  not  com-
pleted untQ  A.D.  64,  under  Herod  Agrippa
11.,  a  very  short  period  before  its  utter  de-
struction. The  irony  and  scorn  are  mani-
fest :  Wilt  thou  raise  it  up  in  three  days  1
John  shows,  in  ver.  21,  that,  in  the  deep
sense  in  which  our  Lord  used  the  words,  he
abundantly  justified  his  promise.  But  he —
ixeivos,  the  Lord,  not  the  people,  not  the
disciples — spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body.
This  is  the  reflection  which  was  made  upon
the  word  of  Jesus  by  the  evangelists  in
after-days.  Even  Mark  (xiv.  58)  reveals
the  presence  of  a  spiritual  interpretation  of
the  words  by  some  of  his  unsympathetic
listeners.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  in
the  synoptists,  we  find  the  pi  esence  of  the
idea  that  his  service  was  a  temple-service,
and  that  he  was  greater  than  the  temple
(Matt.  xii.  6 ;  cf.  also  Heb.  iii.  6 ;  1  Cor.  xii.
12,  27;  vi.  15;  Eom.  xii.  5;  Eph.  iv.  12  ;  i.
22, 23 ;  with  ii.  19—22).  Nor  must  it  be  for-
gotten that  the  Logos  itself  was, in  the  figura-
tive language  of  Philo,  spoken  of  as  the  house,
or  temple,  of  God.  Later  rabbinical  repre-
sentations also  describe  "  the  body  of  man
as  the  temple  in  which  the  Shechinah  ope-
rates "  (Wiinsche).  A  difficulty  arises  from
the  Lord's  having  claimed  in  these  words  to
be  on  the  point  of  raising  himself  from  the
dead,  whereas  elsewhere  his  resurrection  is
referred  to  the  mighty  power  of  God,  as  in
ver.  22;  Acts  ii.  24;  iii.  15;  iv.  10;  Rom.
iv.  24;  viii.  11 ;  Gal.  i.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  20,  etc.
Without  doubt,  God  and  the  Father,  the
Supreme  Power,  was  thus  seen  in  living
activity;  but  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ
not  infrequently  so  steps  forward  into  big


92


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,       [ch.  ii.  1—25,


consciousneBS  that  ho  can  say, "  I  and  the
Father  are  one; "  and  (oh.  x.  17, 18)  "  I  will
lay  down  my  life  that  I  may  take  it  again  "
(of.  Eph.  iv.  8—10).

Ver.  22. — ^When  therefore  ho  was  raised
from  the  dead,  his  disciples  remembered  that
he  spake  this  (to  them  '),  and  believed  the
Soriptnre,  and  the  word  which  Jesus  said.
This  frequent  contrast  Instituted  by  the
apostle  between  the  first  iiupiession  pro-
duced on  the  disciples  (himself  among
them)  and  that  which  was  prnduced  by
subsequent  reflection  after  the  resurrection
of  Jesus  and  gift  of  the  Spirit,  becomes  a
powerful  mark  of  authenticity  (compare  the
passages  which  Godet  has  here  cited,  ch.  iv.
32,  33;  vii.  39;  xi.  12;  xii.  16,  33  ;  xui.  28;
with  many  others).  "A  pseudo-John  imagin-
ing, in  the  second  century,  this  ignorance  of
the  apostle  in  regard  to  a  saying  which  he
had  invented  himself,  is  'criticism'  dash-
ing itself  against  moral  impossibility."
These  quiet  "  asides  "  and  reflections  of  the
biographer  on  the  mistaken  ideas  which  he
cites  and  corrects,  are  of  consummate  value,
as  pointing  out  the  stages  by  which  the
most  stupendous  ideas  that  have  taken
human  spirits  captive  dawned  on  the  most
susceptible  minds.  The  "  Word "  and  the
"  Scripture"  helped  the  disciples  to  subse-
quent faith.  Why  is  "Scripture"  in  the
singular,  seeing  that  John  used  this  form
of  expression  ten  times  when  he  had  one
definite  passage  of  Scripture  in  his  mind,
and  used  the  plural  when  the  general  au-
thority of  Scripture  was  appealed  to  ?  Many
have  looked  to  one  or  another  definite  Scrip-
ture text  supposed  to  predict  the  resurrec-
tion of  Christ,  such  as  Ps.  xvi.  10  and  Isa.
liii.  (some,  very  wrongly,  to  Hos.  vi.  2,  where
no  reference  can  be  established  to  this  great
event).  Dr.  Moulton  points  back  to  Ps.
Ixix.,  and  the  impression  which  the  Lord's
"  zeal  "  had  produced  on  the  disciples.  It
seems  better  to  recall  Clirist's  own  words,
and  the  comment  of  Luke,  in  xxiv.  25 — 27,
where  the  whole  Scripture  seems  to  have
been  laid  under  contribution  to  establish  the
grand  expectation.  Further,  of.  ch.  xx.  9,
where  John,  referring  to  the  same  subject,
uses  the  word  ypa<iyfi  in  the  singular,  for  the
general  tendency  of  Scripture.  All  the
piissages  which  couple  suil'cring  and  ap-
parent defeat  with  triumph  and  victory,  did
prepare  the  mind  of  thoughtful  men  for  the
better  understanding  of  the  Resurrection.
Thus  Ps.  xxii.  and  the  closing  words  of  Ps.
Ixxxix. ;  ex. ;  and  Isa.  liii.  thereupon  come
into  view ;   and,  in  fact,  all  the  Scriptures

'  The  auTois  of  T.R.,  whicli  rests  on  very
slight  authority,  is  omitted  by  the  critical
editors,   to  the  great  improvement  of  the

sense.


which  anticipate  the  glorious  reign  and  vic-
tory of  the  Christ  and  the  extension  of  his
kingdom,  when  coupled  with  those  which
portrayed  the  sorrows  of  Messiah  and  of  the
ideal  Sufferer,  implicitly  convey  the  same
thought.  Consequently,  numerous  passages
in  Isaiah, Micah,I)aniel,Zechariah,  Malachi,
with  Ps.  ii.  and  Ixxii,  xlv.,  etc.,  taken  in
connection  with  prediction  of  the  sorrows  of
Messiah,  did  prepare  the  disciples  to  believe
that  the  Holy  One  could  not  be  holden  by
the  pangs  of  death  (Acts  ii.  24,  etc.).  Before
closing  this  paragraph,  we  must  notice  that,
in  this  entire  transaction,  the  Lord  is  not  se-
parating himself  from  the  existing  theocracy,
but  interpreting  its  highest  meaning.  In  the
cleansing  of  the  temple  at  the  last  he  was
judging  and  condemning.  The  vindication
by  our  Lord  of  his  own  action  was  very
different  on  the  latter  occasion  trom  what  it
is  here  (uf.  John  ii.  16  with  Mark  xi.  17),
and  numerous  other  accompaniments  are
profoundly  different ;  nor  did  he  then  speak
of  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  although,  as
we  have  seen,  much  exaggerated  and  mis-
apprehensive  talk  concerning  him  had  been
floating  among  the  people  (Matt.  xxvj.  61).

Ver.  23 — ch.  iii.  2.-— (3]  Numerous  signs
in  Jerusalem,  with  their  twofold  effects.

Ver.  23. — A  new  paragraph  is  commenced
here.  The  conversation  with  Nioodemus
is  prefaced  by  a  very  remarkable  summary
of  facts,  and  a  hint  of  principles  of  action,
which  are  intended  to  throw  light  on  the  great
discourse,  which  bears  the  same  kind  of  re-
lation to  St.  John's  Gospel  that  the  sermon
on  the  mount  does  to  St.  Matthew's  Gospel.
It  is  a  compendium  of  the  Christian  faith.
The  very  fulness  and  sufSciency  of  it
suggests  the  doubt  of  its  authenticity.  Is
not  the  Lord's  reticence  on  other  occa-
sions, and  even  his  enigmatic,  parabolic
methods  of  teaching,  in  decided  contrast
with  the  abundance  of  the  revelations  with
which  Nicodemus  was  favoured?  We  are
tempted  to  ask — What  was  the  evangelist's
source  of  information?  The  only  reply
that  seems  to  me  rational  is  that  John
himself  was  the  auditor  of  this  discourse,
and  has  preserved  it  for  the  edification  and
solace  of  the  world.  The  disciple  whom
Jesus  loved  never  left  him,  but  was  per-
petually drinking  in  his  words,  and,  with  a
genuine  Hebrew  retentiveness,  preserved
them  intact ;  at  all  events,  he  so  reproduced
the  leading  ideas  of  the  conversation.
This  is,  we  maintain,  a  far  more  scientific
treatment  of  the  authorities  than  the  hy-
pothesis of  a  Johannist  of  the  second  cen-
tury having  gathered  up  and  idealized  the
synoptio  records  of  the  scribes,  who,  .by
sundry  questions,  brought  forth  from  the
Lord  some  of  his  most  characteristic  teach-
ing.    Xhonia  urges  that  we  have  here  a


OH,  n.  1—26.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORD  i  NO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


93


•piritnal  reckaufffot  "  the  rich  young  man,"
of  "  the  lawyer,"  and  of  the  story  of  Paul,
bimself  a  Pharisee,  when  finally  convinced
that  he  needed  a  new  creation  and  a  spiritual
life  I  First  of  all,  then,  we  have  the  place,
general  period,  and  sperifio  time  referred
to:  Now  when  he  was  in  Jerusalem — not
the  temple,  but  in  the  houses  and  streets,
and  perhaps  suburbs,  of  Jerusalem  {'lepovaa-
Mi;uoiv,  the  plural  form  used  generally  in
the  Gospel,  while  'UpovtraX-^fj.  is  used  in  the
Revelation  in  symbolic  sense) — at  the  Pass-
over ;  a  period  generally  covering  nine  or  ten
days  of  celebration,  extending  from  the  first
purifying  of  the  houses  from  all  leaven  and
the  drawing  of  pure  water  on  the  thirteenth
Nisan,  the  paschal  meal  on  the  fourteenth
Nisan,  the  feasts  in  the  evenings  of  the
great  days  of  convocation,  fifteenth  and
twenty-first  of  the  month,  and  the  cere-
monies of  the  intervening  six  days.  In  the
feast  must  refer  to  one  or  other  of  the  great
days  of  convocation,  worship,  and  feasting.
Many  believed  on  Ms  Name;  2.e.  on  his
Messiahahip,  rather  than  on  himself,  as
their  Prophet, Purifier,  self-sacrificing  Priest,
or  than  on  himself  as  Lamb  of  God  or  Son
of  God.  They  accepted  on  easy  terms,
with  a  fickle  and  perhaps  eager  fanaticism,
the  first  impression  i>roduoed  by  him  when
they  saw  the  signs  which  he  was  making  of
his  heavenly  mission  and  nature.  "We  must
conclude,  therefore,  that  he  did  in  many
ways  partially  unveil  himself.  Nicodemus
heard  of  these  "  signs,"  and  referred  them
to  a  Divine  commission.  John  does  not
here,  nor  elsewhere,  say  what  these  signs
were — whether  they  consisted  of  efibcts  pro-
duced on  nature  or  on  men,  whether  they
were  deeds  of  healing,  or  of  moral  oum-
pulsion,  or  repression,  or  reformation.  Great
expectations  with  reference  to  a  coming
Christ  had  been  excited  in  the  breasts  of
tens  of  thousands  by  John  the  Baptist's
fiery  ministry.  The  result  was  that  men
now  flocked  to  Jesus  in  greater  numbers
than  they  had  done  to  him  (oh.  iii.  26).  The
faith  that  they  exercised  was  neither  deep
nor  appreciative,  yet  it  was  worthy  of  the
name  of  faith.

Vers.  24,  25. — But  Jesus  did  not  (imper-
fect) trust  himself  to  them;  not  even  to
those  who  had  "trusted  on  his  Name."
This  remarkable  expression  corresponds
with  many  actions  and  methods  of  Jesus.
When  he  was  offered  the  homage  of  devils,
he  forbade  them  to  speak.  When  those  who
had  been  simply  healeiof  bodily  disease
began  garrulously  to  proclaim  his  praises,
he  silenced  them.  He  had  no  faith  in  their
faith,  and  consequently  did  not  open  to
them  more  of  his  nature ;  still  less  did  he


assume,  as  they  would  have  liked  him  to
do,  an  immediate  and  outward  Messiahship
of  political  revolt.  He  did  not  break  the
bruised  reed  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax,
and  often  made  use  of  the  smallest  remnant
of  spiritual  apprehension  ;  but  even  in  Ga-
lilee, when  they  would  by  force  have  made
him  a  king,  "he  sent  the  multitudes  away."
Tlie  apparently  arbitrary  permission  given
to  others  to  proclaim  his  Name  (as,  e.g.,  to
the  healed  demoniac  of  Gergesa,  Luke  viii.
39 ;  cf.  ix.  57 — 62)  suggests  the  precise
inquiry  which  John  had  felt  from  the  first
Jerusalem  visit,  and  which,  with  profound
insight,  he  thus  meets :  "  He  did  not  trust
himself  to  them,"  owing  to  the  fact  that  he
knew — (ytv^a-iceiv  by  apperceptive  and  con-
tinuous prooefcses) — all  (men)  persons.  He
penetrated  their  thoughts,  discerned  their
character,  saw  the  meaning  of  their  faith,
the  burden  of  their  wishes,  tlie  regal  pas-
sions that  consumed  them — he  knew  all.
And  also  because  he  had  no  need  that  any
should  testify  what  was  in  (the)  man;  for
he  himself — without  such  aid — ^knew  what
was  in  (the)  man.  The  definite  articles
here  may  either  restrict  the  meaning  to  the
men  who  happened  one  by  one  to  come
under  his  searching  glance  (ch.  vii.  51 ;
Meyer),  or  it  may  mean  "  man  "  generically,
"  human  nature  "  in  all  its  peril,  weakness,
and  self-deception.  Geikie  ('  Life  of  Christ,'
i.  508)  gives  a  novel,  though  entirely  inde-
fensible, translation :  "  He  needed  not  that
any  should  bear  witness  respecting  him  as
man."  The  better  and  more  accurate  trans-
lation is  the  first;  but  since  his  glance  is
universal  and  contact  with  souls  continuous
— man  by  man — the  statement  thus  embraces
even  more  than  is  involved  in  the  generic
sense.  The  knowledge  of  man  (liomo)
"  generically  "  would  not  embrace  his  indi-
vidualities— would  leave  out  the  specialities
of  each  case.  The  particularism  of  Christ's
penetrative  glance  gives  the  stronger  and
better  explanation  of  the  reserve  of  Christ
in  dealing  with  these  half-believers,  than
the  generic  or  rather  universal  knowledge
which  is  supposed  to  be  involved.  N.B. —
(1)  There  is  a  so-called  faith  to  which
Christ  will  not  unveil  himself — will  not  give
himself.  (2)  The  great  reward  of  faith  in
Christ  is  the  faith  of  Christ.  (3)  Faith
in  the  Name  of  Christ,  produced  now  by
"  si^ns,"  real  or  artificial,  fictitious  or  sacra-
mental, mystic,  or  miraculous,  or  lesthetic,
by  sortes  JBiblie^,  or  exaggerated  ideas  of
special  providence,  is  not  comparable  to  the
faith  in  Christ  himself,  which  the  truth
about  him  excites.  (4)  It  is  to  the  latter
rather  than  to  the  former  that  the  golden
gates  of  the  heart  of  Jesus  are  opened.


94  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [oh.  n.  1—25.


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  1 — 11.— 7^  first  miracle.  It  took  place  on  "  the  third  day ; "  that  li,  the  third
day  from  the  place — fifty  miles  away — where  Nathanael  had  met  Jesus.  The  Lord
had  then  displayed  his  omniscience,  and  he  now  displays  his  omnipotence.

I.  The  scene  op  the  miracle.  "  Cana  of  Galilee."  1.  This  wai^  a  small  village,
about  three  hour^  journey  from  Nazareth,  rather  insignificant  in  its  history,  for  it  is
not  named  in  the  Old  Testament  nor  in  Josephus.  2.  The  miracle  occurred,  not  upon
the  highway  of  the  village,  but  in  the  comparative  privacy  of  the  family  circle.  3.  The
house  was  probably  occupied  by  persons  known  to  Jesus,  if  not  related  to  his  mother
Mary  by  ties  of  afBnity ;  for  Mary  was  there,  evidently  with  a  view  to  the  marriage,"
and  may  have  superintended  its  social  arrangements.  The  directions  she  gave  to  the
servants  sanctifln  this  view.

II.  The  ocoasion  or  the  miracle.  "  There  was  a  marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee."
1.  The  presence  of  Christ  suggests  the  honour  of  matrimony.  (1)  He  had  no  sympathy
with  those  "  forbidding  to  marry  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  3).  The  Holy  Spirit  afterw'ards  saiil,
"Marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  and  the  bed  undefiled "  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  (2)  Christ's
presence  is  essential  still  to  a  happy  wedding.  (3)  His  presence  does  not,  as  Roman
Catholics  say,  turn  marriage  into  a  sacrament.  That  requires  a  word  of  institution,  of
which  there  is  no  tiace  in  this  history.  2.  It  is  allowable  to  rejoice  on  such  occasions.
Our  Lord  sanctions  by  his  presence  both  the  marriage  and  the  feast.

III.  The  necessity  tor  the  mikaolb.  "And  when  the  wine  failed,  the  mother
of  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  They  have  no  wine."  The  supply  of  wine  may  have  failed
(1)  either  because  of  the  unexpectedly  large  addition  to  the  company,  caused  by  the
arrival  of  Jesus  and  his  five  disciples ;  (2)  or,  because  the  feast  may  have  been  protracted,
according  to  custom,  for  a  week;  (3)  or,  perliapSj/rom  the  humble  circumstances  of  the
bride  and  bridegroom.

IV.  Mary's  appeal  to  Chbist.  "They  have  no  wine."  1.  She  appeals  to  her
Son,  not,  perhaps,  so  much  because  the  deficiency  of  the  wine  was  caused  by  his  arriral
at  Cana  with  his  five  disciples,  but  because  she  evidently  expected  hira  to  exercise  his
superhuman  power  to  meet  the  unexpected  need.  This  seems  evident  (1)  from  the
facts  related  by  his  disciples  as  to  the  recent  events  in  Judeea — the  Baptist's  declaration,
the  miraculous  baptism-scene,  the  proof  of  his  supernatural  knowledge  in  the  case  of
Nathanael ;  (2)  from  the  presence  of  disciples  who  had  gathered  round  him ;  (3)  but,
above  all,  from  her  own  recollection  of  the  marvels  of  his  birth.  2.  Tliere  is  nothing
in  her  appeal  to  her  Son  to  justify  the  Roman  Catholic  argument  in  favour  of  the  Virgin
Mary's  intercession  in  heaven,  because  (1)  it  does  not  follow  that,  becnuse  the  prayers
of  living  saints  are  answered  on  earth,  therefore  the  prayers  of  dead  saints  will  be
either  heard  or  answered  in  heaven ;  (2)  the  rebuke  that  our  Lord  administers  to  his
mother  does  not  strengthen  the  argument  in  favour  of  the  prayers  of  dead  saints.

V.  Christ's  answer  to  his  mother's  appeal.  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee,
woman  ?  "  1.  This  language  implies  no  want  of  respect  for  his  mother,  because  the
term  "  woman  "  is  the  same  which  l.o  addresses  to  her  in  his  dying  moments,  "  Woman,
behold  thy  son  I "  (ch.  xix.  26).  Yet  this  mode  of  address  implies  a  change  of
relationship  between  Jesus  and  Mary.  She  was  no  longer  "  mother,"  but  "woman."
We  see  the  trace  of  this  change  in  the  memorable  question,  "  Who  is  my  mother?  and
who  are  my  brethren?"  (Matt.  xii.  46).  2.  Tlie  language  implies  that  the  period  of
subjection  to  Joseph  and  Mary  was  now  at  an  end,  that  he  is  now  "  the  Servant  of
Jehovah,"  that  his  work  as  the  Messiah  has  at  last  begun.  3.  His  further  reply,  "  Mine
hour  is  not  yet  come,"  does  not  imply  a  refusal  of  her  request,  but  only  a  postponement
of  the  time  for  working  the  miracle.  He  would  hold  in  his  own  hands  the  supreme  dis-
posal of  his  power.

VL  The  eeality  of  the  miracle.  The  water  was  turned  into  wine.  He  who
can  create  the  grape  can  create  the  wine.  He  who  can  create  matter  can  easily  change
it  from  one  kind  to  another.  The  reality  of  this  miracle  is  attested :  1.  By  the  evidence
of  the  servants  who  knew  what  the  wafer  was.  2.  By  the  evidence  of  the  ruler  of  the
feast  as  to  what  it  became.  There  was  no  visible  action  in  this  case  interposing  between
the  miracle-worker  and  his  remarkable  "  sign."


can.  1-^5.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  95

Vn.  There  is  nothino  inconsistent  with  this  ohabaotbr  of  Christ  in  his
REPLENISHING  THE  SUPPLY  OF  WINE.  Those  who  maintain  that  the  wirje  created  by
miracle  was  unfermented,  and,  therefore,  unintoxicating,  ought  to  know :  1.  That  there
is  no  such  thing  as  unfermented  wine.  2.  That  it  is  no  more  inconsistent  with  Ohrisfs
character  to  create  wine  than  to  create  the  grape ;  yet  the  grape  was  created  with  a  full
knowledge  of  its  properties.  3.  That  while  there  is  nothing  in  Scripture  to  Justify  the
statement  that  it  is  a  sin  to  drink  wine,  the  argument  from  expediency  asserted  by
the  Apostle  Paul  (1  Cor.  viii.  13)  ought  to  have  a  conclusive  weight  with  Christian
people  in  the  way  of  justifying  a  total  abstinence  from  strong  drink.

VIII.  The  OBJECT  op  the  miracle  at  Cana.  "It  manifested  forth  his  glory.''
It  proved  that,  because  "  the  Father  lovoth  the  Son,''  he  hath  "  given  all  things  into
his  hand  "  (ch.  iii.  35).  The  apostles  manifested  the  glory  [of  Jehovah  in  their  miracles ;
Jesus  manifested  his  own.

IX.  The  result  op  this  miraole.  "And  his  disciples  believed  on  him."  They
believed  as  tbey  had  never  done  before  ;  their  faith  was  strengthened ;  they  saw,  fresh
evidence  of  his  Bivine  nature  and  Divine  power ;  and,  no  doubt,  bad  "joy  and  peace  in
believing."

Ver.  12. — The  transition  bettoeen  private  and  public  life.  Before  our  L(5rd  entered  on
his  public  life  at  Jerusalem,  he  goes  back,  as  it  were,  for  a  moment  into  the  retirement
of  his  family.

I.  The  scene  of  oub  Lord's  visit.  "After  this  he  went  down  to  Capernaum."
1.  It  was  the  Jewish  capital  of  Galilee,  down  upon  the  Sea  of  Tiberias,  an  important
place  of  commerce.  2.  It  became,  after  Nazareth,  the  hyme  of  Jesus.  (Matt.  iv.  13.)  It
is  called  "  his  own  city  "  (Matt.  ix.  1).  On  the  occasion  of  the  present  visit  he  had  come
directly  from  Nazareth,  after  the  Cana  miracle.  3.  It  was  a  city  honoured  by  the  work-
ing  of  many  miracles ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  distinguished  by  a  most  perverse  unbelief.
"  Thou  Capernaum,  which  art  exalted  to  heaven,  shalt  be  cast  down  to  hell "  (Matt.
xL  23).    4.  It  is  now  a  ruin,  identified  as  TeU-Eum.

II.  The  occasion  and  circumstances  op  this  visit.  It  has  a  double  aspect  so
far  as  it  relates  to  Christ's  relatives  and  to  his  disciples.  "  His  mother  and  brethren
are  still  with  him,  attached  merely  by  nature ;  his  disciples  newly  attached  by  faith."

1.  Christ  recognized  the  tender  ties  of  kinship.  He  allowed  his  mother  and  his  brothers
— thoutjh  they  did  not  yet  believe  in  him — to  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  his  society  for
a  time  before  his  entrance  upon  his  public  ministry.  (1)  The  ties  of  nature  are  not
superseded  by  the  ties  of  grace.  (2)  The  ties  of  nature  may  themselves  be  strengthened
by  the  ties  of  grace.  These  brethren  of  Christ,  though  now  in  unbelief,  are  afterwards
found  as  disciples  of  Christ  (Acts  i.  14).     We  ought  to  love  all  our  relatives  in  Christ.

2.  Christ  definitely  called  the  disciples  to  the  apostleship  during  this  visit.  This  is
evident  from  Matt.  x.  1.  The  call  was  followed  by  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes.
The  disciples  were  henceforth  to  follow  Christ  for  ever.

Vers.  13 — 22. — Christ  in  the  temple.  He  went  up  straightway  to  the  Passover  at
Jerusalem,  for  he  honoured  every  ordinance  of  the  old  dispensation  so  long  as  it  lasted.

L  The  act  of  oub  Lord  in  the  temple.  His  ministry  must  open  in  the  temple,
which  was  the  sanctuary  of  Judaism,  and  it  must  open  with  an  act  of  holiness  rather
than  a  display  of  power.  1.  His  attitude  was  the  subject  of  prophecy.  "  The  Lord,  whom
ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple  ...  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi"  (Mai.
iii.  1 — 3).  2.  It  was  quite  in  keeping  likewise  with  the  character  of  him  of  whom  the
Baptist  said,  "  Whose  fan  is  in  his  hand  "  (Matt.  iii.  12).  Christ  was  about  to  vindi-
cate the  sanctity  of  his  Father's  house  by  cleansing  out  the  rabble  of  money-changers
and  dealers,

II.  The  time  op  this  act — the  Passover.  As  one  of  the  great  feasts  of  the
Jews,  it  attracted  to  Jerusalem  the  entire  people  of  the  country,  in  their  ecclesiastical
relationships.    His  hour  was  now  come.

ILL  Thk  act  itself.  As  to  sellers  of  oxen  and  sheep  and  doves,  and  money-
changers, "he  drove  them  all  out  of  the  teoiple,  and  the  sheep  and  the  oxen,  and
poured  out  the  changers'  money,  and  overthrew  the  tables."  1.  It  was  an  act  of
tupreme  courage.     The  dominant  hierarchy,  corrupt  and  faithless  as  it  was,  was  sup-


9«  THE  GJOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1—25.

ported  by  the  public  opinion  of  Jerusalem,  and  might  have  crushed  this  zealot  on  the
spot.  Yet  our  Lord  proceeds  with  the  utmost  deliljeration  to  the  work  of  purifying  the
temple  with  the  "  whip  of  cords  "  in  his  hand,  not  wielded  as  an  instrument  of  offence,
but  as  a  symbol  of  authority.  He  has,  no  doubt,  the  consciousness  of  a  supernatural
force  that  could  be  put  forth  in  case  of  need.  2.  It  was  an  act  of  holy  zeal.  "  Make  not
my  Father's  house  a  house  of  merchandise."  (1)  Eighteen  years  before  he  said  to  his
parents,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Patlier's  business  ?  "  (Luke  ii.  49).  He
now  shows  his  first  concern  was  for  the  honour  of  his  Father's  house.  (2)  Our  Lord
was  indignant  because  the  Jews  had.  made  the  temple  their  own  house,  and  desecrated  it
by  making  it  the  instrument  of  their  sordid  interests.  (3)  He  asserts  his  Divinity  in
the  act  of  defending  the  honour  of  his  Father's  house.  "  He  is  sustained  by  the  con-
sciousness of  his  dignity  as  Son,  and  his  duty  as  tlie  Messiah."  3.  He  was  supported
in  his  act  by  the  very  conscience  of  the  Jews  themselves,  who  knew  that  he  was  right  and
they  were  wrong.

IV.  The  effect  of  this  act.  It  had  a  double  effect,  1.  Consider  its  effect  upon
the  disciples.  (1)  It  suggested  an  Old  Testament  prophecy :  "  The  zeal  of  thine  house
hath  eaten  me  up"  (Ps.  Ixix.).  This  implies  the  familiar  acquaintance  of  the  disciples
with  the  Scriptures.  (2)  It  ministered  to  their  faith.  The  act  of  Jesus  was  in  their
eyes  a  sign  of-  Divine  holiness.  They  only  understood  the  true  meaning  of  his  words
after  he  had  risen  from  the  dead ;  but  "  they  believed  the  Scripture,  and  the  word  which
Jesus  had  said."  It  was  the  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  hrins;  such  words  to  their
recollection.  2.  Consider  its  effect  upon  the  Jews.  As  soon  as  they  had  recovered  from
the  surprise  of  this  sudden  act,  they  began  to  question  its  authority.  "  What  sign
showest  thou  unto  us,  seeing  that  thou  doest  these  things?"  (1)  The  question  implies
that  they  conceded  the  lawfulness  of  his  act.  But  they  thought  it  just  to  demand  his
warrant  for  an  act  of  such  independent  authority.  (2)  Our  Lord's  answer  to  their
question.  "Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up."  (o)  The  words
were  naturally  taken  by  the  Jews  to  refer  to  the  temple  he  had  just  cleansed.  The
false  witnesses  of  Christ  on  his  final  trial,  and  Stephen's  accusers,  remembered  the
saying  in  its  literal  application  (Matt.  xxvi.  61 ;  Acts  vi.  14).  (6)  But  the  apostle
refers  them  to  "  the  temple  of  his  own  body,"  which  would  in  three  days  be  raised  up
again.  The  apostolic  comment  is  decisive  as  to  their  true  meaning.  But  what  connec-
tion could  there  be  between  the  temple  and  his  body  ?  (a)  The  destruction  of  the
temple  was  to  come  about  by  the  slaying  of  the  Messiah :  "  The  Messiah  shall  be  cut
off  .  .  •  and  the  people  of  a  prince  who  shall  come  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  sanc-
tuary "(Dan.  ix.  26).  The  death  of  the  Messiah  ends  the  temple;  the  veil  of  th€
temple  is  rent;  there  is  no  more  to  be  a  holy  place,  a  priesthood,  a  sacrifice.  The
destruction  of  the  temple  was  destined  to  be  in  Christ's  person :  "  On  his  body  the  fatal
blow  struck  by  the  hand  of  the  Jews  wotdd  fall,  which  would  lay  the  sanctuary  in
ruins."  (;8)  The  restoration  of  the  temple  is  to  come  likewise  through  his  body  raised
from  the  dead.  "  The  Messiah  perishes :  the  temple  falls.  The  Messiah  lives  again :
the  true  temple  rises  on  the  ruins  of  the  symbolical."  (3)  The  Jews'  rejoinder  to  our
Lord's  statement.  "  Forty  and  six  years  was  this  tc^mple  in  building,  and  wilt  thou  rear
it  up  in  three  days  ?  "  There  is  a  spirit  of  raillery  in  the  question.  But  our  Lord  gave
no  answer  to  their  sneering  question.  It  was  his  habit  to  deal  with  men  according  to
what  he  saw  was  the  state  of  their  hearts.

Vers.  23 — 25. — Our  Lord^s  work  in  Jerusalem.  After  the  temple  incident,  there
leemed  to  be  a  disposition  upon  the  part  of  the  people  to  accept  him.

I.  Mark  the  publicity  our  Lord  gives  to  his  mission.  "  When  he  was  in
Jerusalem  at  the  Passover,  in  the  feast."  He  selected  a  time  when  he  could  put  him-
self in  contact  with  the  whole  nation  gathered  to  one  of  their  annual  feasts.  He  must
show  himself  to  "  Israel,"  and  not  only  to  the  people  of  its  capital.  He  must  come
"  unto  his  own,"  whether  they  will  accept  him  or  reject  him.

II.  Mark  the  widespread  movement  in  his  favour.  "Many  believed  in  his
Name,  when  they  saw  the  miracles  which  he  did."  1.  The  nature  of  their  belief.  (1)
They  did  not  believe  with  the  heart,  but  with  the  understanding.  There  is  a  great
difference  between  mere  intellectual  belief,  in  which,  as  in  the  case  of  the  derils,  the
will  iig  not  implicated,  and  the  saving  faitli  which  includes  alike  the  acts  of  intellect,


OH.  u.  1—25.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  97

will,  and  hesirt.  (2)  They  did  not  trust  in  his  Person,  but  believed  in  liis  miracles.
They  "  believed  in  his  Name"  as  the  Messiah.  They  recognized  his  title  to  Messiah-
ship.  2.  The  ground  of  their  helief.  "  When  they  saw  the  miracles  which  he  did."  (1)
There  is  no  detailed  account  of  these  miracles  in  this  Gospel. .  It  is  evident  that  our
Lord  performed  a  vastly  greater  number  of  miracles  than  are  described  in  the  Gospels
(ch.  XX.  30).  (2)  The  belief  of  these  Jews  arose  out  of  astonisliment  at  the  prodigies
of  Divine  power  witnessed  by  them,  (a)  Yet  it  did  not  spring  out  of  any  previous
preparations  of  the  heart,  and  did  not  lead  to  any  definite  or  permanent  result  of
a  spiritual  nature.  (5)  Their  belief,  after  all,  nominal  as  it  was,  was  better  than  the
utter  unbelief  of  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  after  they  had  witnessed  the  signs  and  wonders
of  the  Lord.

in.  Mark  Chkist's  attitudb  towabdr  these  merely  nominal  disciples.  "  But
Jesus  did  not  commit  himself  unto  them."  1.  He  was  not  elated  hy  their  ready  accept-
ance of  Mm.  2.  He  "  had  no  faith  in  their  faith"  and,  accordingly,  he  either  with-
held from  them  the  fuller  instruction  intended  for  disciples,  or  withdrew  from  them  into
the  more  congenial  society  of  those  who  were  "  disciples  indeed."  3.  Mark  the  reason
of  this  conduct.  "  Because  he  knew  all  men."  (1)  Ministers  of  the  gospel  are  often
deceived  in  their  estimates  of  men ;  but  Christ  cannot  be  deceived.  (2)  He  does  not
need  human  testimony  to  guide  him  into  true  estimates  of  character.  We  are  all
more  or  less  dependent,  in  this  matter,  upon  such  external  help.  (3)  His  omniscient
discernment  of  man's  inner  life  made  it  impossible  he  should  be  deceived  in  his
knowledge  uf  men.  (4)  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  our  Lord  "  pondereth  the  hearts  of
men ; "  that  is,  he  weighs  them,  (a)  not  in  the  scales  of  worldly  estimation,  (5)  but  in
the  scale  of  hearenly  realities.  This  thought  ought  to  humble  us  in  the  deepest  self-
abasesnsnt  in  his  sight.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Yeri.  1 — 11. — Jesus  and  social  life.  Public  men  are  sometimes  anxious  with  regard
to  a  first  appearance,  that  it  should-  be  upon  a  scene,  in  society,  and  with  accompani-
ments worthy  of  themselves  or  of  their  own  conceptions  of  themselves.  Jesus  proved
bis  superiority  to  human  vanity  and  weakness  in  performing  his  first  "sign"  in  a  lowly
home  at  a  villager's  wedding.     His  conduct  in  this  was  just  like  himself.

I.  The  Loed  Jesus  was  opposed  to  asceticism.  Religion  and  asceticism  are  often
in  the  popular  mind  associated ;  and  pretenders  have  often  taken  advantage  of  the
association.  Even  true  prophets,  like  Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist,  have  had  a  strain
of  asceticism  in  their  nature,  a  vein  of  asceticism  in  their  life.  And  vigorous  sects,  like
the  Essenes,  have  sometimes  gained  a  reputation  and  an  influence  by  a  self-denying
life  led  for  self-denial's  sake.  In  Christian  times  again  and  again  this  principle  has
sprung  into  prominence,  and  has  exercised  immense  power  over  society.  -One  thing  is
clear,  that  Jesus  had  no  sympathy  with  isolation,  unsociableness,  austerity.

II.  The  Lord  Jesus  frequented  all  kinds  op  human  society.  He  dined  with
Pharisees  and  with  publicans  with  an  impartial  sociability.  He  does  not  seem  to  have
refused  invitations  to  partake  hospitality,  from  whatever  quarter  they  might  come.  It
was  a  complaint  brought  against  him  by  the  formalists,  that  he  was  "gluttonous,  a
wine-bibber,  and  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners."  This  was  untrue ;  but  it  points  to
a  truth,  viz.  that  our  Lord  had  no  aversion  to  social  gatherings.  He  frequented  the
society  of  men,  in  order  to  diffuse  his  inflnence  and  his  doctrine ;  and  chiefly  that  men
might  see  and  hear  and  know  him,  and  through  him  the  grace  of  God.

III.  The  Lord  Jesus  ENOouRAaBD  kis  disciples  to  mix  freely  with  theib
fbllow-mbn.  There  were  at  this  period  but  few  of  them — perhaps  five ;  and  this  was
an  early  stage  of  their  discipleship.  But  there  was  something  for  them  to  learn  at  the
marriage-feast ;  and,  as  the  narrative  tells  us,  the  experience  was  most  profitable  to
themselves.  At  the  same  time,  there  was  a  lesson  regarding  their  own  mission  and  the
methods  uf  its  fulfilment,  which  more  or  less  they  acquired  by  participating  in  such
social  gatherings  as  these.  They  were  to  learn  that  those  who  would  be  spiritual
helpers  of  men  must  first  be,  and  prove  themselves  to  be,  their  friends.

IV.  The  Lord  Jbsus  s4.ncti(wbd  i,ove  and  marriage.     Society  is  not  possible
JOHN.  ■


98  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  a.  1—26.

apart  from  family  life ;  and  it  is  not  a  good  sign  of  the  morals  of  a  community  when
men's  social  enjoyments  are  disconnected  from  virtuous  women  and  from  holy  homes.
It  ia  uniyersally  acknowledged  that  Christ  has  exalted  woman  to  her  rightful  and
intended  position ;  and  it  has  not  generally  been  considered  how  largely  this  effect  has
been  owing  to  our  Lord's  treatment,  first  of  his  own  mother,  and  secondly  of  the  bride
of  Cana,  on  this  occasion.  The  domestic  relations  should  form  the  nucleus,  so  to  speak,
of  the  social  life  of  humanity.  They  are  the  true  and  Divine  antidote  to  man's  selfish-
ness and  passions.  And  Christ  teaches  us  that  pleasure  is  to  be  found,  not  only  in  the
world,  in  the  society  of  the  profligate,  but  in  that  home-life,  those  sacred  relations,
which  are  too  generally  regarded  as  associated  with  disappointment,  cheerlessness,  and
miiery.

V.  Thb  Lord  Jesus  approved  akd  promoted  rtrtrooBNT  pestivitt.  In  his
provisicm  of  wine  for  the  wedding-feast,  we  observe  that  Jesus  did  two  things.  1.  He
gave  his  friends  what  was  not  an  absolute  necessity,  but  an  enjoyment,  a  luxury.  The
guests  might  have  drunk  water,  but  the  Divine  Friend  did  not  choose  that  they  should
be  compelled  to  do  so.  He  gives  us  better  gifts  than  we  deserve,  if  not  better  than  we
desire.  2.  He  gave  his  friends  abundance,  more  than  enough  for  the  occasion.  There
was  a  supply  f  ^r  future  need.  It  is  thus  that  he  reveals  the  liberality  of  his  heart  «nd
the  munificence  of  his  provision. — ^T.

Vers.  1 — IL — Jesus  wnd  the  marriage-state.  Of  the  services  which  our  Lord  Christ
has  rendered  to  human  society,  none  is  more  conspicuous  and  undeniable  than  the  honour
which  he  has  put  upon  marriage.  Of  all  institutions  and  relations  existing  among
men,  there  is  none  which  has  met  with  so  much  slander,  hate,  and  scorn,  as  matrimony.
The  sinful  and  the  ielfish,  not  content  with  avoiding  marriage  themselves,  overwhelm
those  who  honour  and  enter  upon  wedded  life  with  ridicule  and  contempt.  This  is
not  to  be  wondered  at,  inasmuch  as  true  and  honourable  marriage  involves  abstinence
from  unlawful  pleasui-es,  and  also  a  fidelity  and  constancy  of  affection  amidst  the  changes,
responsibilities,  and  troubles  incident  to  this  estate.  From  the  narrative  before  us,  and
other  instances  in  our  Saviour's  life  and  teaching,  we  learn  that  Christ  ooaunands,
sanctions,  and  hallows  matrimony  for  many  sufficient  reasons.

I.  As  TENDING  TO  HONOUB  WOMANHOOD.  Those  who  disparage  wedded  Ufo  are  usually
found  to  take  a  base  view  of  the  feminine  sex,  to  regard  women  rather  as  instruments
of  sensual  pleaswe  than  as  the  honourable  companions  of  men.  The  true  wife  takes  a
position  which  not  only  ennobles  herself,  but  raises  her  sex.  In  this  respect  marriage
is  in  complete  opposition  to  concubinage  and  polygamy  and  those  temporary  alliances
which  there  seems  a  disposition,  even  in  some  civilized  communities,  to  look  upon  with
favour.

II.  As  COMBATTING  THE  SELFISHNESS  OF  SINFUL  MEN.  Many  a  naturally  self-indulgent
and  self-seeking  man  has  experienced  the  benefit  of  a  relationship  which  has  drawn  his
thoughts  away  from  self,  and  has  led  him  to  interest  himself  in  his  wife  and  children,
and  for  their  sake  to  labour  with  strenuous  diligence,  and  to  submit  patiently  to  incon-
veniences and  privations.  Instead  of  living  to  gratify  himself,  and  regarding  the  other
sex  as  offering  opportunities  for  such  gratification,  such  a  man  has  learned  to  look  upon
human  life  as  an  opportunity  for  bearing  the  burdens  and  cheering  the  lot  of  others.
And  virtuous  fidelity  becomes  a  silent  but  effectual  witness  against  the  prevalent  and
seductive  vices  of  mankind.

III.  As  PBOMOTivE  OF  THE  TRUE  WELFARE  OF  SOCIETY.  The  family  is  the  divinely
ordered  unit  of  human  society.  This  has  been  recognized  even  in  pagan  nations.  But
Christianity,  in  giving  to  the  world  a  higher  ideal  of  iiiariiage,  has  rendered  a  vast
service  to  every  Christian  state.  The  increase  of  the  papulation,  the  prevalence  of
industry  and  of  knowledge,  the  formation  of  virtuous  habits,  all  contribute  to  national
prosperity ;  and  all  are  promoted  by  the  sacredness  and  honour  of  the  marriage-tie.

IV.  As    CONTRIBUTIVB   TO   THE    PROSPERITY   OF    THB    CHRISTIAN    ChURCH.      It   18    in

holy  households  that  the  most  intelligent  and  useful  and  steadfast  members  of  Christian
Churches  are  trained ;  it  is  from  these  that  the  ranks  of  the  spiritual  ministries  are
recruited ;  it  is  these  that  hand  down  the  uncorrupted  truth  from  generation  to  genera-
tion. The  children  of  prayer  and  watchfulness  rise  up  to  become  the  strong  men  is.
the  arsenals  and  in  the  armies  of  the  Eternal.


OH.  n.  1—25.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBr)IN&  TO  ST,  JOHN.  S9

v.  Ab  sHBliEUATio  OF  DiviNE  LOVE  AND  FAITHFULNESS.  Christ  himself  Implanted
the  germ  of  that  idea  of  the  spiritual  and  Divine  marriage  which  so  developed  under
the  Apostle  Paul.  He  is  the  true  Bridegroom,  and  his  Church  is  the  true  hride.  But
for  our  appreciation  of  what  is  involved  in  this  mystic  and  hallowed  relationship  we  are
dependent  upon  our  acquaintance  and  experience  of  matrimony  as  existing  in  human
society.  Thus  we  learn  what  depth  of  meaning  lies  in  the  statement,  "  Christ  loved  his
spouse  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it  1 " — T.

Vers.  1 — 11. — Jesus  and  nature.  In  recording  this  incident,  the  evangelist  tells  his
story  with  beautiful  simplicity,  and  as  if  scarcely  conscious  that  it  contains  what  is
marvellous  and  supernatural.  It  doubtless  seemed  to  him  so  natural  that  Jesus  should
have  acted  as  he  did,  that  he  wrote  without  drawing  any  especial  attention  to  what  in
the  narrative  was  evidently  miraculous.  John  had  himself  seen  so  many  instances  of
the  superhuman  authority  of  his  Master,  that  he  could  not  think  of  that  miahty  and
gracious  Being  as  acting  otherwise  than  as  he  did.  In  this  mighty  work  and  sign
which  has  immortalized  the  Galilsean  village  of  Cana,  we  behold  Jesus —

L  AssBBTiNO  HIS  suPBKMAOY  ovBK  NATHBB.  Most  of  Christ's  miracles  were  of  this
character ;  they  exhibit  him  as  governing  and  controlling  with  perfect  ease  the  natural
forces,  whether  physical  or  physiological,  which  the  Creator  has  associated  with  the
various  forms  of  matter.  It  would  be  idle  curiosity  to  speculate  upon  the  methods  in
which  bread  was  multiplied,  and  in  which  water  was  turned  to  wine.  The  poetic
Tendering  of  the  change  may  be  accepted—

"  The  coDBoious  water  saw  its  Lord,  and  blushed."

II.  Making  ube  of  human  agbnoy.  This  was  according  to  our  Lord's  wont.  He
bade  his  disciples  distribute  the  bread ;  he  directed  the  blind  man  to  wash  in  the  pool
of  Siloam ;  and  on  this  occasion,  though  he  might  have  dispensed  with  the  assistance
of  the  servants,  he  chose  to  make  use  of  their  agency,  both  in  filling  the  water-pots,  and
in  pouring  out  from  them  that  draughts  might  be  borne  to  the  master  and  to  the  guests.
It  is  thus  that  the  Lord  Christ  chooses  to  confer  blessings  upon  men ;  he  uses  some  to
provide  for  the  wants  of  others,  both  bodily  and  spiritually ;  he  entrusts  to  each  some
ministry  of  blessing,  and  each  becomes  his  brother's  keeper.

III.  Making  use  of  existing  matbbials.  It  would,  perhaps,  have  been  as  easy  for
Jesus  to  have  filled  the  empty  vessels  with  wine  as  to  transform  the  water  with  which
he  chose  that  they  should  be  filled.  But  this  would  not  have  been  his  way.  He  did
not  work  marvels  for  the  marvels'  sake.  He  took  the  material  which  was  to  hand,  and
wrought  upon  it.  It  is  a  good  lesson  for  us  to  learn ;  let  us  take  the  circumstances  in
which  Providence  has  placed  us,  the  characters  with  whom  Providence  has  associated
us,  and  seek  and  strive  to  use  them  for  God's  glory.

IV.  Chanqino  the  infebiob  into  the  supbeiok.  a  thaumaturge  might  have
attempted  to  change  wine  into  water,  a  man  into  a  beast.  But  such  a  method  of
proceeding  was  not  possible  to  Christ,  who  carries  on  a  process  of  spiritual  evolution  in
which  the  lower  form  is  displaced  by  the  higher,  and  indeed  is  transformed  into  it.  It
is  thus  that  our  Divine  Lord  works  in  the  human  heart  and  in  human  society.  Nihil
tetigit  quod  non  ornavit.  He  has  passed  his  wonder-working  hand  over  many  a  heart,
many  an  institution  and  usage  of  men ;  and  lo !  the  water  of  nature  is  transfigured
into  the  wine  of  grace.

V.  Calling  upon  Natcke  to  yield  of  hbb  best  and  abundantly.  The  wine
which  the  Divine  Guest  provided  was  the  best  at  the  table,  and  of  it  there  was  far  more
than  enough.  When  Jesus  exerts  his  power  he  exerts  it  to  high  purpose  ;  his  gifts  are
gracious  and  liberal.  He  dowers  his  Church  with  choicest  bestowments  ;  so  that  they
who  are  his  own  may  justly  say,  "  All  things  are  ours."  When  he  gives  himself  unto
his  spouse,  the  Church,  he  declares,  in  the  fulness  of  his  love  and  liberality,  "  All  that
I  h*ve  is  thine."— T.

Vers.  1 — ^11. — The  marriage-feast  at  Cana  a  pledge  of  the  marriage-supper  of  the
Lamb.  This  first  "sign"  of  our  Lord's  public  ministry  may  be  taken  as  an  emblem
and  an  earnest  of  a  vaster  gathering,  a  more  sacred  festivity,  an  eternal  fellowship.
Observe  the  elements  of  heavenly  bliss  here  anticipated  upon  earth.


100  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [ch.  n.  1— 25.

I.  Divnra  BSPOOSALS.    Then  shall  it  be  proclaimed,  "  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  la

come."

n.  Congenial  sooibtt.  The  mother  and  brethren  of  the  Lord,  the  disciples,  the
happy  pair,  the  joyous  guests,  figure  the  assembly  and  Church  of  the  Firstborn.

IIL  Abundant  pbovision.  As  Jesus  secured  an  ample  supply  for  want  and  for
enjoyment,  so  shall  the  banqueting-house  of  the  immortals  be  richly  furnished  with
all  spiritual  viands  for  Badsfaction  and  for  delight.

IV.  Pebpetual  festivities.  The  Jews  celebrated  a  wedding  by  festivities  extenJing
over  several  days ;  but  of  the  feast  of  salvation  and  of  life  there  shall  be  no  end.

"  Blessed  are  they  which  are  bidden  to  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb." — T.

Ver.  3. — "  They  have  no  wine."  Just  as  the  scarcity  of  provisions  in  the  wilderness
gave  Jesus  an  opportunity  to  supply  the  need  of  a  multitude ;  just  as  it  was  permitted
that  a  man  should  be  born  blind,  "  that  the  works  of  Grod  should  be  manifest  in  him  ;  "
so  the  falling  short,  of  the  supply  of  wine  at  Cana  gave  an  opportunity  for  the  perform-
ance by  Christ  of  a  beneficent  and  instructive  miracle.  And  the  lesson  is  one  widely
impressive  and  helpful  wliich  is  thus  conveyed  concerning  human  need  and  Divine
grace  and  supply.

I.  (}0D  LETS  MEN  WANT.  It  is  a  paradox,  but  it  is  a  truth,  that  it  is  for  our  good  to
suffer  need  of  many  kinds.  1.  Thus  he  teaches  us  how  slender  are  our  resources,  and
how  soon  exhausted.  2.  Thus  it  is  suggested  to  us  to  look  without,  to  look  above,  for
the  satisfaction  of  our  desires.  3.  Thus  it  is  arranged  that,  when  Grid  interposes  upon
our  behalf,  we  shall  welcome  and  value  his  intervention.

II.  God  supplies  men's  wants  and  satisfies  their  dbsibbs.  1.  He  does  this
at  the  right  moment,  when  the  pressure  is  heavy  enough,  but  not  too  heavy.  2.  He
does  this  in  the  exercise  of  his  own  power,  that  the  glory  may  be  his.  3.  He  does
this  in  a  gracious  and  affectionate  manner,  displaying  his  sympathy  as  well  as  his
authority.

ill.  The  pukposeb  bubsekvbd  by  the  supply  of  human  need  by  Divine  bodsty.

1.  All  blessings  come  thus  to  be  regarded  as  the  immediate  bestowments  of  Heaven.

2.  And  are  seen  to  be  the  outward  revelations  of  the  attributes  of  the  Fathei's  heart.
iJ.  And  are  the  occasion  of  devout  acknowledgment  and  fervent  adoration. — T.

Ver.  4. — "Mine  hour  is  not  yet  come."  God  has  his  own  times  for  all  his  works.
His  Son,  Christ  Jesus,  knew  no  haste ;  he  laboured  sometimes  to  exhaustion ;  he  shrank
from  no  suffering  or  privation.  Yet  he  was  thirty  years  of  age  before  he  began  his
ministry ;  and  now  and  a^ain  in  the  course  of  that  ministry  he  withdrew  from  the
public  gaze.  When  the  time  came  for  conflict  and  death,  he  was  ready  for  the  encounter.
But  until  the  time  came  he  was  not  to  be  forced  into  the  position  which  he  knew  he
was  to  take.  Neither  the  urgency  of  his  mother  and  his  brethren,  nor  the  restlessness
of  some  of  his  disciples,  nor  the  impulses  of  the  multitude,  could  move  him  to  take  a
step  for  which  he  was  not  yet  prepared.  "  Mine  hour,"  said  he,  "  is  not  yet  come."
There  was —

L  An  houb  fob  his  advent.  This  seems  to  us  to  have  come  late  in  the  history
of  our  sinful  humanity.     But  it  was  in  "the  fulness  of  the  time"  that  Jesus  came.

II.  A   SEASON   FOB    HIS    ENTKANCB   UPON   THE   PUBLIC   MINISTRY.       Why   this    should

have  been  deferred  so  long,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  say;  but  there  was  a  sufficient
reason.    A  delay  which  seems  to  us  protracted  is  as  a  moment  to  the  Eternal.

III.  A    TIME    FOB    THE    MANIFESTATION    OF    HIS    GLORY    BY    MIRACLES.       Again    and

again  the  Jews,  and  even  his  own  disciples,  impatiently  urged  the  Lord  to  assert  his
supernatural  power.  It  was  characteristic  of  him  that  he  commenced  his  series  of
"  signs  "  in  the  quiet  domestic  scene  at  Cana.  He  was  not  to  be  hastened  in  this  or
in  any  of  his  plans.

IV.  An  HOUB  FOB  HIS  GIVING  UP  OF  HIMSELF  TO  DIB.  We  Cannot  read  the  words
of  the  text,  spoken  at  the  commencement  of  his  public  life,  without  having  our  thoughts
carried,  by  way  of  contrast,  to  the  close  of  that  wonderful  career,  when  our  Lord
exclaimed,  "  Father,  the  hour  is  come  I "    Until  then,  none  could  take  from  him  his  life.

V.  A  TIME  FOB  THE  OUTPOUEING  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIBIT,  AND  FOR  THE  EVANGELIZATION

OF  THE  WORLD.     Jesus  had  waited,  and,  after  his  ascension,  his  disciples  wore  enjoined


en.  n.  1—25.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  101

to  wait.  The  proniiBe  of  the  Father  was  to  he  fulfilled  in  its  appointerl  time;  when
they  should  receive  power  from  on  high,  then  was  to  commence  the  great  work  of  their
life.

VI.  An  hour  fob  the  second  comino.  "  God  hath  appointed  a  day.''  '•  Of  that
day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man."  Why  should  we,  like  Mary,  like  the  short-sighted
disciples,  urge  and  implore  the  immediate  appearance  of  the  Lord?  His  hour  has  not
yet  arrived,  or  he  himself  would  he  here.  It  is  ours  reverently  to  expect,  patiently  to
wait  and  hope.     "  He  that  oometh  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry." — T.

Ver.  6. — "  Whatsoever  lie  saith  unto  you,  do  it."  As  his  mother  knew  Jesus  the
best,  so  she  reverenced  him  the  most.  She  had  reason  for  thinking;  and  for  speaking
as  she  did  regarding  her  Divine  Snn.  In  the  words  she  addressed  to  the  servants  at  the
house  where  the  wedding-feast  was  celebrated,  her  estimation  of  Jesus  came  forth  from
lier  lips  unconsciously.  We  admire  her  character,  and  we  receive  her  testimony.  The
Church  takes  up  this  her  language,  and  addresses  those  who  are  within  the  house  and
those  who  are  without,  and,  pointing  to  the  Divine  Lord,  eays,  "  Whatsoever  he  saith
imto  you,  do  it."

I.  The  authobitt  op  Christ  re  unique  and  absolute.  There  are  limits  to  the
authority  of  all  human  leaders,  teachers,  and  masters,  however  wise  and  good,  and  it
would  be  folly  to  bind  ourselves  to  obey  them  in  all  things.  But  it  is  wisdom  to  yield
an  unhesitating  allegiance  to  our  Divine  Lord.  1.  For  his  authority  is  Divine  in  its
nature.  He  that  honoureth  the  Son,  honoureth  the  Father  who  sent  him.  2.  His
commands  possess  the  authority  of  rectitude.  Herein  lies  the  incontrovertible  ground
of  our  obedience.  Reason  and  conscience  acknowledge  and  approve  the  claims  of  the
Lawgiver  and  the  Law.  None  does  wrong  who  obeys  Christ,  even  though  he  may
thus  be  led  into  suffering  and  danger.  3.  To  this  is  added  the  sacred  authority  of  love.
All  that  Jesus  has  done  and  sulTered  for  us  constitutes  a  claim  upon  our  cheerful
loyalty.     "  If  ye  love  me,"  is  his  appeal,  "  keep  my  commandments."

II.  The  authoeity  op  Chbist  is  universal  in  its  range.  1.  It  t»  manifestly
binding  upon  all  his  people.  They  are  admonished  to  "call  no  man  Master; "  and,  at
the  same  time,  they  are  thus  addressed :  "  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord,  and  ye  say
well,  for  so  I  am."  The  word  "whatsoever"  may  remind  us  that  occasions  may  arise
when  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  obey  our  Lord's  behests ;  such  occasions  will  test  our
fidelity  and  sinceiity  and  constancy ;  and  they  will  enable  us  to  commend  ourselves  to
him  "whose  we  are  and  whom  we  serve."  2.  It  is  truly  binding  upon  all  mankind.
He  is  "  Lord  of  all,"  because  he  is  Saviour  of  all.  He  claims  submission  and  service  as
his  right.  He  says  to  all  who  hear  his  Word,  "  Come  unto  me ; "  "  Learn  of  me ; "
"  Follow  me."  Whatsoever,  then,  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it  1  Such  obedience  will  be
for  your  true  interest,  your  eternal  peace  and  happiness. — T.

Ver.  10. — "  Thmt  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now.''  True  religion  and  all  its
benefits  are  progressive.  Instead  of  looking  back  to  a  golden  age,  the  people  of  God
have  ever  been  encouraged  to  turn  the  gaze  of  their  hearts  towards  the  future.  The
counsels  of  God  have  been  gradually  unfolded,  and  the  visions  of  inspired  seers  have  in
measure  been  realized.  There  is  no  sign  of  exhaustion  in  the  resources  of  Divine  grace,
in  the  provisions  of  Divine  beneficence.  Every  age  of  Church  history,  every  period  of
Christian  experience,  has  heard  the  amazed  and  grateful  acknowledgment  offered  to
heaven :  "  Thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now."

I.  God's  obace  is  peoobbssivelt  bbvbaled  in  the  individual  bxpbbibnce  of
Christians.  The  longer  Jesus  is  known,  the  more  are  his  benefits  realized,  and  the
more  is  he  valued.  Advancing  years,  seasons  of  affliction  and  adversity,  the  approach
of  the  end  of  the  pilgrimage,  afford  growing  opportunities  of  tebting  the  faithfulness  of
the  Father  and  the  friendship  of  the  Christ.  The  wine  of  grace  mellows  and  refines
with  the  lapse  of  time  and  the  enlargement  of  experience.

II.  God's  grace  is  progressively  revealed  in  the  succbssivb  epochs  of  the
world's  and  the  Church's  history.  1.  Time  has  unfolded  to  the  understanding
and  the  heart  of  humanity  the  character  of  Christ.  There  cirtainly  never  was  a  time
when  that  character  was  so  studied  and  so  appreciated  as  now.  2.  Time  has  proved
the  extent  and  the  variety  of  Ghrist's  power  to  bless.    Days  of  persecution,  days  of


102  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO   ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  u.  1—25.

missionary  zeal,  days  of  defence  and  confirmatioa  of  the  truth,  have  succeeded  one
another;  and  every  epoch  seems  to  reveal  to  humanity  the  goodness  of  the  wine  in  a
heightened  and  more  precious  degree.  3.  Time  has  shown  what  GhrUtianity  can  do  to
develop  and  improve  society.  As  new  forms  of  social  life  have  come  into  being,  as  new
social  needs  emerge,  as  new  dif&oulties  arise  in  human  relationships,  these  successive
events  make  it  evident  that  what  the  world  wants  is  supplied  in  the  Sou  of  man.  That
new  conditions  of  human  society  are  approaching  is  certain ;  but  it  is  equally  certain
that  our  Divine  religion  will  prove  its  adaptation  in  the  future  as  in  the  past.  Under
the  guidance  of  Providence,  there  is  in  store  for  our  humanity  larger,  richer,  better  life ;
and  the  Lord  Christ  -shxll  fill  the  multiplied  and  ampler  vessels  with  the  choicest
vintage  of  his  love.

IIL  God's  gbaob  will  bb  peookessivbly  revealed  in  eternity.  The  vrine  is
good  here  and  now ;  Christ  saves  from  sin,  strengthens  for  duty,  renews  and  purifies
and  blesses.  But  surely  those  who  are  brought  to  the  kingdom  above,  where  the
question  is  not  of  conflict  but  of  service,  not  of  patience  but  of  praise,  shall,  upon
tasting  the  spiritual  deli^^hts  of  eternity,  be  constrained  to  exclaim,  "  Thou  hast  kept
the  good  wine  until  now." — ^T.

Ver.  11. — "  This  heginning  of  his  signs.''  All  that  a  man  does  may  be  regarded  as
significant  of  his  character  and  aims  in  life.  How  far  more  obviously  and  instructively
is  this  the  case  with  the  actions  of  the  Son  of  God  I  Yet,  though  whatever  Jesus  did
may  be  regarded  thus,  there  are  certain  works  of  his  which  the  evangelist  notes
especially  as  being  signs.  Of  these  works,  the  deed  performed  at  Cana  is  remarked  to
be  the  first  in  point  of  time.

I.  What  these  signs  webb  in  themselves.  1.  They  were  works,  and  mighty
works ;  such  as  implied  great  power  on  the  part  of  the  Worker ;  such  as  were  not  wrought
by  ordinary  men.  2.  They  were  wonders,  or  miracles,  fitted  to  arrest  the  attention,
awaken  the  inquiry,  excite  the  surprise,  of  beholders.  3.  As  in  this  instance,  they
were  deeds  authoritative  over  nature,  its  elements,  processes,  and  laws.

II.  Of  what  these  signs  vtere  biqnifioant.  That  they  did  speak  to  the  mind«
and  hearts  of  those  who  beheld  them,  is  clear;  they  compelled  the  inquiry,  "What
manner  of  man  is  this?"  The  works  led  the  witnesses  to  ask  concerning  the  Worker;
for  they  testified  of  him.  1.  Of  a  Dioine presence  and  power  among  men.  The  signs
were  as  the  cry  of  a  herald,  as  a  trumpet-call  summoning  the  attention  of  all  who  were
capable  of  understanding.  They  spake  in  plainest  language,  and  their  voice  and  utter-
ance was  this :  "  The  King  of  nature  and  the  Lord  of  man  is  here  1 "  2.  Of  Divine
compassion  and  mtrey.  Observe  the  contrast  between  the  mediators  of  the  old  covenant
and  the  new.  The  first  sign  which  Moses  wrought- was  to  turn  water  into  blood;  the
first  which  Jesus  presented  to  men  was  to  turn  water  into  wine.  We  see  pity  in  its
varying  grades  excited  by  human  want  and  misery,  manifesting  itself  in  the  exercise
of  authority  prompted  and  guided  by  love.  3.  Of  Divine  adaptation  to  special  needs
of  men.  There  was  vast  variety  in  the  miraculous  ministrations  of  Immanuel.  The
first  sign  proves  that  the  same  Lord  who  supplies  the  most  urgent  wants  is  not
unmindful  of  the  social  pleasures  and  comforts  of  men.  There  is  delicate  discrimination
and  thoughtful  adaptation  and  suitability  in  the  marvels  which  Jesus  wrought.  Bread
for  the  hungry,  healing  for  the  sick ;  yet  also  wine  for  the  joyful  and  the  festive.

III.  To  WHOM  these  signs  appealed.  1.  Not  primarily  to  unbehevers.  Whether
there  v?ere  any  such  in  the  happy  circle  in  whose  midst  and  for  whose  benefit  the  first
of  the  signs  was  exhibited,  we  do  not  know;  probably  all  were  friendly  and  receptive,
and  none  more  than  partially  enlightened.  Je^us  did  not  go  into  public  and  perform  a
wonder  to  amaze  a  multitude.  2.  But  to  his  disciples.  There  was  no  sign  from  heaven
for  the  unspiritual,  but  for  the  believing  and  afl'ectionate  there  were  proofs  given  that
their  confidence  and  love  were  not  misplaced.  "  His  disciples  believed  on  him,"  t.«.  all
the  more  as  they  saw  more  of  the  might  of  his  word  and  the  tenderness  of  his  heart. — T.

Ver.  11. — "  Jesta  .  .  .  manifested  forth  his  glory."  Does  it  seem  to  the  reader  of  this
simple  narrative  that  this  language  is  somewhat  strained — is  pitched  rather  too  high  ?
An  obscure  village,  a  bcoiely  festival,  a  peasants'  party; — are  these  suggestive  of,
harm<Miious  with,  this  great  word  "  glory  "  ?    Ah  1  }et  us  not  le  deceived  by  outward


OH.  n.  1—25.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  »       103

appearances ;  but  rather  remember  that,  as  the  world  judges,  there  was  no  glory  in
Jesus  any  more  than  in  his  surroundings,  his  associates.  Be  it  ours  to  form  a  wiser,
]u«ter,  truer  judgment.

L   GlOBT    was   MANirESTED   IN  OhKIST's   COMMAND   AND  OONTBOL  OF  NATUBE.

n.   GliOBT   WAS    SHOWN    FORTH    IN    THE    REVELATION    OP    ChRIST's    OWN    LOVE    AND

OBAOE.  To  the  purged  vision  of  evangelists  and  apostles  there  was  a  higher  glory  in
the  pity  of  the  Redeemer  than  could  have  been  displayed  by  any  sign  from  heaven.
"They  belield  his  glory  .  .  .  full  of  grace  and  truth."

III.  GlOET   was    reflected    upon    the    COUNTENANCES    AND    THE    HEARTS   OF    THE

ASSEMBLED  COMPANY.  The  master  of  the  feast,  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom,  may
little  have  known  wlio  and  what  manner  of  person  they  liad  invited  and  were  enter-
tuning  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  But  henceforth! — surely  henceforth  he  must  have  been
to  them  the  Divine  Friend  and  Lord.  Whosoever  wiU  welcome  Jesus  to  his  home  and
to  hia  heart  shall  learn  the  mystery  alike  of  his  majesty  and  of  his  love.

IV.  Globt  was  REVEALED  TO  Chbist's  OWN  DISCIPLES.  These  five  newly  found
companions  and  pupils  were  soon  privileged  with  intimations  of  the  unique  character
and  power  of  their  Master.  It  was  a  lesson  memorable  and  precious  as  being  the  first
among  many.  They  who  learn  from  Jesus  lessons  of  love  and  pity,  lessons  of  wisdom
anil  power,  learn  at  the  same  time  a  lesson  of  moral  splendour  and  majesty  which  shall
prepare  them  for  renewed  manifestations  in  a  long,  an  infinite  series.

v.  Globt  was,  through  this  record,  radiated  to  all  time  and  to  the  whole

UNIVEBSB,  REVEALING   THE   OHABAOTEB   AND  THE   MINI8TBT  OF  ImMANUEL. T.

Ver.  11. — " His  disciples  hdieved  on  him"  There  is  singular  simplicity  and  beauty
in  this  statement,  coming  where  it  does  at  the  close  of  this  narrative.

I.  Of  WHOM  IS  THIS  BELIEF  ASSERTED  ?  Not,  as  might  perhaps  have  been  expected,
of  .strangers,  who  witnessed  the  mighty  work  and  sign,  but  of  five  men  here  named
"  the  disciples  "  of  Jesus.

II.  What  was  their  peeparation  fob  this  belief  ?  Undoubtedly  their  admira-
tion and  affection  for  Jesus,  who  had  sought  them  or  welcomed  them,  and  shown  them
the  Iriendliness  of  his  heart.

III.  What  was  the  occasion  of  this  belief  ?  It  was  the  "  sign  "  they  witnessed,
the  moral  glory  which  they  discerned  in  the  Master's  sympathetic  and  gracious  action.
Coming  to  hearts  so  prepared,  the  wonder  did  its  work  effectually.

IV.  What  were  the  results  of  this  belief?  1.  The  satisfaction,  rest,  and  joy
of  their  own  minds.  2.  The  resolve  and  abihty  to  publish  the  Savioiu'i  fame,  and
bring  men  to  behold  his  glory. — ^T.

Vers.  14 — 17. — 2^e  vindication  of  a  desecrated  temple.  High  purposes  were  sub-
served by  the  exercise  of  the  Saviour's  authority  both  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  close
of  his  ministry.  If  there  was  in  this  conduct  an  evidential  meaning  for  the  Jews,  there
was  also  a  symbolical  meaning  for  all  time.

I.  In  what  the  holiniiss  of  the  temple  consisted.  1.  The  true  answer  to  this
inquiry  is  to  be  found  in  the  language  of  the  Lord  himself.  The  temple  was  his
Falher't  house.  It  was  the  building  which  was  originally  erected  in  a  measure  upon
the  model  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  wilderness,  the  pattern  of  which  had  been  communi-
cated by  Jehovah  in  some  way  to  Moses,  the  servant  of  God.  It  was  by  Divine  com-
mand that  a  certain  special  locality  and  building  were  set  apart  and  consecrated  to  the
service  of  him,-who  nevertheless  "  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  2.  The
holy  memories  of  national  history  gathered  around  tbis  sacred  edifice.  The  original
tabernacle  was  associated  with  Moses  and  Aaron;  the  fiist  temple  at  Jerusalem  with
the  great  kings — Uavid  who  prepared  for  it,  and  Solomon  who  buUt  it;  the  second
temple  with  the  great  leaders  of  the  return  from  the  Captivity ;  and  this  restored
edifice,  in  its  costly  magnificence,  with  the  royal  Herodian  house.  3.  The  sacrifices
which  were  offered,  the  priestlioods  that  ministered,  the  festivals  which  were  observed,
the  praises  and  prayers  which  were  presented,  in  these  consecrated  precincts,  all  added
to  the  sanctity  of  the  place.  4.  And  it  must  he  remembered  that  the  house  of  the
Father  was  the  house  of  the  children ;  that  our  Lord  himself  designated  the  temple  "  a
houH  of  prayer  for  aU  nations."    This  may  not  have  b«en  acknowledged  or  understood


104  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [ctl  n.  1—26.

by  the  Jews  themselves.  Yet  there  were  intimations  throughout  their  sacred  litarature
in  its  successive  stages  that  they,  as  a  oaiion,  were  elected  in  order  that  through  them
all  tlie  nations  of  the  earth  might  be  blessed.  The  width  of  the  counsels  of  Divine
benevolence  is  apparent  to  all  who  study  the  psalms  and  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment Scripture ;  and  our  Lord's  language  connects  those  counsels  with  the  dedicated
house  at  Jerusalem.  5.  To  our  minds  the  temple  possesses  sanctity  through  its  devotion
to  a  symbolical  use,  for  by  anticipation  it  set  forth  in  emblem  the  holiness  of  our  Lord's
body  and  the  purity  of  the  spiritual  Church  of  Christ.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  should
be  destroyed  in  the  crisis  of  Israel's  fate ;  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord's  body  should  be
taken  down;  and  the  holy  temple,  consecrated  to  the  Lord,  should  grow  in  stateliness
and  beauty  until  all  the  living  stones  should  be  built  into  it  for  grace  and  glory  eternal.
IL  By  what  tub  holiness  of  the  temple  was  violated.  There  must  have
been  an  infamous  desecration  in  order  to  have  awakened  such  indignation  in  the  breast
of  Jesus.  We  can  see  two  respects  in  which  this  was  so.  1.  The  building  was  abused
and  profaned  in  being  diverted  from  sacred  to  secular  uses.  Where  there  should  have
been  only  sacrifices,  there  were  sales  of  beasts  and  birds ;  where  there  should  have  been
only  ofi'erinps,  there  was  money-changing.  2.  The  sanctity  of  the  temple  was  violated
by  the  cupidity  of  the  rulers,  who,  it  is  well  known,  made  a  sinful  and  scandalous  profit
for  themselves  by  the  transactions  which  awakened  the  indignation  of  Jesus.  3.  Nor
was  this  all,  injustice  and  fraud  were  added  to  cupidity — the  temple  became  "  a  den  of
thieves."

in.    In    what    WAT    THE    HOLINESS    OF    THE    TEMPLE    WAS    VINDICATED.      1.   By  the

interposition  of  One  of  the  highest  dignity.  Christ  was  "greater  thati  the  temple;"
he  was  the  Lord  of  the  temple ;  nay,  he  was  himself  the  true  Temple  appointed  to  super-
sede the  material  structure.  2.  By  the  exercise  of  just  and  manifested  authority.  The
demeanour  and  the  language  of  Jesus  were  such  as  to  preclude  resistance,  to  silence
murmuring.  The  Lord  came  to  his  own  inheritance,  to  the  house  of  his  Father.  3.  By
the  comparison  of  the  edifice  at  Jerusalem  to  his  own  sacred  body.  In  the  language  he
used  in  his  subsequent  conversation  with  the  Jews,  he  "  spake  of  the  Temple  of  his
body,"  and  in  so  doing  he  attached  to  the  sanctuary  a  holiness  greater  than  waa  ocn-
ferred  upon  it  by  all  the  associations  of  its  use  and  of  its  history. — T.

Ver.  11. — The  mirade  of  Oana.    Notice —

I.  The  miracle  in  relation  to  Jesus  himself.  The  miracle,  with  its  attending
circumstances,  was :  1.  A  manifestation  of  his  glory.  Every  act  and  every  word  of  his
manifested  the  glory  of  his  character,  but  his  miracles  were  spiritual  and  natural  signs
of  the  Divinity  of  his  Person  and  the  distinguishing  feature  of  his  character.  His
miracles  were  purely  voluntary.  Still,  he  pleased  to  perform  them  in  order  to  manifest
his  glory — the  fulness  of  his  Divine  and  human  life.  2.  It  was  a  manifestation  of  his
own  glory.  The  glory  manifested  by  the  greatest  and  best  of  men  is  only  derived  and
borrowed;  but  Jesus  manifested  his  own  glory — that  which  originally  and  inherently
belonged  to  him  as  the  "  Son  of  God,"  and  now  as  the  Son  of  God  in  human  nature.
What  glory  was  specially  manifested  by  this  miracle  and  its  attending  circumstances  ?
(1)  The  thorough  sociality  of  his  nature.  His  first  public  appearance  was  in  the  house
of  joy,  at  a  marriage-feast,  and  that  of  a  young  couple  in  humble  circumstances,  so  that
he  was  not  attracted  by  worldly  distinction  or  sell-interest,  but  by  the  simple  sociality
of  his  nature.  He  was  not  an  Ascetic  or  a  Stoic,  but  a  perfect  Man.  His  Divine  nature
did  not  interfere  with  his  human  instincts  so  as  to  keep  him  away  from  the  human
family.  Thus  the  human  side  of  his  character  was  very  different  from  and  superior  to
that  of  the  "Baptist."  He  lived  out  of  the  world;  Jesus  liveri  in  it.  And  on  this
ixjcasion  was  strikingly  manifested  the  warm  sociality  of  his  nature,  one  of  the  chief
glories  of  his  Divine-human  character,  and  thus  representing  faithfully  the  character
of  God,  which  is  intensely  social.  Although  invisible  and  infinite,  yet  he  minglei
with  all  the  innocent  joys  and  piercing  sorrows  of  his  creatures.  He  is  present  in  the
genial  sunshine  and  in  the  dark  cloud.  (2)  The  absolute  independency  of  hit  con-
duct. His  mother  innocently  interfered.  She  had  long  expected  a  dis[ilay  of  his
power,  and,  as  she  thought,  the  occasion  had  come.  She  says,  "  They  have  no  wine."
Being  touched  by  the  breath  of  a  cai  ual  notion,  he  gently  but  firmly  rebuked  it :
"  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "    In  every  instance  of  interferenc*  with


OH.  n.  1—26,]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOH^.  105

hia  Divine  course,  such  as  that  of  Peter,  or  that  of  his  enemies,  he  .nvariably  rebuked
it.  If  anything  could  vary  his  course,  it  would  be  parejitil  and  filial  affection;  hut
even  this  had  to  give  way — it  was  ignored.  His  Divine  sovereignty  shone  brilliantly
under  all  human  conditions ;  he  acted  as  God  in  the  nature  of  man.  In  this  instance
he  gives  a  reason  for  his  conduct,  which  he  was  not  called  upon  always  to  do :  "  Mine
hour  is  not  yet  come."  There  is  not  a  great  difference  between  his  "  hour  "  and  that
of  his  mother;  the  greatest  difference  is  moral,  and  it  was  immediately  checked — it
vanished  before  the  sovereignty  of  Divine  rectitude  and  the  glory  of  Divine  propriety.
It  did  not  affect  his  mother's  love  and  faith;  and  if  she  could  speak  to  those  who
superstitiously  seek  her  intercession,  she  would  point  them  to  this  incident,  and  say  now
as  then,  "  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it."  She  at  once  comprehended  and  began
to  preach  the  revealed  and  absolute  independency  of  his  conduct,  the  sovereignty  of  his
position.  (3)  His  absolute  control  over  the  elements  of  matter.  The  water  was  made
wine,  (a)  This  was  done  by  his  mere  will.  Nothing  was  said,  nothing  was  done.  The
elements  were  pliant  to  his  will.  It  was  done  with  the  greatest  ease.  (6)  It  was  done
openly,  before  the  disciples  and  the  crowd.  ^  (c)  It  was  done  immediately.  There  was
no  break  in  the  festive  joy.  No  disappointment  on  account  of  failure ;  no  anxiety  on
account  of  delay.  What  took  him  months  to  do  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  he  did
now  in  a  moment ;  and  the  water,  as  if  competing  with  other  elements  in  raising  a  com-
memorative monument  to  the  presence  of  its  Lord,  made  haste  to  obey,  and  "  blushed  "
its  homage,  (d)  It  was  done  perfectly.  The  wine  was  pronounced  "  good,"  not  extra-
ordinary. God  in  miracles  is  not  superior  to  God  in  nature.  God's  works,  however
performed,  are  Divine  and  uniform,  and  all  his  gifts  are  good.  Man  disimproves  things,
— turns  the  water  into  blood.  Christ  improves  everything — the  water  is  made  wine.
Jesus  reverses  the  human  order.  The  good  wine  is  kept  last.  This  is  the  Divine  order.
In  all  the  earthly  life  of  Jesus  it  was  so,  and  eternity  will  not  alter  this  order.  In  the
enjoyment  of  heaven  the  language  of  blissful  experience  will  ever  be,  "  Thou  hast  kept
the  good  wine,"  etc.  (4)  The  singular  benevolence  of  his  character.  This  was  a  miracle
of  kindness,  as  all  his  were.  This  was  the  natural  key-note  of  his  life  and  of  his  nature.
Whenever  his  power  rode  forth  in  majesty,  kindness  was  ever  in  its  chariot,  and  the
ocean  of  his  benevolence  was  ever  tremulous  to  the  least  breath  of  want ;  there  was
no  need  of  a  storm.  Some  might  think  that  more  wine  was  extravagance ;  but  Jesus
thought  and  felt  differently.  He  knew  how  any  lack  in  this  direction  would  hurt  the
virgin  feelings  of  a  newly  wedded  couple.  So  that  he  is  tenderly  and  delicately  kind.
The  quality  of  the  wine  is  good,  and  the  quantity  is  kingly — probably  from  sixty  to  a
hundred  gallons.  "Too  much,"  says  some  one.  Tes,  too  much  for  a  peasant,  but  not
for  a  kinfj.  He  gave  for  himself  and  friends.  None  shall  suifer  for  being  kind  to  him,
but  he  will  repay  with  Divine  interest.  There  was  enough  for  the  guests  and  enough  to
spare,  as  his  wedding-gift  to  the  young  pair  to  commence  lifj  with.  "  Fill  to  the  brim."
AH  his  vessels  are  filled  to  the  brim,  and  the  cup  of  blesaings  which  he  sends  round  his
people  is  not  merely  brimful,  but  "  runneth  over."  Just  like  himself.  (5)  His  gracious
power  and  readiness  to  satisfy  the  natural  expectations  of  faith.  To  supply  the  lack  of
wine  at  the  feast  was  not  the  chief  reason  of  the  miracle.  This  was  only  secondary.
There  was  a  higher  reason,  and  a  more  spiritual  significance.  It  was  performed  in
answer  to  the  natural  expectations  of  faith.  There  was  another  newly  wedded  couple
in  the  feast  of  Cana — Jesus  and  his  disciples.  They  had  believed  on  him  without  a
miracle,  but  expected  one  at  no  distant  date.  Faith  accepted  him  on  trust.  At  the
proper  time  he  fully  pays  in  hard  cash,  and  his  power  and  readiness  to  satisfy  the  lawful
demands  of  faith  shone  forth  with  Divine  brilliancy ;  and  here  is  the  climax  of  his  glory
in  this  miracle.  Genuine  faith  shall  never  cry  to  him,  "  Show  me  thy  glory,"  in  vaiu.
3.  This  was  only  the  beginning  of  the  mam^estation  of  his  glory.  The  beginning  of
miracles ;  hence  the  beginning  of  his  self-manifestation.  (1)  The  beginning  of  the  mani-
festation of  his  glory  was  perfect.  There  is  a  special  interest  connected  with  the  first
performances  of  men  of  genius,  and  invariably  they  are  inferior  to  their  maturer  efforts.
But  this  first  miracle  of  Jesus  is  as  perfect  in  execution  as  his  last;  he  never  improved.
It  is  not  the  first  attempt  of  a  pupil,  but  the  first  demonstration  of  a  master.  The  first
miracle  of  the  Son  of  God  was  as  perfect  of  its  kind  as  his  last.  (2)  The  manife$tation
of  his  glory  was  gradual.  It  was  so  then,  and  is  so  still.  Faith  could  not  stand  the  full
blaze  of  hu  glor^;  it  would  dazzle  rather  than  nurse  it.    We  cannot  stand  the  full  glare


106  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,       [oh.  n.  1—26.

of  the  sun,  how  much  less  that  of  its  Creator  1  Christ  feeds  futh  as  a  nuTse  feeds  the
babe,  and  manifests  his  glory,  not  in  full  blaze,  but  sometimes  in  startling  flashes,  and
ever  in  genial  rays,  so  as  to  suit  the  conditions  and  requirements  of  faith.  (3)  The  mani-
festation of  his  glory  will  he  ever  progressive.  It  wag  so  whUe  he  was  here  on  earth.
He  increasingly  manifested  his  glory  from  Cana  to  Bethany,  and  on  to  the  great  miracle
of  the  cross  with  its  sequeuces — the  resurrection,  etc.,  which  still  unveil  his  glory,  scene
after  scene,  to  the  human  family.  And  ever  since  he  ha»  been  progressively  manifesting
his  glory  on  this  and  the  other  side,  and  will  coniinue  to  do  so,  till  it  will  reach  a  dis-
pensational  climax  in  his  second  coming,  when  he  will  be  glorious  in  his  saints,  the  rich
trophies  of  his  redeeming  victories.  His  glory  is  such  in  its  fulness  and  variety  that
time  cannot  contain  it  and  eternity  will  not  exhaust  it.  But  after  ages  have  passed
away,  and  the  heavens  flooded  with  its  radiance,  then  Its  manifestation  will  only  be
beginnint;.

II.  The  MisAciiX  nr  belation  to  the  disciples.  "  And  his  disciples  believed  on
him."  This  implies :  1.  That  they  had  faith  in  him  eitready.  Otherwise  they  could
not  be  called  his  disciples,  much  less  be  his  disciples.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  first  con-
dition of  Christian  discipleship.  The  disciples'  faith  was  kindled  by  the  preaching  of
John,  and  declared  as  they  met  Jesus  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan.  2.  That  their  faith
wanted  confirmation.  It  was  yet  young  and  tender,  still  clinging  to  him  like  the  vine
to  the  tree.  It  was  weak  in  itself,  but  strong  in  its  demands,  longing  in  its  expectations,
and  eloquent  in  its  secret  prayers  for  a  Divine  manifestation  and  nourishment.  3.  The
miracle  satisfied  the  present  want  of  their  faith.  Jesus  through  it  mauifested  his  glory,
and  they  believed  on  him.  Faith  progresses  with  the  progress  of  revelation,  as  revela-
tion progresses  with  the  development  of  faith.  While  the  guests  generally  enjoyed  tlie
miraculous  wine,  faith  had  a  higher  enjoyment  in  drinking  the  wine  of  Jesus'  manifested
glory,  and  was  invigorated  and  established.  The  wine  of  Cana  was  soon  exhausted,  but
the  glory  of  him  who  made  it  still  shines,  and  faith  still  delights  to  revel  in  its  light
and  bask  in  its  gunshine.  "  And  his  disciples  believed  on  him"  All  believed  in  the
wine,  but  not  in  him.  The  majority  remained  with  the  material,  and  soon  forgot  him ;
but  the  disciples  rose  to  a  diviner  sphere,  and  left  the  stream  and  dipped  their  pitcherg
in  the  well.  Many  enjoy  the  gifts,  but  forget  the  great  Giver.  Bnt  laith  almost  forgets
the  gifts  in  the  Giver,  leaves  the  rays  and  flies  upwards  like  an  eagle  to  gaze  on  the  Sun,
the  k^ource  of  light.  And  this  is  wise.  Have  the  fountain,  and  you  have  the  stream.
Have  Christ,  and  you  have  all.

Lessons.  1.  If  married  couples  taish  a  happy  life,  let  them  commence  it  hy  inviting
Jesue  to  their  marriage-feast.  Let  him  be  the  chief  Guest,  and  he  will  give  the  proper
tone  to  it,  as  well  as  to  the  after-life.  A  good  beginning  is  half  the  battle.  The
evil  one  will  be  there,  whether  invited  or  not ;  he  does  not  observe  the  rules  of  pro-
priety. But  Jesus  wants  to  be  invited,  and  if  invited  he  will  be  there ;  for  he  loves
even  the  best  earthly  illustration  of  the  loving  connection  between  himself  and  his  bride,
the  Church.  2.  Many  invite  Jesus  to  their  scenes  of  sorrow,  but  not  to  their  scenes  of
joy.  He  shall  perform  all  the  drudgeries  of  life,  but  not  mingle  with  any  of  its  luxuries.
He  is  invited  to  the  sick  and  death-bed,  but  not  to  the  marriage-feast.  This  is  neither
kind  nor  wise.  Let  us  remember  that  he  can  enjoy  as  well  as  suffer  and  pity.  He  can
rejoice  with  those  that  rejoice,  as  well  as  weep  with  those  that  weep.  And  if  we  invite
him  to  the  sunshine  of  marriage,  we  have  claim  on  his  presence  in  the  gloom  of  dissolu-
tion. 3.  Thxise  who  invite  him  to  their  marriage-feast  will  he  amply  repaid  here  and
hereafter.  He  will  have  his  marriage-feast  soon — the  grandest  and  happiest  marriage
that  ever  occurred  in  the  universe,  and  the  most  sumptuous  and  lasting  feast.  With
regard  to  those  who  invited  him,  he  will  certainly  return  the  compliment,  and  invite
them ;  "and  blessed  are  they  who  are  invited  to  the  mairiage-supper  of  the  Lamb."  4.
2%er«  is  infinite  giery  as  well  as  grace  in  Christ.  Let  faith  help  herself.  Faith  drew  out
the  miracle,  and  the  miracle  drew  out  faith,  and  both  met  in  glory.  "  Draw  out  now,"
says  Jesus.  It  is  water.  Yes,  but  draw  out,  and  it  will  be  wine.  The  quality  and
quantity  of  blessings  depend  on  the  quality  and  quantity  of  faith.  Jesus  is  fulL  "Draw
out  now."— B.  T.

Vers.  13 — 17. — Oenuine  zeal.  The  conduct  of  our  Lord  in  the  temple  reminded  the
disciples  of  the  words  of  \he  psalmist,  "  The  zeal  of  thine  house,"  etc.     They  supplied


OH.  n.  1—26.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  101

a  most  appropriate  text  to  the  symbolic  sermon  of  our  Lord.  Genuine  religioaa  zeal
as  illustrated  by  the  conduct  of  our  Lord  here.    Notice  it —

I.  In  the  chief  object  of  its  concbbn.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  and  the  purity  of
Jiis  house  and  worship.  Under  the  influence  of  this  zeal :  1.  Our  relationship  to  God
and  his  relationship  to  tis  are  specially  felt.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Christ  now,  and  in
a  special  manner  he  felt  and  proclaimed  God  to  he  his  Father.  "  My  Father."  Jesus
ever  felt  this  relationship ;  and  in  the  degree  in  which  we  are  possessed  of  holy  zeal,  we
shall  feel  our  relationship  to  God  and  his  to  us.  2.  God's  relationship  to  his  house  is/eli.
Jesus  calls  the  temple  his  Father's  house.  And  so  it  was.  It  was  his  earthly  habitation,
where  his  glory  should  have  shone,  his  Name  should  be  honoured,  his  worship  devotedly
observed,  and  his  people  abundantly  blessed.  Holy  zeal  ever  feels  God's  relationship  to
his  house,  and  looks  at  and  speaks  of  it  as  the  house  of  God,  and  not  of  men.  3.  A
burning  interest  in  Ood's  house  is  felt.  Jesus  could  not  look  on  the  temple  with
indifference ;  but,  feeling  God  to  be  his  Father,  and  the  temple  his  Father's  house,  as  a
loving  and  dutiful  Son,  he  felt  an  absorbing  interest  in  its  welfare.  His  Father's  house
was  his  own,  and  their  interests  and  zeal  were  identical.  This  holy  zeal  does  not  stop
with  trifles,  but  is  engaged  with  the  highest  and  most  momentous  subjects — the  glory
and  honour  of  God,  and  the  purity  and  success  of  his  cause  on  earth.

n.  This  zeal  in  contact  with  a  gbbat  abuse.  The  house  of  God  was  made  a
house  of  merchandise.  1.  This  abuse  is  quickly  seen.  No  sooner  had  Jesus  entered  the
temple  than  this  terrible  abuse  attracted  his  notice.  How  many  were  there  that  saw  it
not!  Coldness  of  the  moral  nature  results  in  bUndness  to  moral  eviL  But  where  this
zeal  is  present,  and  burning  in  the  breast,  then  the  moral  eye  is  keen  and  the  moral
visions  are  clear,  and  iniquities  and  abuses  are  quickly  seen  in  their  magnitude  and
horror.  2.  This  abuse  is  keenly  felt.  No  sooner  seen  than  fully  realized  and  felt — felt
as  repugnant  to  Jesus  as  to  God  himself,  and  filled  him  with  feelings  of  disgust  and
indignation.  Where  this  zeal  is  predominant,  not  merely  the  moral  eye  is  keen  to
discern  social  and  religious  evils,  but  the  moral  heart  is  sensitive  of  their  iujuriousness
and  intolerant  of  their  existence.  3.  This  abuse  is  unmercifully  condemned.  Con-
demned :  (1)  As  an  abuse  of  the  place.  Making  God's  house  a  house  of  merchandise.
Merchandise  in  itself  is  not  condemned.  As  such  it  is  right  and  necessary,  and  was  even
necessary  in  connection  with  the  service  of  the  temple,  but  not  in  the  temple.  In  the
market  it  is  proper ;  in  the  house  of  God  it  is  profanation.  (2)  As  an  abuse  of  privileges.
People  professed  to  come  to  the  temple  to  worship  Jehovah,  but  Divine  worship  is
exchanged  for  human  business.  In  our  Father's  house  we  should  be  about  our  Father's
business.  It  is  a  house  of  merchandise,  but  merchandise  of  a  spiritual  order — not
between  man  and  man,  but  between  man  and  God.  It  is  an  exchange,  but  not  that  of
foreign  coins  for  those  of  the  temple,  but  an  exchange  of  repentance  for  forgiveness,
faith  for  Divine  justification  and  peace.  (3)  As  an  insult  to  God.  An  insult  to  his
authority,  purity,  and  honour.  What  an  affront  to  the  Lord  of  the  temple  I  what  an
insult  to  the  Divine  Father,  to  be  turned  out  of  his  own  home,  and  what  is  most
distasteful  to  him,  worldliness,  admitted  instead  1  and  what  a  breach  of  trust,  what
irreligiousness  of  feelings  and  conduct,  which  are  unmercifully  condemned  by  holy  zeal !

III.  This  zeal  exercised  in  the  eefoemation  op  abuses.  As  illustrated  in  the
conduct  of  our  Lord,  we  see  that :  1.  It  is  ever  active  and  aggressive.  It  does  not
remain  in  mere  speech  and  sentiment,  but  ever  rushes  into  aggressive  action.  It  can  no
more  remain  long  in  the  pregenoe  of  evil  without  attacking  it,  than  a  hungry  lion  in  the
presence  of  his  prey,  or  a  powerful  army  in  the  presence  of  the  foe.  2.  It  is  most  sweep-
ing in  its  demands.  It  will  not  be  satisfied  with  anything  short  of  a  complete  reform.
Our  Lord  entered  the  temple  and  drove  out  all  that  sold  oxen,  etc.,  and  even  the
innocent  doves  had  to  leave.  The  language  of  holy  zeal  with  regard  to  social  and
religious  evils,  is,  "Take  these  things  hence;  make  not  my  Father's  house,"  etc.  Between
good  and  evil,  truth  and  error,  there  is  an  eternal  difference,  there  can  be  no  compromise ;
an  eternal  war,  there  can  be  no  truce ;  nothing  will  satisfy  it  but  a  coniplete  surrender.
3.  It  is  intensely  earnest.  How  intensely  earnest  was  our  Lord  on  this  occasion  I  He
made  a  scoiu'ge  of  small  cords,  a  sign,  not  merely  of  authority,  but  also  of  terrible
earnestness.  This  instrument  was  not  apparently  adapted  to  attain  the  end  in  view,
but  it  was  the  best  he  could  get,  and  answered  his  purpose.  He  wished  to  destroy  the
merch«ndiBe,  not  the  merchants.    Holy  zeal,  while  not  regardless  of  adaptation,  will


108  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1—25.

ever  use  the  one  available  means.  Ttwill  attack  the  walls  of  Jericho  with  ram's  horns,
go  forth  against  the  giant  with  a  shepherd's  sling,  and  clear  the  temple  with  a  scourge
of  small  cords.  The  intensely  earnest  man  is  never  idle  for  want  of  suitable  weapons.
4.  It  is  heroically  courageous.  It  carries  its  possessor  away  to  attack  fues  who  from  a
human  point  of  view  he  can  never  hope  to  vanquish.  What  was  Jesus  to  the  mighty
opposition  he  confronted  ?  He  had :  (1)  The  opposition  of  interested  persons.  Those
in  the  trade — the  host  of  dealers  in  oxen,  etc.  (2)  The  opposition  of  interested  patrons.
The  rulers  of  the  people  and  the  governor  of  the  temple.  (3)  The  opposition  of  a  con-
senting and  benefited  public.  The  crowd  who  would  be  more  likely  to  sympathize
with  the  aristocracy  of  the  place  than  with  the  carpenter's  Son  of  Nazareth.  But  this
combined  opposition  he  fearlessly  confronted,  and  commenced  his  task  almost  alone.
Holy  zeal  is  ever  courageous,  and  makes  its  possessor,  if  not  beside  himstlf,  far  beyond
and  above  himself.  5.  2%is  zeal  is  entirely  self-sacrificing.  Liberty,  personal  safety,
and  even  life  is  set  at  nought.  It  was  so  with  Jesus  now.  He  purified  his  temple  at
the  risk  of  his  life,  and  at  last  he  gave  himself  as  a  sacrifice,  not  to  the  fury  of  his  foes,
but  to  the  flames  of  his  burning  zeal.  "  The  zeal  of  thy  house,"  etc.  And  those  under
its  influence  are  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  even  life  to  their  master  passion  and  purpose.

IV.  We  have  this  zeal  globioublt  teiumphant.  Our  Lord  drove  out  the
merchants  and  their  merchandise  with  scarcely  any  opposition ;  and  did,  as  one  has
said,  what  a  powerful  army  could  not  do  so  quickly  and  completely.  How  did  this
zeal  triumph,  and  how  must  it  ever  triumph  ?  1.  By  its  own  inherent  strength.  It
is  powerful  in  itself,  even  when  it  has  only  comparatively  weak  men  as  its  instruments ;
but  how  much  more  powerful  when  swaying  great  and  well-balanced  souls,  such  as
Luther,  Wicklitfe,  Paul,  and  especially  our  Lord,  who  is  the  Son  of  God  as  well  as  Son
of  man  I  In  such  as  these,  its  voice  is  thunder,  its  deeds  are  lightning,  its  words  are
two-edged  swords,  and  its  chariots  and  horses  are  of  fire.  Its  marcti  is  majestic,  its
consciousness  of  success  is  supreme,  and,  should  a  cloud  appear  in  its  firmament,  it  must
soon  vanish  before  its  dazzle.  It  ever  goes  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer,  and  in  its
own  energy  and  majesty  is  terrible.  2.  By  the  strength  and  justice  of  its  cause.  Its
demands  are  ever  reasonable,  and  its  cause  is  just.  Jesus  was  right,  and  these
merchants  and  their  patrons  were  wrong,  and,  in  the  presence  of  holy  enthusiasm,  they
felt  it.  He  had  a  scourge  of  small  cords,  but  he  had  a  more  terrible  scourge  than  this
— he  made  a  scourge  of  their  guilty  consciences,  and  with  it  whipped  them  out.  They
writhed  under  the  lashes;  and  corruption  slunk  away  before  the  majesty  of  burning
holiness ;  and  the  unrighteous  practice  gave  way  before  the  heat  of  embodied  justice  on
fire.  Risiht  is  ever  stronger  than  wrong,  good  than  evil,  and  truth  than  error.  Let
true  principles  blaze  in  the  lives  and  actions  of  their  adherents;  they  must  be  trium-
phant. 3.  By  its  ever-accompanying  Divinity.  Jesus  was  a  Divine  Person,  and  his  act
in  tlie  temple  was  miraculous.  True;  but  is  not  God  ever  against  evil,  and  on  the  side
of  good  ?  Holy  zeal  is  ever  accompanied  with  Divine  authority  and  power ;  it  is  really
the  natural  expression  of  all  virtue,  the  burning  presence  of  holiness,  and  the  flaming
manifestation  of  God's  holy  nature,  who  is  a  consuming  Fire.  The  act  of  Christ  in  the
temple  was  symbolic.  God  is  ever  on  the  side  of  purity  and  order,  and  the  feeblest
voice  raised  for  them  and  against  evil.    God  is  in  that  voice,  and  it  must  triumph.

Lessons.  1.  Our  Lord  was  a  Seformer.  One  of  his  first  acts  was  to  reform  the
worship  of  the  temple.  His  followers  should  be  the  same ;  the  disciples  should  follow
their  Master,  and  the  motto  of  their  lives  should  be  reform.  2.  Before  we  can  te  true
reformrrs,  we  must  be  inspired  with  holy  and  burning  zeal.  -This  is  an  essential  element
of  a  reformer,  as  the  revealer  of  evil  and  the  inspiring  motive  of  attack.  Without  it  we
cannot  see  as  Jesus  saw,  we  cannot  act  as  he  acted  ;  but  with  it  we  shall  be  true
reformers.  Jesus  will  have  true  representatives,  holiness  will  have  a  voice,  and
iniquity  a  scourge.  3.  When  holy  zeal  becomes  absorbing  and  universal,  abuses  and
evils  in  the  Church  and  the  world  must  retire,  and  the  Church  and  even  tlie  earth  will
indeed  be  the  house  of  God  and  the  gate  of  heaven. — B.  T.

Ver.  11. — The  iaginning  of  miracles.  I.  The  occasion.  It  is  possible,  of  conrse,  to
lay  too  much  stress  on  the  circumstances  and  nature  of  the  first  sign  Jesus  gave  respecting
his  own  character  and  mission ;  but  it  is  better  to  go  to  the  extreme  in  this  direction  than
to  pretend  that  this  beginning  has  no  significance  at  all.    Nothing  would  have  been  easier


OH.  n.  1—25.]      THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHK.  109

than  to  let  the  wedding-feast  pass  over  without  exercise  of  the  special  power  of  Jesus.
What  necessity  could  there  be  for  guests  having  wine  rather  than  water?  But  if  we
speak  thus,  what  necessity  was  there  for  any  of  the  miracles  of  Jesus  ?  They  helped
just  one  here  and  there  out  of  the  vast  mass  of  needy  ones.  Jesus  looks  with  a  kindly
eye  on  the  innocent  pleasures  of  men.  His  disciples  had  been  disciples  of  John  the
Baptist,  and  John  was  an  ascetic,  a  Nazarite,  a  man  of  the  wilderness ;  and  now  that  these
disciples  of  John  had  become  disciples  of  Jesus,  they  cannot  learn  too  soon  that  their
new  Teacher  proceeds  by  different  methods  from  those  of  John.  Not  that  blame  of
John  is  thereby  implied.  John  had  his  own  work  to  do  in  his  own  way,  and  Jesus  had
his  work  to  do  in  his  way.  Jesus  will  become  all  things  to  all  men,  that  he  may
gave  some.  He  cannot  truly  weep  with  the  weeping  unless  he  can  also  rejoice  with
the  rejoicing.  He  takes  men  as  they  are,  and  tries  to  get  hold  of  them  by  some  timely
service.  It  is  a  Christian  act  to  increase  the  innocent  pleasures  of  the  world.  Where
the  cup  of  gladness  is  not  full,  Jesus  will  fill  it.  The  good  of  this  miracle  is  made
manifest  as  one  considers  what  an  effectual  protest  it  is  against  those  who  would  make
religion  the  necessary  enemy  of  deep-rooted  social  customs.  Here  were  a  bride  and
bridegroom,  to  whom  the  more  serious  side  of  life  would  come  soon  enough.  For  the
present  they  desire  their  wedd:  ng-feast  to  pass  off  creditably.  Is  it  not  likely  they  would
feel  somewhat  humiliated  to  think  the  provisions  were  running  short?  and  was  it  not,
then,  a  worthy  aim  in  Jesus  to  make  every  one  satisfied,  and  at  the  same  time  to  give
an  opportunity  for  the  whole  neighbourhood  to  be  impressed  by  his  power?

II.  The  miracle  itself  must  be  looked  at  along  with  the  feeding  of  the  multitudes.
Jesus  does  not  create  wine  or  create  bread.  He  has  visible  material  before  him,  and  to
it  he  adds  what  makes  it  sufficient  for  the  need.  But  we  must  believe  that  he  adds
what  he  finds  elsewhere  in  the  world.  He  makes  available,  in  his  own  way,  stores
already  existing.  We  toil  and  wait,  and  the  results  of  our  operations  are  bread  and
wine.  Jesus,  if  needful,  can  bring  the  same  results  without  any  toiling  or  waiting.  His
sphere  is  eternity.  We  can  do  nothing  without  time  for  a  settled  order  of  processes  j  but
whatever  Jesus  can  do  at  all,  he  can  do  at  once.  Beally  he  was  doing  in  a  moment
what  he  does  with  every  vine,  with  every  grape,  only  he  does  it  by  agencies  stretching
over  a  longer  period.— T.

Vers.  13 — ^22. — The  honour  of  the  Fathet's  house.  Going  to  Jerusalem  meant  going
to  the  temple,  so  far  as  Jesus  was  concerned.  Where  could  he  go  more  fittingly  than
to  what  he  calls  his  Father's  house  ?  Jesus  could  not  but  think  how  often  the  Divine
glory  had  been  manifested  in  that  temple,  how  many  generations  of  worshippers  had
trodden  its  courts,  what  countless  offerings  had  been  presented,  what  multitudes  of
beasts  had  been  slain.  All  places  of  religious  assembly  are  a  grand  testimony  to  man's
need  of  God.  How  it  must  have  helloed  Jesus  to  direct  his  ministries,  as  he  observed
the  people  in  their  prc^fessions  of  approach  to  their  Maker  I     Consider  here —

I.  An  instance  of  the  wrath  of  Jesus,  and  what  cattsed  it.  Jesus  pitied  men
far  oftener  than  he  was  angry  with  them ;  and  yet  there  were  times  when  not  to  have
been  angry  would  have  argued  an  imperfect  sense  of  right.  To  be  downright  angry
with  a  man  is  sometimes  the  best  way  of  approaching  him  for  his  good.  The  anger  of
Jesus  on  this  occasion  must  have  done  good.  Jesus  found  buyers  and  sellers  turning  a
religious  duty  into  a  trade  transaction.  The  offering  to  God  was  forgotten ;  only  the
making  of  a  good  bargain  was  remembered.  Both  the  claims  of  God  and  the  religious
needs  of  men  were  utterly  neglected.

II.  An  absurd  question  and  a  puzzling  answer.  When  our  hearts  do  not  perceive
the  truth  that  is  laid  right  before  them,  then  we  are  very  likely  to  ask  absurd  questions.
The  very  expelling  of  the  traffickers  gave  the  clearest  sign  that  he  who  expelled  had  the
right  to  expel.  Still,  Jesus  can  take  the  greatest  absurdities  of  men  as  occasions  for
uttering  the  profoundest  truths.  The  cleansing  of  a  defiled  temple  is  reckoned  an
insufficient  sign,  so  now  he  adds  that,  if  the  Jews  will  give  him  the  opportunity,  he  will
rebuild  a  destroyed  temple.  Ko  one  understood  his  meaning  at  the  time ;  it  was  enough
if  people  remembered  his  words.  The  meaning  would  appear  when  it  was  wanted.  "  He
spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body.''  Compared  with  that  body,  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,
in  all  its  glory,  beauty,  and  service,  was  but  a  poor,  profitless  structure.  We  must  evei
b9  ou  the  alert  to  see  realities,  and  not  let  our  eyes  be  deceived  by  mere  appearance!.


110  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  n.  1—26.

in.  The  promised  sion.  Note  wliat  Christ  does  not  ask  for.  He  does  not  say,
"  Defile  this  temple."  It  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  Jews  to  defile  the  temple  of  the
budy  of  Jesus.  The  temples  of  our  bodies  are  more  or  less  defiled  to  begin  with ;  but
there  was  in  Jesus  a  vital  power  repelling  every  taint  of  disease,  and  a  heart  that  in  its
purity  kept  evil  far  away.  Men  could  destroy  what  they  could  not  defile.  They  were
able  to  take  away  the  natural  life  of  Christ,  though  they  could  not  lead  him  into  the
smallest  act  of  sin.  Thus  we  see  how  the  so-called  destruction  is  a  small  evil  compared
with  defilement.  We  call  it  destruction  for  want  of  a  better  word,  but  it  is  really  glori-
fication and  freedom.  The  building  of  men,  held  in  such  veneration  by  the  Jews,  was
utterly  destroyed  before  many  years  had  passed  away,  and  no  mighty  hand  was  reached
down  from  heaven  to  put  it  together  again.  Its  work  being  done,  it  was  better  gone
from  the  sight  of  men.  But  these  same  Jews,  not  knowing  what  they  were  doing,
destroyed  a  temple  which  God  raised  again,  and  raised  in  a  glory  and  a  power  which  it
had  not  known  before.  So  may  it  be  with  the  temple  of  our  body.  Service  will  not
cease  with  the  glorified  body;  it  will  but  rise  into  higher  opportunities  and  higher
joys.— T.

Ver.  25. — Jesus  knowing  man.  John  gives  us,  in  the  course  of  his  Gospel,  wonderful
evidences  and  illustrations  on  this  point.  When  people  came  to  him,  he  seemed  to  see
right  into  tlieir  hearts  and  thr6ugh  their  present  lives  into  all  their  past.  Instances  in
Nathanael,  Nicodemns,  and  the  woman  of  Samaria.  The  power  of  Jesus  in  this  respect
as  much  supernatural  as  that  by  which  he  raised  Lazarus  from  the  dead.

I.  It  18  Jesus  who  knows  what  is  in  man.  His  awful  power  of  knowing  the
secrets  of  human  hearts  is  his  power.  Hence  we  behold  the  exercise  of  it  without  being
startled  or  alarmed.  The  woman  at  the  well  does  not  seem  to  have  been  at  all  terrified
by  her  discovery  of  the  omniscient,  resistless  eye  of  Jesus.  We  are  made  to  feel  that
Jesus  knows  us  altogether ;  but  at  the  same  time,  we  are  assured  as  to  the  use  he  will
make  of  his"  knowledge.  He  does  not  come  to  expose  us  to  our  fellow-men.  He  does
not  come  to  protect  us  from  them,  although  he  will  do  so  if  it  be  needfuL  The  injuries
of  others  do  not  penetrate  to  the  heart,  do  not  burden  the  conscience,  so  Jesus  does
not  trouble  about  them.  What  gives  him  concern  is  the  evil  we  work  to  ourselves.
What  a  scratch  is  to  a  deep  stab,  that  the  very  worst  thing  another  can  do  is  as  com-,
pared  with  what  we  ourselves  do.  We  have  cause  to  rejoice  that  it  is  Jesus  who  has  a
knowledge  so  complete,  a  knowledge  so  certain  to  be  used  for  our  best  advantage.  It  is
Jesus,  the  professed  Saviour  Jesus,  who  loves  little  children,  Jesus  who  takes  pity  on
hungry  multitudes — he  of  the  truest,  tenderest  heart  that  ever  beat  in  a  human  bosom
— it  is  lie  who  knows  what  is  in  man.

II.  Jesus  knows  what  is  in  man.  He  never  needs  to  act  doubtfully  and  upon
specnlatiun.  His  knowledge  is  not  in  appearance,  but  in  reality.  It  ranges  over
human  nature  in  all  the  vast  extent  of  it.  He  knows  the  real  and  the  ideal,  the  actual
and  the  possible;  how  bad  men  are,  and  how  good  they  may  become.  His  real  know-
ledge is  to  be  contrasted  with  our  assumed  knowledge.  He  knows  us  round  and  round
and  through  and  through.  It  is  not  a  knowledge  of  the  weakness  and  follies  at  men  just
to  make  better  use  of  them.

III.  Jesus  wants  man  himself  to  know  what  is  in  man.  First,  that  we  may  know
ourselves,  and  that  for  the  practical  purpose  of  making  the  best  of  our  lives.  We  need
great  knowledge  to  make  the  best  of  lite,  with  its  rich  opportunities,  its  great  difficulties,
its  strict  limitations.  Jesus  wants  us  to  have  a  living  sense  of  our  ignorance  and
our  weakness.  He  wants  us  to  discover  how  blind  the  natural  man  is  when  confronted
with  spiritual  things.  He  wants  us  to  be  persuaded  how  low  we  can  sink,  how  high
we  can  rise.  Then,  as  far  as  we  know  ourslxes  tiuly,  we  shall  know  others  also.
They  are  weak,  even  as  we ;  and,  if  we  become  strong  in  Christ,  we  shall  hope  for  the
same  strength  for  them.

IV.  Jesus  wants  us  to  know  what  is  in  him.  Wants  us  to  see  human  nature
in  its  purity  and  its  perfection.  Knowing  the  perfection  of  Jesus  rightly,  we  shall  not
despair,  but  aim  to  be  drawn  onward  to  it  ourselves. — Y.


cdB.  m.  l-M.]     I'fiB  OOSPEL  ACCOBDiNa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


Ill


EXPOSITION,


CHAPTER  III.


This  is  the  first  of  the  eleven  diaconrses
recorded  by  this  evangelist,  and  for  the  most
part  addressed  to  the  cultivated,  hierarohioal
party  in  Jerusalem,  who  questioned  him  in  an
unfriendly  spirit.  On  the  sources  of  these
records,  and  the  degree  to  which  John's
subjectivity  coloured  hii  record  of  them,  see
Introduction.

Ver.  1. — ^But  there  was  a  man  of  the
Pharisees.  Is  this  narrative  introduced,  as
Baui  thinks,  to  give  a  specimen  of  wrongly
directed  faith,  to  which  Christ  did  not  en-
trust himself?  and  was  the  evangelist  busy
at  once  on  his  great  mission  of  undervaluing
the  Jewish  parties  and  nation?  Certainly
not  We  have  a  clear  proof  that,  in  the
case  of  the  genuine  inquirer,  Christ  did  open
his  very  heart ;  and  to  a  "  ruler  of  Jews,"  to  a
"Pharisee,"  to  a  "teacher  of  Israel,"  he
deigned  (because  he  knew  what  was  in  the
man,  and  required  nobody's  help)  to  unveil
the  deepest  realities  of  the  kingdom  of  Gnd
and  of  the  salvation  of  man.  Baur  is  not
correct  in  making  Nicodemus  out  to  be  a
specimen  of  unbelieving  Judaism  and  unsus-
ceptible Pharisaism,  seeing  that  the  later
notices  of  this  Sanhedrist  show  that  he  be-
came a  disciple  of  Jesus,  if  secretly.  Nicode-
mus was  attracted,  as  others  had  been,  by  the
"signs"  which  Jesus  had  wrought;  but  he
had  gone  further  and  deeper  than  they,  and
Jesas  "knew  it."  A  controversy  has  arisen
on  the  point — Did  our  Lord,  by  these  pene-
trative glances,  manifest  his  Divine  nature,
assume  a  Divine  prerogative,  or  exercise  a
lofty,  penetrative  human  gift?  Westcott,
on  the  philological  ground  of  the  contrast
in  meaning  hetyieen  yiv^ciceiv  and  eiSevcu,
urges  that  the  former  word,  used  bore,  repre-
sents knowledge  acquired  by  processes  of
inquiry  and  perception,  as  distinct  from  the
latter,  which  is  reserved  for  absolute  and
settled  knowledge.  Godet,  on  theological
grounds,  urges  that  tlie  phrase  refers  to  the
human  faculty  of  observation  rather  than  to
the  Divine  prerogative  of  heart-searching.
There  are,  however,  many  other  indications
of  this  same  thought-mastery,  which  the
evangelists  appear  to  regard  as  proofs  of
Divine  power ;  so  that  I  think  the  real  sig-
nificance of  the  passage  is  an  ascription  to
Jesus  of  Divine  power.  The  supernatural
in  mind,  the  superhuman  mental  processes
of  JesuB,  »re  part  of  the  proof  we  have  that,
though  he  was  Man,  he  created  the  irre-
sistible impression  that  he  was  more  than
man.  Thus  Nathanael  and  Thomas  found
these  to  be  the  most  irresistible  proofs  of  the


supreme  Divine  perfections  of  their  Master
(of.  oh.  i.  49;  iv.  17;  vi.  64;  xi.  4,  14;
xiii.  11 ;  ixi.  17 ;  and  also  Rev.  ii.  2,  9,  13,
etc.).  "The  man  of  the  Pharisees"  fur-
nishes (Godet)  a  test  for  determining  the
autlienticity  of  the  narrative.  If  the  lines
of  the  following  discourse,  which  move  from
the  first  fundamental  conditions  of  ad-
mission into  the  kingdom  of  God  to  the
deepest  principles  of  Divine  character,  and
the  grounds  and  consequences  of  recon-
ciliation with  God,  are  such  as  meet  the
standpoint  and  correct  the  deductions  of  the
Pharisee,  we  have,  then,  all  but  demon-
strative evidence  that  this  conversation  did
not  evolve  itself  out  of  tlie  consciousness
of  the  second  century.  The  Pharisaic  party
was  excited  by  the  ministry  of  John  (ch.  i.
24),  and  throughout  the  early  ministry  of
Jesus  in  Galilee  followed  him,  with  sus-
picious, malicious  suggestions,  even  plans
for  his  suppression.  The  name  Nicodemus,
if  Hebrew  in  etymology  from  dam  and  nald,
may  have  meant  "  Innocent  blood ; "  if
Greek,  as  is  more  probable,  seeing  that  the
plan  of  bearing  Greek  as  well  as  Hebrew
names  was  not  uncommon,  it  would  signify
"  Conqueror  of  the  people."  Tradition  says
that  he  was  baptized  by  Peter  and  Jolm, »
and  deposed  from  his  position  in  the  Saa-
hedrln,  but  supported  by  his  kinsman,
Gamaliel.  Each  reference  to  him  (cli.  vii.
50  and  xix.  39)  implies  a  certain  timidity,
and  perhaps  unworthy  retioenca  These
are  relative  terms.  Much  moral  courage
must  have  been  required  for  a  ruler  of  the
Jews  (a  phiase  only  applicable  to  a  man
of  high  eccle»iastical  rank)  to  have  dreamed
of  doing  what  he  is  reported  to  have  done
here  and  elsewhere.  The  Talmud  mentions
a  Nicodemus  ben  Gorton,  who  was  also
called  Bonai,  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  of  great
wealth  and  piety,  who  survived  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem,  and  therein  lost  all  his
fortune  (Lightfoot,  in  loo. ;  Delitzsch,
'Zeitsch.  Luth.  Theol.,'  1854).  The  hint
that  he  was  an  old  man  in  this  year  (A.r.o.
781,  or  A.D.  29)  renders  his  survival  till  a.d.
70  improbable,  but  not  impossible  by  any
means.  The  identification  is  not  complete.
The  Talmud  does  not  speak  of  him  as  a
Sanhedrist,  though  it  gives  curious  details,
which  imply  that  he  must  have  been  a
priest  in  the  temple,  and  had  the  charge  of
providing  the  water-supply  for  the  pilgrims
(Geikie,  i.  584 ;  Winer,  '  Keal.,'  ii.  152).
Ver.  2. — ^This  man  came  to  him '  by  night,

'  The  reading  auric,  instead  of  riv
'Vi\irovv  of  T.E.,  is  the  best  attested,  and  is
adopted  by  modem  editors.  It  gives  addi-
tional resbson  for  believing  that  the  previoui


lit


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  in.  1—86.


and  said  nnto  him.  To  suppose,  with  many
commentatoia  (after  Augustine),  that  the
night  ie  heie  symbolic  of  the  mental  con-
dition of  the  man,  is  far-fetched.  Thoma,
here  intent  on  his  principle  of  the  fabricated
character  of  the  Oospel,  compares  this  to
King  Saul  (Paul's  ancestor !)  going  by  night
to  Samuel— a  type  of  Chiist  1  There  is  more
probability  that  the  night  of  the  Last  Supper
was  in  the  mind  of  John,  and  that  these
two  nights,  the  one  at  the  beginning,  the
other  at  the  close  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus —
nights  of  extraordinary  significance — were
impressed  ineffaceably  on  his  memory,  and,
to  some  extent,  contrasted  with  each  other.
Nicodemus  did  not  fear  the  Lord  or  his
disciples,  but  hia  own  colleagues,  whose
exoitement  had  already  betrayed  their  sen-
timents. Without "  believing  on  his  Name,"
they  had  come  to  some  conclusions,  and
Nicodemus  with  them.  Babbi,  said  he,  we
know.  He  does  not  conceal  a  common  sen-
timent at  that  moment  agitating  his  own
class  in  society,  and  he  bestows  the  honorific
title  of  Babbi,  "my  Master,"  which,  as
coming  from  a  learned  doctor  to  a  humble
peasant,  was  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the
efiect  Jesus  had  indirectly  exerted  beyond
the  circle  of  his  immediate  hearers:  that
thou  art  a  Teacher  come  from  God.  The
phrase,  owrA  ®eov,  precedes  "the  Teacher
come."  Certainly  it  yields  to  Jesus  great  dig-
nity. He  is  God-sent,  like  the  prophets  of  old.
He  has  a  right  to  teach.  His  doctorate  is  a
heavenly  diploma;  and  Nicodemus  draws
a  wiser  conclusion  than  the  many  did  who,
in  some  sense,  believed  on  his  Name.  They
were  rushing  heedlessly  forward  to  further
conclusions.  Nicodemus  saw  a  grand  au-
tliority  as  a  Teacher  of  men,  a  Hearen-sent
Messenger,  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  he  cnme
to  this  conclusion  from  the  settled  persuasion
that  no  man  can  do  the  signs  which  thou  art
performingf,  if  Ood  be  not  with  him.  This
confession  was  true,  indicating  candid  and
honest  inquiry  and  a  teachable  mind.  It
was  the  vory  truth  which  Peter  in  subse-
quent times  gave  to  Cornelius  as  explana-
tion of  the  healing  and  beneficent  powers  of
Jesus.  Chi  ist  knew  the  whole  man,  undei-
stood  at  once  the  honesty  of  the  inquiry,  and
did  entrust  himself  to  Nicodemus.  There
was  more  faitli  in  this  modest  inquiry,  in  this
honest  scepticism  of  liis  own  position,  than  in
the  clamours  andhosannas  of  the  fickle  crowd.

Vers.  3 — 21. — 5.  Tlw  revelatiou  of  earthly
and  heavenly  things  to  one  who  ftnew  (hat
Clod  was  witk  him.

Vers.  3 — 12. — (1)  Theeonditiontof  admit-
tion  into  the  kingdom  c/  Ood.  New  birth  of
the  Bpirit.

verses  are  closely  oonneoted  with  the  present
obapter.


Ver.  3. — ^Many  explanations  have  been
offered  of  the  link  of  connection  between  the
suggestion  of  Nicodemus  and  the  reply  of
Jesus.  Many  expansions  or  additions  have
been  conjectured,  such  as  the  following,  sug-
gested by  Christ's  own  language  elsewhere :
"  You,  by  the  finger  of  God,  are  casting  out
devils ;  then  the  kingdom  of  God  has  come
nigh  unto  us.  How  may  we  enter  upon  its
further  proofs  ?  " — a  view  which  would  de-
mand a  deeper  knowledge  of  tlje  mind  of
Christ  than  we  have  any  reason  to  suppose
diffused  at  this  period.  Others  (Baumlein)
have  supposed  Nicodemus  to  have  said,
"  Does  tlie  baptism  of  John  suflSce  for  ad-
mission into  the  kingdom  ?  " — a  suggestion
which  would  be  most  strange  for  a  Pharisaic
Sauhedrist  to  have  extemporized.  At  the
same  time,  it  may  be  proved  that  the  rabbis
regarded  proselytism  as  a  "  new  birth,"  and
one  produced  or  brought  about  by  circumci-
sion and  baptism  ( WUnsche,  I.e.,  506 ;  Geikie,
1.  505).  Others,  again,  have  put  further
words  into  the  reply  of  Jesus,  such  as,
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  the  miracles
which  I  am  working;  it  is  in  a  state  of  things
which  can  only  be  appreciated  by  a  radical
spiritual  change  "  (Lucke).  Similarly  Lu-
thardt.  Nicodemus  was  thinking  of  the
kingdom  of  God  evinced  by  miraculous
signs;  and  Jesus  points  him  to  the  inner
reality  rather  than  to  the  outer  manifesta-
tion. Godet  sees  the  Pharisaic  position  in
the  question  of  Nicodemus,  "Art  thou  the
Messiah?  is  the  kingdom  of  God  near,  as
thy  miracles  seem  to  indicate?"  He  was  as-
suming that,  as  a  Pharisee,  he  had  nothing
to  do  but  walk  in  the  light,  the  dawn  of
which  was  revealed  to  him  in  the  signs  of  a
divinely  sent  Teacher.  All  these  views
embrace  a  large  amount  of  possible  conjec-
tural truth ;  but  they  ignore  the  play  upon
the  words  of  Nicodemus,  which  the  answer
of  Jesus  involves,  showing  that  a  sharp,
clean  retort  followed  the  speech  of  the
former.  "  We  know  that  no  man  is  able  to  do
theie  ligns  which  thou  art  working  except  God
BE  WITH  HIM.  Verily,  verily,  I  lay  unto  thee,
EXCEPT  ONE  be  bom  anew,  he  is  not  able
to  tee  the  kingdom  of  Ood."  The  form  of
both  protasis  and  apodosis  in  each  sentence
closely  corresponds,  and  this  correspondence
suggests  the  fact  of  an  immediate  repartee,
adopting  even  the  form  of  the  question  or
assertion  of  the  ruler  of  the  Jews.  To  tlie
"  we  know  "  of  Nicodemus,  comes  the  "  J
say  unto  thee"  nf  Jesus.  To  the  general
sentiment  of  Nicodemus  Christ  gives  •  per-
sonal application.  In  place  of  speculation
concerning  his  own  relation  to  God  and  to
the  kingdom,  Christ  searches  in  the  heart  ol
his  questioner  for  spiritual  susceptibility.
Orer  against  the  general  proposition  about
I  God  being  with  the  Worker  of  these  sifiu,


OH.  m.  1—86.]      THE  GHJSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


113


Ohiigt  Bets  the  practical  truth  and  Divine
possibility  <£  any  man  seeing  the  kiugdom
of  Ghid.  To  the  suspicion  of  Jeaus  being
the  Messenger  and  Minister  of  God,  he
opposes  the  supposition  of  being  born  from
heaven,  or  anew.  From  ancient  times  com-
mentators have  been  divided  as  to  the  mean-
ing of  the  word  Hnadey — whether  it  should  be
rendered  "  from  above  "  or  "anew,"  "ajain."
The  first  wag  favoured  by  Odgen  and  many
others  down  to  Bengel,  Lficke,  Meyer,  Baur,
Wordsworth,  Lange,  based  on  the  local
meaning  of  the  word  in  numerous  places;
e.g.  "  from  the  top  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  51),  "  from
heaven  above  "  (Jas.  iii.  15, 17 ;  ch.  iii.  31 ;
zix.  11).  Moreover,  John  nses  the  idea  of
birth /rom  God,  or  by  hit  wiU  supervening
on  the  life  of  man,  and  the  consequent  con-
ference upon  it  of  a  new  beginuing  (ch.  i.
13;  1  John  iii.  9 ;  iv.  7 ;  v.  1,  4,  18).  The
great  point  on  which  our  Lord  insists  is  the
Divine  spiritual  origin  of  the  life  of  which
he  has  so  much  to  say.  Several  of  the  English
versions,  Coverdale's — and  second  edition  of
the  Bishops'  Bible — have  adopted  this  ren-
dering, with  the  Armenian  and  Gothic  Ver-
sions. The  Bevlsed  Version  has  placed
it  in  the  margin.  Against  it  is  to  be
brought  the  use  of  the  verb  ivayevmtrdai
(1  Pet.  i.  3, 33,  and  in  Justin, '  Apol.,'  i.  61)
— a  word  which  corresponds  with  this  clause,
iaiuBev  yevvTie^vai,  and  yet  could  scarcely  be
translated  "to  be  born  from  above,"  but,
"to  be  bom  again."  The  second  rendering,
giving  a  temporal  value  to  ivaiBev,  was
adopted  by  Augustine,  Cbrysostom  (who  uses
both  views),  the  Vulgate,  Luther,  Calvin,
Tholuch,  Glodet,  Westcott,  Moulton,  Weiss,
and  Luthardt,  and  is  sustained  by  the  fact
that  NicodemuB  was  led  by  It  to  an  inquiry
about  (Seirepov  yevvriBrivai)  a  second  birth.
If  the  expression  had  had  no  ambiguity
about  it,  and  merely  conveyed  the  idea  of  a
heavenly  birth,  his  mistake  would  have  been
greater  tlian  it  was.  There  are,  moreover,
numerous  passages  confirming  the  temporal
sense  of  ivueev  (Wettstein  and  Grimm  both
quote  from  Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  i.  18.  3 ;  and
Artemidorus,  'Oneiroc.,'L  13);  and  the  iro-
Kiyycyeiria  of  Titus  iii.  5  points  in  the  same
direction.  The  Jewish  rabbi  ought  to  have
been  familiar  with  the  idea  of  the  "  ue  w  heart "
and  "  right  spirit,"  and  the  marvellous  and
mighty  change  wrought  in  men  by  the
Holy  Spirit;  but  the  spiritual  idea  had
been  overlaid  by  rabbinic  ritualism,  and  all
the  hopeless  entanglements  of  ceremonial
purity  which  had  been  made  to  do  duty  for
spiritual  conformity  with  the  Divine  will.
Archdeacon  Watkins  reminds  us  that  the
Syriao  Version  here  gives  the  rendering
"  from  the  beginning,"  or  "  anew,"  and  lays
great  stress  on  this  solution  of  the  ambiguity
in  the  Greek  word.  The  statement  of  Christ

torn.


is  very  remarkable.  A  man  must  be  born
anew,  niust  undergo  a  radical  change,  even
to  see  the  kingchm  of  Ood  (fit  Matt,  iviii.  3).
The  true  kingdom  is  not  a  Divine  govern-
ment of  outward,  visible  magnificence,  sus-
tained by  miraculous  aid — a  physical  sove-
reigaty  which  shall  rival  and  eclipse  the
majesty  of  Osssar.  When  the  kingdom  shall
come  in  its  genuine  power,  the  carnal  eye
will  not  discover  its  presence.  The  man
bom  anew  will  alone  be  able  to  appreciate
it.  The  Jews  boasted  that  they  were  bom
of  God  (ch.  viii.  41),  but  could  not  under-
stand that  they  needed  vital,  fundamental,
moral  renewal — a  second  birth,  a  new  begin-
ning. Let  the  opening  of  Christ's  Galilssan
ministry  be  compared  with  this  bold  utter-
ance. There  in  public  discourse  he  called
upon  all  men  everywhere  to  "repent,"  to
undergo  a  radical  change  of  mind,  and  that
because  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand.
t/lerivoia  portrays  the  same  change  as
■iraKfyyfveala;  but  one  term  denotes  that
change  as  a  human  experience  and  effort^
the  other  as  a  Divine  operation.  Neithei
reppntanoe  nor  regeneration  commended
itself  to  the  rabbinic  mind  as  a  necessity  for
one  who  was  exalted  by  privilege  and
ennobled  by  obedience.  The  phrase, "  king-
dom of  God,"  is  not  a  mode  of  representing
truth  to  which  this  Gospel  calls  frequent
attention.  Still  our  Lord  to  Pilate  (ch.  xviii.
3ij)  admits  that  he  is  himself  the  Head  of  a
kingdom  which  is  "not  from  hence" — not
resting  on  this  world  as  its  foundation  or
source.  In  Matthew  the  whole  of  the  mis-
sion of  Christ  among  men  is  repeatedly
portrayed  as  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven."
And  from  the  time  when  the  Lord  ascended
until  now,  various  efforts  have  been  made
to  realize,  to  discover,  to  embody,  to  em-
blazon, to  crush,  to  ignore,  that  kingdom
and  its  King.  This  great  utterance  is  a  key
to  much  of  the  history  of  the  Church,  and
an  explanation  of  its  numberless  mistakes.
Moreover,  it  supplies  an  invaluable  hint  of
the  true  nature  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
Thoma  insists  on  the  other  rendering  of
Hvadev,  and  compares  it  with  the  Fhilouic
doctrine,  '*  that  the  substance  of  the  vovs  is
not  attributed  to  that  which  is  created,
but  is  breathed  into  the  flesh  from  above
(ivaffer)  by  God.  .  .  .  Aim,  O  soul,  at  the
bodiless  escence  of  the  spirit- world  as  tliy
inheritance."  These  ideaa,  he  thinks,  John
has  placed  into  the  lips  of  Jesus.  The  two
classes  of  ideas  are  fundamentally  distinct.
Philo  contrasts  the  sensuous  and  the  intel-
lectual; Christ  is  contrasting  nature  and
grace.

Vor.  4.— ITioodemas  saith  to  him,  How  can
a  man  be  bom  when  he  is  oldT  can  he  enter
a  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb,  and  be
Domf    The  numerous  endeavours  to  inter-


lU


THE  GOSPEL  AGCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,     [o*-  m- 1—^6.


pret  the  motive  oi  mind  of  NicoJemus  show
almost  aa  much  misundeTBtanding  of  the
naivety  of  his  amazement,  as  Nicodemus  did
of  the  deepest  significance  of  this  solemn
utterance  of  the  Lord.  Two  things  are  per-
fectly clear :  (1)  Nicodemus  saw  a  grave  and
amazing  difficulty  in  the  idea  of  a  second
birth  of  a  man  old,  like  himself,  in  years,  pre-
possessions, habits  of  thought,  ways  of  acting,
social  ties,  ancestral  and  traditional  customs,
and  in  venerable  ideas  consecrated  by  long
usage.  He  might  have  known  the  language
of  the  prophets  concerning  circumcision  of
heart  (Deut.  xxx.  6 ;  Jer.  iv.  4)  and  concern-
ing a  new  heart  and  right  spirit  (Ezek.  xxivi.
26,  27;  Ps.  U.  10  ;  Ixxxvi.  4);  but  the  full
bearing  of  these  prophetic  ideas  were  beyond
and  different  to  the  almost  drastic  form  of
Christ's  call  for  spiritual  change  and  "  birth
from  the  beginning."  There  is  no  necessity
for  OS  to  accuse  him  either  of  "  narrowness  "
(Meyer)  or  of  imbecility  (Beuss,  Liioke),  or
to  make  such  a  charge  react  upon  the  spirit
or  temper  of  the  evangelist  in  delineating
him.  It  is  enough  tliat  Nicodemus  should
have  seen  a  grave  difficulty ;  and  Thoma  here
is  justified  in  referring  to  the  language  of  the
apostles,  when  the  narrow  entrance  into  the
kingdom  was  set  forth  under  the  image  of
the  camel  and  the  needle's  eye ;  and  to  Mary,
when  she  cried,  "  How  can  this  thing  be  ?  "
Moreover,  the  same  perplexity,  after  eighteen
hundred  years  of  Christian  experience,  still
encumbers  this  utterance  uf  the  Master.  (2)
Nicodemus  did  not,  by  the  form  of  his  ques-
tion, put  such  query  to  the  Lord  in  any
literal  baldness  orinsolentworldliness.  Surely
such  a  view  ignores  all  the  tropical  methods
of  speech  current  in  the  rabbinical  schools.
He  virtually  said, "  Birth  such  aa  you  speak
of  is  as  impossible  as  the  second  physical
birth  of  an  old  man,  as  prepotterous  as  would
be  re-entrance  into  the  womb  of  his  mother
for  ihe  purpose  of  a  second  birth."  Christ
had  spoken  of  a  fundamental  change— one
going  right  down  to  the  very  sources  and
beginnings  of  life.  The  Lord  had  used  this
difficult  image,  and  propounded  his  view  in
a  term  capable  of  various  interpretation.
Nicodemus  simply  expresses  his  alarm  and
incredulity  iu  terms  of  the  image  itself.  It  is
little  more  than  the  language  of  the  prophet,
"  Can  an  Ethiopian  change  hia  skin,  or  a
leopard  bis  spots  7  "  Are  you  not  proposing
a  natural  impossibility  ?  Must  not  ihe  king-
dom of  Ood,  which  we  thought  we  saw  in  thy
advent  and  mighty  deeds,  be  on  this  under-
standing hopelessly  veiled  from  human
vision  ?  The  "  being  old"  shows  that  Nico-
demus had  gone  through  the  metaphor  to  the
condition  of  mind  of  which  it  was  the  sub-
ject. There  was  no  greater  physical  diffi-
culty in  an  old  man  re-entering  Ijis  mother's
voiub  than  for  a  boy  of  twelve  to  do  so ;  but


being  probably,  not  necessarily,  an  old  man,
and  belonging  to  a  society  of  grave,  reverend
elders,  with  the  inveterate  habits,  practices,
traditions,  of  long  lives  behind  them,  how
impracticable  and  impossible  does  the  notion
of  so  complete  a  change  appear  to  him  I
Hence  his  question.  Westcott  says  admir-
ably, "  The  great  mystery  of  religion  is  not
the  punishment,  but  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;
not  the  natural  permanence  of  character,
but  spiritual  regeneration."

Ver.  5. — Jesus  answered,  Verily,  verily,  I
say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  (any  one)  have
been  bom  (out)  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  he
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  This
memorable  utterance  has  been  the  occasion
of  much  controversy,  arising  from  the  con-
tested sanction  thus  supposed  to  be  given  to
the  opus  operatum  of  baptism,  and  to  the
identification  of  water-baptism  with  Spirit-
baptism.  Expositors  have  asserted  that  the
lite  of  water-baptism  is  not  merely  regarded
OS  the  expressive  symbol  and  prophecy  of  the
spiritual  change  which  is  declared  to  be  in-
dispensable to  admission  into  the  kingdom,
but  the  veritable  means  by  which  that  bap-
tism of  the  Spirit  is  effected.  Now,  in  the
first  place,  we  observe  that  the  sentence  is  a
reply  to  Nicodemus,  who  had  just  expressed
his  blank  astonishment  at  the  idea  that  a
fundamental  change  must  pass  over  a  man,
in  any  sense  equivalent  to  a  second  birth,
before  he  can  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Our
Lord  modifies  the  last  clause,  and  speaks  of
entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God  rather  than
perceiving  or  discerning  the  features  of  the
kingdom.  Some  have  urged  that  iSuv  of  ver.
3  is  equivalent  to  fltreKBiw  eU  of  ver.  5.  The
vision,  say  they,  is  only  possible  to  those  who
partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  kingdom.
But  the  latter  phrase  does  certainly  express
a  further  idea — a  richer  and  fuller  apprecia-
tion of  the  authority  and  glory  of  the  King ;
just  as  the  "birth  of  wat«r  and  of  the
Spirit "  conveys  deeper  and  further  thought
to  Nicodemus,  than  did  the  previously
used  expression,  ■yo'i'rief  HvaScy^  The  first
expression  was  dark  in  the  extreme ;  the
latter  pours  light  upon  it.  "  Birth  of  water  "
points  at  once  to  the  method  so  frequently
adopted  iu  Jewish  ceremonial,  by  which  a
complete  change  of  state  and  right  before
God  was  instituted  by  water.  Thus,  a  man
who  had  not  gone  througli  the  appropriate
and  commanded  lustrations  was  unfit  to  pre-
sent his  offering,  to  receive  the  benediction
sought  by  his  sacrificial  presentment;  the
priest  was  not  in  a  fit  state  to  carry  the  blood
of  the  covenant  into  the  holy  place  without
frequent  washings,  which  indicated  the  ex-
tent and  defilement  of  his  birth-stain.  Nico-
demus for  probably  thirty  years  had  seen
priests  and  men  thus  qualifying  themselves
for  solemn  functions.     So  great  was  ttui


ca.  m.  1—36.]     TflB  GOSPEL  ACCOSCma  TO  St.  JOH».


115


urgency  of  these  ideal  that,  as  he  must  have
known,  the  Esseues  had  formed  separatecom-
munities,  with  the  view  of  oariying  out  to  the
full  consummation  the  idea  of  ritual  purity.
More  than  this,  it  is  not  improbable  that  prose-
lytes fromheathen  nations,  whenbrought  into
covenant  relation  with  the  theocratic  people,
were,  at  the  very  time  of  this  conversation,
admitted  hy  baptismal  rites  into  this  privi-
lege. To  the  entire  confusion  of  Pharisee  and
Sadducee,  John  the  Baptist  had  demanded  of
every  class  of  the  holy  people  "  repentance
uuto  remission  of  sins,"  a  demand  which  was
accepted  on  the  part  of  the  multitudes  by
submitting  to  the  rite  of  baptism.  The  vastly
important  question  then  arises — ^Did  John  by
this  baptism,  or  by  any  power  he  wielded,
give  to  the  people  repentance  or  remission  oiF
sins  ?  Certainly  not,  if  we  may  conclude  from
the  repeated  judgment  pronounced  by  himself
and  by  the  apostles  after  him.  Nothing  but
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  could  convey
either  remission  or  repentance  to  the  souls  of
men.  John  preached  the  baptism  of  repent-
ance nnto  remission,  but  could  confer  neither.
He  taught  the  people  to  look  to  One  who
should  come  after  him.  He  sharply  dis-
criminated the  baptism  with  water  from  the
baptism  of  the  Spirit  and  fire.  This  dis-
crimination has  been  repeatedly  referred  to
already  in  this  Gospel.  Thus  the  Fathers  of
the  Church  saw  distinctly  that  there  was  no
regenerating  efficacy  in  the  water-baptism  of
John,  and  the  Council  of  Trent  elevated  this
position  into  a  canonical  dogma.  It  is  most
melancholy  that  they  did  not  also  perceive
that  this  judgment  of  theirs  about  the
baptism  of  John  applied  to  water-baptism
altogether.  Christ's  disciples  baptized  (not
Christ  himself,  ch.  iv.  2)  with  water  unto
repentance  and  remission ;  but  even  up  to
the  day  of  Pentecost  tliere  is  no  hint  of  this
process  being  more  than  stimulus  to  that  re-
pentance which  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  to  the
consequent  pardon  which  was  the  condition
of  still  further  communication  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  The  great  baptism  which  Christ
would  administer  was  the  baptism  of  Spirit
and  fire.  The  references  to  the  baptism  of
the  early  Church  are  not  numerous  in  the
New  Testament,  but  they  are  given  as  if  for
the  very  purpose  of  showing  that  the  water-
baptism  was  not  a  necessary  or  indispensable
condition  to  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Cornelius  and  his  friends  received  the  sacred
bestowment  hejare  baptism.  The  language
of  the  Ethiopian  eunucli  shows  that  he  had
received  the  holy  and  best  gift  of  Divine
illumination  and  faith  hefore  baptism.  Simon
Magus  w»B  baptized  with  water  by  Philip,
but  was  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  un-
spiritnality.  There  is  no  proof  at  all  that
the  apostles  of  Christ  (with  the  exception  of
Fftol)  were  ever  baptized  with  water,  unless


it  were  at  the  hands  of  John.  Consequently,
we  cannot  believe,  with  this  entire  group  of
facts  before  us,  that  our  Lord  was  making
any  ceremonial  rite  whatsoever  indispens-
able to  entrance  into  the  kingdom.  His
own  reception  and  forgiveness  of  the  woman
that  was  a  sinner,  of  the  paralytic,  and  of
the  dying  brigand,  his  breathing  over  his
disciples  as  symbolic  of  the  great  spiritual
gift  they  were  afterwards  to  receive,  is
the  startling  and  impressive  repudiation  of
the  idea  that  Cliridlan  baptism  in  his  own
name,  or,  still  less,  that  that  ordinance  treated
as  a  supernaturally  endowed  and  divinely
enriched  sacrament,  was  even  so  much  as
referred  to  in  this  groat  utterance.  But  the
entire  system  of  Jewish,  proselyte,  and
Johannine  baptisms  was  in  the  mind  of  both
Nioodemus  and  Christ.  These  were  all  sym-
bolic of  the  confession  and  repentance,  which
are  the  universal  human  conditions  of  pardon,
and,  as  a  ritual,  were  allowed  to  his  disciples
before  and  after  Pentecost,  as  anticipatory  of
the  great  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  No  bap-
tism, no  "birth  out  of  water,"  can  give
repentance  or  enforce  confession ;  but  the
familiar  process  may  indicate  the  imperative
necessity  for  both,  and  prove  still  more  a
prophecy  of  the  vital,  spiritual  transforma-
tion which,  in  the  following  verse,  is  disso-
ciated from  the  water  altogether.  Calvin,
while  admitting  the  general  necessity  for
baptism,  repudiates  the  idea  that  the  rite  is
indispensable  to  salvation,  and  maintains
that  "  water  "  here  means  nothing  different
or  other  than  "  the  Spirit,"  as  descriptive  of
one  of  its  great  methods  of  operation,  just
as  "  Holy  Spirit  and  fire "  are  elsewhere
conjoined.

Ver.  6. — That  which  hath  been  bom  of
the  flesh,  is  flesh.  2iip^  is  not  the  physical
as  opposed  to  the  spiritual  or  immaterial,
nor  is  o-apf  necessarily  sinful,  as  we  see  from
ch.  i.  14,  but  as  it  often  appears  in  John's
writing  and  Paul's,  (rdp^  is  the  constituent
element  of  humanity  as  apart  from  grace —
humanity  (body,  intellect,  heart,  conscience,
soul,  spirit)  viewed  on  its  own  side  and  merits
and  capacity,  without  the  Divine  life,  or
the  Divine  supernatural  inbreathing.  The
being  born  of  the  flesh  is  the  being  born
into  this  world,  with  all  the  privations  and
depravations,  evil  tendencies  and  passions
of  a.  fallen  humanity.  Birth  into  the  theo-
"cracy,  birth  into  national  or  ecclesiastical
privilege,  birth  that  has  no  higher  quality
than  flesh,  no  better  germ  or  graft  upon
it,  simply  produces  flesh,  humanity  over
again.  When  the  Logos  "became  flesh,"
something  more  than  and  different  from
ordinary  traduction  of  humanity  took  place.'

'  Attention  is  here  called  to  a  profoundly
interesting  but  specious  reproduction  by  Dr,


116


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [pa.  m.  1—36.


Destitute  of  any  higher  birth  than  the  birth
of  flesh,  man  is  fleshly,  psychical,  earthly,
<rapiciK6s,  ^uxinrfi,  x"""'*  (Kom.  vii.  14 — 25),
and,  uioru  than  that,  positively  opposed  to
the  will  and  grace  of  God,  lashed  with
passions,  defiled  with  debasing  ideas,  in
eumity  against  God.  Hence  the  birth
"  from  the  Spirit "  is  entirely  antithetic  to
the  birti  from  the  flesh.  That  which  hath
been  bom  of  the  Spirit,  is  spirit.  There  is
a.  birth  which  supervenes  on  the  flesh-be-
gotten man,  audit  is  supernaturally  wrought
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  in  the  first
instance,  at  man's  creation,  God  breathed
into  man  the  breath  of  life,  and  by  that
operation  man  became  a  living  soul ;  so  now
the  new  birth  of  man  is  wrought  in  him  by
tlie  Spirit,  and  there  is  a  new  life,  a  new
mode  of  being,  a  new  bias  and  predomi-
nating impulse.  "  A  spiritual  mind  which  is
life  and  peace  "  has  taken  the  place  of  the
old  carnal  mind.  He  is  "spiritual,"  no
longer  "psychical,"  or  "carnal,"  but  able
to  discern  the  tilings  that  are  freely  given
to  liim.  'J'he  eye  of  the  spirit  is  opened,
unsealed,  Ihe  toi  toO  Tryeiixaros  are  revealed
to  him  (1  Cor.  ii.  12—16;  iii.  1-5).  The
reference  to  "birth  ef  water"  is  not  re-
peated, because  the  birth  from  water  is
relatively  unimportant,  and  of  no  value
apart  from  tlie  Spirit-change  of  which  it
may  be  a  picture,  or  even  a  synonym.  More
than  that,  the  Spirit-birth,  the  Divine  ope-
ration, is  the  eflioient  cause  of  that  which,
under  the  form  of  a  human  experience,  i«
called  /lerdvoia.  The  human  metanoia,
rather  than  the  new  birth,  is  the  great
burden  of  our  Lord's  public  address,  as  re-
corded in  the  synoptic  Gospels.  In  both
representations  the  bame  fact,  the  same  cou-
ditiou  and  state  of  the  human  conscious-
ness, is  referred  to.  In  "  repentance,"  how-
ever, and  in  the  moral  characters  which  are
the  several  preliminaries  to  the  beatitudes
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  a  change  is
declared  necessary  for  the  constitution  and
inauguration  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
This  change  is  there  viewed  from  the  stand-

Janiieson,  '  Profound  Problems  in  Theology
and  Philosophy,'  of  Edward  Irving's  hy-
pothesis of  the  sinfulness  of  the  fltsli  of
Christ.  "  The  Logos  was  made  flesh,"  i.e.
"sin"  for  us,  and  he  was  "without  sin"
only  by  the  sanctifying  energy  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  his  continuous  victory  over  it.
There  is  no  position  in  Christian  theology
that  is  not  modified  or  transformed  by  this
hypotliesis.  If  we  have  to  put  away  sin
with  our  lower  powers,  with  no  indwell-
ing Logos  to  aid  us  alter  the  manner  of
Christ,  to  secure  the  salvation  which  he  has
taught  us  thus  to  effectuate,  what  hope  ii
there  for  the  human  race  ?


point  of  human  experienoe,  and  urged  in
the  form  of  a  direct  appeal  to  conscience.
In  this  discourse  to  Nicodemus.  the  same
change  is  exhibited  on  its  Divine  side,  and
as  one  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  In
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  "meekness,"
"poverty  of  spirit,"  " mourning,'* " hunger
after  righteousness,"  "  purity  of  heart,"  the
spirit  of  forgiveness  and  long-suffering,
are  the  moral  conditions  of  those  minds  and
hearts  which  would  become  the  city  of  God
and  the  light  of  the  world  (Matt.  v.  1 — 12).
On  this  occasion,  when  addressing  the
learned  rabbi,  Christ  sums  all  up  in  the
demand  for  a  birth  from  the  Spirit — a  new
and  .spiritual  recommencement  of  life  from
the  Spirit  of  God.  The  clause  found  in  the
Yetus  liala  and  the  Syriac,  quia  Deut
spiritus  est,  et  de  Deo  natut  eel,  is  a  gloss
sustained  by  no  Greek  manuscript  authority.
Thoma  here  quotes  two  interesting  passages
from  Philo,  i.  533,  599,  where  the  vovs  is
spoken  of  as  given  to  man  from  above,  and
where  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual  over
the  fieshly  is  made  the  only  guarantee  of
admission  into  the  world  of  spirit.  But  Philo
obviously  meant  the  intellectual  rather  than
the  moral  element  in  human  nature,  and
prized  the  ascetic  process  rather  than  the
supernatural  regeneration.

Yer.  7. — Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,
Ye  must  be  bom  anew.  Nicodemus  had  re-
vealed, by  his  expressions  of  countenance
or  unrecorded  words,  his  surprise.  This
further  explanation  deepened  the  solem
nity  of  the  first  assertion  by  a  bold  anti-
thesis between  the  birth  of  flesh  producing
nothing  but  flesh,  however  high  its  culture,
and  the  birth  of  spirit  from  the  Spirit
himself,  the  heavenly  and  Divine  Origi-
nator of  all  genuine  repentance,  and  the
sole  Cause  of  the  new  life.  Nicodemus
was  clinging  more  and  more  eagerly  to  the
old  ideas  of  national  privilege,  of  sacra-
mental purification,  of  soundly  taught  prin-
ciples and  habits.  He  marvelled  at  such  a
representation  which  took  the  heart  out  of
all  liis  previous  training.  The  Messianic
kingdom  for  which  he  had  been  looldng  and
longing  seemed  to  fade  away  in  the  clouds
of  an  utter  mysticism,  and  to  vanish  out  of
his  power  of  recognition.  Our  Lord  gently
reproved  the  expression  of  his  surprise,  and
reminded  him  of  the  previous  uttCTanoe,  "  1
said  to  thee.  Ye''  etc.  Nicodemus  had  come
in  the  name  of  others.  Jesus  replies,  and
reasserts  the  principles  for  the  entire  group
of  persons  wliich  Nicodemus  might  be  sup-
posed to  represent.  We  must  not  fail  to
notice  that,  whereas  in  other  parts  of  the
discourse  our  Lord  speaks  in  the  plural  first
person,  yet  he  discriminates  himself  fron
others  in  this  statement.  He  doei  not  say,
"  We  must,"  etc.,  but  "  Yt  mutt,"  etc.    He


en.  HI.  1—86.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORWNa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


117


hnd  BO  oonMlonenesi  of  personal  need  of
regeneration,  nor  was  lie  in  the  first  case
born  aa  flesh  &om  flesh.  His  flesh  was
itself  the  work  of  the  Spirit.

Ver.  8.— The  wind  bloweth  (the  Spirit
hreathei,  Bevised  Version,  in  margin)  where
it  willetii,  and  then  hearest  (his  voice)  the
soond  thereof,  but  thon  knowest  not  whenoe
it  oometh  and  whither  it  goeth.  Vulgate
(followed  by  Wioklifte  and  the  Bheims
Versions)  is,  Spiritus  tibi  vuU  epirat  et
voaem  ejut  audis,  led  nescis  unde  veniat,  out
quo  vadat:  tic  est  mnnis  qui  natua  eet  ex
Spirita.  Augustine,  though  acquainted  with
tlie  other  rendering,  approves  of  this ;  so
Origen,  Bengel.  The  great  majority  of
commentators  and  versions  have  held  that
the  former  of  ttie  two  translations  is  coiTect ;
that  the  first  time  the  word  nyeS/ia  is  used,
it  refers  to  the  wind,  "the  unseen  simili-
tude of  God  the  Spirit — his  most  meet  and
mightiest  sign ; "  and  that,,  since  the  same
word  is  used  for  the  two  things.  Spirit  and
wind,  the  Lord,  after  the  parabolic  manner
which  he  adopted  (in  the  synoptic  Gospels),
took  advantage  of  some  gusts  of  roaring
wind  then  audible,  to  call  attention  to  the
mystery  and  incomprehensibility  of  its  origin
or  ecd,  and  to  see  a  parallel  between  the
unknown  ways  of  the  wind  and  the  un-
known points  of  application  to  the  human
spirit  of  the  mighty  energy  of  the  living
God.  The  passage,  Eccles.  xi.  5,  may  have
been  in  his  mind  (though  there  "  Spirit "  is
as  likely  to  be  the  reference  as  is  the  motion
of  the  "  wind,"  and  our  ignorance  of  the  way
of  the  Spirit  is  akin  to  our  ignorance  of  the
formation  of  bones  in  the  womb  of  her  who
la  with  child),  and  the  adoption  of  the
unusual  word  Trvsi  (cf.  ch.  vi.  18;  Eev.  vii.
1  ;  Matt.  vii.  25 ;  Acts  xxvii.  40)  is  in  sup-
port of  the  comparison  between  "wind"
and  the  "  Spirit ; "  while  the  ipaiiii,  the
"  voice "  or  sound  of  the  wind  in  trees  or
against  any  barriers,  and  the  other  effects
that  the  rapid  motion  of  the  air  produces,
gives  a  lively  illustration  of  the  metliod  in
which  the  Spirit  of  God  works  in  human
minds,  revealing,  not  itself,  but  its  eflects.
The  parallel  is  not  peculiar  to  Scripture
(see  the  remarkable  passage  in  Xenophon,
'  Memor.,'  iv.  3—14  ; '  also  '  Big  Veda,'  x.
1 68  »).  It  is  further  urged  that  the  following

'  "  And  the  winds,  indeed,  are  not  seen,
but  the  things  which  they  do  are  manifest,
and  we  perceive  their  going  or  coming,  but
so  also  indeed  the  soul  of  man  ...  is  not
itself  perceived."

'  "  Speaking  of  the  wind,  a  poet  of  the
'  Big  Veda,'  x.  168.  3,  4,  says,  '  Where  was
he  Mm?  Whence  did  he  spring?  the  life
of  the  gods,  the  germ  of  the  world  I  That
G«d  mores  »bo«t  where  he  listeth,  his  voices


clause,  So  is  every  one  that  hath  been  bom '
of  the  Spirit — meaning.  So  doth  it  happen  to
every  one  who  i»  horn  of  the  Spirit — suggests
the  analogy  between  imv/ia  in  its  material
sense,  and  irpeC/ia  in  its  customary  and
deeper  sense.  Now,  on  the  other  hand,  it
appears  to  me  that  this  latter  clause  is  com-
patible with  the  older  translation  and  appli-
cation. There  t>  a  comparison,  but  it  may
be  between  the  mysterious  working,  breath-
ing of  the  Divine  Spirit,  whose  "voice"  or
"word"  may  be  heard,  whose  effects  are
present  to  our  senses  and  consciousness,  but
the  beginnings  and  endings  of  which  are
always  lost  in  God, — and  the  special  opera-
tions of  Divine  grace  in  the  hirOi  of  the
Spirit.  There  are  numberless  operations  of
the  Spirit  referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament,
from  the  first  brooding  of  the  Spirit  on  the
formless  abyss,  to  all  the  special  and  mighty
effects  wrought  in  creation,  all  the  heighten-
ing and  quickening  of  human  faculty,  all
the  conference  of  .-pecial  strength  upon  men
— their  intellectual  energies  and  Divine  in-
spirations. Over  ami  above  all  these,  there
is  aU  the  supernatural  change  wrought  in
souls  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Christ  calls  this
a  "  birth  of  the  Spirit,"  and  declares  that,
according  to  all  the  mysterious  comings  and
depariings  of  the  Spirit,  Itaving  only  mani-
fold effects,  so  is  the  special  Divine  work
which  morally  and  spiritually  recreates
humanity.  Pneuma  is  used  three  hundred
and  fifty  times  in  the  New  Testament,  and
twenty  times  in  this  Gospel  for  "the
Spirit ; "  and  if  the  usage  is  reversed  here,
this  is  the  solitary  occasion.  The  word
flc'XEi  is,  moreover,  more  appropriate  to  a
living  Being  tiian  to  the  wind.  There  is
another  way  which  suggests  itself  by  which
the  word  ni/tuiita  may  mean  the  same  in
both  clauses :  The  breath  of  God  hlowefh  where
it  listetli,  etc.,  so  is  every  one  horti  of  the
breath  of  God.  If  this  be  possible,  the  form
of  the  expression  supplies  a  co-operating
similitude  drawn  from  the  unknown  origin
and  mighty  cifects  of  the  unseen  breath  of
heaven;  and  on  this  translation  the  com-
parison is  drawn  between  all  the  ways  of
the  Spirit  and  the  special  work  of  the  Spirit
in  regeneration.  An  inference  is  dedncible
from  either  interpretation  of  this  verse,  in-
compatible with  the  theory  that  "  birih  from
water"  is  equivalent  to  "regeneration  in
baptism."  If  the  rite  of  baptism  provided
the  moment  and  occasion  of  the  spiritual
result,  we  should  know  whenoe  it  came  and

are  heard,  but  he  is  not  to  be  seen ' "  (Haz
Miiller, '  What  can  India  teach  us  ?'  seot.  vi.
p.  180).

'  The  Sinaitio  (K)  and  other  manu-
scripts read,  "and  of  water;"  but  this  is
not  accepted  by  any  modem  editors.


lid


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  10  ST.  JOHN.      [on.  m.  1—36.


whither  it  went.  We  might  not  know
"how,"  but  we  ebould  know  "when"  and
"  whence  "  the  gpiiitual  change  took  place.
But  this  knowledge  is  distinctly  negatived
by  Christ,  who  herein  declares  the  moment
of  the  spiritual  birth  to  be  lost  or  hidden  in
God.  Physical  birth  is  a  deep  myatery,
both  whence  the  "spirit"  comes  and
whither  it  goes ;  the  signs  of  the  presence
of  life  are  abundant,  but  there  is  an  infinite
difference  between  the  stillborn  or  dead  child
and  the  living  one.  Similarly,  the  com-
mencement of  the  Spirit's  creation  within
our  nature  is  lost  in  mystery.  We  discern
its  presence  by  its  effects,  by  consciousness
of  a  new  life  and  sense  of  a  new  world  all
around  the  newly  born,  but  the  Spirit-birth,
like  all  the  other  operations  of  the  Spirit,  is
hidden  in  God.

Yer.  9. — Ifieodemns  answered  and  ^aid  to
Mm,  How  can  these  things  come  to  pass?
He  takes  the  position  now  of  a  learner,  and
does  not  by  his  query  repudiate  regeneration
as  absolutely  impossible,  but  he  asks  the
questions  "  why "  and  "  how."  He  may
reveal  his  continued  ignorance  of  the  sub-
ject-matter, but  he  is  willing  to  be  taught.
The  idea  we  form  of  our  Lord's  reply  is
regulated  by  the  strict  meaning  we  assign
to  the  question — (Trasi)  "how?"  (cf.  Horn.
ii.  19,  29,  and  note  on  ver.  12).

Ver.  10. — Jesus  answered  and  said  to  him,
Art  thou  the  teacher  of  Israel,  and  peroeivest
thou  not  these  things  t  The  term  "  Israel "
is  used  four  times  by  John  (ch.  i.  31,  49;
zU.  13 ;  and  here).  In  each  place  the  high
dignity,  calling,  and  glory  of  the  nation
chosen  for  the  loftiest  privilege  and  destiny
are  involved.  Notice  the  article, "  the  Israel "
<^  Ood.  The  article  before  SiSdirKaXos  gives
a  high  distinction  to  Nicodemus.  Scliottgen
and  Liicke  suppose  some  special  of&ce  to  be
here  referred  to,  either  the  president  of  the
Sanhedrin,  or  the  hakim,  or  cliakam,  "the
wise  man,"  who  eat  on  his  left  in  the  public
sessions,  or  the  "father  of  the  house  of
judgment,"  who  sat  on  his  right ;  but  it  may
simply  mean  the  teacher  of  Israel,  who  has
come  to  me  in  representative  fashion,  and
who  is  reminded  that  he  should  have  been
more  intimately  acquainted  with  tlie  teach-
ing of  his  own  sacred  books  (Farrar, '  Life  of
Christ,'  p.  153).  Witljout  doubt,  the  fact
of  human  corruption,  and  the  power  of  the
Spirit  of  God  to  renovate,  to  change  utterly
down  to  tile  very  core  and  heart  of  human
nature,  is  a  great  dogma  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment (cf.  Deut.  z.  16 ;  xxx.  6 ;  1  Sam.  z.  9,
where  God  gave  Saul  another  heart ;  1  Sam.
zvL  13,  the  effect  upon  David;  David's  own
prayer,  Pe.  li.  10;  and  the  great  promises
of  God  by  Ezekiel,  zi.  19;  zviii.  31;
zzzvi.  26 ;  Jer.  iv.  4 ;  zzzi.  33).  Nicodemus,
wa  iUustiious   man,  «  teacher   of  others.


presumably  acquainted  with  the  teaching
of  the  Scriptures,  need  not  have  been  in
such  doubt  and  amazement  at  the  searching
words  of  Jesus.

Ver.  11. — Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  thee,
We  speak  that  which  we  know,  and  testify
that  which  we  have  seen.  Liicke  and
Meyer  think  that  our  Lord  here  merely
uses  the  pluralU  majeitatieus — uses  it  as
St  Paul  does,  wlien  clearly  he  was  referring
to  himself  alone.  It  is  difiioult  to  believe
this  in  the  curious  and  impressive  Changs'
of  person  here  adopted,  and  the  return  to
the  first  person  singular  in  ver.  12.  There
was  some  reason  why  Jesus,  in  making  thia
particular  saying,  uses  the  plural.  (1)
Luthardt  says,  "  Christ  and  the  Baptist."
(2)  Luther  and  Tholuok,  "Christ  and  the
whole  prophetic  company."  (3)  Stier,  "  The
Three  Persons  of  the  iilessed  Trinity"  (see
Chrysostom,  etc.).  (4)  Hengstenberg,  Godet,
Westcott,  Moulton,  liave  in  various  ways
recognized  the  fact  that  the  company  of  the
disciples  already  called  into  the  spiritual
kingdom,  and  alive  to  the  mighty  power  of
the  Spirit  in  recreating  humanity,  were
present  at  this  interview.  They  stood  there
to  affirm  the  reality  of  the  truth  of  which
their  Lord  was  speaking.  Nothing  in  this
sentence  is  incongruous  with  the  experience
and  practice  of  those  who  had  appreciated
and  were  already  speaking  of  the  necessity
of  radical  change  or  spiritual  regeneration
and  of  genuine  repentance.  John  in  his
First  Epistle  (i.  1 — 4)  uses  some  of  the  very
phraseology  of  this  solemn  verse,  &  kapixaum
. .  .  fiaprvpoOfify,  Our  Lord,  on  this  occasion,
gave  him  permission  to  do  so.  The  know-
ledge which  he  spake  of,  the  vision  to  which
he  testified,  was  in  its  way  and  to  a  degree
within  the  compass  of  any  disciple  who  had
been  waked  up  by  the  Lord's  words  to  crave
an  entirely  new  beginning  of  his  life,  a
birth  of  the  Spirit.  And  ye  receive  not  our
testimony.  This  melancholy  assertion  proves
that  from  the  very  first  (as  John  said  in  his
"prologue"  concerning  all  the  ministry  of
the  Logos,  and  all  the  testimony  of  the
prophetic  Spirit  to  the  reality  of  the  light)
"  the  darkness  reeeiveth  it  not."  The  first
demand  which  the  Divine  Lord  made  was
rejected,  the  first  "testimony"  was  dis-
believed. From  the  beginning  the  dark
shadow  of  death  fell  on  his  path.  Nicodemus,
or  those  whom  he  represented,  may  have
had  their  curiosity  excited,  but  their  entire
attitude  was  non-admission  of  the  funda-
mental principle,  viz.  the  inward  illumina-
tion and  life  lie  came  to  supply.^

Ver.  12. — ^If  I  told  you  earthly  things  and
ye  believe  not,  tow  will  ye  believe  if  I  tell
yon  of  heavenly  things!  Our  Lord  here
drops  the  pluitil  form  of  address,  and  returns
to  the  singular.    He  i»  about  to  refer  to


CH.  m.  1— Se.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHIT.


119


matters  In  which  the  testimony  of  disoiples
was  not  available.  It  has  sometimes  been
said  that  the  "earthly"  and  "heavenly"
things  refer  to  the  wind-parable  and  its
interpretation.  But,  on  the  supposition  that
there  is  a  parable  or  metaphor  in  ver.  8,
which  we  have  seen  reason  to  doubt,  there
would  be  no  perplexity  about  the  reception
of  the  earthly  illustration ;  none  could  in  that
day  have  maile  a  moment's  question  touch-
ing the  invisibility  and  incomprehensibility
of  the  motion  of  the  wind.  The  birth  from
water  has  been  supposed  by  others  to  be
the  (cTrfyeioc)  "earthly"  thing  of  which  he
had  spoken,  as  contrasted  with  the  heavenly
thing,  the  birth  anew  from  the  Spirit.  But
this  also  is  improbable,  for  of  all  the  tilings
of  which  Jesus  spoke,  that  was  the  least
likely  to  have  been  rejected  by  the  Pharisaic
party.  The  "  earthly  thing*  "  are  the  sub-
ject-matter of  the  discourse  as  a  whole,  in
apprehending  which  Nicodemus  manifested
such  obtuseness.  The  change,  renovation
of  human  nature,  the  new  beginning  "  from
the  Spirit "  of  each  human  life,  was  indeed
operated  on  the  ground  of  an  earthly  ex-
perience, and  came  fairly  within  the  compass
of  common  appreciation.  Though  produced
by  the  Spirit,  these  things  were  enacted  on
earth.  When  Kicodemus  asks  the  question
"  ftetB  f ''  he  launches  the  inquiry  into  another
region.  There  is  wide  dilference  between
the  question  "what?"  and  the  question
"  how  ?  "  The  one  in  physical  science  refers
to  the  whole  range  of  phenomena,  and  the
answer  states  the  facts  as  they  present
themselves  to  the  senses ;  the  other  question
inquires  into  what  Bacon  called  the  latens
procetsu* — into  vera  causte,  into  the  move-
ments and  method  of  the  creative  hand.
So  the  answer  to  the  question  "  what  1 "  may
be  an  "earthly  thing,"  the  answer  to  the
question  "  hmo  1"  a  "  heavenly  thing."  If
Christ  answer  the  "  how  "  of  his  listener,  he
raises  his  mind  to  the  "  heavenly "  and
transcendental  realities  which  Nicodemus
and  we  too  will  have  to  receive  on  an
authority  which  entirely  outsoars  that  of
daily  experience  or  temporal  phenomena.
Truly  he  does  proceed  to  do  so,  but  the
difficulty  of  acceptance  is  indefinitely  aug-
mented. The  answer  of  Christ  to  the
mattera  of  personal  experience,  verifiable  by
conscience  and  affirmed  by  Scripture,  was
difficult  to  the  master  of  Israel.  The  answer
of  Jesus  to  the  question  "  how  ?  "  may  prove
far  more  formiilable.  It  involves  the  reve-
lation of  "the  Sou  of  man,"  and  the  re-
demption by  the  cross,  and  the  ascension  of
the  Son  of  man  into  heaven,  and  the  love  of
God  to  the  world,  and  the  gift  of  eternal  life
to  faith.

Vers.  13— 15.— (2)  The  truth  concerning  Oie
S«n  of  man  and  his  $aerifict.


Ter.  13. — And.  The  simple  copula  is  here
full  of  significance.  Olshausen  regards  it  as
"  adversatire,"  equivalent  to  "  yet."  Meyer,
as  a  simple  continuation  of  the  previous
statement.  The  koX  has  more  than  a  mere
conjunctive  force.  Lange  puts  it  thns:
"  And  yet  you  must  be  told  heavenly  things
by  him  who,  being  the  Heavenly  One,  is
himself  the  first  subject  of  this  revelation."
No  one  hath  ascended  into  heaven.  The
past  tense  must  be  honestly  considered.
The  word  cannot  refer  to  the  future  ascension
of  Jesus  the  Lord  of  glory  to  where  he  was
before — to  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the
Father  before  the  world  was  (oh.  zviL  5);
nor  can  it  refer,  as  the  Socinian  interpreters
supposed,  to  a  rapture  into  heaven  of  the
Divine  Man  between  his  baptism  and  temp-
tation (Soeini  '  Opera,'  ii.  511,  610,  quoted
by  J.  P.  Smith,  '  Scripture  Testimony  to  the
Messiah,'  ii.  pp.  103 — 117),  of  which  we  have
not  the  faintest  trace  either  in  Scripture  or
tradition ;  nor  is  it  sufficient,  with  Heng-
stenberg  and  others,  to  regard  it  as  a  mere
Hebraism  for  high  and  exalted  intercourse
with  God  and  heavenly  things.  True,  there
have  been  many  who  have  sought  to  climb
the  steep  ascent  (Gen.  xi.  4 ;  Isa.  liv.  13) ;
true  also  that  rabbis  spoke  of  Moses  having
"  ascended  into  the  heavens,"  by  which  (says
Whitby)  they  meant  "admission  to  the
Divme  counsels."  The  authority  on  which
he  depends  is  the  late  '  Targum  on  Cantic.
i.  5,  11,  12,'  by  which,  however,  all  that  is
clear  is  that  the  Targnmist  was  referring  to
the  ascent  of  Moses  to  the  top  of  §inai,  i.e.
above  the  multitude  in  the  deserts,  to  the
place  whither  Jehovah  came  to  speak  with
him.  But  Exod.  xx.  22,  the  canonical
Scripture,  makes  it  clear  that  it  was  "  from
the  heavens "  that  Jehovah  spoke  with  his
servant.  There  are,  however,  other  pas-
sages quoted  by  Schottgen  from  Jerusalem
Targum  on  Deut.  xxx.  12,  and  from  the
*  Mishna,'  in  which  Moses  is  said  to  have
"  ascended  into  heaven,  and  heard  the  voice
of  God ; "  but  further  inquiry  leads  us  to
judge  that  the  Hebrew  commentators  were
thinking  of  the  going  up  to  Sinai  for  his  lofty
revelations,  and  their  followers  have  sup-
posed that  this  process  was  a  synonym  of  the
revelations  themselves.  Many  have  thought
to  rise  abore  the  world  to  the  beatific
vision,  but  Jesus  says  none  have  done  it  in
the  only  sense  in  which  they  would  have
been  thereby  fitted  to  discourse  on  the
heavenly  things.  Two  things  arc  needed
for  this  in  the  main — to  be  in  heaven,  and
come  thence  charged  with  its  Divine  com-
munications. Enoch,  Elijah,  may  have  been
translated  that  they  should  not  see  death,
but  they  are  not  so  lifted  into  the  abode  of
God  that  they  might  come  thence  charged
with  heavenly  truth,  and  able  to  explain


120


THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  in.  1—36.


the  "  how  "  of  Divine  grace.  No  one  hath
ascended  into  heaven  except  he  who  has
by  living  there  aa  in  his  eternal  home  oome
down  from  heaven.  Meyer,  Lathardt,
Westcott,  etc.,  all  call  attention  to  other  and
analogous  usage  of  ei  /i^,  which  fastens  upon
a  part  of  the  previous  negative,  not  the  whole
assertion,  and  therefore  here  upon  the  idea
of  living  in  heaven  and  coming  thence  (Matt.
xii.  4  ;  Luke  iv.  26,  27 ;  Gal.  i.  7).  Man,  if
he  should  presume  to  come  with  a  full  reve-
lation of  Divine  and  heavenly  things,  must
come  down  from  a  height  to  which  he  had
previously  ascended ;  hut  no  man  has  thus
and  for  this  purpose  ascended,  except  he  who
hae  descended  from  heaven,  having  been
there  before  his  manifestation  in  the  flesh,
having  been  "in  God,"  "with  God,"  "in
the  bosom  of  the  Father,"  and  having  come
thence,  not  losing  his  essential  ego,  bis
Divine  personality,  even  though  calling  him-
self the  Sou  of  man.  For  any  other  to  have
come  down  from  heaven,  it  was  necessary
tliat  he  should  first  have  ascended  thither  ;
but  the  Son  of  man  has  descended  without
having  ascended.  He  calls  himself  •'  Son  of
man,"  and  he  claims  to  have  oome  down
from  heaven  without  ceasing  to  be  wliat
he  was  before.  Godet  urges  that,  by  the
"  ascended  into  heaven,"  he  meant  such
lofty  communion  with  God  and  immediate
knowledge  of  Divine  things  as  to  differen-
tiate him  from  all  others,  but  that  the  phrase,
"  come  down  from  heaven,"  implies  previous
existence  in  his  native  place,  and  that  the
Lord's  filial  intimacy  with  God  robts  on  his
essential  sonsliip.  Still,  he  conceives  that
Jesus  asserts  his  own  ascension  in  the
spiritual  sense  to  the  heart  of  God,  and  his
descent  with  consequent  resultant  know-
ledge, and  expounds  both  statements  by  the
explanation  that  as  Son  of  man  he  is  living
the  twofold  life  in  heaven  and  on  earth  at  the
same  time.  By  using  the  term,  "Son  of  man,"
Christ  emphasized  the  exalted  dignity  that
is  involved  in  the  extent  of  his  self-humilia-
tion and  complete  sympathy  vrith  us.  He  was
"  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord  from  heaven."  '
Who  is  (not  was)  in  heaven.  If  this  be  only
an  early  gloss,  it  throws  light  on  the  two
previous  clauses.    It  declares  that,' though


'  Tlschendorf  (8th  edit.).  Revised  Version,
Meyer, Tregellus,  Godet,  retain  the  additional
very  diflScult  clause,  on  the  authority  of  A,
r.  A,  and  many  others,  all  cursives,  Vulgate,
Coptic,  numerous  versions  and  quotations ;
but  Westcott  and  Hort  reject  it,  and  B.T,
states  its  doubtfulness  in  margin,  seeing
X,  B,  L,  33,  etc.,  omit  it.  There  seoms  no
motive  to  justify  an  omission,  if  it  were  in
the  original  text ;  and  there  can  hardly  be
discovered  any  reason  for  the  addition,  if  not
there  already.


he  came  down,  and  though  his  introduction
to  this  world  was  an  incarnation,  yet  that
he  is  in  the  deepest  sense  still  in  hetLven.
Such  language  is  a  vindication  of  his  claim
to  reveal  heavenly  things.  Augustine  Bay»,
"  Ecce  hie  erat  et  in  coelo  erat,  hie  erat  in
came,  in  coelo  erat  divinitate,  natus  de
matre,  non  recedens  a  Patre."  Again,  "  Si
Faulus  ambulabat  in  came  in  terra  et  con-
versabatur  in  coelo,  Deus  coeli  et  terrse  poterat
esse  et  in  coelo  et  in  terra."  Archdeacon
Watkins  says  admirably,  "If  heaven  is  a
state,  a  life,  in  which  we  are,  which  U  in
us,  now  in  part,  hereafter  in  its  fulneas,  then
we  may  understand,  and  with  glad  hearts
hold  to,  the  vital  truth  that  the  Son  of  man
who  came  down  from  heaven  was  ever  in
heaven."

Vers.  14,  15. — ^And.  Seeing  that  our  Lord
bad  claimed  supreme  right  to  speak  of
heavenly  things,  he  proceeds  at  once  to
speak  of  them  also.  There  may  be  many
ways  of  tiiking  the  Ka\ :  supposing  that  it
indicates  a  transition  from  the  person  of  the
Lord  to  his  work.  From  his  Divine  and  en-
dowed humanity  thus  shown  to  be  competent
to  explainand  reveal  heavenly  things,  he  pro-
ceeds to  his  atoning  sacrifice.  These  under-
lying links  of  coimection  are  not  mutually
exclusive.  Even  as  Hoses  lifted  up  the
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  so  must  also  the
Son  of  man  be  lifted  up.  The  narrative  of
Numb.  xxi.  8,  etc.,  is  one  of  the  most  curioiu
in  Scripture,  and  it  was  a  great  puzzle  to  the
Jewish  commentators,  who  felt  that  it  was
in  apparent  violation  of  the  second  command
of  the  Decalogue.  Moreover,  in  the  days  of
Hezekiah  the  reverence  paid  to  the  serpent
led  to  disastrous  consequences  and  puritanic
removal  of  the  idolatrous  snare.  The  Jewish
divines  consulted  by  Trypho  (see  Justin
Martyr,  '  Dial.,'  94)  were  unable  to  explain
it.  Philo  regarded  it  as  a  designed  con-
trast to  the  serpent  of  the  Book  of  Gtenesis,
but  he  supposed  the  antithesis  to  be  that
between  pleabure  and  righteousness  or  pru-
dence ('  De  Leg.  AH.,'  ii.  1.  80).  The  Book  of
Wisdom  (xvi.  6),  "  The  murmuring  people
were  troubled  for  a  while  for  warning,
having  a  symbol  of  salvation,  ...  he  that
turned  to  it  was  saved,  not  by  reason  of  that
which  he  beheld,  bnt  by  reason  of  the  Saviour
of  all."  Ferguson,  in  his  '  Tree  and  Serpent
Worship,'  regards  the  narrative  as  an  indi-
cation that  within  tlie  bosom  of  Israel  the
worship  of  the  serpent  had  been  introduced
and  had  left  its  traces.  But  the  nanativs
itself  show*  that  the  serpent  healing  from
the  serpent  bite  was  a  Jehovistic  symbol
of  Divine  love  and  victory.  The  '  Test.  XH.
Patr.  Benj.,'  9,  refers  to  it  its  the  type  of  the
cross  (cf.  Phil.  ii.  9 ;  Acts  il.  33).  "Moses
made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon  a
pole,  and  it  came  to  pass,  that  if  a  serpent


OH.  in.  1—36.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


121


had  Mtten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the
serpent  of  brass,  he  lived."  The  flery  fly.
ing  serpent,  with  its  poisonous  bite  and  its
deadly  malice,  was  the  vivid  type  of  the
evil  of  disobedience  to  the  Divine  command,
infusing  its  malign  venoiu  into  the  whole
nature  of  its  victim.  The  serpent  of  brass
was  not  venomous,  though  it  bore  the  like-
ness of  the  deadly  plague.  It  was  not  fly-
ing, gliding  from  tent  to  tent,  but  captured,
still,  hoisted  triumphantly  upon  the  pole,  a
sign  of  its  conquest.  The  serpent  in  Hebrew
and  Christian  literature  throughout  was  em-
blematic of  evil,  not  as  in  many  Oriental
religions,  of  healing  or  deliverance  (see  Gen.
iii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  3 ;  Bev.  xii.  9 ;  and,  properly
translated,  Jobxxvi.l3,Revised Version);  and
it  is  possible  to  see  in  this  type  an  anticipa-
tion of  the  "  lifting  up  "  of  Jesus  on  the  cross.
Tliere  are  several  interpretations  of  the  iif/a-
erivat.  Paulus  urged  that  Jesus  by  it  referred
to  the  final  glorification  of  himself ;  but  if  so,
why  was  not  the  word  So^auB^vai  used  ?  It
may  mean,  with  Bleek,  LeoMer,  Godet,  the
exaltation  upon  the  cross  as  the  stepping-
stone  to  his  glory,  the  way,  not  only  to  David's
throne,  but  to  the  very  throne  of  God  —
a  conception  profoundly  different  from  the
current  Pharisaic  notions  concerning  the
Messiah.  The  word  is  used  in  ch.  viii.  28
and  xii.  32,  34  for  the  passion  of  the  cross,
although  Peter  (Acts  ii.  33)  and  Paul  (Pliil.
ii.  9)  used  it  for  the  glorification  consequent
upon  the  Passion.  Surely  the  word  does,  if
it  is  to  correspond  with  Moses'  exaltation  of
the  serpent  of  brass,  point  to  the  exaltation
of  the  cross,  but  to  that  as  to  the  very  throne
of  his  power  and  glory.  Tholuok  says,  "  A
word  must  have  been  used  in  Aramaic  which
admitted  both  ideas,  and  the  word  '^pi.  means

in  Chaldee  and  Syriao  to  'lift'Up'  and  'cru-
cify.' "  Many  striking  relations  thus  present
themselves.  ( l)The  Lord  wasmadein  thelike-
ness  ofjSinful  flesh,  though  witliout  sin.  (2)
The  evil  of  sin  was  seen  in  him  conspicuously
revealed,  but  conquered;  not  only  conquered,
but  transformed  into  a  remedy.  The  enemy
of  man,  the  world  itself,  was  crucified  on  the
cross  of  Christ.  Sin  was  nailed  to  the  cross
when,  In  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  the
eternal  Son  of  God  made  flesh  submitted  to
all  the  shame  of  the  flesh.  "  The  world  is
crucified  unto  me,"  says  Paul  ("  in  the  cross
of  Christ "), "  and  I  to  the  world."  Jesus  says,
"Even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up."
The  Son  of  man  here  on  earth,  but  having
always  a  Divine  life  in  heaven,  when  revealed
in  human  nature,  subject  to  the  laws  and
destiny  of  the  flesh,  "  mutt "  be  lifted  up.
This  pathway  to  his  glory  must  pass  through
the  blood  and  an:ony  of  the  Passion.  There
was  a  needs-be  in  the  Divine  counsel,  in  the
purposes  of  Divine  love,  in  the  full  measure
of  the  grace  which  was  welling  from  the


heart  of  God.  (3)  The  comparison,  however,
and  relation  between  type  and  antitype  is
more  conspicuous  still  in  the  fifteenth  verse,
where  Jesus  added :  In  order  that  whosoever
belieTeth  might  have  in  him  eternal  life.'
Granting  that  the  above  is  the  trae  text,  in
our  translation  an  instance  occurs  of  the
frequent  absolute  usage  of  Trurreieiv  (iritr-
reietv  iv  aiiToi  is  not  a  Johannlne  phrase,
while  we  do  find  (ch.  v.  39 ;  xvi.  33 ;  xx.
31)  that  "life,"  "peace,"  are  "in  him").
On  tills  ground,  if  we  retain  the  ev  airtji,
we  translate  it  as  above.  The  object  of  faith
is  not  specified ;  but  he  who  believes,  who
looks  with  God-taught  longing  to  the  Christ,
to  the  Son  of  man  uplifted  to  save,  sees
God  at  his  greatest,  his  best,  and  discerns
the  fullest  revelation  of  the  redeeming  love.
"Believing"  corresponds  with  "looking"
in  the  narrative  of  Numb.  xxi.  Whoso-
ever "  looked,  lived."  Such  looking  was  an
act  of  faith  in  the  promise  of  Jehovah ;
the  otherwise  despairing,  dying  glance  of
poisoned  men  was  a  type  of  the  possibility
of  a  universal  salvation  for  sin-envenomed,
devil-bitten,  perishing  men.  Let  them  be-
lieve, and  there  is  life.  Let  them  under-
stand the  meaning  of  the  Son  of  man  thus
exhausting  the  curse,  and  enduring  in  love
the  burden  and  penalty  of  human  trans-
gression, and  they  have  straightway  a  life
that  is  spiritual,  fundanientally  and  radically
new,  a  life  heavenly  and  eternal.  Thus  can
this  vast  change  of  which  he  had  spoken  to

'  I  extract  here  the  substance  of  West-
cott's  elaborate  note  on  the  omissions  from
this  verse.  The  words,  /u?)  47r<iAr)Toi  aW',
in  T.E.,  "  may  not  perish,  but,"  etc.,  are
omitted  by  K,  B,  L,  1,  33,  and  a  few  manu-
scripts, l^  Old  Latin  (some).  Old  Syriac,
Memphitio  (.33tliiopic,  Armenian),  by  Cyril
Alex.,  Cyprian,  Lueiferus ;  but  found  in  A
and  numerous  manusoripta  and  versions,  in
some  Old  Latin,  Vulgate,  Peschito  Syriac
and  Harclean  Syriac,  quoted  by  Chrysos-
tom,  Theodoret.  There  is  no  anti-Nioene
evidence  of  existence,  except  some  Latin
texts.  The  words  were  adopted  by  the  An-
tiochene  school  of  the  fourth  century.  The
source,  viz.  ver.  16,  explains  their  presence,
and  suggests  no  cause  for  voluntary  omis-
sion. So  Westeott  and  Hurt,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  and  the  Bevised  Version  omit
the  words  with  confidence.  Trt  gelles  retains
them.  The  iv  ofcr^,  in  place  of  cis  aurhy,  is
also  preferred  by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),
Westuott  and  Hort,  with  far  less  apparent
reason,  for  the  latter  is  found  in  N,  r,  A,
other  manuscripts,  Old  Latin  texts,  Vulgate,
Chrysostom,  Cyril,  Theodoret,  etc.  Lach-
mann  reads,  iir'  avT6v.  The  authorities  for
the  former  seem  to  be  B,  T,  and  one  or  tw«
quotations  from  Latin  Fatheri,


122


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      t<».  in.  1—36.


NicodemiiB  rapervene.  " How"  asks  Nico-
demuB,  "  can  this  be  ?  "  "  Thus  may  it  be,"
answers  the  Son  of  man.  It  is  not  necessary
that  all  the  mystery  of  the  cross  should
have  been  perceived  by  Nioodemus,  yet  the
subsequent  references  to  this  man  make  it
highly  probable  that,  when  he  saw  Jesus
suspended  on  the  cross,  instead  of  giving
way  to  unbelief  and  despair,  he  was  stimu-
lated to  an  act  of  lofty  faith  (ch.  lir.  39,
and  note).  In  this  great  utterance  we  have
(he  answer  which  Paul  addressed  to  the
Philippian  jailer,  and  we  have  the  argument
of  Paul  in  Eom.  i.,  ii.  and  we  infer  that  the
sources  of  the  Pauline  doctrine  were  to  be
found  in  the  known  teaching  of  the  Lord
himself.

Many  oommentaton,  beginning  with
Erasmni,  and  followed  by  Neander,  Tho-
luck,  L&cke,  Westcott,  and  Moulton,  have
supposed  that  our  Lord's  discourse  with
Nicodemus  ended  with  ver.  15,  and  that
thenceforward  we  have  the  reflections  in
after-times  made  by  the  evangelist,  in  har-
mony with  the  teachings  which  he  had  re-
ceived from  the  Lord.  This  is  urged  on
the  ground  that  in  ch.  i.  18,  and  at  the  close
of  the  present  chapter  (vers.  31 — 36),  when
reciting  the  iestimony  of  the  Baptist,  it
appears  to  the  commentators  that  John  has
blended  his  own  reflections  with  the  words
of  the  Baptist,  adding  them  without  break
to  the  sentences  which  he  does  record  (see
notes).  I  am  not  prepared  to  admit  the
analogy ;  there  is  nothing  in  these  words,  if
attributed  to  the  Baptist,  incompatible  with
the  purely  Old  Testament  position  and
transition-standpoint  to  which  he  adhered.
The  argument  drawn  from  the  past  tenses,
^y&ir-i)(Tev  and  tSaxev,  is  not  incompatible  with
the  large  view  "of  the  whole  transaction
which  the  Son  of  God  adopted,  as  though  in
the  fulness  of  its  infinite  love  it  had  already
been  consummaled.  We  are  told  that  there
are  certain  phrases  which  nowhere  else  are
ascribed  to  Jesus  himself,  such  as  "only
begotten  Son  " — a  term  which  is  found  in  the
prologue  (ch.  i.  14,  18)  and  First  Epist.  (iv.
9),  i.e.  in  John's  own  compobition.  The  reply
is  that  John  used  this  great  word  on  the
specified  occasion  because  he  had  heard  it
on  the  lips  of  Jesus ;  that  he  would  not  have
dared  to  use  it  if  he  had  not  had  the  justi-
fication of  such  use,  the  like  to  which  he
here  recounts.  The  believing  eis  ri  ovofii
— "on  the  naeae  of" — does  not  occur,  it  is


said,  in  the  recorded  words  of  Jesns,  thongh
it  is  found  in  the  discourse  of  the  evangelist
himself  in  oh,  i.  12 ;  ii.  23 ;  and  1  John  T.  13.
The  same  criticism  applies.  John  nsed  it
because  he  had  heard  our  Lord  thus  deign
to  express  himself.  Moreover,  the  commence-
ment of  the  paragraph,  by  the  use  of  the
particle  yap,  shows  that  no  break  has  oe-
curred,  that  a  richer  and  fuller  and  more
triumphant  reason  is  to  be  given  for  the
obtaining  of  life  eternal  than  that  which  had
already  been  advanced.  He  passes  from
the  Son  of  man  (who  is  in  heaven,  and
came  from  heaven  and  Ood)  to  the  Son  of
Ged,  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  Be
speaks  in  more  practical  and  explanatory
form  of  the  Object  of  faith,  and  the  Divine
source  of  the  arrangement  and  its  issues,  A
flood  of  new  thoughts  and  some  terms  occur
here  for  the  first  time;  but  they  are  no  more
startling  than  other  words  of  Jesus,  whose
awful  weight  of  meaning  and  rich  originality
gave  to  the  evangelist  all  his  power  to  teach.
It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  find  fault  With  the
abruptness  of  the  olose  of  this  discourse,  or
the  sudden  cessation  of  the  dialogue,  or  the
disappearance  of  Nicodemus,  or  of  any  lack
of  affectionateness  in  the  style  of  address.
Christ  is  often  abrupt,  and  in  numerous
replies  which  he  gave  to  his  interlocutors
he  proloncrs  the  remarks  as  though  they
were  addressed  to  the  concealed  mind  of  the
speakers  rather  than  to  their  littered  words.
If  there  had  been  any  hint  or  indication  that
these  were  John's  reflections,  we  can  only  say
that  he  who  by  the  Holy  Spirit  penned  the
prologue  waa  not  incapable  of  these  splendid
and  heart-searching  generalizations  of  love,
faith,  judgment,  and  eternal  life.  But
there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  sufficient
reason  for  such  an  hypothesis.  Still,  it  must
be  admitted  that  we  have  not  the  whole  of
the  former  or  the  latter  part  of  this  wondrous
discourse.  Much  has,  without  any  doubt,
been  omitted.  John  has  seized  npon  the
most  salient  points  and  the  loftiest  thoughts.
These  stand  out  like  mountain-peaks  above
the  glittering  seas,  indicating  where  the
inner  and  hidden  connections  of  their  bases
lie,  but  not  unveiling  them.  We  do  not
doubt  that  John's  mind,  by  long  pondering
on  the  thoughts  of  Jesus  and  his  words  of
profound  significance,  had  acquired  to  some
extent  the  taethod  of  his  speech,  and  do  not


m.  in.  1—36.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


123


doubt  that  a  certain  subjective  colouring
afieota  his  condensation  of  the  discourses  of
Jesus.  He  was  not  a  shoithand  reporter,
photographically  or  telephonically  repro-
ducing all  that  passgd.  He  was  a  beloved
disciple,  who  knew  his  Lord  and  lost  him-
self in  his  Kaster.  He  seized  with  inspired
and  intuitive  accuracy  the  root-ideas  of  the
Son  of  man,  and  reproduced  them  with  the
power  of  the  true  artist.  It  is  incredible,
even  if  we  regard  the  entire  paragraph
(vers.  16 — ^21)  as  the  language  of  our  Lord,
that  we  have  the  whole  of  the  discourse,  or
conversation,  of  the  memorable  night.  Still
less  satisfactory  is  it  to  suppose  that  we
bave  in  it  nothing  more  than  an  imaginary
scene,  an  idealization  of  the  bearing  of
Christian  truth  on  Jewish  prejudice.  So
vast  a  thought,  though  it  be  the  burden  of
the  Kew  Testament,  and  because  it  is  so,
issued  from  the  heart  of  Jesus.

Vers,  16 — ^21. — (3)  Divine  love  ond  judg-
ment,

Ver.  16. — Jfor  God  so  loved  the  world.
The  Divine  love  to  the  whole  of  hu-
manity in  its  condition  of  supreme  need,
t'.e.  apart  from  himself  and  his  grace,  has
been  of  such  a  commanding,  exhaustless,
immeasurable  kind,  that  it  was  equal  to
any  emergency,  and  able  to  secure  for  the
worst  and  most  degraded,  for  the  outcast,
the  serpent-bitten  and  the  dying,  a  means  of
unlimited  deliverance  and  uplifting.  The
Divine  love  is  the  sublime  source  of  the
whole  proceeding,  and  it  has  been  lavished
on  "  the  world."  This  world  cannot  be  the
limited  "world"  of  the  Augustinian,  Cal-
vinian  interpreters — ^the  world  of  the  elect;
it  is  that  "  whole  world  "  of  which  St.  John
speaks  in  1  John  ii.  2.  "  God  will  have  all
men  to  be  saved  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  4).  Calvin  him-
self says,  "  Christ  brought  life,  because  the
heavenly  Father  loves  the  human  race,  and
wishes  that  they  shouldnot  perish."  Pharisaic
interpretations  of  the  Old  Testament  had  left
the  outside  world  in  judgment,  to  cursing  and
condign  punishment,  and  had  made  Abia-
hamic  descent  and  sacramental  privilege  the
conditions  of  life  and  honour  and  royal  free-
dom. Here  the  poor  world  is  seen  to  be  the
object  of  such  love,  that  he — the  Father-
God — gave,  "  delivered  up,"  we  do  not  know
certainly  to  "  what,"  but  we  may  judge  from
the  context  that  it  was  such  a  deliverance,
or  such  giving  up,  as  is  involved  in  the  up-
lifting of  the  Son  of  man  upon  his  cross  of
humiliation  and  shame.  But  the  Lord  in-
troduces a  more  wonderful  term  to  denote  his
own  personality.      This  "Son  of  man"  ii


none  other  than  Us  only  begotten  Son  (of.
notes,  ch.  i.  14,  18).  Just  as  Abraham  had
not  kept  back  his  only  begotten  son  from
God,  BO  God  has  not  withheld  his  perfect
Image,  his  Well-beloved,  his  Eternal  Logos,
the  perfect  ideal  of  sonship.  He  gave  him
with  the  following  view :  that  whosoever  be-
lieveth  in  him  (eij  ouTA>')may  not  perish,  but
have  eternal  life.  The  previous  saying  is
repeated  as  in  a  grand  refrain  for  which  a
deeper  reason  and  fuller  explanation  have
been  supplied.  Perishing,  ruin,  the  issues
of  poisonous  corruption,  might  and  would,  by
the  force  of  natural  law,  work  themselves  out
in  the  destinies  of  men.  The  awful  curse
was  spreading,  but  it  may  be  arrested.
None  need  be  excluded.  Looking  is  living.
Believing  in  this  manifestation  of  Divine
love  is  enough.  This  is  the  first,  high,  main
condition.  Appropriation  of  such  a  Divine
gift  unriddles  the  mysteries  of  the  universe,
emancipates  from  the  agelong  bondage,  con-
fers a  life  which  is  beyond  the  conditions
or  occasions  of  dissolution.  This  verse  is
infinite  in  its  range,  and,  notwithstanding  a
certain  vagueness  and  indefiniteness  of  ex-
pression, presents  and  enshrines  the  most
central  truth  of  Divine  revelation.  When
the  terms  "gave,"  "only  begotten  Son,"
"believeth,"  "life,"  "perishing,"  "God,"
"  the  world,"  are  fully  interpreted,  then  the
words  of  this  text  gather  an  ever-augmenting
force  and  fulness  of  meaning ;  and  they  may
have  been  expanded  to  meet  the  prejudices
of  Nioodemus  or  the  difiSoulties  of  disciples.
The  idea  of  gift  and  giver  and  the  ends  of
the  giving  may  have  at  once  suggested  to
the  Pharisaic  mind  the  grand  distinction  be-
tween Israel  and  the  world,  and  the  inquiry
may  have  been  made — Is  not  Messiah,  then,
about  to  judge  the  world,  to  summon  all  the
nations  round  to  hear  their  doom  ?  To  some
such  heart-deadening  query,  to  some  such
conscience-benumbing  scepticism,  our  Lord
continued — No;  this  love  to  the  world  on
the  part  of  God,  this  condition  of  faith  on
the  side  of  man,  thus  laid  down,  is  perfectly
honest  and  sincere —

Ver.  17. — For — notwithstanding  your  vain
and  selfish  interpretation  of  the  older  reve-
lation— Ood  sent  not  his  Son  to  judge  (Im
lepivri,  with  a  view  to  judge,  to  discriminate
the  evil  from  the  good.  "  Judgment"  in  this
sense  may  be  identical  with  "absolution,"
and  may  also  connote  "  condemnation,"  but
in  itself  it  leaves  the  issue  undecided)  the
world.  Observe  that  the  word  "  sent "  re-
places the  word  "gave"  of  the  previous
statement  {awotrriKKui,  not  Trefiiru).  The  word
carries  with  it  "the  sending  on  a  special
mission"  (see  notes  on  ch.  xx.  21),  and
arrests  attention  by  denoting  the  imme-
diate function  of  the  Son  of  God's  mission
into  the  world.     He  was  sent,  not  ic  judgt


12i


TUE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [cii.  in.  1—36.


ihe  norld.  This  judgment  is  not  the  end
of  his  manifestation.  This  statement  is  not
without  difficulty,  because  we  learn  from  ch.
V.  27,  28  and  xii.  48  that  there  is  a  great
function  of  judgment  which  will  ultimalely
be  discharged  by  him,  and  which  does,
indeed,  follow  from  the  contact  of  all  men
with  his  truth  and  light.  This  is  confirm'  d
by  the  declarations  of  our  Lord  in  Matthew
(xiii.  24—30,  47),  thut  the  judgment  would
be  delayed  till  the  consummation  of  his
work,  but  would  then  be  most  certain  (see
Matt.  XXV.).  But  judgment  is  not  the  end
or  purpose  of  his  mission.  Judgment,  dis-
crimination of  the  moral  character  of  men,
is  a  consequence,  but  not  the  prime  nor  the
immediate  purport  of  his  coming.  Nume-
rous passages  from  the  Book  of  Enoch  and
the  Fourth  Book  of  Esdras,  and  the  literal
interpretation  of  Pg.  it.  9  ;  Mai.  iv.  1,  etc.,
may  be  quoted  to  show  the  Jewish  preju-
dices against  which  our  Lord  here  pro-
tested. But  God  sent  his  Son  that  the
world  through  him  may  be  saved.  "  Saved  "
is  here  the  analogue  and  interpretiition  of
the  not  perishing  and  tlje  having  of  eternal
life.  Christ  is  "  the  Saviour  of  the  world"
(oh.  iv.  42).  Hengstenberg  says  truly, "  The
Old  Testament  basis  for  the  words  is  found
in  Isa.  lii.  10,  'And  all  ths  ends  of  the
earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God.' "
His  coming  \y  ill,  as  he  goes  on  to  say,  exer-
cise a  discriminating  process  and  a  saving
energy.  There  will  occur  a  further  advent,
when  he  will  consummate  both  his  judgment
and  hig  mercy.  "  In  the  Old  Testament,"
says  Lange,  "  the  Judge  becomes  Redeemer
by  judging;  in  the  New  Testament,  the
Redeemer  becomes  Judge  by  his  redeem-
ing." Through  him  the  world  may  be
saved  from  its  ruin,  by  reason  of  individuals
accepting  his  grace.  The  saving  of  hu-
manity as  a  whole  issues  from  the  believing
nnd  living  of  men.  God's  love  of  the  woild
and  his  sending  of  his  Son  aim  at  the  saving
of  the  world  as  their  Divine  end.  Salvation
(jornpia)  is  the  largest  of  all  the  famous
biblical  terms  which  denote  the  restoration
and  blessedness  of  man.  It  means  all  that
is  elsewhere  denoted  by  "  justification,"  but
much  more  than  that.  It  connotes  all  that
is  included  in  "  regeneration  "  and  "  sancti-
fication,"  but  more  than  these  terms  taken
by  themselves.  It  includeg  all  that  is  in-
volved in  "redemption"  and  "adoption"
and  the  "  full  assurance,"  and  also  the  con-
ditions of  "appropriation" — the  subjective
states  which  are  the  human  antecedents  of
grace  received,  such  as  "faith"  and  "re-
pentance," with  all  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit."
These  Divine  blessings  originated  in  the
bosom  of  the  Father,  where  the  only  begotten
Son  for  evermore  abides,  and  they  are  all
poured  furth  througli  the  ISon  upon  the  world


in  the  coming  of  the  Christ.    He  vas  sent
to  save.

Yer.  18. — Salvation  is  the  Divine  result
of  believing  on  liim,  and  salvation  lifts  the
saved  man  frcjm  the  necessity  of  the  judg-
ment, of  the  moial  discrimination  which
awaits  every  man,  and  is  passed  upon  every
man  by  his  own  conscience  and  by  the
providence  of  God.  The  word  Kptyai  does
not  necessarily  mean  "  to  coiulemn  "  (see  ver.
17),  and  whensoever  the  unfavourable  issue
of  judgment  is  emphatically  referred  to,  then
KaTaKplva  is  used  (Eom.  ii.  1 ;  viii.  3 ;  1  Cor.
xi.  32  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  3).  Still,  tl  lis  first  clause
shows  that  the  predominant  sense  in  which
it  is  used  throughout  the  passage  is  con-
demnatory. He  that  believeth  on  him — i.e.
whoso  submits  and  yields  to  the  truth  con-
fessed and  conspicuous  in  the  Christ — he
who  accepts  the  mission  of  the  Logos,  both
before  and  after  the  Incarnation  (aee  notes
on  ch.  i.  12 — 14) — is  not  judged.  If  there  be
a  judgment,  it  is  one  of  acquittal.  In  his
case  judgment  is  salvation,  salvation  is  the
judgment.  Faith,  affectionate  confidence
in  the  supreme  Judge,  transforms  the  judg-
ment into  mercy,  anticipates  the  Divine  and
gracious  result.  But  he  that  believeth  not
(subjective  negative)  has  been  already
judged,  and  is  now  so  adjudged  (here  the
word  seems  necessarily  to  assume  a  condem-
natory character)  that  he  hath  not  believed
on  the  Name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  oi
God.  Such  non-belief  reveals  insensibility
to  troth,  indifference  to  the  reality  of  things,
unsusoeptibili'ty  to  the  light,  and  a  moial
perversity  which  hag  been  persisted  in.
The  approach  to  such  a  one  of  the  Eternal
Logos  did  not  move  him,  the  un>eiUng  of
the  Divine  face  did  not  awe  him  into  re-
verence. ■  The  sin  of  his  life  had  blinded
his  eyes,  closed  his  ears,  hardened  his  heart,
and  the  consequence  was  that  when  the
Name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  was  made
known  to  him,  like  all  previous  Divine
Belf-revelatious,  it  exercised  no  commanding
influence  upon  him,  no  convincing  power,
no  saving  grace.  To  refuse  Christ,  to  mani-
fest unbelief  under  such  circumstances,
proves  that  the  laws  of  Divine  judgment
which  are  always  going  on  have  already
enacted  themselves.  He  hat  been  (and  is)
condemned.  He  is  "judged  already,"  and
the  unbelief  is  the  judgment  which  the  self-
acting  moral  laws,  or  rather  which  the
Logos  actively  at  work  in  every  human
being,  pronounces  upon  him.  The  manner
in  which  any  man  receives  Divine  revela-
tion is  the  judgment  passed  upon  his  entire
life  up  to  that  moment  by  the  unerring  and
infallible  wisdom  of  the  supreme  Judge.
The  final  judgment  is  thus  anticipated,  but
it  is  not  irreversible,  aid,  should  repentance
and  f  lith  supervene  by  Divine  grace  on  this


OH.  in.  1—36.]      THE  GOSl'EL  ACCOIIDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


125


stolid  indiffeienoe  and  damnable  unbelief,
the  onceunbelieTer  will  become  the  believer,
tlie  judgment  upon  whom  is  no  more  a
judgment  of  condemnation,  but  one  of  life
and  peace.  Nothing  can  indicate  a  more
iratractable,  uiis|iiritual,  and  carnal  state
tlian  a  refusal  to  admit  so  great  and  im-
posing a  manifestation  of  the  Divine  nature
MS  the  Name  of  the  only  begotten  Bon  of
God.

Ver.  19. — The  above  interpretation  is  con-
firmed by  the  explanatory  sentence  which
follows,  and  which  is  obviously  meant  to
ux|)lain  the  nature  of  the  xplais,  the  process
of  the  judgment  of  which  he  had  spoken.
This  ciisis,  in  the  case  of  the  believer,
fiirnislies  a  clear  and  illustrious  proof  that
tlie  Son  of  Uod  had  primarily  come  to  save,
not  to  judge;  while  in  the  case  of  the
unbeliever  it  was  sufficiently  manifested  by
I  he  absence  of  faith  in  that  which  was  so
sublimely  adapted  to  induce  affectionate
leverenoe  and  adoring  trust.  Now  this  is
the  judgment.  The  peculiar  form  of  the
sentence,  oSttj  Se  ^ffrtv  tj  Kpliris  St*,  is  found
elsewhere  in  John  (1  John  i.  6;  v.  11,  14).
We  are  here  reminded  of  the  words  of  the
prologue  (cli.  i.  5,  9,  see  notes),  where  the
original  shining  of  the  Light  in  the  (rxorla
(the  abiding  state  of  darlcness)  ended  in
non-reception,  non-perception  of  the  Light.
Smboequcntly  it  i»  laid  that  the  light — the
iirchetypal  light  which  illumines,  shines
upon,  ereiy  man  who  comes  into  the  world
— came,  i.e.  in  a  new  and  more  impressive
manner,  and  by  its  coming,  originated  a
pi'ucess  of  judgment  and  diseiiminatiou
among  men.  This  utterance  of  the  prologue
is  here  shown  to  depend  upon  the  words  of
the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  made  flesh.
Tlie  critical  school  make  this  correspondence
with  the  prologue  and  with  Johannine
thought  incontestable  evidence  that  we  have
here  John's  meditation  rather  than  the  word
of  Jeeus.  There  is,  of  course,  an  alternative
interpretation.  But  it  appears  to  us  that  it
is  equally  rational  and  critical  to  see  in  the
words  of  Jesus  thus  reported,  the  oiigin  of
the  prologue.  Light  has  come  into  the  world,
and  made  evident  and  established  the  awful
fact  that  men  loved  (aorist,  denoting  a  defined
characteristic)  the  darkness  (itic^tos,  used
huie  and  1  John  i.  6  for  absolute  darkness,
I  he  complete  contradictory  of  the  light),
rather  than  the  light.  Liicke  has  urged  that
/MttWov  here  might  mean  magis,  not  potiue,
and  that  the  Lord  admits  a  certain  amount
of  love  for  the  light,  though  less  than  that
for  the  darkness ;  but  numerous  passages  of
similar  construction  muke  it  certain  that
potius,  not  magis,  is  the  meaning  (cf.  ch.
xii.  43 ;  Matt.  x.  6 ;  Mark  xv.  11 ;  2  Tim.
iii.  4).  "  The  light,"  though  so  needed,  and
BO  loTely  in  itself,  was  not  loved  by  men.    It


brought  consequences  from  which  "  men  "
recoiled  and  revolted.  They  loved  their  own
ignorance  and  peril.  They  shrank  from  tlie
demands — from  the  repentance,  the  trans-
formation of  habit  and  character,  the  utter
moral  revolution  that  must  be  consequent
upon  the  reception  of  the  light,  Darkne>8
was  loved,  hailed,  accepted,  rested  in.  The
process  of  the  judgment  was  conspicuous  in
demonstrating  this  unholy  love.  If  a  man
love  the  deformed,  the  misshapen,  the  defiled,
and  the  corrupt  thing,  rather  than  the  truly
beautiful,  this  is  a  judgment  passed  upon
his  entire  previous  life  and  on  his  present
chariicter,  which  is  the  outcome  and  upshot
of  the  life.  If  a  man  love  sensual  gratifica-
tion, its  objects  and  its  means,  rather  than
virtue  and  chastity  and  serene  and  sacred
purity,  this  is  in  itself  a  terrific  xplins — the
announcement  of  his  previous  career  of  dis-
sipation and  folly.  If  a  man  love  the  d  rk-
ness  of  unrenewed  humanity  rather  than
the  uncreated  liglit  embodied,  this  is  liis
Kpi/io,  and  the  process  by  which  it  is  made
evident  is  the  npiais  passing  over  him.  The
explanatory  clause  that  follows  givis  grout,
force  to  the  previous  assertion :  For  their
works  were  evil.  Their  hahitual  contluct
supplies  permanence  and  energy  to  tlieir
perverse  "  love,"  and  reveals  its  historical
antecedent — their  works  (epya)  were  "  evil  "
(rrovripd).  The  love  of  darkness  was  the  con-
sequence of  their  wicked  ways.  The  jud;,'
ment  of  eternal  law  lias  fallen  upon  ti.eii
violation  of  it.  The  great  penalty  of  sin
is  sinful  desire.  A  bias  towards  evil  is
originated  and  confirmed  by  sinful  compli-
ance. The  blinding  of  the  eye,  deafeniii';
of  the  ear  (cf.  Matf.  xiii.  10,  and  parallels;,
is  tlie  judicial  result  of  their  unwillingness
to  see  or  walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord.

Ver.  20. — This  verse  expoundsand  supplier
a  further  and  causal  explanation  of  tlio
relation  of  comluct  to  character.  For  every
one  that  practiseth  bad  things  {npaatreiv
and  TToiei'i'  are  contrasted,  not  only  hero,  but
in  Kom.  i.  32;  ii.  3;  vii.  15,  19,  20.  See
Trench's  •  Syn.  N.T.,'  p.  340).  The  first  sug
gests  the  repeated  acts  of  a  man's  conduct,
his  habits,  his  piactice,  and  notunfiequeutly
it  has  a  bad  sense  attiibuted  to'it,  while  the
second,  iroaw,  refers  to  the  full  expression  of
an  inward  life,  and  is  more  appropriate  to
denote  the  liigher  deeds  and  grander  prin-
ciples). This  practice  of  bad  ways  (0au\a)
leads  infallibly,  by  the  just  judgment  of  God,
to  a  hatred  of  that  which  will  reveal  and
confound  the  transgressor.  Every  one,  etc.,
hateth  the  light  (this  shows  that  we  cannot
err  in  giving  to  /laWoii  in  ver.  19  the  sense
of  potius),  and  the  hardening  process  which
is  a  judgment  of  God  upon  man,  ever  going
on,  becomes  more  conspicuous  in  this,  that
he  Cometh  not  to  the  light,  in  order  that  his


126


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,      [oh.  m.  1—36.


worlEB  may  not  ie  convicted;  t.e.  lest  his
works  should  be  revealed — shown  to  him  and
to  others  in  their  true  light.  The  night-tiiue,
during  which  so  many  evil  things,  base
tilings,  unclean  things,  are  practised,  was
darkening  down  over  Jerusalem  when  our
Lord  wag  speaking,  and  would  give  fateful
emphasis  to  these  solemn  words.  This  love
of  darkness  proceeded  from  a  hatred  of  the
revealing  power  of  the  light.  This  rejection
of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  proceed  ud
from  a  long  habit  of  sin,  showing  more
emphatically  than  before  the  need  of  radical
spiritual  regeneration — a  birth  of  watur  and
of  the  Spirit.  The  rejection  of  the  Christ's
claim  to  cleanse  the  temple — a  fact  f  which
Nicodemna,  as  Sanhedrist,  must  have  been
fully  awaie — was  a  striking  illustrutinn  of
his  great  argument.  The  "  dread  of  the
light  is  both  moral  pride  and  moral  effemi-
nacy" (Meyer).  (See  parallel  in  Eph.  v.
11,  12.)

Ver,  21.— But  he  that  doeth  the  truth—
who  is  "of  the  truth,"  and  "heareth  liis  voice"
(oh.  xviii.  37),  he  who  is,  "  morally  true,"
inwardly  sincere,  who  would  never  shrink
from  a  genuine  self-revelation — cometh  to
the  li£;ht.  This  remarkable  expression  allies
itself  with  many  other  words  of  Christ,  and
suggests  that  in  the  heart  of  Judaism  and
of  mvakind  generally,  amid  and  notwith-
standing the  darkness  which  prevailed,  there
were  found  elect  souls,  taught  of  the  Spirit,
longing  for  more  light,  yearning  to  know
the  truth  about  themselves,  however  humili-
ating it  might  prove  to  be.  This  is  confirmed
by  St.  Paul's  argument  (Bom.  i.  and  ii.),  where
some  Gentiles  who  have  not  the  Law  are
admitted  to  do  by  nature  the  things  contained
in  the  Law,  and  even  to  become  a  law  unto
themselves  ;  and  where,  in  contradistinction
to  the  hopelessly  rebellious,  Paul  assumes
that  there  are  some  who  "by  patient  con-
tinuance in  well-doing,  seek  for  glory, honour,
and  immortality."  These  "  do  the  trutli,  and
have  no  pleasure  in  unrighteousness."  Tliey
lire  "  taught  of  God,"  they  have  "  seen  and
heard  from  the  Father "  some  of  the  great
things  of  the  Law.  The  Holy  Spirit  has
opened  their  eyes  to  see  great  tilings  iu  the
Law,  and  they  come  to  the  light.  They
are  not  afraid  of  the  revelation  it  will  make.
They  may  be  humbled  and  pained  by  the
disclosure,  but  there  is  a  Divine  luxury  in
such  pain.  The  purpose  of  the  coming  to
the  light  on  the  part  of  one  who  doeth  the
truth,  is  in  order  that  his  works  may  be  made
manifest.  This  is  the  precise  contrary  of
the  conduct  of  the  man  whose  eye  is  scaled
and  whose  heart  is  made  fat  by  Bin.  Such  a
one  dreads  ocnviction,  the  outward  afSrmation
or  utterance  of  the  inwardly  known  xpiais ;
and  therefore  shrinks  from  conviction  or
any  conduct  which  will  promote  it.     He


flees  from  the  man  of  God,  he  disdains  the
revealing  Word,  he  rejects  the  bleated  Christ,
he  loves  the  darkness,  this  it  his  condemna-
tion.   On  the  other  hand,  the  sincere  man,
who  is  honest  with  himself,  is  supremely
anxious  for  the  true  light  to  bear  down  npon
his  "  works."    He  is  willing  that  they  should
be  manifested.     If  he  is  deceiving  himself
with  false  hopes,  he  yearns  that  these  should
disappear  before  the  shining  of  the  true  ligiit.
If  his  works  will  bear  examination,  then  let
him  know  the  verdict  which  is  unconsciously
being  given  by  the  revelation  of  the  light.
It  is  a  nice  question  to  determine  the  mean-
ing of  the  Sti.    The  current  interpretation
is  for,  or  because,  they  are  wrought  in  God ;
t.e,  the  sincere  man  desires  this  self-mani-
festation, comes  to  the  light  because  his
works  have  been  inwrought  by  Divine  grace.
He  loves  the  light,  he  does  the  truth  hecauee
God  has  wrought  within  him  to  will  and  to
do.    In  other  W(irds,  the  work  of  grsice  is  in
every  case  the  adequate  explanation  of  such
a  contrast  to  the  common  conditiou  of  human
nature.     Godet  suggests  that  on  here  has
the  meaning  of  "  that,"  and  urges  that  the
Greek  usage  in  eh.  iv.  35  an!  other  passages
will  justify  the  translation,  he  mmelh  .  .  .
mamfeal,  that  they  are  wrought  in  God,  as
though  this  Divine  revelatiou  were  the  real
end  of  his  coming  to  the  light.  This  appears
to  me  to  be  incompatible  with  the  fact.    Tl»  t
man  who  doeth  the  truth  may  yet  need  very
much   instruction    before   he   accepts    the
Divine  Original  of  his  own  conduct,  or  desires
the  manifestation  to  others  of  the  Divine
Source  of  his  humble  search.     The  more
current  translation, "because,"  is  in  harmony
with  the  facts  of  Christian  and  religious
experience,  and  is  in  keeping  with  the  biblical
assurance,  that  all  good,  all  holiness,  sin-
cerity, and  upright  striving,  just  such  as
Nicodemus  was  then  displaying,  is  God's
own  work,  and  is  the  result  of  his  grace.

Nicodemna  oomes,  asks  questions,  re-
ceives weighty  answers,  and  retires.  We
do  not  know  the  immediate  result  of  these
most  wonderful  words  upon  him ;  but  we  do
find  him  taking  the  part  of  Jesus  before  the
Sanhedrin  (oh.  vii.  50,  51);  and  &om  ch.
xix.  39  we  learn  that,  though  a  secret
disciple,  he  did  not  disdain  to  come  out
of  his  hiding-place  to  honour  the  corpse  of  I
the  Crucified.  The  death  of  Jesus,  which
had  blasted  the  hopes  of  the  apostles,  had
fired  those  of  Nicodemus.  Every  word  of
this  discourse  is  compatible  with  the  position
of  the  great  Prophet  at  this  early  period  of
his  ministry,  Is  suited  to  the  Pharisaic  mind,
and    adapted    to  meet  its  difflonltles  and


OH.  Ui.  1—36.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOfiDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


12?


correct  its  prejudices.  If  a  few  expressions,
such  as  "the  only  begotten  Son,"  "this  is
the  oondemnation,  tliat,"  "he  that  doeth
the  truth,"  are  found  in  writings  which  are
John's  undoubted  composition,  the  circum-
stance may  be  explained  that  he  boiTowed
tljem  from  Jesus.  This  is  quite  as  rational
(not  to  say  legitimate  and  reverential)  as  to
suppose,  because  of  them,  that  John  in-
vented them,  and  betrayed  their  origin  by
placing  them  in  the  lips  of  Jesus.

We  do  not  suppose  that  John  has  me-
chauiouUy  recited  the  whole  of  the  words
that  were  spoken  on  either  side,  but  pre-
served those  heads  of  discourse  which  rise
like  mountain-peaks  above  the  oceans  of
thought  between  them,  and  are  linked  to-
gether by  the.  glory  whicli  they  SL'Veially
reflect  from  the  sublime  personality  of  the
Son  of  man.

Vers.  22—36.-6.  The  ttvanlike  long  of  the
Baptiet.

Vers.  22 — 2G. — (1)  The  ministry  and  bap-
Utm  of  Jesus  in  Judsea.

Ver.  22. — With  this  verse  a  new  departure
is  taken,  and  oircumbtaiices  are  described
which  indirectly,  tatlier  than  explLcil:l>,  in-
dicate the  manner  of  our  Lord's  ministry
for  the  larger  part  of  a  year ;  and  tlicy
furnish  opportunity  for  recording  the  last
great  public  utterance  of  John  tlie  Baptist,
with  all  its  special  diiBculties  of  chronology
and  doctrine.  After  these  things,  related
in  the  previous  paragraphs ;  alter,  that  is,
the  sceue  in  the  temple,  and  the  demand  for
a  sign,  and  the  typical  discourse  of  the  Lord
with  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  from  reasons  not
diiHcult  to  deduce  from  the  narrative,  Jesus
(came')  and  his  disciples  [came]  into  the  land
(7^1',  not  x^po"!  ^B  ip  Mark  i.  5)  of  Judsea.
Surrounded  or  accompanied  by  some  of  hii
disciples  (John  being  one  of  them),  Jesus
left  the  metropolis  and  betook  himself  to  the
country-side.  His  Mesbianio  claims  were
not  accepted  by  the  autliorities.  He  did
not  entrust  himself  to  the  half-believers.
He  altered  or  deviated  from  the  course
hitherto  adopted,  and  addressed  himself  to
the  less-prejudiced  inhabitants  of  the  country
places  in  the  province  of  Judsea.  His  hour
was  not  yet  come.  Jerusalem  and  Judiih
were  thus  compared  or  contrasted  in  Ezra
ii.  1 ;  vii.  14  ;  2  Chrun.  xx.  18.  The  preci^ie
locality  is  not  stated,  though  it  is  probable
it  was  not  far  from  the  new  scene  chosen  by
John  for  the  continuance  of  his  ministry.
The  identification  of  the  site  of  Mnon,  near
Baleim,  does  not  finally  determine  the  scene
•f  QUI  Lord's  abode  or  baptismal  ministry.


We  are  expressly  told,  bolh  here  and  in  ch.
iv.  3,  that  it  was  in  Judsea,  not  Samaria,
that  Jesus  there  tarried  with  them,  and  was
baptizing.  The  words  imply  a  lengthened
abode,  and  a  method  of  ministry  which,  from
that  time,  he  laid  aside.  The  statement
that  he  administered  the  rite  personally  is
in  ch.  iv.  2  explicitly  corrected.  'I'he  bap-
tism by  the  di.sciples  was  done,  however,
with  the  sanction  and  under  the  direction
of  Jesua.  As  the  trial  ministry  of  the  twelve
apostles  (mentioned  in  Matt,  x.),  occurring
dn'ing  our  Lord's  earthly  life,  corresponded
with  tlie  first  preaching  of  John  rather  than
with  that  which  followed  the  glorification
of  Jesus  and  the  Pentecostal  effusion,  so
this  ordinance  closely  resembled  the  water-
baptism  of  John;itwas  a  preparatory  symbol,
an  educational  rite,  one  that  allied  this  early
ministry  to  that  of  his  great  forerunner.
The  water-baptism  of  Jesus  corresponded
in  significance  with  the  water-baptism  of
John.  They  were  one  and  the  same  ordi-
nance, predictive,  symbolic,  anticipatory  of
the  baptism  of  the  Spirit.  "  Jesus  adopted
John's  baptism  ere  its  waters  for  ever  ceased
to  flow,  and  thus  he  blessed  and  consecrated
them,  He  took  up  the  work  of  his  fore-
runner and  completed  it"  (EderJieim,  i.
393).  Weiss  (with  consent  of  Eenan)  ad-
mits that  these  reminiscences  reveal  their
own  historicity,  and  none  more  so  than  the
return  of  Jesus  for  a  time  to  the  scenes  ol
the  activity  of  the  Baptist.  Apparently  sucli
an  act  conflicts  with  the  exalted  ideas  the
author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  entertains  with
reference  to  his  Master.  Thoma  thinks  he
sees  in  Pauline  writings  indication  of  Christ's
baptismal  ministry,  and  suggests  that  the
"  Johannist"  therefore  finds  a  place  for  such
"a  washing  in  water  bytlieAVord"  in  the
active  word  of  Jesus  1  When  our  Lord,
after  his  resurrection,  referred  to  the  bap-
tism with  the  Spirit,  he  contriisted  it  with
the  baptism  of  J.>hn,  and  made  no  reference
to  his  own  temp.irary  adoption  of  the  same
rite.  All  water-baptism  is  thus  placed  in
its  true  relation  to  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit
— not  as  the  necessary  preliminary  of  the
latter,  nor  its  indispensable  seal  or  guarantee,
but  as  the  impressive  symbol  of  the  need  of
heavenly  cleansing,  and  of  the  direct  impact
upon  the  soul  of  the  power  of  the  eternal
Spirit.  The  length  of  our  Loru's  residence
in  Judesa  cannot  be  positively  determined ;
but  one  hint  may  be  gathered  trum  ch.  iv.  35.
The  "four  months  before  the  harvest"  indi-
cate the  airival  of  the  month  of  December,
and  thcrefure  the  lapse  of  some  eight  months
between  the  cleansing  of  the  temple  and
the  return  to  Galilee.  This  last  eyent,  in
Matthew's  Gospel  (iv.  12 — 17  with  parallels),
is  associated  with  the  imprisonment  of  John.
The  Fourth  Gospel,  by  obvious  lefeienee  to


Lza


THfi  GOStEL  AdCOtlDixa  1*0  ST.  JoUlt.      [oh.  m.  i— 36


the  current  synoptic  chronoliigy  of  the  com-
mencement of  the  Galilsenn  ministry  (one
which  made  this  imprisonment  a  note  of
time),  shows  that  the  period  described  in
this  Gospel,  and  the  baptismal  energy  of
Jesua  in  Judaea,  and  tlie  profoundly  in-
teresting events  mentioned  in  oh.  iii.  and
iv.,  were  not  incompatible  with  admitted
facts.  It  also  suggests  that  the  chnracter
of  our  Isold's  miiiistry  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  metropolis  was  closely  allied
with  that  which  the  synoptists  described
as  obtaining  in  his  early  Galilsean  efforts.
We  are  impressed  by  the  solemn  silence
which  has  fallen  over  tliese  eight  months.
It  may  be  accounted  for  on  the  general
jirinciple  of  the  evangelist,  which  was  to
fasten  upon  and  preserve  the  memory  of
a  few  solemn  moments  which  especially
nil  pressed  his  own  mind,  and  whidi  had
been  overlooked  or  unknown  by  Matthew
and  the  other  evangelists. ,  Moreover,  it  is
more  than  probable  that  the  author  of  this
Gospel  was  not  with  the  Muster  during  the
whole  of  this  period.  There  are,  however,
hints  that  the  rumours  of  the  spiritual  might
end  gathering  power  of  Jesus  had  produced
a  great  effect  upon  John  the  Baptist,  and
qualified  the  tone  of  his  last  testimony.

Ver.  23. — And  John  also  was  baptizing  in
JEnon,  near  to  Salim,  because  there  were
many  waters  there ;  and  they  came,  and  were
baptized.  There  is  much  difficulty  in  de-
termining the  site  of  .^non,  near  Saleim.
Eusebius  and  Jerome  (in  '  Onomasticon ')
place  it  in  the  northern  part  of  Samaria,
iibout  eight  miles  south  of  Scythopolis
(Jerome,  'Ad  Evagrium,'  Ep.  126;  Epiph.,
'Hajr.,'  Iv.  2;  Winer,  'Eeal  Wort.,'  i.  33;
Liicke,  in  loc. ;  Thomson,  '  The  Land  and
the  Book,'  ii.  176)  This  does  not  well
accord  with  the  statement  that  Jesus  wns  "  in
Judsea,"  and  proposed  to  "pass  through
Samaria  "  (cf.  ver.  22 ;  ch.  iv.  1 — 4).  It  may
be  observed,  however,  that  our  narrative
does  not  limit  the  scene  of  our  Lord's  Judsean
ministry  to  any  one  place,  nor  does  it  assert
that  the  Baptist  and  Jesus  were  in  near
proximity,  but  rather  the  reverse.  There  is
a  Shilhim  mentioned  in  Josh.  xv.  32,  with
which  is  associated  an  ain  (or  fountain) — a
word  closely  resembling  " Mnon"  This
ivould  seem  to  have  been  in  the  south  of
Judeea.  Godet  thinks  that,  since  Ain  and
Rimmon  are  associated  with  each  other  in
Josh.  xix.  7  and  1  Chron.  iv.  32,  and  an
En-Remmon  is  spoken  of  in  Neh.  xi.  29,  that
we  have  in  this  blending  tlio  origin  of  the
word  "  Mnon."  He  thinks  that  the  presence
of  waters  is  more  likely  to  be  specified  in  a
dry  region  like  that  of  the  border  of  Edom
than  in  a  fertile  district  like  Samaria ;  and
be  goes  on  to  argue  that  Jems  may  therefore
have  travelled  south  between  Hebron  and


Beersheba,  even  as,  in  the  synoptics,  we  find
him  in  Csesarea  Philippi,  the  northernmost
portion  of  the  Holy  Land.  Certainly  he  may
have  tarried  there  during  the  eight  months,
but  wo  have  no  right  to  establish  it  from
this  passage.  It  is  not  said  that  Jesus  was  at
jEnon.  Dr.  Barclay  (1858)  reports  the  dis-
covery of  Muou  at  Wady  Fdr'ah,  a  suoludeil
valley  five  miles  north-east  of  Jerusalem
(Grove,  Smitii's  '  Diet.  Bible ').  The  recei  t
discoveries  of  the  Palestine  Exploration
Society  find  this  Enun  ^Aynun)  and  Saleim
not  far  from  the  Aslcar,  or  Sychar,  where
Ji'sus  rested  when  Jolin's  ministry  had
been  suddenly  arrested.  (Edersheira  thinks
that  this  Enou  and  Salim  in  Wady  Fdr'ah
leading  from  Samaria  to  the  Jordan,  are  too
far  apart;  but  see  'Pal.  Exp.  Fund  Eeport,'
1874,  p.  141;  'Plot.  Palestine,'  ii.  237;
'  Tent- Work  in  Palestine,'  i.  91—93.)  Alle-
gory reaches  the  point  of  absurdity  when  wo
are  told  by  Thoma  that  neither  place  nor  time
are  histono.  The  Salem  is  (says  lie),  accord-
ing to  Ps.  Ixxvi.  2,  the  tabernacle  or  place
of  God,  and  therefore,  according  to  Philo,
indicates  the  Logos,  who  thenceforth  be-
comes the  Illuminator  and  Ruler.  "  The
multitude  of  waters"  would  be  suitable,
necessary,  to  any  great  gatherings  such  as
those  which  had  followed  the  Baptist  to  the
banks  of  the  Jordan,  as  well  as  for  bap-
tismal processes.  Such  a  site  for  .^non
is  far  more  probable,  on  historical  grouiid.s^
than  is  the  southern  extremity  of  Judeea ;  foi
Herod  would  have  had  no  jurisdiction  there,
and  would  not  have  been  tempted  to  arrest
John's  ministrations,  nor  would  he  or
Herodias  have  suffered  from  the  Baptist's
rebuke  of  their  adultery,  if  such  reproaches
had  been  spoken  so  far  away  from  the  ceutrs
of  his  tetrarchy.  If,  however,  John  had
made  no  secret  of  his  disapproval  in  regions
so  near  to  Galilee  and  Peraea,  over  which  he
presided,  the  consequent  irritation  of  the
voluptuous  prince  may  have  been  more
easily  aroused,  and  his  vengeance  more
legitimately  taken.  But  how  came  John  to
be  still  administering  baptism  with  a  group
of  disciples  of  his  own,  and  doing  this  long
after  the  amazing  announcements  he  hail
made  in  the  spring  of  the  year  with  reference
to  the  rank  and  functions  of  the  Lor<l
Jesus?  This  narrative  is  the  true  key  to
the  otherwise  inexplicable  contrariety  be-
tween the  Johannine  testimonies  to  Christ
and  the  message  from  the  prison  as  de-
scribed by  the  synoptists.  It  is  the  solution
of  the  mystery  that  one  who  hailed  Jesus  as
the  Son  of  God  and  the  Lamb  of  God  and
Baptizer  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  who  was
declared  by  Christ  himself  to  be  the  gi'e;itest
of  woman  bom,  was,  notwithstanding,  "  less
than  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaveu.''
John  is  here  shown  by  the  fourth  evangelitt


cH.  ni.  1—36.]     THE  OOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


129


to  hare  been  still  talfing  an  independent
position.  He  pointed  others  to  Jesus,  but
he  did  not  enioU  himself  among  his  fol-
lowers. John  was  at  last  "  offended  "  more
than  ho  knew  at  the  humility  of  Jesus.  He
still  waited  for  the  coming  of  the  Conqueror
and  the  Wielder  of  the  axe  j  he  was  lonking
for  the  manifested  King,  for  the  hour  which
had  not  yit  come.  He  is  a  remarkable
specimen  of  the  energy  with  which  a  great
purpose  is  embraced  by  those  who  are
pledged  to  make  it  accomplish  its  end.  The
preparatory  worlc  of  John  could  not,  any
more  than  the  Hebraism  of  which  it  was  the
highest  type,  come  to  an  abrupt  end  volun-
tarily; hence  he  continued  it  even  to  the
peril  of  sacrificing  all  its  value.  Tliey  came,
and  were  baptized ;  as  "  they  "  had  done  at
Bethabara.  There  was  some  splitting  up  of
the  Messianic  movement  (Keim),  and  we  see
the  eifect  of  it  upon  his  disciples  and  him-
self. Even  in  the  midst  of  the  labours  of
Paul  (Acts  xix.  1 — 4),  we  find  that  Johau-
nine  baptism  was  still  practised,  and  traces
of  the  custom  may  still  be  observed  in
Oriental  sects  even  to  the  present  day.'

Ver.  24. — For  John  had  not  yet  been  oast
into  the  prison.  This  clause  shows  that  the
evangelist  was  alive  to  the  apparent  dis-
crepancy whicli  his  account  of  a  Judsean
niiuibtry  might  otherwise  have  suggested
with  the  synoptic  chronological  initium  of
the  Galilaean  ministry.  The  remark  shows
tliat  all  that  happened  preceded  that
ministry,  and  equates  the  journey  through
Samaria  with  that  mentioned  in  Matt.  iv.  12.
Even  Hilgenfeld  says,  "  InvoluntaTily  the
fourth  evangelist  here  testifies  to  his  ac-
quaintance with  the  synoptical  narrative."
In  our  opinion  it  was  designed  and
spontaneous.  The  first  journey  to  Galilee,
mentioned  in  ch.  i.  43,  was  not  the  com-
mencement of  a  public  prophetic  ministry,
and  the  synoptists  are  silent  about  it.  The
S,vex'^PV<^^''j  1^6  "withdrew,"  shows  that  there
was  some  reason  for  his  abrupt  departure,
over  and  above  what  was  stated.  John
gives  the  reason  for  the  departure  by  ch.
iv.  1,  2,  where  the  conduct  of  the  Pharisees
was  becoming  more  watchful  and  jealous.
The  authority  which  John  here  assumes  to
correct  and  enlarge  apostolic  tradition,  re-
veals the  claim  of  one  who  professed  unique
knowledge  of  inexpugnable  facts.

Ver.  25. — There  arose  therefore  a  question-
ing on  the  part  of  John's  disciples  with  a
Jew'  about  purifying.     Such  proximity  of

'  Of.  author's  article, "  Sabeans,"  in.' Diet.
Christ.  Biog.,'  vol.  Iv.

•  T.K.,  with  Griesbach,  etc.,  read  'lovSattap,
with  X*,  G,  A,  and  numerous  manuscripts ;
but  Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Meyer,
Westcott  and  Hort,  Revised  Version,  'louSafou,


two  snch  leaders,  teaching  and  proclaiming
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  baptizing  into
a  glorious  hope,  a  Divine  future,  and  a
spiritual  oliauge,  was  certain  to  excite  con-
troversy. The  word  (f^rijiris)  "questioning"
is  used  in  Acts  xv.  2  for  the  dispute  at
Antioch,  and  Paul  uses  the  same  phrase
for  dangerous,  useless,  and  angry  debate
(1  Tim.  vi.  4;  2  Tim.  ii,  23;  Titus  iii.  9).
It  was,  perhaps,  not  the  first,  and  certainly  it
was  not  the  last,  of  the  controversies  which
raged  over  the  symbolic  purification  of  the
Ciiuroh.  John's  disciples  appear  to  have
taken  up  arms  against  some  particular  Jew,
who  was  prepared  either  to  question  the
right  of  Jesus  to  baptize,  or  the  essential
value  of  this  ordinance.  This  "  Jew "  was
apparently  maintaining  a  greater  potency
for  the  biiptism  of  Jesus  than  John  could
claim  for  his,  and  was  basing  his  view  upon
the  testimony  which  John  had  already  borne
to  Jesus.  Furi/ying  was  the  great  theme  of
Essenic  and  Pharisaic  profession.  It  was
without  doubt  one  of  the  great  symbolic
purposes  of  the  Levitioal  legislation.  The
purification  of  the  flesh  was,  however,  in
Christ's  teaching,  a  very  small  part  of  the
claim  for  purity.  Nothing  less  than  a
spiritual  and  radical  moral  change  availed,
and  our  Lord  insisted  on  this  to  the  dis-
paragement of  the  mere  ceremonial.  This
was  the  first  recorded  discussion  on  the
nature  and  value  of  baptismal  purifying.
Would  that  it  had  been  the  last  I  The
question  arose  among  those  who  had  been
baptized  by  John,  whether  another  had  any
right  to  administer  such  an  ordinance?
Could  another  receive  the  confession  of  sins  ?
Was  the  baptism  of  John  to  terminate  now
that  he  had  come  of  whom  John  himself
had  said,  "  This  is  he  that  baptizeth  with
the  Holy  Spirit"?

Ver.  26.— They  (the  disciples  of  John)
oame  to  John,  and  said  to  him,  Bahbi — the
title  of  deep  respect  (ver.  2),  which  stood  in
Jewish  reverence  high  above  all  civil  and
military  rank,  and  was  here  yielded  in
courtesy  to  the  heroic  lender — ^he  who  was
with  thee,  apparently  in  entire  mutual
understanding  wiih  thee,  receiving  baptism
at  thy  hands,  and  thus  admitting  thy  right
to  baptize  the  people  of  God — "  with  thee  "
as  we  are  "  with  thee  " — ^beyond  Jordan — at
Bethany  (Bethabara),  at  a  better  baptizing —
place  than  this,  on  a  grand  historic  site,  the
very  scene  of  the  great  administration,  where
the  Sanhedrin  deferred  to  thy  claims  and

with  N°,  A,  B,  L,  r,  etc.,  and  a  number  of
versions  and  Fathers,  and  it  gives  definite-
ness  to  the  narrative.  Godet  disputes  the
change,  and  thinks  the  reading  may  easily
have  been  occasioned  by  the  similarity  of  the
termination  of  'lovSatov  and  of  KaOaptaiiov,


130


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  hi.  i-36.


the  mnltitndeB  attested  the  hold  thou  hadst
on  their  affections — to  whom  thou  hast  home
testimomes — the  man  ^ho  received  thy
homage,  but  who  admitted  also  thy  claimB,
about  \fhom  thou  didst  utter  such  strong
things  of  unspeakable  import — hehold,  he
is  now  thy  rived  in  popular  esteem ;  this
man  is  baptizing,  and — with  a  pardonable
exaggeration,  they  add — all  men  are  coming
onto  him.  He  is  eclipsing  thee ;  he  seems
to  usurp  the  high  and  unique  position  which
had  been  assumed  by  thyself.  Serious
questions  these,  which  must  lead  to  a  com-
plete disruption  among  the  disciples  of
John.  Before  examining  the  reply  of  John
to  the  query,  it  is  well  to  observe  that  John
had  been  walking  in  the  blinding  and
bewildering  light  of  new  ideas;  that  the
Fourth  Gospel  brings  us  into  contact  with
John  at  the  moment  where  the  synoptic
narrative  draws  its  portraiture  to  a  con-
clusion; and  yet  the  Fourth  Gospel,  qtiite
as  firmly  as  the  synoptists,  shows  that  the
fresh  light  which  had  dawned  on  John  had
not  induced  him  to  forego  the  preparatory
mission  on  which  his  heart  was  set,  and  the
zeal  of  which  had  consumed  him.  If  the
perplexity  arises — ^How  could  John  have
borne  such  ample  testimony  to  Jesus  and
not  at  once  have  followed  in  his  train  ?  we
reply  that  the  language  of  John  in  Matt,
iii.  11  is  just  as  difficult  to  reconcile  with
the  message  from  the  prison.  Thoma
admits  that  this  fact  corresponds  with  the
question,  "  Art  thou  he  that  should  come,
or  look  we  for  another?"  In  like  manner,
Hebraism  itself  within  the  bosom  of  the
Church  maintained  a  place  after  all  its
purpose  had  been  fulfilled.  The  destruction
of  tile  temple  and  of  the  Jewish  state  was
necessary  to  abolish  the  force  of  the  Hebrew
tendency  to  ritualism  of  place  and  symbol
even  in  the  heart  of  Christ's  disciples.
Many  of  the  mighty  powers  of  the  world,  if
they  had  not  possessed  an  energy  and
vitality  which  refused  to  succumb  when
tlieir  work  was  really  done,  would  never
have  done  that  work  at  all.

Vers.  27— 32.— <2)  The  earthly  and  heavenly
commiesion,

Yer.  27. — John  answered  and  said,  A  man
can  receive  nothing — neither  office,  function,
faculty,  nor  life-work,  in  the  kingdom  of
God — except  it  has  1>Mn  given  him  from
heaven.  The  saying  is  broEid,  general,
comprehensive,  sustaining.  It  is  not  the
glorification  of  success,  but  an  explanation
of  the  ground  of  high  service.  All  good
service,  all  high  faculty,  all  holy  mission,
all  saored  duty,  are  assigned  to  us  by  Heaven.
"  No  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself,
unless  he  be  called  of  God."  Commeutaturs
iiave  ranged  themselves  into  three  groups
as  to  the  primary  application  of  the  words.


(1)  Those  who  have  limited  the  mcintal
reference  to  John  himself.  "  My  function  is,
as  I  am  about  to  explain,  a  subordinate  one,"
"I  have  received  that  and  nothing  else  from
heaven."  "1  cannot  make  myself  into  the
Bridegroom  of  the  Church,  or  the  Light  of
the  world,  or  the  Baptizer  with  the  Holy
Ghost."  "  I  have  received  that  only  which
is  given  and  assigned  to  me  by  God."  (So
Bengel,  Calvin,  Hengstenberg,  and  at  one
time  Godet.)  (2)  Those  who  regard  it  as
being  a  distinct  reference  to  Christ,  and  as
a  vindication  of  Jesus  from  the  complaint  of
John's  own  disciples.  The  high  activity  and
present  position  of  Jesus  is  declared  by  John
to  have  been  conferred  on  Christ  "from
heaven."  He  would  not,  could  not,  have
taken  it  upon  himself  apart  from  the  Divine
order.  (So  Godet,  Meyer,  Watkins,  Thoma.)
(3)  Those  who  refer  it  to  both  "  John  and
Jesus ; "  i.e.  accept  it  as  the  general  principle,
applicable  with  equal  force  to  them  both.
Intense  man  that  he  was,  John  felt  justified
in  referring  the  entire  function  and  mission
of  both  the- Christ  and  his  forerunner  to  the
will,  predestination,  and  bestowment  of
Heaven.  (So  Wettstein,  Lange,  Lutbardt,
Liicke,  Westcott,  Geikie,  Moulton.)  This
is  surely  the  most  obvious  and  rational
interpretetion.  Perhaps  "heaven"  is  not
exactly  identical  with  "  God,"  but  may  point
to  the  whole  of  the  providential  circum-
stances, to  the  Divine  resources,  to  the
inheritance  of  effects  from  more  remote
antecedents  In  the  Divine  will;  but  it  is
difficult  to  press  this  distinction  in  all  cases.
Ver.  28. — Ye  yourselves  (cf.  1  Thess.  iv.
9  for  similar  emphatic  pronoun)  bear  me
witness — you  will  do  it  readily,  if  1
challenge  you,  for  my  testimonies  were  fre-
quent and  varied  (in  fact,  the  synoptists  and
the  fourth  evangelist  are  equally  explicit
here) — that  I  said,  I  am  not  the  Messiah
(ch.  i.  20 ;  Matt  ui.  11, 12 ;  Luke  iii.  15—17).
This  announcement,  made  with  great  pub-
licity at  Bethany,  was  the  basis  of  the
present  remonstrance ;  and  the  words  which
follow  strongly  sustain  John's  reference  to
the  Divine  predestination  in  his  own  case
and  that  of  Jesus  (a\A'  3t<  may  point  back
to  the  discourse  of  John,  or  may  simply
indicate  transition  to  the  second  statement).
But  that  I  am  one  sent  (on  a  special  mission)
before  him.  He  boldly  implies,  "This  is
more  than  I  have  already  testified  concern-
ing '  the  Christ ; '  and  my  place  is  not  at  his
side,  not  following  in  his  train.  I  am  'a
voice ; '  my  work  is  continuously  to  break  up
a  way  for  him.  I  am  here  still,  making  the
mountains  low,  and  filling  up  the  valleys  for
the  approach  of  the  great  King."  A  man
can  receive  nothing  in  the  shape  of  life-
work  except  tliat  whieh  is  assigned  to  him
out  of  heaven.


CH.  m.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


13i


Ver.  29. — And  now  the  Baptist  bethinks
him  of  anollier  remarkable  image,  with
whioh,  as  a  student  of  the  Old  Testament,
and beino;  himself  "  more  than  a  prophet,"  he
was  familiar.  The  tenderness  of  the  iniagery
liad  not  hitherto,  however,  comported  with
the  ministry  of  the  vox  clamantis,  Wheiras
the  New  Testament  represents  the  loving-
kindness  and  righteousness  of  the  Lord
God  under  the  mitaphor  of  a  Father's
love  to  his  prodigal  but  repenting  children,
the  prophets  were  often  disposed  to  set
forth  the  same  idea  in  the  light  of  a  Husband
yearning  over  his  bride,  even  betrothing  her
a  second  time  unto  himself  after  hur  faith-
lessness and  folly.  Jehovah  and  Jehovah's
King  and  Kcpresentative  are  set  forlh  as  the
Bridegroom  of  the  true  Israel  (Ps.  xlv. ;
Isa.  liT.  5;  Hoi.  ii.  19,  20;  the  Song  of
Songs;  Ezek.  xvi. ;  Mai.  ii.  11,  etc.);  and
the  New  Testament  writers,  especially  John
himself,  who  delights  in  the  image  (Rev.
xix.  7;  xii.  2,  9;  xxii.  17),  and  Paul,  who
compares  the  relation  of  the  Saviour  to  his
Church  under  this  endearing  imagery  (Eph.
V.  32;  2  Oor.  xi.  2),  vindicate  the  legitimacy
of  the  metaphor.  The  Baptist  might  easily
think  of  this  language,  but  it  is  more  than
possible  that  he  had  been  profoundly
touched  by  the  news  that  had  reached  him
concerning  the  presence  of  Jesns  at  a
marriage- least.  John  had  been  a  Nazarite
from  his  birth.  Jesus  was  revealing  himself
amid  the  pleasures  and  innocent  joys  of
life  and  love.  John's  conception  of  the
kingdom  had  been  that  of  severance  from  the
world — seclusion,  ascetic  restraint.  Jesus
liad  manifested  his  glory  amid  the  festival
and  in  the  common  life  and  daily  ways  of
men.  John  may  have  sfeen  that  there  was
much  in  this  to  captivate  the  heart  of  the
true  Israel ;  and  he  glances  at  the  bridal  of
heaven  and  earth  iu  this  new  conception  of
the  mission  of  the  Messiah.  It  may  have
staggered  him,  as  he  had  tanght  Israel  to
hope  for  One  whose  hand  would  be  more
heavy  upon  them  and  on  their  sins  than  his
had  been.  Where  was  the  axe  laid  at  the
root  of  the  trees  ?  where  the  fire  that  scorches
to  cleanse  and  purify  ?  But  he  accepted  to
some  extent  the  new  revelation,  and  found
his  own  place  in  the  novel  reconstruction  of
the  kingdom.  So  he  says,  He  that  hath  the
bride  is  the  bridegroom.  However,  John
throws  in  a  novel  thought,  explanatory  of
his  own  position,  and  not  found  in  the  Old
Testament  imagery :  "  I  am  not  the  Bride-
groom," says  he ;  "  but  it  is  also  true  that  I
am  not  the  Bnde.  Such  is  my  positinn  that
I  am  standing  outside  the  company  of  those
wlio  are  the  prophetic  '  Bride.' "  The  friend
of  the  bridegroom  (^^l\os  rod  i/vfi(j>iov,  irapa-
i/ili(j)tos,  answering  to  the  sn'iM  and  fi^^sl  of

the  Aramaio  writers)  ia  he  who  acts  the  part


of  intermediary — ^the  confidant  of  both.  He
presides  at  the  ceremonies  of  tlie  betrothal
and  at  the  wedding-feast,  and  especially  in
the  interi  sts  of  the  bridegroom.  The  image
was  probably  suggested  to  him  by  the  great
discovery  made  by  the  friend  of  the  Cana
bridegroom  touching  the  "  glory  "  of  the  mys-
terious Guest  on  that  typical  occasion.  "  The
friend  of  the  bridegroom  "  differs  profoundly
from  the  Bridegroom.  The  Christ  will  prove
ready  to  occupy  this  position,  and  John  has
declared  that  he  is  not  the  Christ.  More-
over, John  differs  from  the  Bride;  he  does
not  receive  the  lavish  love,  nor  the  deep
intimacies  of  that  affection,  nor  the  dowry
of  sacrificial  devotion  with  which  that  love
will  at  length  be  won.  This  paranymphios
standeth  and  beareth  him.  It  is  not  said,
"  seeth  him."  Some  have  argued  that  John
here  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  all  that
the  Bridegroom  has  been  s-ayinghas  reached
him  by  means  of  the  information  brought  to
him  on  the  part  of  those  who  were  both  his
own  disciples  and  the  disciples  of  Jesus ;
but  the  next  clause  is  inconsistent  with  this.
The  friend  of  the  bridegroom  stands  ready
to  do  the  will  and  promote  the  honour  and
pleasure  of  his  friend.  (Jlie  materialistic
and  sensualistic  maimer  in  whioh  some
have  pressed  the  force  of  the  imagery  is  out
of  place.)  "  The  voice  of  the  bridegroom,"
the  hilarious  joy  of  the  bridegroom,  is  a  pro-
verbial expression  (Jer.  vii.  34 ;  xvi.  9 ;  xxv.
10),  There  is  a  contrast  felt  between  the
formal  buaiuess-like  fellowship  that  pre-
vailed between  the  bride  and  the  friend  of
the  bridegroom,  and  the  free  outspoken
love  of  the  bridegroom  himself.  The  lisp-
ings  of  prophecy  are  contrabted  with  the  out-
spoken utterances  of  the  gospel  of  love.  And
he  rejoioeth  with  joy  (xap?  X"'p^'  '•  "f.  for  this
form  01'  expri  ssioUj  which  corresponds  with
the  frequent  Hebrew  juxtaposition  of  the
finite  verb  with  the  infinitive  absolute,  tlie
LXX.  of  Isa.  XXX.  19 ;  Ixvi.  10 ;  Dcut.  vii.  26,
etc. ;  Luke  xxii.  15 ;  Acts  iv.  17 ;  v,  28 ;  xxiii,
14 ;  Jas,  V.  17).  It  is  not  an  indubitable
Hebrai.-m,  because  similar  expressions  are
found  in  the  classics,  as  Plato,  '  Sympos.,'
195,  B.,  (peiyaiv  <l>vyf ;  '  Phjedr.,'  265,  D.;
Soph.,  '  CEd.  Rex,'  65  ;  see  Winer, '  Gramm.
B.  T.,'  p.  685.  This  is  tlie  only  place  where
such  a  construction  occurs  in  the  writings  of
John)  because  of  the  bridegroom's  voice.
Intense  joy  is  thus  ascribed  to  oue  who  was
the.minister  of  the  bliss  of  another.  This  my
joy — or,  thin  joy,  therefore,  which  is  mine —
hath  been  made  full.  "  I  have  thus  com-
pleted my  task,  and  reached  the  climax  o(
my  bliss.  I  have  wooed  and  won,"  'J'he
bridal  of  heaven  and  earth  is  begun.  In
subsequent  words  of  Jesus  and  his  disciple:!
other  great  epochs  of  complete  cousummatii  >n
are  refeired  to.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  will  only


132


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [ch.  hi.  1—36,


be  entirely  realized  when,  after  tl>e  rrsnr-
rection  and  the  second  advent,  the  rapture
of  fellowship  with  his  Bride  nill  be  com-
pleted. But  the  Baptist  recognized  that  his
own  work  was  finished  when  the  Messiah
had  been  introduced  to  those  wIjo  under-
stqod  something  of  his  claims,  wlien  the
Itingdom  was  at  hand,  when  there  were
many  who  sought  and  found  their  Lord.

Ver.  30. — He  must — by  a  Divine  necessity
of  things  (of.  vers.  7,  14;  ch.  ix.  4 ;  x.  16;
S.X.  9  ;  Kev.  i.  1),  he  must — increase ;  augment
in  power  and  following  and  great  joy.  He
must  win  eventually  all  hearts.  His  enemies
must  become  the  footstool  of  his  fi  et.  His
ii  the  beginning  of  an  eternal  blessednee^.
I  mnst  decrease ;  not  become  annihilated,
though  through  the  very  completion  of  the
purpose  of  my  calling  of  God,  my  scope
must,  by  the  nature  of  the  case,  become
narrower  and  smaller.  Some  have  felt  the
improbability  of  the  great  prophet,  the
ascetic  reformer,  acquiescing  so  patiently
in  the  diminution  of  his  influence  or  the
virtual  cessation  of  the  primary  impoitance
of  his  career.  Yet  this  is  in  complete
harmony  with  John's  repeated  and  con-
tinuous recognition  of  the  preparatory  and
transitory  nature  of  his  own  work.  He
cannot  lay  down  his  commission,  but  he
knows  that,  like  prophetism,  priesthood,
Nazarite  asceticism,  and  the  like,  it  will  be
merged  in  the  grander  life  of  which  he  was
the  herald.  The  ministers  of  the  New  Tes-
tament all  take  up  the  same  note  of  Divine
praise  and  of  self-depletion  as  they  prepare
the  way  of  the  Lord  to  human  hearts.  They
hide  ihemselyes  behind  the  greater  glory  of '
their  Lord.  However  considerable  their
powers,  they  are  serviceable  only  as  they
contribute  to  the  glory,  and  succeed  in  un-
veiling the  face,  of  their  Lord.  Tliere  is  a
.Tohannine  message  still  required  to  disturb
the  fleshly  equanimity  and  to  break  up  the
narcotized  sleep  of  the  unbeliever.  The
stern  spirit  of  rebuke  and  warning  is  still
indispensable ;  yet  the  voice  of  him  that
cries,  "  Eepent  1 "  knows  that  his  voice  may
fade  »way  into  faint  echoes  and  stillness,  so
soon  as  the  promises  of  redemption  and  sal-
vation are  uttered  by  the  Divine  Lord.
When  the  absolution  of  grace  gives  the  kiss
of  peace  to  the  broken-hearted,  the  morning
star  fades  into  the  dawning  of  the  day.

Ver.s.  31 — 86.  -A  large  number  of  com-
mentators of  all  schools  hold  that  the
remaining  verses  of  this  chapter  give  us  the
reflections  of  the  evangelist  rather  than  a
continuous  discourse  of  the  Baptist.  Strauss,
Weisse,  Eeuss,  and  Bretsohn  elder,  who  make
the  supposed  proof  of  this  Johannine  appen-
dix to  the  Baptist's  words  an  evidence  of
inhistoricity  throughout  the  Gospel,  and  the
school  of  Baur,  which  finds  in  the  entire


repicseutation  simply  an  artistic  endearoui
on  the  part  of  a  second  century  faUarim  to
show   that  John's  disciples  were  absorbed
into  the  Catholic  Church,  are  joined  here
by  Ben  gel,  De  Wette,  Westcott,  Moulton,
and  Bdersheim,  who  see  no  difficulty  in
the  introduction  of  these  sentiments,  which
coriespond  with  those  of  the  Epistles  of
John,  as  an   appendix  of  the  evangelist,
and  not  a  reminiscence  of  the  teaching  ol
the  Baptist.     The  reasons  in  favour  of  this
view  are  that  the  ideas  and  phraseology
are  said  to  be  far  in  advance  of  John  the
Baptist's  theological  position,  and  certainly
reflect  the  later  teaching  of  the  Master.
We  will  consider  some  of  these  eeriatim,
but  cannot  accept  the  argument  as  final.
Hengstenberg,  Meyer,  Gtodet,  Alford,  Lange,
even  Benan,  do  not  yield  to  the  positions
thus   assumed,  nor  will   they  admit   any
word  of  the  Baptist  here  uttered  to  be  in-
consistent with  the  known  doctrine  of  the
forerunner;   whereas  they  urge   that    the
simple  communication  to  John  of  the  gub-
stance  of  our  Lord's  discourse  to  Nioodemus
is  adequate  explanation  of  the  similarities
between  the  two.    It  may  be  admitted  that
some  subjective  colouring  from  the  apostle's
own  mind  may  hare  been  transfused  by  him
into  his  report  of  both  discourses,  which  we
cannot  doubt  (whatever  may  be  said  about
the  Galilssan  ministry)  were  conducted  in  the
Aramaic  tongue.  Weiss  makes  the  pertinent
suggestion  that  we  cannot  think  that  John
the  son  of  Zebedee  heard  the  final  testimony
(jf  the  Baptist.     It  may  easily  have  been
communicated  to  the  circle  around  Jesus  by
Andrew  and  some  other  disciple  of  the  two
masters.    This  may  account  for  the  appear-
ance   throughout    the   discourse   of   more
Johannine  language   than  usual.      If  we
cannot,  or    may  not,   make   these  simple
hypotheses,  then  we  too  should  be  disposed
to  think  that  the  subjective  element  had
so  predominated   as    almost    to   hide  the
historic  quality  of  the  whole  of  this  swanlike
song  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.
But   the   hypotheses   seem   to    be   highly
probable   and   extremely  natural,  and  the
coherence  of  the   passage  with  what  has
gone  before   to  be  obvious  and  complete.
The  discourse  contrasts  the  entire  prophetic
ministry  with  that  of  the  Son  of  God  (vers.  31,
32),  which  then  sets  forth  the  means  of  ap-
propriating the  Divine  gift  of  the  Son  of  God
(vers.  33 — 35),  and  predicts  the  awful  issues
of  rejecting  the  supreme  claims  of  the  Divine
Lord  (ver.  36),     The  teaching  is  in  accord
with  Old  Testament  doctrine,  illumined,  as  we
learn  that  John's  was,  by  special  visions,  and
by  communications  to  him  of  the  significance
of  the  Lord's  uttered  words.     It  is  quite
irrelevant,  if  not  absurd,  to  say  that  such  a
testimony  of  the  forerunner  makes  the  con-


CH.  in.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEblNG  TO  St.  JO&iT.


153


tinuance  or  spread  of  John's  teaching  and
baptism  impossible ;  for  (1)  the  words  were
obviously  addressed  to  a  small  group  only  of
the  many  thousands  who  heard  John  preach ;
and  (2)  it  does  not  follow  that  all  those  who
heard  these  memorable  words  should  have
deserted  their  fiist  miieter,  even  in  deference
to  his  own  advice.  The  words  that  follow,
whether  a  simple  record  of  Jolin's  discourse
or  one  deeply  coloured  by  the  subjectivity  of
the  evangelist,  are  as  follows : —

Yer.  31. — He  that  is  coming  from  ahove  is
above  all.  Now,  it  is  obvious  that  Jesus
had  spoken  of  the  Son  of  man  as  liaving
come  down  from  heaven  (ver.  13),  and  of  his
own  power  to  speak  of  heavenly  things  (i.e.
of  causes  and  measures  of  Divine  opera-
tions) ;  and  he  contrasts  these  with  the
"  earthly  things  "  of  which  he  too  had  spoken
— "  earthly  "  they  were  because  they  dealt
with  experiences  felt  and  witnessed  and
realized  on  earth.  Now,  John  is  represented,
on  the  occasion  of  the  baptism  of  our  Lord,
as  being  convinced  that  Jesus  was  "  the  Son
of  God,"  and  that  his  existence  was  prior  to
his  own,  and  that  his  rank  in  the  universe
was  one  utterly  transcending  his  own.  These
statements  have  been  already  put  into  the
lips  of  John  by  the  fourth  evangelist,  and
are  scarcely  exceeded,  if  at  all,  by  the
u Iterance  before  us.  We  find  a  bold  con-
trast between  tlie  Logos  himself  and  the
witness  to  the  manifested  Logoi.  Se  who
Cometh  from  above,  being  before  John,  and
being,  therefore,  in  his  essential  dignity,
superior  to  him,  is  above  all,  and  therefore
above  him.  He  that  is,  in  his  origin  and  the
entire  self-realization  of  his  life,  from  the
earth,  and  not  incarnate  Logos,  is  of  the  earth
in  quality,  and  speaketh  of  the  earth  (observe,
not  K(i<r/ioj,  but  7^  is  here  used).  Tlie  ex-
peiiencee  to  which  he  refers  are  enacted  on
tlie  eai'th,  and  he  has  no  power  to  go  back
and  heavenwards  for  the  full  explanation  of
them.  Higher  than  heaven  are  the  thoughts
and  revelations  of  the  Son  of  God.  He  can
unveil  the  heart  of  the  eternal  Father.
Christ  can  link  his  own  work  with  the
ministry  of  the  mightiest  of  the  Heaven-sent
messengers ;  but  John  starts  from  the  con-
sciousness, the  perils,  the  self-deceptions
and  contrition  of  man.  He  that  cometh  out
of  heaven  is  above  aU.'   This  great  utterance

■  The  repetition  of  "  is  above  all "  (irdr'a
irivraiv  iariii)  is  omitted  by  the  N,  D,  and  some
cursives,  by  Old  Latin,  Syriac  and  Arme-
nian Versions,  by  Origen  and  Hilary ;  though
it  is  found  in  K",  A,  B,  L,  and  other  manu-
scripts, cursives,  the  Vulgate,  Memphitio,
Syriac  Peschito,  .3?thiopic,  and  quoted  by
OhryBostom.  The  omission  of  the  Kail  before
the  next  clause  is  incumbent  upon  critics.
It  if  omitted  by  i<*,  B,  D,  L,  T,numeroas  cur-


is  repeated,  and  it  involves  little  more  than
what  John  had  implied  to  the  Sanhedrin
(ch.  i.  30—34).

Ver.  32. — That  which  he  hath  seen  and
heard,  this  he  testifieth ;  or,  bearetk  witness  to.
His  pre-existent  glory  with  the  Father  makes
him  the  adequate  Witness  to  the  heavenly
things  (^iroupai/ia) of  which  he  hath  authori-
tatively spoken ;  i.e.  the  eternal  love  of  the
Father,  the  purpose  of  the  Son  being  sent
into  the  world  from  the  heart  of  God,  and  its
ultimate  issues — eternal  life  to  the  believer,
and  condemnation  to  those  who  love  the
darkness  and  do  not  believe.  Westcott,  who
regards  these  words  as  the  free  reflections  of
the  evangelist,  thinks  that  reference  is  being
made  to  the  continued  testimony  of  the
Church  as  the  voice  of  Christ ;  but  the  spirit
of  the  passage  is  obscured  by  this  interpre-
tation. The  living  present  vocal  testimony
of  Christ  is  being  throughout  contracted  witli
tliat  of  John.  And  no  man  receiveth  his
witness.  This  seems  in  direct  antagonism  to
the  language  of  the  disciples,  "  All  men
cnme  to  him ; "  and  to  John's  own  language,
"  He  must  increase."  Westcott  regards  it,
again,  as  the  melancholy  reflection  of  the
aged  apostle  towards  the  close  of  the  century.
This  seems  to  me  to  be  an  inadequate  ex-
planation. The  reception  of  the  witness  of
Christ  had  moved  the  whole  world  when
John  wrote  his  Gospel ;  and  it  would  be  in-
consistent with  the  tone  of  exhilaration  with
which  the  evangelist  closes  his  work.  The
forerunner  may,  however,  have  used  this
strong  expression  in  purposed  contrast  to  tlie
jealous  language  of  his  own  followers.  "  No
man" — in  comparison  with  the  multitudes
who  ought  to  have  already  accepted  him  as
the  Son  of  God,  as  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.
The  concourse  who  crowded  to  the  baptism
of  Jesus  for  a  little  moment  did  not  blind
the  Baptist  to  the  persistent  and  malignant
opposition  which  awaited  Jesus.     "  His  joy

sives,  Harclean  and  Curetonian  Syriac,  Cop-
tic, Armenian,  Persian.  Origen  omits  it  in  the
passage  in  which  he  retains  the  'eirdva  nivTwv
ia-riv,  etc.  A,  T,  A,  and  others  sustain  Lach-
mann  and  T.E,  in  retaining  it.  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.).  Revised  Version,  Westcott  and
Hort,  discard  it.  Now,  in  consequence  of
this,  and  the  fine  sense  thus  suggested,  also
because  the  authorities  for  the  omission  are
stronger  generally  in  their  omissions  than  in
their  additions,  Westcott  and  Moulton  think
the  preferable  reading  of  vers.  31, '32  to  be,
"  He  that  cometh  from  heaven,  that  which
he  hath  seen  and  heard,  this  he  testifieth  "
(cf.  margin  Eevised  Version).  Meyer,  Tre-
gelles,  Godet,  Luthardt,  Eevised  Version,  do
not  accept  the  argument,  but  maintain  that
this  repetition  of  the  clause  is  in  the  mairnec
of  John.


134


THE  GOSPEL  AUOORDINQ  TO  ST.  JOHIT.     [oh.  m.  1—30


(ver.  29)  and  his  grief  (ver.  32)  both  forlned
a  noble  contrast  to  the  jealousy  of  his  own
iliBoiples"  (Meyer).

Vers.  33— 36.— -(3)  The  eoniequencet  of
nceepiing  and  rejecting  the  lupreme  revela-
tion.

Ver.  33. — He  that  receiveth  his  witness —
i.e.  hia  testimony  to  what  he  hath  personBUy
seen  and  heard  in  the  heaven  from  which  he
has  come — sealed — {eaippiytatv),  confirmed
by  such  very  act,  ratified  and  vindicated  as
trustworthy  and  stable  (cf.  Bom.  iv.  11 ;  xv.
28 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  2 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22.  In  other
places  the  idea  or  image  of  a  "  seal "  ia  used
for  guaranteeing  a  special  commission,  ch.
vi.  27  (see  notes);  Bev.  vil.  3;  Eph.  i  13) —
that  Ood  is  true ;  i.«,  admits  that  the  words
of  Christ  are  the  words  uf  God,  are  absolute
truth  and  reality — an  idea  which  is  made
more  obvious  by  ver.  31,  where  Jesus  is  the
Ambassador  of  Ood,  It  may  even  mean
more  than  this,  viz.  that  in  Jesus  "  all  the
promises  of  God  are  Yea  and  Amen,"  tliat
God  is  true  in  himself,  and  tlie  witness  of
Christ  embraces  all  that  for  which  prophecy
and  promise  and  previous  revelation  had
prepared  the  way  (see  Luthardt  and  West-
cott).  Such  an  idea  is  certainly  beyond  the
scope  of  John's  ministry  or  message.

Ver,  81, — The  yhp  shows  that  the  former
utterance  is  sustained.  For  he  whom  Ood
sent  nttereth  the  words  of  Ood, '  The  full,
many-sided,  abundant  expression  of  the
thought  of  God.  Hb  has  been  sent  for  this
purpose.  Some  take  this  clause  to  refer  to
all  the  ambassadors  of  God,  and  pre-emi-
nently to  the  "  man  (ob,  i,  6)  sent  from  God,
whose  name  was  Johii."  But,  on  tbe  other
hand,  observe  that  throughout  the  Gospel,
air(!irTeWa)  and  TTFyuvu  are  used  of  tbe  "  Lord
from  heaven  "  (ver.  17).  Christ  certainly  is
aireaToKiiivos  as  well  as  Ipxo/tcfos,  and  this
great  statement,  viz.  tliat  Christ  speaks  tlie
words  of  God,  is  a  justification  of  the  fact
that,  in  accepting  the  witness  of  Christ  to
invisible  and  eternal  things,  and  in  the
admission  that  he  has  been  sent  from
heaven  charged  with  tbe  words  of  God,
every  separate  believer  becomes  a  seal,  a
ratification,  of  the  veracity  of  God.  The
clause  that  follows  (seeing  that  "  to  him  "  is
unquestionably  a  gloss  of  translators,  and  is
not  found  in  any  manuscripts)  may  be  trans-
lated in  tliree  different  ways,  (1)  Jlor  God
giceth  not  the  Spirit  by  meaiure  ;'  for  \{  i0eis
18  omitted,  still  the  same  sulject,  "God,"
migiit  be  and  is  generally  supplied,  and  the
object,  supposed  to  be  either  Christ  or  any

>  l«.  if  we  retain  the  i  0e6s  of  T.B.
which  is  omitted  by  N,  B,  0*,  L,  T,  with
cursives,  is  marked  doubtful  by  Lachmann,
and  is  deleted  by  Tischendort  (8th  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  B.T.


of  his  rervants  to  whom  in  these  days  of  the
baptism  of   the  Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost  is
poured  forth  from  an  inexhaustible  treasure.
Augustine  and  Calvin  urged  that  it  was  said
concerning  Christ;  for  we  read  in  ver,  35
that  "  the  Father  hath  given  all  things  into
his  hand; "  but  exclusively  to  limit  the  object
of  SlSa<rt  to  Christ  is  more  than  the  passage
will  justify.    (2)  For  he  (the  Messiah,  tc.)
givelh  not  (he  Spirit  by  measure  ;  l,e.  he  is
exalted  to  pour  forth  from  the  heart  of  the
Deity  the  Spirit  of   the  Father  and   Son.
This  is  preferred  by  Westcott  and  by  those
who  see  in  the  entire  passage  the  reflections
of  the  author  of  tlie  Gospel  (cf.  ch.  xv.  26).
(3)  For  the  Spirit  giveOt  not  by  meature  ;  the
object   (gc.)   being   "the  words  of   God,"
which  he  who  is  sent  and  is  coming  from
heaven,  and  is  above  all,  is  now  lavishing
upon  the  world.    This  translation  (Godet)
is  in  harmony  with  the  vision  of  John  at  the
baptism,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  after  the
manner  of  a  dove  descended  and  abode  upon
him.      With  an    unmeasurable    supply    of
spiritual  energy  wai  the  humanUy  of  him
who  came  (jpid  his  Divine  nature  and  per-
sonality)   from    heaven    enriched    for  his
prophetic  and  Messianic  functions  ■■  the
beloved  Son  of  Ood  on  earth.     I   see  no
difficulty  in  this  last  interpretation,    (a)
The  present  tense  is  justified  by  the  state-
ment of  the  abiding  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon
Jesns,  and  the  continuous  operation  of  the
gift  in  the  "words  of  God,"   which  were
flowing  from  his  lips,      (b)  The  air^  is
easily  supplied  in  thought,    (e)   The  con-
nection is  thus  instituted  with  the  thirty-
fifth    Terse.    Meyer    and    Lange    prefer  a
wider  significance  being  given  to  the  words,
seeing  in   them  a  broad  reference   to  the
affluence  and  measureless  capacity  of  tht
gift  of  the  Spirit.     Luthardt :  "  This  ia  true
of  all  God's  messengers,  but  especially  of
him  of  whom  the  Baptist  speaks"  (M.  I
Cor,  xii,  1 — 12).     Tiie  Lord  from  heaTen
leoeiTes  all  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,

Vers,  35,  36. — These  final  verses  certainly
have  the  ring  of  the  Gospel  as  a  whole,  and
correspond  with  the  fulness  of  Christulogical
teaching,  with  which  the  words  of  Chriist
abound,  as  well  as  the  Epistle  of  John  ;  yet
there  is  no  exact  parallel  in  the  later  revda-
tion.  From  whom  could  such  a  statement
come  with  greater  power  than  from  him
who  heard  the  Divine  voice  from  heavea  say-
ing, "  This  is  my  beloved  Son :  hear  him"  ?
Tbe  Berleb,  Bible  (quoted  by  Hengstenberg)
adds,  to  the  great  words,  the  Father  lovetii
the  Son,  "  as  I  sufficiently  learned  from  the
voice  at  the  Jordan" — and  hath  given  all
things  into  his  hand.  The  "all  things"
may  be  taken  by  us  in  their  widest  sense  (of
Matt.  xi.  27) — "all  i^ovala  in  heaven  and
eurth"  (Matt,  xxvui.  18;  cf.  1  Cor.  xv,  27 ;


OH.  ni.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.


135


Bev.  L  18) ;  and  the  power  of  determining
the  final  condition  of  all  souls,  suggested  in
ver.  36.  But  ve  may  conceive  a  less  ex-
tended horizon  limiting  the  vision  of  the
Baptist :  all  things  belonging  to  the  king-
dom of  God,  to  the  progress  and  consumma-
tion of  it  in  the  world.  John  need  not  be
supposed  to  have  swept  onward  into  the
sternal  future,  but  mainly  to  have  been
thinking  of  the  mutual  relations  of  the
forerunner  and  the  Christ.  The  Son  will
determine  the  place  of  his  herald  and  of  his
disciple.  There  is  no  limit  expressed,  He
who  had  these  matters  entrusted  to  him
might  easily  be  supposed  to  have  "all
things  in  his  hand."  He  tested  the  less
upon  the  greater.

Ver.  36. — He  that  believeth  on  the  Son
hath  eternal  life  (cf.  here,  vers.  16,  17;
oh.  xvii.  3;  1  John  v.  10).  These  words,
which  above  every  other  clause  in  this
"  swanlike  song,"  are  sufTused  with  a  glow
that  it  is  difficult  to  believe  issued  from
the  heart  of  the  forerunner,  unless  we  may
make  the  supposition  already  referred  to,  that
some  of  John's  former  disciples  had  carried
to  his  earlier  master  the  grand  refrain  of  the
discourse  to  Nicodemns,  The  entrusting  of
the  soul  in  utter  moral  surrender  to  the  Son
of  God,  is  life — eternal  life.  All  cruel  sus-
picions of  God  vanish  when  the  veil  is  lifted
which  sin  and  the  corruption  of  the  human
heart  have  hung  over  the  holiest  of  alL
John  had  passed  into  a  new  world  when  he
discovered  the  true  nature  of  the  kingdom —
the  tempted,  humbled,  sacrificial,  triumphant
character  of  tlie  Son  of  God.  To  believe  on
tlie  Son  is  to  have  the  life.  But  he  that  is
disobedient  to  the  Son.  The  words  6  ivetSSiv
are,  in  the  English  Version,  translated  "  be-
lieveth noC  and  again  so  in  Bom.  xi.  30,
where  airitrreTv  and  (iira6Eui>  are  used  inter-
changeably. The  word  means  one  who  is
{iwfieiis')  distrustful,  who  refuses  to  be  per-
suaded, is  contumacious  and  expresses  the
opposite  to  faith  in  active  exercise,  who
repudiates  faith  on  its  fiducial  and  practical
side.  Nothing  is  said  of  those  who  have
)iad  no  opportunity  of  coming  to  a  know-
ledge of  the  Son  of  God.  Shall  not  see  life ;
sluill  not  even  see  so  as  to  be  able  to  con-
ceive of,  much  less  enjoy,  life  (Westcott ;  see
ver.  3);  There  is  a  blinding  power  in  dis-
obedience, which  prevents  those  who  are
actively  hostile  to  the  essential  excellences
and  glories  of  Christ  from  even  knowing


what  lift  U.  Life  is  obviously  here  and
elsewhere  more  than  physical  existence,  or
than  its  continuance,,or  than  its  resuscita-
tion after  death ;  it  is  the  activity  of  the  new
spirit,  the  supernatural  and  eternal  blessed-
ness wrought  by  "  birth  of  the  Spirit."  Nor
b  the  calamity  referred  to  a  mere  negation.
John  may  be  said  here  to  have  gone  beyond
the  words  of  the  Master  in  the  previous
discourse,  and,  moreover,  it  is  in  fiery
earnestness  that  he  speaks.  The  wrath  of
God,  wliich  has  already  been  called  down
upon  him  by  hia  disobedience,  abideth  on
him.  God's  opyli  had  been  spoken  of  by
the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  7 ;  Luke  iii.  7) ;  and
the  term,  wherever  used,  is  far  more  than
"  the  consuming  fire  of  infinite  love,"  into
which  many  strive  to  resolve  it.  It  repre-
sents active  and  terrible  displeasure  revealed
from  heaven  (Bom.  i.  18 ;  iii.  5 ;  1  Thess.  i
10 ;  ii.  16).  Much  of  the  wrath  of  the  Lord
is  said  to  be  temporary  in  its  character
(Wisd.  xvL  5 ;  xviii.  20) ;  but  this  is  abiding,
and,  so  far  as  is  here  revealed,  permanent.
The  most  terrible  expression  in  the  New
Testament  is  the  "wrath  of  the  Lamb"
(Rev.  vi.  16).  The  last  word  of  the  Baptist,
even  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  is  a  word  of
thunder,  and  he  disappears  from  view  when
he  has  delivered  this  terrible  condemnation
on  those  who  are  wilfully,  actively  resisting
that  Son  whom  "  the  Father  loves,"  and  to
whose  hands  he  has  "  entrusted  all  things."
The  ministry  of  John  is,  after  all,  that  of
the  Elijah,  not  that  of  the  Christ.  To  the
last  word,  even  if  the  phiaseology  has  been
muulded  in  the  Greek  of  the  fourth  evange-
list into  a  closer  resemblance  to  his  own
vocabulary,'  and  if  by  his  attempt  to  epito-
mize what  may  have  taken  hours  to  say  in
varied  phrase,  the  apostle  has  uncon-
scionsly  adopted  some  of  his  own  favourite
terms,  yet  the  message  flashes  with  the  fire
of  the  prophet  of  the  wilderness ;  and  men
are  threatened  with  the  peril  of  abiding
under  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God.

'  If  ver.  27  be  compared  with  oh.  xix.
]  I,  ver.  29  with  1  John  L  4,  ver.  33  with  1
John  V.  10,  ver.  35  with  ch.  xiii.  3,  there  is
seen  a  decided  adoption  of  the  purely  Johan-
nine  vocabulary;  but  there  is  much  in  it
which  "  shows  that  we  have  genuine  words
of  the  Baptist  repeated  in  a  &ee  Johannine
way  "  (Weiss).


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Ute  int«rvi«w  </  Christ  with  Nicodemus,  This  brings  before  M  one
of  the  most  important  passages  in  Scripture.

L  NicoDEiius  AtesAjtB  ESSE  Ag  A  BELiaious  iNQuiBBB.  1.  He  was  "  a  ruler  t^  tilt
Jews."     That  is,  not  a  civic  magistrate,  but  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrin,    which


i3tt  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDIKG  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [om.  in.  1—8*.

governed  the  Jewish  community  in  ecclesiastical  concerns.  2.  Et  wai  a  Pharisee.
The  most  popular  and  influential  of  the  Jewish  sects — narrow  in  its  particularism,  and
with  a  zeal  springing  out  of  a  selfish  root.  According  to  his  view  as  a  Pharisee,  every
Jew  with  the  authorized  ritualistic  qualification  would  enter  the  llessianio  kingdom
as  a  matter  of  right,  and  saw  in  the  Messiah  tlie  Head  of  a  new  kingdom  that  would
annihilate  Gentile  powers  and  control  the  destiny  of  the  world.  3.  Nicodemus  was  of
a  timid  and  compromising  temper.  He  came  to  Jesus  "  by  niglit ;  "  not,  as  some
suppose,  because  he  feared  to  give  too  much  importance  to  the  young  Rabbi  by  comin;^
openly,  but  because  he  feared  to  lose  his  credit  with  his  unbelieviiig  colleagues  of  the
Sanhedrin.  This  timid  spirit  never  left  him,  though  he  became  somewhat  stronger
with  experience ;  for  he  alterwards  defended  Jesus  without  acknowledging  any  personal
interest  in  him  (oh.  vii.  51),  and  it  was  not  till  Jesus  was  dead  and  liis  body  in  the
hands  of  Joseph  of  Arimathjea,  that  he  brought  the  precious  offering  that  displayed  his
faith.  4.  His  curiosity  in  Jesus  may  have  been  excited  by  the  report  made  to  the  San-
hedrin hy  the  deputation  that  waited  en  John  the  Baptist.  His  jiresent  secret  visit,
ilicrefore,  was  one  of  inquiry  as  to  whether  Jesus  was  not  the  Messiah  spoken  of  by
the  Baptist.

II.  The  mode  of  his  inquiby.  "  Babbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  Teacher  come  from
God  :  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him."
1.  He  concedes  that  Jesus  was  a  Rahhi,  though  he  had  not  received  his  knowledge
from  the  rabbinical  schools,  but  "  from  Goil "  himself.  2.  He  concedes  his  miracle-
working  power  as  an  evidence  of  his  Divine  mission.  This  was  in  accordance
with  our  Lord's  own  declaration  at  another  time,  that  "  his  works  bore  witness  that
the  Father  seit  him"  (ch.  v.  36).  It  is  suggestive  that  Nicodemus  uses  the  very
expression  of  Peter  when,  in  describing  our  Lord's  min'stry  and  miracles,  that  apostle
i-aid,  "God  was  with  him"  (Acts  x.  38).  3.  Yet  he  does  not  concede  our  Lord'n
Aletsiahship,  much  less  his  Divinity  as  the  Son  of  Ood.  He  calls  him  simply  "t
Teacher,"  as  if  he  were  not  diiferent  from  other  teachers.  This  was  the  error  of
Nicodemus.  4.  Yet  hi*  inquiry,  though  not  formally  exjireaed,  was  for  further  light
— as  to  how  far  this  teaching  and  these  miracles  betokened  the  dzLwn  of  the  Messiah't
kingdom.

III.  Oun  Lord's  answer  to  his  inquibt.    "  Except   a  man  he  bom  again,  he
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."     We  have  here  the  statement  of  the  doctrine  of
regeneration  by  the  Holy  Ghost.    The  answer  is,  in  substance,  "  You  nre  askin  r,  Am  I
the  Messiah,  and  is  my  kingdom  near,  as  my  miracles  seem  to  testify  ?    1  answer  that
my  kingdom  is  at  hand;  but  it  is  not  a  Isingdom  that  men  see  coming  '  with  observa-
tion,' but  a  spiritual  state  into  which  men  enter  by  a  transformation  of  character."
I.  Our  Lord  asserts  the  fact  of  the  new  hirth.    (1)  This  new  phrase  is  used  six  times
in  this  Gospel,  six  times  in  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  and  once  in  the  First  Epistle
of  Peter.     It  marks  the  starting-point  of  a  new  spiritual  experience.     (2)  It  is  more
than  moral  renovation  or  outward  conformity  to  a  rule  of  life.     (8)  It  is  more  than
baptism,  to  which  some  think  it  a  theological  equivalent ;  foi-  baptism  .was  no  mystery
to  the  Pharisees,  as  this  new  birth  appeared  to  be,  lor  they  were  familiar  with  the
baptism  of  proselytes.     (4)  It  signified  the  change  of  heart  which  is  wrought  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  when  a  sinner  believes  repeniingly  on  .lesus  ('hri^t.     It  is  no  mere  fut
of  New  Testament  experience  (Ezek.  xi.  19 ;  xxxvi.  26).     (5)  Yet  it  was  a  mystery
to  Nicodemus,  notwithstanding  his  presumed  knowledge  of  SLriptnre ;   else  he  never
would  have  asked  the  absurd  question,  "  How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old  ?  "
He  confounded  a  second  beginning  with  a  different  beginning — the  sphere  of  nature
with  the  sphere  of  grace,    2.   Our  Lord  asserts  the  condition  of  this  new  birth,  and  the
agent  in  its  accomplishment.     "  Except  a  mim  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."     The  usual  interpretation  is  that  the  water
refers  to  a  definite  external  rite — baptism — and  to  an  internal  spiritual  operation.     The
theory  of  baptismal  regeneration  points  to  this  pa-snge  as  one  of  its  favourite  proofs.
Many  able  divines,  however,  believe  that  there  is  no  allusion  whatever  here  to  Christian
baptism.    (1)  Because  this  ordinance  was  not  then  instituted,  though  the  baptism  of
John  must  have  been  familiar  to  Nicodemus.     (2)  Because,  if  the  expression,  "  bom  of
water,"  refers  to  baptism, and  the  expression, "  born  of  the  Spirit,"  to  regeneration,  they
are  distinct.    The  very  use  of  the  two  terms  implies  that  baptism  will  not  of  itself


CH.  m,  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  BT.  JOHN.  137

aave.    (3)  Because,  in  an  analogous  passage,  "  He  who  believeth  and  is  baptized,

shall  be  saved,"  baptism  and  faith  are  not  regarded  as  the  same  thing.     There  may  hu

baptism   without    faith,  and  faith  without    baptism.      (4)    Becaiuse   to  understand

baptism  by  "  the  water  "  here  involves  the  absurdity  of  extending  the  same  meaning;

to  the  word  everywhere  in  this  Gospel  wherever  anything  spiritual  is  meant  by  water.

But  let  it  be  conceded  that  "  born  of  water  "  does  refer  to  baptism,  there  is  nothing  in

the  passage  to  justify  the  theory  of  regeneration  by  baptism.    (1)  Consider  tliat  John

the  Baptist  made  a  marked  distinction  between  baptism  by  water  and  baptism  by  the

Holy  Ghost.     He  could  administer  the  one ;  Jesus  only  could  administer  the  other.

(2)   As  Pusey  concedes  there  was  no  such  thing  as  baptismal  regeneration  till  the

Spi]  it  was  given  after  the  ascension  of  Christ,  there  could  have  been  no  such  thing

when  Jesus  »p(ike  to  Nicodemus— no  possibility  of  a  man  on  that  night  being  born  both

of  water  and  of  the  Spirit.     (3)  Scripture  uniformly  represents  faith,  not  baptism,  as

necessary  to  salvation.     As  a  matter  of  fact,  faith  wag,  in  adults,  regarded  as  necessary

to  baptism ;  and  as  faith  is  the  pure  effect  of  regeneration,  regeneration  can,  no  more

than  faith,  be  the  effect  of  baptism.    We  have  instances  in  the  New  Testament  of

regeneration  be/ore  baptism,  and  therefore  without  baptism  ;  therefore  baptism  does  not

regenerate  (Acts  x.  44 — 48 ;  etc.).     (4)  Much  as  John  speaks  of  regeneration  in  his  Piist

Rpistle,  he  never  connects  it  with  liaptism.     Yet,  in  naming  the  tests  of  regeneration,

he  never  includes  baptism  among  them.    (5)  Eegeneration  is  expressly  referred  to  the

Word,  and  not  to  baptism  (1  Pet.  i.  23 ;  Jas.  i.  18).     There  is  an  analogy,  indeed,  in  the

relation  of  baptism  and  the  Word  respectively  to  salvation.     The  Word   saves,  as

baptism  saves  ;    yet  all  who  hear  it  do  not  believe,  just  as  all  the  baptized  are  nut

'  regenerated.     (6)  If  "  water "  in  the  text  means  baptism,  then  baptism  is  necessary  to

salvition.     Then,  all  the  unbaptized,  not  to  speak  of  the  whole  body  of  the  Quakers,

are  bst.     (7)  This  theory  implies  that  all  the  liaptized  are  saved.    Yet  Simon  Mngiis  .

was  still  unregeiienite  after  his  baptism.,     (9)  If  this  thwry  be  true,  people  are  born  of

God  who  have  not  a  single  mark  of  regeneration,  but  rather  every  sign  of  godless

apostasy.     (9)  Such  an  interpretation  makes  it  difficult  to  understand  why  our  Lord

rebuked  Nicodemus  for  not  knowing  it:  "Knowest  thou  not  these  things?"     He

knew  there  was  baptism,  but  he  did  not  know  it  involved  regeneration.     (10)  If

baptism  is  equivalent  to  regeneration,  why  should  it  be  so  seldom  referred   to  in

Scripture?     Faith,  which  is  the  true  means  of  our  salvation,  i«  mentioned  everywhere.

Yet  baptism  is  only  mentioned  twice  in  Romans,  seven  times  in  Corinthians,  only  once

in  Gaiatinns,  Ephesians,  Colossians,  Hebrews,  and  Peter.

IV.  The  necessity  of  the  new  bietii.  "That  which  is  of  the  flesh,  is  flesh  ;  and
that  which  is  of  the  Spirit,  is  spirit."  Nicodemtis  had  spoken  of  a  man  entering  once
more  into  his  mother's  womb,  and  being  born  a.ain.  Our  Lord  declares  that  if  such  a
thing  were  possible,  it  would  not  effect  the  new  birth.  Children  will  always  be  like
their  parents.  Grace  does  not  descend  with  blood.  Therefore  there  is  a  profound
necessity  for  the  life  of  the  Spirit  being  imparted  by  the  Spirit.

V.  The  mystery  of  the  new  birth.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth, .  .  .  but
thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it  conieth,  and  whither  it  goeth."  We  cannot  account  for
the  beginning,  or  the  influence,  or  the  diieclion  of  the  wind.  So  there  is  deep  mystery
in  the  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  spirit  of  man;  for  while  man  preserves  hit.
absolute  moral  freedom,  the  Spirit  works  in  him  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  his  good
plea.suie.

VI.  The  evidence  op  the  new  birth.  "Thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof."  We
cannot  know  all  the  mysteries  of  the  wind,  but  we  see  and  feel  the  effects  of  iis
presence  in  nature.  So  the  mystery  of  regeneration  comes  visibly  to  the  surface  oi
Christian  life  in  the  fruits  of  that  life.

Vers.  9 — 13. — 2%e  advent  of  a  wholly  new  teaching.  Nicodemus  asks  in  surprise,
"  How  can  these  things  be  ?  "  And  Jesus,  with  equal  surprise,  asks  how  a  teacher  in
Israel  can  be  ignorant  of  them.    Then  he  discloses  a  new  scheme  of  truth.

1.  The  new  TEACHina.  "  We  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have
teen."  Mark :  1.  Its  nature.  "  That  we  do  know."  (1)  Jesus  knows  the  truth,  for
he  is  the  Truth  itself.  (2)  He  imparts  it  by  the  Spirit  of  truth.  (3)  It  is  a  blessed
thing  to  know  what  he  knows — "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."    2.  Its  source.    "  Tlint


138  THE   GOSPEL   ACCORDING    TO  ST.   JOHN.      [oh.  m.  1—36.

we  liaye  leen.*  Man  believes,  for  he  must  here  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight ;  but
Jeeug  sees.  He  has  seen  hearen,  and  knows  all  heavenly  realities  by  immediate
intuition.  3.  It  is  truth  to  be  openly  dtdartd.  "  We  speak  ...  we  testify."  Jesus  and
his  disciples  are  witnesses  to  the  truth.  4.  Tit  it  was  refected  by  the  rabbinical  teachers.
"  And  ye  receive  not  our  testimony."  (1)  The  Pharisees  "  rejected  the  counsel  of
God  against  themselves,  being  not  baptized  by  him  [John]  "  (Luke  vii.  30).  The
acceptance  of  John's  work  involved  the  acceptance  of  that  of  Jesus.  (2)  Our  Lord
desires  Nicodemus  to  break  with  his  party.

II.  Faith  ib  needed  fob  the  beception  of  this  new  teaohinq.  "  If  I  told  you
earthly  things,  and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly
things?"  There  is  an  evident  contrast  between  two  classes  of  truths.  1.  Earthly
things.  (1)  These  were  not  things  touching  worldly  interests,  much  less  carnal  things.
(2)  But  things  within  the  sphere  of  man's  knowledge  and  appreciation,  affecting  the
life  of  the  soul.  The  new  birth  itself,  though  "a  heavenly  thing,"  has  its  life  and
manifestation  on  earth.  The  earthly  things  are  the  elements  of  spiritual  knowledge,
having  their  test  in  the  moral  sense,  and  in  their  fitness  to  supply  the  spiritual  wants
of  men.  (3)  The  moral  fitness  of  the  gospel  is  one  main  guarantee  of  its  Divinity.  2.
Heavenly  things.  These  are  the  secrets  of  Heaven  which  are  to  be  received  on  the
word  of  Christ.  The  knowledge  of  earthly  things  will  initiate  us  into  the  knowledge
of  heavenly  things.  Evidently  our  Lord  classes  among  heavenly  things  the  'revelation
he  makes  in  the  folL^wing  verses  respecting  the  Person  and  work  of  Jesus  Christ.

III.  The  Author  of  the  new  teaohino.  "And  no  man  hath  ascended  up  to
heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from  heaven,  even  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in  heaven."
Jesus  knows  heavenly  things  because  heaven  is  his  native  home.  1.  These  words
imply  the  Inca/rnation  of  the  Son  of  God ;  for  they  imply  his  pre-existence.    2.  They

.  imply  his  possession  of  two  natures  in  one  Person ;  for  he  who  is  the  Son  of  man  as
to  his  human  nature,  is  in  heaven  in  his  Divine  nature.  3.  They  imply  that  during
his  human  life  he  received  an  immediate  intuition  of  heavenly  things.  4.  ITiey  imply
that  heaven  is  a  place  as  well  as  a  state.

Ven.  14, 16. — The  revelation  of  the  Divine  plan  of  salvation.  Bedemptiaa  ii  the
essential  content  of  revelation.  The  Incarnation  carries  with  it  the  necessity  of  the
Crucifixion.

I.  The  nature  of  the  Old  Testament  symbol  here  presented  to  our  view.
"  And  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man
be  lifted  up."  1.  This  refers  to  the  last  miracle  wrought  by  Moses  on  the  borders  of
the  promised  land.  (Numb.  xxi.  7.)  2.  The  Israelites  were  to  see  in  it  the  sovereign  hand
of  God,  and  not  to  ascribe  the  efficacy  of  the  cure  to  the  mere  outward  symbol — the  brazen
serpent— apart  from  Divine  power.  3.  2%ey  were  to  see  in  the  whole  incident,  not  a
mere  effective  comparison,  but  a  preparatory  type — a  figure  of  "good  things  to  come,"
exhibiting  (1)  the  punishment  of  sin,  (2)  and  the  image  of  a  vicarious  dispensation.
"  By  his  stripes  we  are  healed  "  (Isa.  liii.  5).

II.  The  work  of  Christ.  "  Even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up."  1.  Con-
sider the  meaning  of  this  expression.  (1)  It  does  not  signify  that  he  was  to  be  exalted
in  the  sight  of  men  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  (2)  Nor  does  it  signify  his  exalta-
tion to  heaven.  (3)  But  his  being  lifted  up  on  the  cross.  This  is  the  commentary
of  the  apostle  himself:  "  This  he  said,  signif^'ing  what  death  he  should  die"  (oh.  xii.  33).
The  cross  was  to  be  the  step  to  the  throne.  2.  There  was  a  Divine  necessity  for  the
death  of  Christ.  "  The  Son  of  man  must  be  lifted  up."  (1)  The  Divine  prophecies
must  be  fulfilled.  (2)  The  justice  of  God  demanded  the  sacrifice.  Sin  can  no  more
exist  without  punishment  than  it  can  exist  without  hatefulness.  The  justice  of  God
is  as  manifest  as  his  grace  in  the  death  of  his  Son.  (3)  The  love  of  God  was  the  grand
motive  for  this  sacrifice.  (4)  The  necessity  of  Christ's  death  is  attested  by  many
passages  of  Scripture  (Heb.  vii.  29 ;  viil.  3 ;  ix.  7, 12,  22).

III.  The  debion  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ.  •'  That  whosoever  believeth  in
him  should  have  eternal  life."  Mark  the  various  points  of  comparison  between  the  type
and  the  antitype.  1.  I%e  poison  of  the  serpents  in  the  wilderness  r^resents  the  deadly
nature  of  sin.  That  poison  was  death  ;  so  sin  is  death.  2.  TTie  gaze  of  the  striekin
Israelites  answers  to  the  look  of  faith.     "  There  was  life  in  a  look."     (1)  Faith  is  the


OH,  HI.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST,  JOHN,  139

eye  of  the  floul  looking  to  a  Saviour,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved  "  (Isa.  xIt,  22).
(2)  The  look  implied  a  dependence  in  the  divinely  appointed  remedy.  3.  The  brazen
serpent  answers  io  Christ  the  Son  of  man.  We  admit  none  of  the  fancies  of  divines
respecting  this  matter.  The  one  point  of  analogy  was  in  the  "lifting  up."  Jesus
is  the  Object  to  be  looked  at  by  faith ;  and,  as  suoh,  is  seen  (1)  in  the  excellence  of  his
Person,  (2)  in  the  completeness  of  his  work,  (3)  in  the  fulness  of  his  grace.  4.  T/ie
healing  of  the  Israelites  answers  to  that  eternal  life  which  is  the  result  of  faith.  Thus
the  death  of  Christ  is  indispensable  to  the  life  of  believers.  And  it  stands  in  causal
connection  with  eternal  life  as  their  inheritance.  This  passage  proves  not,  as  some
divines  say,  that  life  is  first,  and  that  the  acceptance  of  the  sinner  flows  from  the  life ;
but  that  acceptance  flows  from  Christ's  death,  and  that  life  issues  out  of  the  acceptance.

Yer.  16. — The  immensity  of  Qod't  love  to  the  world.  The  apostle  here  emphasizes
the  love  which  was  manifest  in  the  method  of  salvation,

L  The  tbuk  obigin  of  salvation.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only
begotten  Son."  It  is  God's  love,  iafinite,  eternal,  unchangeable.  1,  Salvation  is  not
wrung  from  the  Father  by  the  So7i.  The  atonement  was  the  effect,  not  the  cause,  of
God's  love.  2.  This  love  is  no  contradiction  to  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is  implied  in
this  very  verse  as  the  doom  of  imbelievers.  3,  It  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Justice  of
Ood;  for  love  is  here  defined  as  giving  the  Son  to  a  sacrificial  death,  which  signifies  the
satisfaction  of  Divine  justice.  4.  It  is  not  possible  to  resolve  justice  into  love  under  the
idea  tf  "  a  dualism  of  the  Divine  attributes ;  "  for  they  are  each  distinct  attributes :  as
ill  love  God  gives,  in  justice  he  maintains  his  inalienable  prerogatives  as  God.  5.  Christ
does  not  set  forth  Ood's  love  with  the  mere  object  of  assuring  us  of  its  reality,  but  rather
to  magnify  it  by  the  value  of  the  sacrifice  which  was  the  design  of  it.  6.  Love  is  not
sacrificed  to  justice,  but  becomes  all  the  more  transcendently  glorious  because  of  the
Divine  necessity  for  a  satisfaction  to  justice.

II,  The  infinite  Sacrifice  fob  the  woeld.  "  He  gave  his  only  begotten  Son."
1,  It  was  the  Son  of  Ood  who  was  given  hy  Qod.  In  the  previous  verse  his  title  is  the
Son  of  man,  which  recalls  his  humiliation.  Here  his  title  recalls  his  Divine  dignity.
The  union  of  the  two  natures  in  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  gives  an  infinite  value  to
his  sacrifice.  2.  The  gift  of  the  Son  impliei  his  sacrificial  death.  (1)  The  words  do
not  point  to  God's  purpose  of  salvation,  (2)  Nor  to  the  gift  of  the  Son  to  the  believer
in  the  application  of  redemption  by  his  Spirit,  (3)  But  to  his  being  given  up  to  death,
whether  it  refers  to  the  Father's  act  in  giving  him  (Rum.  viii.  32),  or  to  the  Son's  act
in  giving  himself  (Matt.  ix.  28 ;  Gal.  i,  4),  The  expression  points  to  sacrifice,  because
the  offerer  of  the  victim  in  the  Levitical  economy  presented  it  himself  as  part  of
the  established  ceremony,  3.  The  unworthy  objects  of  this  love.  "  God  so  loved  the
world."  (1)  It  would  be  a  startling  announcement  to  Nicodemus,  with  all  the  narrow
particularism  of  the  Pharisee,  that  this  love  was  destined  to  extend  to  the  whole  world
of  man  outside  the  borders  of  Judaism.  (2)  There  is  nothing  in  God's  love  to  the
world  inconsistent  with  his  wrath  against  sin.  He  loves  all  his  creatures,  but  he  hates
and  punishes  their  sin,  and  will  not  imperil  the  effects  of  his  love  while  the  obstacles
caused  by  sin  stand  in  the  way.

III.  The  design  of  'ihe  sacbificb  of  Christ,  "That  whosoever  believeth  in
him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,"  1.  The  channel  of  Divine  life  is
opened  by  faith.  (1)  Faith  accepts  the  Divine  testimony  respecting.  Christ  as  the
Redeemer  (1  John  v.  10).  (2)  Faith  is  the  instrument  of  our  justification,  as  it  is
the  means  of  apprehending  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  (3)  Faith  is  the  root-principle
of  Christian  life  (Gal.  ii.  20),  2.  The  tremendous  evil  that  is  averted.  "  Should  not
perish."    This  implies  (1)  separation  from  God  both  here  and  hereafter  (2  Thess.  L  9) ;

(2)  the  suff'erings  of  hell  (Rev.  ii,  10, 15) ;  (3)  an  eternity  of  punishment  (Matt,  xxv,
46),  3.  The  infinity  of  the  blessings  receiued  by  faith.  "  Everlasting  life."  It  is  con-
trasted (1)  with  the  wrath  of  God  (ch.  iii.  36) ;  (2)  with  destruction  (Matt,  vii.  13,  14);

(3)  with  eternal  fire  (Matt,  zviii.  9) ;  (4)  with  judgment  or  death  (ch.  r.  24).  (5)  It
is  everlasting  in  duration,  as  well  as  in  excellence.

Vers.  17 — 21. — The  Incarnation  regarded  respectively  in  its  design  and  in  it*  actual
result.    I.  The  design  of  the  Inoabnation,     "  For  Gcd  sent  not  his  San  into  the


140  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,      [oh.  m.  1—36.

world  to  judge  the  world ;  but  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved."  1.  If
was  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  (1)  There  was  no  longer  a  merely  particularistic
dispensation,  but  one  that  included  the  whole  race  of  man.  (2)  It  was  not  a  mere
design  to  include  the  race  within  an  area  of  religious  privileges.  (3)  It  was  a  design
to  save  man  (a)  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  (6)  from  the  power  of  sin,  (c)  and  to  give  him
an  eternal  inheritance  in  glory.  2.  It  was  not  for  the  judgment  of  the  world.  The
Jews  expected  the  kingdom  for  the  Jews,  and  judgment  for  the  Gentiles.  (1)  The  text
does  not  imply  that  the  Son  of  man  will  not  judge  the  world  in  the  great  day.  This
will  be  his  personal  act.  (2)  It  implies  that  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  would  not,
as  the  Jews  fondly  imagined,  involve  an  immediate  judgment  of  the  Gentiles  or  nations.
(3)  But  the  salvation  brought  by  the  Messiah,  though  not  including  judgment,  was,
by  the  act  of  men  themselves,  a  preparation  for  judgment.

II.  The  actual  kbsult  of  the  Incarnation— a  judgment.  "  To  judge  is  to
prove  a  man's  moral  state  by  a  detailed  examination  of  his  acts."  The  judgment  is
not  condemnation,  for  it  may  be  favoiuable  or  otherwise.  1.  The  application  of  the
judgment.  "  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  judged :  but  he  that  believeth  not  is
judged  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son
of -God."  (1)  Judgment  does  not  touch  the  believer,  because,  being  in  Christ,  there
is  no  condemnation  against  him  (Bom.  viii.  1).  The  death  of  the  Surety  is  his
guarantee  against  judgment.  (2)  Judgment  rests  on  the  tmbeliever  by  the  very  fact
of  his  unbelief,  (a)  The  greatest  sin  is  unbelief,  because  it  is  a  rejection  of  God's
dear  Son,  his  sacrifice,  his  work.  (6)  This  unbelief  reveals  the  moral  tendency  of  the
man.  It  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  unbelief  is  a  purely  intellectual  act.  It  is  moral
as  well  as  intellectual.  2.  The  peculiarity  of  the  judgment,  "  And  this  is  the  judg-
ment, that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  the  light."
The  unbeliever  unveils  his  moral  state  by  rejecting  Christ.  (1)  The  light — which  is
Christ — is  offered,  setting  forth  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  clearest  manner.  In  that
light  men  might  well  see  (a)  themselves  and  (6)  Christ.  (2)  The  darkness  is  chosen
because  it  is  loved  more  than  light,  (a)  It  is  hard  to  conceive  of  a  rational  creature
loving  darkness,  walking  in  it,  having  fellowship  with  the  works  of  darkness,  because
darkness  suggests  the  idea  (o)  of  stumbling,  (j8)  of  discomfort,  (7)  of  danger.  (6)  The
reason  of  their  choice.  "  Because  their  deeds  were  evil."  (a)  Thus  the  evil  life  reacts
upon  the  mental  judgment.  (/3)  The  unbeliever  is  resolved  to  continue  in  his  evil,  and
therefore  will  not  allow  the  light  to  fall  upon  him.

III.  The  cause  op  this  belf-bxecutinq  result.  There  is  a  twofold  moral  state.
1.  Those  who  do  evil  hide  from  the  light,  hecause  they  dread  its  manifesting  power.
"  For  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his
deeds  should  be  reproved."  (1)  This  displays  the  cowardice  of  man  in  unbelief.  He  is
afraid  of  himself.  He  is  afraid  to  see  himself  as  he  really  is  in  the  sight  of  God's
unerring  Law.  (2)  It  displays  the  folly  of  man,  for  there  is  a  day  coming  in  which  the
secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  made  manifest.  Ko  sinner  can  escape  from  final  judgment.
(3)  It  shows  how  the  principle  of  tmbelief  is  more  moral  than  intellectual.  2.  The
true  believer  seeks  the  light,  hecause  he  seeks  the  manifestation  of  his  divinely  done  acts.
"  Right  action  is  true  thought  realized"  in  the  case  of  the  "  doer  of  truth."  (1)  He  recog-
nizes the  true  source  of  all  his  holy  deeds — they  are  "  wrought  in  Gkid ; "  for  God  works
in  him  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure  (Phil,  ii  14,  15).  (2)  He  seeks  to  give
God  the  glory  of  his  obedience  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  (3)  The  manifesting  light  is  (a)  lovely,
(b)  comforting,  (c)  stimulating.

Ver.  22. — 77ie  ministry  of  our  Lord  in  the  country  districts  ofJudma.  I.  Mark  the
INCESSANT  activity  OF  OUR  LoBD.  "  After  these  things  Came  Jcsus  and  his  disciples
mto  the  land  of  Judaea;  and  there  he  tariied  with  them,  and  baptized."  1.  Be  passed
from  the  city  to  the  country,  finding,  perhaps,  a  happy  change  in  the  simplicity  and
docility  of  the  peasantry.  If  he  is  rejected  in  Jerusalem,  he  will  appeal  to  the  people
of  Judaea  outside  the  religious  centre.  He  went  about  every  day  doing  good.  2.  Ee
baptized  disciples.  (1)  His  baptism  was  preparatory  to  the  establishment  of  his  king-
dom, like  John's  baptism.  (2)  The  baptism  was  administered  by  the  disciples,  yet  by
his  authority.  It  was  less  ostentatious  to  employ  the  disciples,  as  the  ordinance  involved
th*  acceptance  of  hjmself  as  Saviour,


OH.  ni.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  141

IL  M^BE  THE  BCC0ES3  OF  HIS  oonNTBT  M1NI8TRT.  The  baptisms  implied  that  ba
had  collected  disciples.  "  All  men  come  unto  him."  The  success  that  w<ts  denied  to
him  in  Jerusalem  was  most  marked  in  the  places  where  the  representatives  of  the
reigning  Pharisaism  had  no  place.

Vers.  23 — 30. — Tlie  relation  between  ow  Lord  and  his  forerunner.  Jesus  seems  to
have  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  John,  who  was  still  at  large,  baptizing  disciples  in  the
soutbera  borders  of  Jud»a.

I.  The  contboverst  between  the  Jews  and  John's  disciples.  The  subject  of
dispute.  "About  purifying."  It  was  caused  by  the  competition  of  the  two  baptisms,
and  turned  upon  the  best  mode  of  true  purification.  1.  The  Jews  might  ascribe  greater
efficacy  tp  Jesus'  baptism  than  to  John's.  2.  John's  disciples  might  daim  the  honour  of
superiority,  because  their  master's  baptism  was  the  first  in  point  of  time.  3.  The  Jews
might  argue  that  John's  was  unnecessary  now  that  Christ  had  come.  4.  John's  disciples
might  argue  that  their  master's  baptism  was  still  necessary  a$  a  preparation  for  the
Messiah.

II.  CoNsiDEB  HOW  JoHN  SETTLES  THE  00NTB0TER6T.  1.  The  Baptist  dots  not  resolve
it  directly  at  all,  for  he  makes  no  allusion  to  the  question  of  baptism.  2,  Be  resolves  it
by  pointing  out,  with  a  noble  and  touching  humility,  the  exact  relation  existing  between
himself  and  our  Lord,  as  one  not  of  opposition  or  comparison  at  all.  (1)  He  represeuts
the  greater  success  of  Jesus  as  due  to  God.  "  A  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be
given  him  from  heaven."  It  is  God's  will,  not  man's  energy  or  leal,  that  secures
success.  (2)  He  reminds  his  disciples  that  he  had  all  along  consistently  repiesented
his  mission  as  purely  provisional.  "  Ye  yourselves  bear  me  witness  that  I  said,  I  am
not  the  Christ,  but  that  1  am  sent  before  him."  (3)  He  distinctly  marks  the  inferior
place  assigned  to  himself.  "  He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom."  He  is  himself
not  the  Bridegroom,  but  his  friend,  (a)  The  bride  is  the  Messiauic  community ;  (6)
Christ  is  the  Bridegroom ;  (c)  John  is  "  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom,"  whose  office  it
was  to  bring  them  together.  (4)  He  is  perfectly  satisfied  with  this  position.  "  This
my  joy  therefore  is  fulfilled."  He  is  delighted  to  hear  the  Bridegroom's  voice,  and  to  be
the  agent  of  bringing  the  Jews  to  recognize  his  Messiahship.  3.  //«  regards  his  own
importance  as  destined  to  diminish  from,  day  to  day  before  the  increasing  acceptance  of
the  Messiah.  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease."  (1)  It  is  a  great  trial  to  human
pride  to  efface  one's  self  in  the  midst  of  a  career  of  extraordinary  popularity,  while  the
energies  of  life  are  still  unbroken,  and  the  hopes  of  expanding  usefulness  are  strong  in
the  heart.  (2)  As  s  test  of  character,  this  declaration  marks  the  true  greatness  of
the  Baptist.    There  is  something  sublime  as  well  as  touching  in  his  humility.

Vers.  31 — 36. — The  Baptist's  confirmation  of  his  statement  respecting  the  superiority
of  Christ.  He  gives  several  reasons  why  Jesus  must  increase,  and  iae  himself  must
decrease.

I.  The  obioin  of  Jesds.  "  He  that  cometh  from  above  is  above  all :  he  that  is
of  the  earth  is  earthly,  and  speaketh  of  the  earth."  1.  Jesus  belongs  to  heaven ;  the
Baptist  to  the  earth.  2.  Jesus  is  above  all  servants  if  Ood  ;  the  Baptist  is  one  of  his
servants.  3.  Jesus  triust  ever  eclipse  all  his  servants,  causing  them  to  fade  away  like  the
morning  star  before  the  sun  ;  they  find  their  true  enjoyment  in  the  resplendent  glory
of  Christ.  4.  John  is  henimed  in  by  the  peculiar  limitations  of  an  earthly  existence;
his  ideas  are  derived  and  dependent;  he  sees  heavenly  realities  from  the  imperfect
standpoint  of  faith.  He  can  summon  the  world  to  repentance,  but  he  cannot  give
repentance.

IL  The  febfection  of  Christ's  tkaohing.  "  And  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard,
that  he  testifieth."  1.  His  Divine  origin  secures  the  unique  glmry  of  his  teaching;  for,
being  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  is  acquainted  with  all  his  counsels.  He  is  a  wit-
ness who  has  both  seen  aud  heard  what  he  declares  to  man.  2.  Consider  the  perverse
unbelief  that  rejects  the  teaching.  "  And  no  man  receiveth  his  testimony."  JeVusalem,
as  the  religious  centre  of  Judaism,  gives  it  no  welcme.  3,  The  believei's  witness  to  the
truth  of  Ood.  "  He  that  receiveth  his  testimony  hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true."
(1)  Tlie  Jews'  rejection  was  not  total.  There  were  many  believers  in  Christ's  words.
(2}  The  believer  bears  his  testimony — the  testimony  of  his  inward  experience — to  the


142  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  nt  1—36.

truth  of  God,  just  as  the  unbeliever  makes  God  a  liar  (1  John  ii.  4).  What  «  gnnd
reality  is  faith  1  (3)  The  reason  of  Christ's  words  being  the  very  truth  of  God;  for
"  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure."  Therefore  he  is  "  full  of  grace  and  truth,"
and  "  in  him  are  all  the  treasures  of  «isdom  and  knowluilge.''  4.  Christ >  filial  dignity,
and  sovereignty.  "  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given  all  things  into  his  hand."
(1)  The  love  of  tiie  Father  is  the  source  of  all  gifts  to  the  Head,  and,  through  the  Head,
to  the  members.  (2)  The  sovereignty  in  the  hands  of  Christ  enables  him  to  make  all
things  work  together  for  the  good  of  his  people.  He  has  a  hand  of  power,  of  pity,  of
blessing,  always  stretched  out  over  big  Chuich.  5.  The  practical  consequence  of  the
Son's  supremacy  in  the  twofold  issue  of  life.  (1)  The  issue  of  eternal  life.  "  He  that
believeth  on  the  Sun  hath  everlasting  life."  (a)  The  nature  of  faith,  (o)  It  is  not  a
mere  belief  in  the  Son's  Godhead,  or  Mediatorship,  or  ability  to  give  life ;  it  is  not  a
mere  assent  to  Divine  testimony  concerning  the  Son.  (i8)  It  is  an  actual  trusting  in
the  Son,  and  therefore  an  act  of  the  will  and  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the  understanding.
(6)  The  object  of  faith.  "  The  Son,"  who  is  able  to  save,  (o)  because  he  is  the  Son  of
God,  and  therefore  Divine ;  (3)  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man,  and  therefore  human.^
Faith  derives  all  its  importance  from  its  object,  (c)  The  connection  between  faith  and
life.  Faith  brings  the  sinner  into  possession  of  everlasting  life,  because  it  unites  him
to  Christ  as  his  life.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  liye  also."  "  The  life  I  now  live  in
the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God  "  (GaL  ii.  20).  (2)  The  issue  of  abiding
lorath.  "  But  he  that  disobeyeth  the  Son  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth
on  him."  (a)  Unbelief  is  disobedience,  as  faith  is  obedience,  to  the  Son  of  God.  Thus  it
is  essentially  a  practical  principle  controlling  conduct.  (6)  The  guilt  of  disobedience
is  enhanced  by  the  supreme  dignity  of  him  to  whom  it  is  due.  (c)  Disobedience  is
incapacity  to  see  life.  The  sinner  has  (o)  no  conception  of  its  nature,  (j3)  and  no  enjoy-
ment of  its  blessings,  (d)  The  retribution  of  disobedience  is  permanent,  (a)  So  long  as
a  sinner  obstinately  refuses  to  receive  the  Son  of  God,  there  is  nothing  to  break  the
connection  established  by  Divine  law  between  disobedience  and  wrath.  "  The  wrath
of  God  abideth  on  him."  ($)  There  is  wraih  as  well  as  love  in  God.  (y)  The  last
words  of  this  discourse  represent  the  last  words  of  the  Old  Testament — for  the  warning
voice  of  the  Baptist  is  no  more  heard ;  and  they  recall  the  closing  sentence  of  that
Testament,  "  Lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  3. — Christianity  the  kingdom  of  Ood.  From  this  language  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
employed  thus  early  in  his  ministry,  we  learn  what  was  his  own  conception  of  the
religion  he  came  to  found  amongst  men.  It  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  the  Jewish
theocracy  suggested  the  form  and  type  of  the  new  and  perfect  religion.  The  Divine
wisdom  had  instituted  a  State  which  was  intended  to  serve,  and  which  had  serred,  the
purpose  of  introducing  into  the  world  ideas  of  the  eternal  righteousness.  But  the
Jewish  nation  was  only  a  shadow  of  the  Christian  Church.  We  are  accustomed  usually
to  speak  of  Jesus  as  the  Saviour,  and  to  picture  Christianity  under  its  gentler  aspect  as
a  fellowship  and  a  family.  But  Clirist  claimed  to  be  a  King,  s^nii.  represented  his
Church  as  a  kingdom.  Not  that  this  aspect  is  exclusive  of  others.  But  our  Lord
stated  the  plain  truth,  and  his  statements  should  be  taken  as  a  rebuke  to  all  merely
sentimental  and  selfish  views  of  religion.

I.  The  bpibitdal  kingdom  jb  ruled  bt  a  Divine  Sovebeion.  Absolute  monarchy
is  among  men  distrusted  on  account  of  the  imperfections  and  weaknesses  of  human
nature.  The  autocrat  is  usually  a  tyrant.  But  Christ,  being  the  Son  of  God,  and  the
incarnation  of  Divine  wisdom,  justice,  and  clemency,  is  fitted  to  rule  ;  and  his  sway  is
acknowledged  as  deserving  of  implicit  submission  on  the  part  of  all  mankind.

II.  The  bpieitual  kingdom  is  composed  of  consecrated  human  natubbb.  The
empire  of  the  Creator  over  the  inanimate  and  the  brute  creation  is  perfect.  The  Lord
Jesus  came  to  reassert  and  re-establish  the  Divine  dominion  over  intelligent  and
spiritual  beings.  That  these  are  in  a  sense  suliject  to  Divine  authority  is  not  disputed.
But  Christ  desires  a  voluntary  and  cheerful  obedience.  Unwilling  subjects  afford  him
no  satisfaction.    To  rule  over  the  bodily  and  outward  life  of  men  is  an  object  of  humao


earn.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  143

ambition.  But  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  and  their  glory,  have  no  charm  for  Chriit.
It  is  in  human  hearts  that  he  desires  and  loTes  to  reign.  He  has  undoubtedly  M
external  empire ;  but  tkis  he  possesses  in  virtue  of  his  spiritual  sway.

III.  The  spiritual  kinodou  is  oovebned  BTHiaHTEOus  LAWS.  The  ordinance*
of  earthly  governments  aim  at  justice,  and  in  varying  degrees  they  secuie  their  aim.
Yet  they  partake  of  human  imperfection.  But  of  tlie  laws  of  Christ,  and  of  his  apostles,
who  spoke  with  his  authority,  we  may  say  that  they  are  the  expressions  of  the  Eternal
Mind.  It  is  no  grievance  to  obey  them.  They  realize  our  moral  ideals,  i.e.  in  their
intention  and  requirements.  Their  observance  tends  to  the  highest  human  good  and
well-being.     Their  practical  and  universal  prevalence  would  make  earth  heaven.

IV.  The  spiritual  kingdom  is  entered  by  compliance  with  conditions  personal
AND  spiaiTUAL.  Men  are  hoxn  subjects  of  the  Queen  of  England  ;  but  they  must  be
bom  anew  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  in  order  that  they  may  become  subjects  of  the
Lord  Christ.  Both  the  Catholic  and  the  Puritan  ideas  of  regeneiation  convey  this  truth.
The  one  lays  more  stress  upon  the  baptism,  which  symbolizes  a  heavenly  influence;  the
other  upon  the  individnal  experience,  which  emphasizes  the  spiritual  personality.  Both
alike  agree  with  the  soiiptural  assertion  that  Christianity,  in  its  Divine  completeness,
involves  men's  participation  in  newness  of  convictions,  newness  of  feeling,  newness  of
principle,  newness  of  life.  The  new  birth  begins  the  new  life.  The  birth,  no  doubt,
directs  our  thoughts  to  a  Divine  agency  ;  the  new  life  leads  us  to  think  of  the  human
co-operation.  '  And  the  kingdom  of  the  just  and  holy  Christ  is  characterized  both  by
the  Divine  provision  and  by  tke  human  acceptance,  both  by  tlie  Divine  authority  and
the  human  submission.

V.  The  spiritual  kingdom  is  distinquished  by  many  and  valuable  PRiviLKaES.
The  citizenship  of  a  great  nation,  of  a  powerful  city,  is  prized  among  men  for  the  sake
of  its  accruing  honours  and  advantages.  Civis  Bomanus  sum  was  no  empty  boast.
Far  greater  are  the  immunities  and  honours  and  juys  connected  with  citizenship  in  the
kingdom  of  Christ.  The  safety  which  is  experienced  beneath  Divine  protection,  the
happiness  which  flows  from  Divine  favour,  the  sjiiritUKl  profit  which  accompanies  suli-
mission  to  Divine  requirements, — these  are  some  of  the  privileges  accorded  to  such  as
are  within,  unknown  to  such  as  are  without,  the  heavenly  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  God.

VI.  ThB  spiritual  kingdom  has  before  it  a   destiny  BRIGHT  AND  GLORIOUS.      All

earthly  kingdoms  bear  within  them  the  seeds  of  corruption  an<i  decay.  From  these  the
spiritual  state  is  free.  It  is  subject  to  no  "  decline  and  fall."  Because  Divine,  it  is
incorruptible ;  and  because  incorruptible,  imperishable — "  an  everlasting  kingdom,  a
dominion  enduring  unto  ail  generations." — T.

Ver.  7. — "  Born  anew  ! "  The  turn  which  our  Lord  Jesus  gave  to  this  conversation
with  Nicodemus  must  have  been  a  great  surprise  to  the  "teacher  of  Israel."  The
thoughts  of  the  rabbi  seem  to  have  run,  naturally  enough,  upon  outward  and  tangible
realities.  To  him  a  prophet  was  authenticated  by  "  signs ;  "  a  "  kmgdom  "  was  some-
'  thing  of  political  interest,  "birth  "was  physical,  etc.  Christ's  way  of  looking  at  religion,
and  at  the  religions  life,  evidently  perplexed  him.  Yet  it  would  seem  that  alterward*',
when  these  new  ideas  had  penetrated  his  mind,  he  came  to  sympathize  with  the  mis-
sion and  the  methods  of  the  Messiah.  He  exchanged  his  carnal  views  for  such  as  were
spiritual, his  timidity  for  boldness,  his  questioning  for  a  confident  faith.

I.  The  subject  of  the  new  birth.  In  opposition  to  the  prejudices  of  Nicodemus,
who  at  first  could  think  only  of  a  body  as  susceptible  of  birth,  our  Lord  taught  that
the  spirit  of  man  may  be  born  anew,  and-  must  be  so  born  in  order  to  the  experience
of  highest  blessing.

II.  The  need  of  the  new  birth.  This  is  to  be  remarked  in  the  nature  of  the  old
and  unregenerate  life.  The  soul  which  is  misled  by  error,  which  is  abandoned  to  sin,
which  is  strajge  to  the  favour  of  God,  needs  to  be  born  anew.  Carnal  views  of  religion,
selfish  principles  of  li'e,  need  to  be  eradicated  from  the  soul.  But  evil  is  so  inwrought
into  man's  constitutinn  and  habits  that  he  nee<is  to  be  spiritually  reconstructed  in  eider
that  he  may  see  as  God  sees,  feel  as  God  feels,  act  as  God  wills.

III.  The  P0W3R  or  the  new  bisth.  The  change  to  be  effected  is  so  radical  and  so
complete  that  no  human  means  can  avail  to  bring  it  about.  Hence,  as  our  Lord  teaches,
the  necessity  fo;  the  operations  of  the  Spine  of  God— rmighty,  though  mysterious,  as  the


144  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [or.  m.  1— a6.

rush  of  the  wind  when  it  bends  the  trees  of  the  forest  and  roars  in  its  fierceness,  though
man  can  neither  see  nor  comprehend  it.  This  we  know:  that  if  the  spirit  of  man  is
the  scene  of  transforming  operations,  if  spiritual  results  are  to  be  wrought,  the  Spirit  of
God  alone  can  account  for  snob  a  process.

IV.  Thk  peoop  of  the  new  birth.  In  a  word,  this  is  the  new  life.  The  interest  of
birth  lies  in  the  life  to  which  it  is  the  introduction.  So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  realm.
The  higher,  the  spiritual  life,  is  a  contrast  to  the  old;  it  is  marked  by  all  that  is
divinely  excellent  and  beautiful,  and  it  is  immortal,  being  perfected  only  in  the  presence
and  the  fellowship  of  God  himself. — T.

Ver.  8. — JVie  wind  and  the  Spirit.  Things  natural  »r«  the  emblems  of  things
spiritual.  It  is  no  accident  that  in  this  very  verse  the  same  word  is  used  to  design-rite
the  wind  that  blows  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  the  Spirit  that  breathes  over  the
souls  of  men.  In  many  languages  the  breeze  or  the  breath  is  the  symbol  of  the  unseen
vital  principle  that  distinguishes  living  beings  from  the  material  universe,  and  even  of
the  higher  and  properly  spiritual  nature.  Our  Lord  in  this  passage  of  his  conversation
with  Nicodemus  extends  the  symbolism  from  the  principle  to  its  agency,  and  illus-
trates the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  God  by  k  reference  to  the  mysteriuus  movement  of
the  wind.    The  parallelism  appears  in —

I.  Tmt  ORIGIN.  Man  is  powerless  to  cause  the  wind  to  blow  from  one  quarter  or
from  another,  for  the  wind  is  one  of  the  great  forces  of  nature,  «'.«.  of  the  operation  of
God,  the  Maker  and  Lord  of  all.  In  like  manner,  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  holiness  is  the
Spirit  of  God.  No  man  can  claim  credit  for  his  influences;  they  belong  to  the  super-
human system  which  is  independent  of  human  wisdom  or  skill.  It'  the  Church  of
Chris:;  is  the  creation  of  the  Spirit  (u&i  Spirittis,  ibi  Ecdesia),  it  is  not  an  institution  of
human  origin  and  device,  but  an  organism  into  which  God  himself  has  breathed  the
breath  of  life.

II.  The  ohabacteristicb.  1.  The  wind  is  invisible,  and  the  same  is  the  case  with
the  Spirit  of  God,  who  is  perceived  by  no  one  of  the  senses.  Invisibility  is  no  proof  of
the  unreality  of  the  breeze  or  the  gale.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  upon
human  souls,  and  cannot  be  traced  by  the  action  of  the  senses ;  but  that  influence  is  as
real  as  is  that  of  any  force,  whether  material  or  psychical.  2.  The  Spirit  of  God
resembles  the  wind  in  the  secret  and  inscrutable  character  of  his  operations.  That  there
are  meteorological  laws  is  not  questioned ;  but  the  forces  that  account  for  the  wind  are
so  many  and  so  complicated,  that  they  are  even  now  only  very  partially  understood
At  all  events,  the  variations  of  the  atmosphere  were  altogether  unknown  to  Nicodemus,
and  the  argument  v.  as  obviou.sly  effective  for  him.  In  like  manner,  the  operations  of
God's  Spirit  are  mysterious ;  they  take  place  in  the  recesses  of  the  soul ;  their  method
is  often  incomprehensible  by  us.  Yet  there  is  nothing  arlritrary  or  capricious  in  these
operations;  they  are  all  the  manifestations  of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness.  The
workings  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  present  where  we,  perhaps,  should  little  have  expected
them.  Not  only  can  we  not  prescribe  to  God  how  he  should  work ;  we  cannot  always
tell  how  he  has  worked.  He  evidently  has  many  direct  channels  by  which  his  Spirit
approaches  the  souls  of  men.

III.  The  results.  If  we  cannot  see  the  wind  or  trace  ite  modes  of  action,  we  are
at  no  loss  to  understand  and  appreciate  its  effects.  We  hear  its  sound,  we  feel  its  force,
we  perceive  its  presence  by  its  works.  The  Spirit  makes  his  efficacy  apparent  by  his
fruits.  1.  How  powerful  is  the  Spirit  of  God  1  The  wind,  by  its  steady  blowing,  turns
the  sails  of  the  mill,  propels  the  ship  across  the  ocean;  by  its  vehemence,  in  the  form  of
a  hurricane  or  •  whirlwind,  destroys  great  works,  uproots  trees,  unroofs  houses.  But
what  is  this,  as  evidence  of  ]x>wer,  compared  with  the  effects  wrought  by  the  Holy
Spirit  in  human  hearts — in  human  society?  Here  we  see  the  mightiest  works  of  the
^preme.  2.  How  various  are  the  tokens  of  the  Spirit's  working !  The  wind  may  be
Boreas  or  Zephyr ;  may  sink  into  a  sigh  or  wax  into  a  roar ;  may  pile  the  clouds  in
masses,  or  drive  the  mists  like  sheep  before  it,  or  fling  the  hail  abroad.  And  the  Spirit
of  God  is  the  Spirit  of  truth,  of  conviction,  of  holiness,  of  consolation.  The  same  Spirit
distributes  varied  gifts  to  men  "  seveially  as  he  will."  None  can  limit,  none  can  even
trace  out,  the  diversity  of  spiritual  operations.  3.  How  leneficent  is  the  Spirit  of  God  in
hit  working  I    The  wind  doe*  harm ;  yet  its  action,  on  the  whole,  is  advantageous.   But


Lit.  ur.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDiNG  TO  ST.  JOHN,  146

the  Holy  Ghost  not  only  works  grod;  he  works  nothing  but  good.  He  whc  is  "bom  of
the  Spirit "  is  bqrn  to  a  new,  a  holy,  a  Divine  life.  A  spiritual  dispensation  is  the
occasion  of  hope  to  this  humanity,  imparts  to  it  a  prospect  which  otherwise  the  most
sanguine  would  not  venture  to  dream  of.  A  ransomed  humanity  thus  becomes  a
renewed  humanity,  and  renewal  is  the  pledge  of  glorification.  From  the  four  winds  the
breath  comes  and  breathes  upon  the  slain ;  and  the  dead  live,  and  "  stand  upon  their
feet,  an  exceeding  great  army."— T.

Vers.  14, 15. — An  emblem  of  talvation.  It  was  Christ's  teaching  that  Moses  testified
of  him.  This  Moses  did  by  foretelling  the  advent  of  a  prophet  liko  unto  himself,  and
•till  more  strikingly  by  the  whole  system  of  sacrifice  which  he  perfected,  and  which
the  Messiah  both  fulfilled  and  superseded.  He  did  so  likewise  by  symbolic  acts,  thus
unconsciously  witnessing  to  Christ  and  his  works.  It  was  natural  that  our  Lord's  first
mention  of  Moses  should  occur  in  his  conversation  with  a  Hebrew  rabbi,  an  inquirer,
and  a  sympathizing  inquirer  into  his  claims.  The  incident  in  Jewish  history  upon
which  our  Lord  grafts  great  spiritual  lessons  was  one  familiar,  doubtless,  to  Nicodemus,
but' one  of  which  he  could  never  until  now  have  seen  the  deep  spiritual  significance.

L  The  seepent-bite  is  the  emblem  of  sin.  For  the  moral  evil  is,  like  the  venom
of  the  viper,  (1)  diffused  in  action;  (2)  rapid  in  progress;  (3)  painful  to  experience;
(4)  dangerous  and  deadly  in  result.

XL  The  deaths  in  the  camp  op  Israei,  abb  the  emblems  of  the  BPiRiTirAi.
CONSEQUENCES  OF  SIN.  Scripture  consistently  represents  death,  ie.  moral,  spiritual
death,  as  the  natural  and  appointed  result  of  subjection  to  sin.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,
it  shall  die ;  "  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  ,  If  spiritual  life  is  the  vigorous  exercise,
in  the  way  ap[)ointed  by  heavenly  wisdom,  of  the  faculties  of  our  intelligent  and
voluntary  nature,  spiritual  death  consists  in  the  deprivation  of  power,  in  the  cessation
or  suspension  of  such  activities  as  are  acceptable  to  God.

III.  The  bbazen  serpent  is  an  emblem  of  the  Divine  redemptive  bembdt.
1.  Like  the  figure  placed  upon  the  banner-staff,  the  provision  for  salvation  from  spiritual
death  is  due  to  Divine  mercy.  Christ  is  the  Gift  of  Gjd ;  the  power  of  spiritual  healing
is  Divine  power ;  the  ransom  paid  is  appointed  and  accepted  by  God.  2.  In  both  there
is  observable  a  remarkable  connection  between  the  disease  and  the  cure.  It  was  not
without  significance  that  the  remedy  provided  in  the  wilderness  bore  a  resemblance  to
the  disease.  Christ  too  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  in  •  human  body
endured  for  us  that  death  which  is  the  penalty  of  sin.

IV.  The   ELEVATION  OF   THE   BBAZEN   SEBPKNT   UPON  THE   POLE   WAS   AN  EMBLEM   OF

ouB  Saviour's  cruoifixiqn  and  exaltation.  It  is  observable  how  early  in  his
ministry  Jesus  referred  to  his  "  lifting  up."  That  he  by  this  language  indicated  his
crucifixion  does  not  admit  of  question.  "  When  ye  have  lilted  up  the  Son  of  man ;  "
*'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth ;  "—are  instances  which  show  how  distinctly  Jesus
foresaw  and  foretold  his  death,  and  even  the  manner  of  it.  The  consistency  is  manifest
between  this  elevation  of  sacrificial  death  and  the  subsequent  elevation  to  the  throne
of  eternal  glory.

V.  The  looking  at  the  lifted  fioubb  of  the  serpent  is  an  emblem  op  faith
EN  Christ.  There  was  nothing  in  the  act  of  gazing  which  itself  contributed  to  the
recovery  of  those  who  were  bitten.  Nor  is  there  anything  meritorious  in  the  attitude
of  the  soul  that  exercises  faith  in  the  Saviour.  But  it  is  an  act  which  brings  the  soul
into  closest  relation  with  the  all-gracious  Eedeemer.  Faith  is  an  attitude,  an  inspira-
tion of  the  soul,  which  instrumentally  secures  salvation.  The  Divine  ordinance  is  this :
"  Look  and  live ! "

VI.  The  publication  of  the  news  conoerninci  thb  bekpent  of  brass  is
EMBLEMATICAL  OF  THB  PREACHINO  OF  THE  oosPBL.  It  was  a  ministry  of  bquevolencc
and  of  blessing  which  was  discharged  by  those  who  went  through  the  camp  of  Israel,
heralding  deliverance  and  life.  And  there  are  no  tidings  so  honourable  to  deliver,  and
so  profitable  to  receive,  as  the  glad  tidings  of  a  great  Saviour  and  a  great  salvation,
which  it  is  the  ofiice  of  the  Christian  preacher  to  publish  to  those  who  are  afar  off  and
to  those  who  are  near. — T,

Vers.  16,  17.—"  The  gift  of  God."    This  is  the  language  either  of  our  Lord  himielf

JOHN.  I,


146  THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  m.  1—36

or  of  the  evangelist.  If  these  are  Christ's  words,  they  contain  his  authoritative  testimony
to  his  own  declaration.  If  they  are  the  words  of  John,  we  have  in  them  th6  inspired  judo--
ment  of  one  who  was  in  most  intimate  fellowship  with  Jesus,  and  who  was  peculiarly
competent  to  represent  his  Master's  work  in  accordance  with  that  Master's  own  mind!
Familiar  as  this  comprehensive  and  sublime  utterance  is  to  all  Christians,  there  is  danger'
lest  it  should  become  trite,  lest  it  should  fail  to  impress  our  minds  with  its  most  amnzing
import.  Obvious  as  are  the  several  aspects  of  the  central  truth  of  Christianity  her«
presented,  it  may  be  well  to  bring  them  successively  before  the  mind.

I.  The  motive  which  pbomptbd  thk  gift.  This  was  love,  an  emotion  which
some  think  too  human  to  attribute  to  the  Kuler  of  the  universe.  But  we  are  justified
in  believing  that  we  ourselves  are  susceptible  of  love  only  because  God  has  fashioned  us
in  Lis  own  likeness.  Loye  is  distinguishable  from  goodness  as  having  more  of  the
character  of  personal  interest.  And  the  relations  between  God  and  man  being  considered,
love  here  must  be  understood  as  involving  pity  and  also  sacrifice.  And  whereas  human
love  is  often  intense  in  proportion  to  its  narrowness  and  concentration.  Divine  love  is
all-embracing — ^includes  all  mankind.  TTiis,  indeed,  follows  from  the  origination  of  this
love  in  the  Divine  mind.  It  was  nothing  in  mankind  except  their  need  and  sin  and
helplessness  which  called  forth  the  benevolence  of  the  heart  of  the  heavenly  Father.

II.  The  peeciousness  of  thb  gift.  Great  love  found  its  expression  in  a  great
gift,  worthy  of  the  generous  and  munificent  Benefactor  of  mankind.  The  use  of  the
appellation,  "  only  begotten  Son,"  seems  to  point  to  the  estimation  in  which  Christ  was
held  by  the  Father,  in  whose  view  none  was  to  be  compared  with  Christ.  It  is  not
easy  for  us  to  realize  the  value  set  upon  Christ  by  the  Father ;  but  we  can  look  at  this
gift  from  our  own  side,  and  can  form  some  judgment  of  the  worth  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to
our  humanity.  Because  he  was  the  Son  of  m»n  and  the  Friend  of  sinners,  and  because
he  was  this  in  his  humiliation,  and  is  this  in  his  glory,  therefore  he  is  dear  and  precious
to  the  hearts  of  those  whose  nature  he  deigned  to  assume,  whose  lot  he  deigned  to  share.
He  who  withholds  no  good  thing  from  men,  withheld  not,  spared  not  his  own  Sou,  but
gave  him  up  for  us  all.

III.  Thb  intention  and  purpose  with  which  the  gift  was  bestowed.  As
here  presented,  this  was  twofold.  1.  The  aim  was  one  of  deliverance,  to  secure  men
from  impending  condemnation  and  perdition.  2.  It  was  also  an  aim  of  highest
beneficence,  viz.  to  make  men  partakers  of  eternal  life.  By  this  marvelous  and  glorious
language  we  must  understand,  not  the  mere  continuanceof  existence,  but  the  perpetuity
of  the  highest  well-being— that  life  which  truly  deserves  the  name,  and  which,  being
Divine,  is  also  imperishable.

IV.  The  condition  upon  whioh  the  gift  mat  be  enjoyed.  A  moral,  spiritual
gift  cannot  be  bestowed,  as  can  a  material  boon,  independently  of  the  character  and
religious  position  of  the  beneficiary.  The  greatest  gift  of  God  is  conferred,  not  upon
the  deserving  or  upon  the  fortunate,  but  upon  the  believing.  Concerning  this  condition
of  faith,  it  should  be  remarked  that  it  is  (1)  indispensable  upon  Gvd's  side,  for  he  is
honoured  by  the  grateful  acceptance  of  his  free  and  precious  gift.  And  it  is  further
(2)  indispensable  upon  man's  side,  for  the  gift  must  be  accepted  and  appropriated  by
those  for  whom  it  is  intended.  He  who  rejects  Christ  cannot  benefit  by  Christ ;  it  is
faith  timt  links  the  soul  to  the  Saviour.

Application.  The  word  "whosoever"  is  here  employed  in  order  to  point  out  that,
in  the  Divine  compassion  there  is  no  limitation,  in  the  Divine  offer  there  is  no  restric-
tion. There  is  nothing  in  the  purposes  of  God,  nothing  in  the  condition  prescribed  hy
Divine  wisdom,  which  can  exclude  the  meanest  or  the  vilest,  if  only  penitent  and
believing,  from  the  enjo^meDt  of  this  incomparable  gilt. — ^T.

Ver.  18. — Faith  and  judgment.  Man's  life  is  full  of  alternatives.  Choice  between
different  paths  that  offer  themselves,  often  between  two  paths,  determines  the  direction
and  the  character  of  the  journey.  If  it  is  so  in  the  decision  men  form  as  to  a  prcfesdion,
an  abode,  a  friendship,  etc.,  is  it  not  also  thus  with  regard  to  religion,  with  regard  to
the  principle  which  shall  govern  our  moral  life  and  decide  our  lasting  destiny?
Imiaediately  after  propounding  one  of  the  fullest  and  richest  statements  of  the  gospel,
our  Lord  reverts  to  the  moral  probaticm  which  is  distinctive  of  human  life,  and  whioh
is  only   intensified   by  -  the  privilege  of   hearing    of  and   knowing    himself.      The


OH.  m.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  147

question  for  those  thus  privileged  is — Shall  they  or  shall  they  not  helieve  on  the  Son
of  God?

I.  Our  judicial  relation  to  God  necessarily  involves  one  ob  otheb  of  two
BENTENOBB.  Because  he  has  devised  and  provided  the  gospel,  God  does  not  therefore
cease  to  he  a  Judge,  wise,  lioly,  and  just.  As  such  he  will  pronounce  upon  all  who  are
suhject  to  his  authority  a  sentence  either  of  (1)  condemnation,  which  is  the  due  of  sin
and  the  desert  of  sinners ;  or  of  (2)  acquittal,  which  proceeds  from  Divine  grace,  and
which  is  the  condition  of  true  well-heing.  This  being  the  alternative,  it  is  for  ua  a
question  of  supreme  moment — Can  we  in  any  way  aCfect  this  sentence  ?

II.  OUB   MORAL   relation   TO   GOD   DETERMINES   OUR  JUDICIAL   RELATION.      In  Other

words,  his  sentence  will  be  according  to  the  attitude,  so  to  speak,  of  our  hearts.  It  is
open  to  us  :  1.  To  reject  or  disbelieve  in  Christ  the  Saviour.  The  "  only  begotten  Son
of  God"  claims  our  reverence  and  our  faith.  But  the  language  of  Jesus  makes  it
evident  that  we  may  withhold  what  he  claims;  and  to  neglect  and  disregard  is  the
same  thing  as  to  refuse  and  despise  salvation.  Such  a  choice  is  falling  back  upon  our
own  desens ;  and  to  appeal  to  justice  is  to  court  condemnation.  Or  we  may  :  2.  Accept
or  put  faith  in  Christ.  Such  a  choice  is  opening  the  eye  of  the  soul  to  the  light  that
shines,  and  welcoming  it  and  walking  in  it.  This  ii  to  fall  in  with  the  gracious
proposals  of  our  heavenly  Father,  to  obey  the  call  to  spiritual  liberty  and  life.  If  it  be
said  that  God  judges  righteously  according  to  the  character  of  those  who  stand  at  his
tribunal,  this  is  admitted  j  but  it  should  be  observed  that  faith  is  the  means  of  forgive-
ness, and  forgiveness  is  the  spring  of  obedience  and  of  conformity  to  the  mind  and  will
of  the  All-h(Jly.

III.  The  SENTENCE  or  acquittal  ob  CONDEMNATION  IS  THEREFORE  VIBTUALLT
PRONOUNCED   BY    OURSELVES,    AND   THAT   IN   THIS   PRESENT  LIFE.        There    is    an    awful

meaning  in  these  words :  "  He  that  believeth  not  hath  been  judged  already."  Condem-
nation is  virtually  passed  upon  the  unbelieving,  even  in  this  life ;  and  it  may  be  said
that  it  is  pronounced  by  themselves.  This  doctrine  of  Christ  is  in  no  way  inconsistent
with  the  scriptural  declaration  that  there  shall  be  a  day  in  which  God  shall  judge  all
men  by  Jesus  Christ.  But  it  reminds  us  of  the  far-reaching,  the  eternal  influence  of
our  present  decision,  and  bids  us  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come," — T.

Ver.  19. — Lovers  of  darkness.  Our  Lord's  discourse  to  Nicodemus  was  mainly  of
redemption  and  regeneration,  and  was  therefore  bright  and  hopeful.  Yet  he  was
constrained,  in  faithfulness  and  candour,  to  speak  also  of  condemnation.  The  prospect
before  mankind  was  not  one  of  unclouded  glory.  The  prevalence  of  sin  and  the
alienaticm  of  man  from  God  were  a  cloud  upon  the  horizm  which  obscured  the  bright-
ness even  of  the  gospel  day.

I.  The  advent  of  light.  In  the  spiritual  world  light  is  the  emblem  of  know-
ledge. Christ  is  designated  by  the  evangelist  "  the  true  Light ; "  he  calls  himself  "  the
Light  of  the  world."  He  brirtgs  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  consequently  of  salvation
and  of  eternal  life.  This  spiritual  sunrise  involves  the  diffusion  of  purity,  peace,
and  joy.

II.  The  preference  of  some  men  for  darkness  over  light.  In  itself  light
is  best.  "Light  is  good,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun."
Those  who  live  and  walk  in  the  light  of  God  are  spiritually  blessed.  If  any  person
rejects  and  loathes  the  light,  the  fault  is  in  the  eye  of  the  soul,  which  is  manifestly
diseased.  The  captive  may  prefer  the  dungeon  to  liberty.  Of  many  of  the  Jews —
Christ's  own  countrymen — it  was  justly  said,  "He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own
received  him  not."  And  even  now,  when  the  gospel  is  preached,  and  men  are  invited
to  come  into  the  sunshine  of  God's  favour,  there  are  found  those  who  prefer  to  lurk  in
the  dark  caves  of  iynoraiice,  superstition,  and  sin.

III.  Their  reason  or  motive  for  this  prefbbence.  Our  Lord  speaks  explicitly
and  powerfully  upon  this.  His  doctrine,  his  religion,  condemns  sin ;  his  gospel  is
good  tidings  of  deliverance  from  An.  His  (jwn  hatred  to  sin  was  such  that  he  was
crucified  by  sinners  vvlio  could  not  endure  his  purity,  whilst  he  endured  cruciBxion  that
he  might  redeem  men  from  the  power  and  love  of  sin.  Hence  Christ's  society  was
distastefiil  to  impenitent  sinners  when  he  was  upon  earth,  and  his  gospel  is  distasteful,
is  repugnant,  to  the  same  class  to-day.    Those  whose  works  are  evil  will  not  come  ta


148  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  tO  ST.  JOHli.     [Ofi.  Hi.  1—36.

the  light,  for  thus  their  evil  works  would  be  exhibited  in  their  monstrous  heinoutness,
and  they  themselves  would  be  reproved.

IV.  Thk  judohent  THtJB  INOUBEBD.  1.  The  ground  of  judgment  is  here  plainly
stated ;  it  is  not  so  much  for  sin,  as  for  that  content  and  deliglit  in  sin,  which  leads  to
the  rejection  of  the  gospel,  to  the  refusal  of  deliverance  from  sin,  to  the  hatred  of  that
Saviour  who  came  to  vanquish  sin.  2,  The  cotart  of  judgment  is  implied.  The  lovers
of  darkness  are  condemned  by  their  own  conscience,  whose  dictates  they  disregard  in
order  to  follow  the  impulses  of  passion.  Yet  it  is  Christ  himself,  the  Word  of  God,  who
speaks  in  human  nature,  and  utters  the  sentence  of  disapproval  and  of  condemnation.
Thus  it  is  that  Christ  is  to  all  men  either  their  Saviour  or  their  Judge.  His  coming  to
this  earth  was  the  cause  only  of  salvation,  but  to  many  it  was  the  occasion  of  judgment
and  of  confusion. — T.

Ver.  34. — Unmeagured  gifts.  If  this  passage  describes  the  fulness  of  spiritual  gifts
and  powers  bestowed  by  God  upon  the  Lord  Jesus,  then  there  is  here  implicit  or
explicit  mention  of  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Trinity.  Impossible  though  it  is  for  the
finite  intellect  thoroughly  to  understand  the  statement,  Ctiristians  receive  it  in  faith,
and  believe  that  the  Father  bestows  the  Spirit  upon  the  Son,  and  that  in  unstinted
liberality.

I.  A    GOMTBABT    IS    HEBE    IMPLIED    BETWEEN    ChBIST    AND    THE   PBOPHETB.      1.   The

immediate  suggestion  seems  to  be  the  language  in  which  John  the  Baptist  acknow-
ledged the  superiority  of  the  Messiah,  whose  herald  and  forerunner  he  was  appointed  to
be.  John  was  inspired  in  such  measure  as  was  requisite  in  order  to  the  accomplishment
of  his  mission.  But  the  compass  of  his  revelation  was  limited,  and,  powerful  as  was  his
preaching,  it  was  of  necessity  human,  and  by  its  very  aim  one-sided.  The  inspiration
of  Christ  was  very  different;  for  his  ministry  was  Divine  and  perfect,  and  needed
qualifications  altogether  transcending  those  which  sufiSced  for  his  forerunner.  2.  The
same  was  the  case  with  the  earlier  prophets  of  the  older  dispensation.  They  could,
indeed,  truly  prtface  their  prophecies  with  the  declaration,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was
upon  me."  Bat  they  were  commissioned  for  a  purpose,  and  they  were  inspired
accordingly ;  and  when  they  foretold  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  they  foretold  that  that
advent  should  be  accompanied  by  a  Divine  effusion  of  blessing — a  very  flood  of  spiritual
energy  and  life.  And  they,  as  well  as  John,  testified  beforehand  of  the  higher  gifts  of
him  who  should  come.

II.  Reasons  are  apparent  for  the  bestowal  of  the  Spibit  in  unlimited
MBAS0BE  upon  THE  Christ.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  was,  by  virtue  of  his  Divine
nature,  capable  of  receivino;  the  Spirit  in  a  larger  degree  than  all  who  went  before  him,
than  all  who  followed  him.  2.  The  Father's  approval  and  love  of  the  Son  were
unlimited ;  for  Christ  did  always  those  things  that  pleased  the  Father,  and  the  Father
declared  himself  to  be  well  pleased  with  him.  3.  Inasmuch  as  the  Father  sent  hig  Son
upon  a  mission  altogether  unique,  one  requiring  most  "peculiar  qualifications,  it  was
evidently  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  corresponding  impartation  of  spiritual  power,
that  the  work  might  be  not  only  performed,  but  performed  in  a  manner  wanting  in
no  respect.    The  greatest  of  all  works  needed  the  greatest  of  all  gifts.

III.  These  were  proofs  in  our  Lord's  character   and    ministry  that  he

POSSESSED    AN    INEXHAUSTIBLE    SUPPLY    OF    THE    SPIRIT   OF    GoD.      The    wholc   of  the

Gospels  -might  be  quoted  in  support  of  this  assertion.  Upon  Christ  rested  the  Spirit,  as
the  Spirit  of  wisdom,  of  pov>er,  and  of  love.  His  discourses,  his  mighty  works,  his
demeanour  under  suffering  and  wrong,  his  willing  death,  his  glorious  exaltation, — all
evinced  the  presence  and  indwelling  of  the  immortal  power  that  pervades  and  hallows
to  highest  ends  the  spiritual  universe  of  God.
rV.  The  UNIQUE  ootpourino  of  the  Diviwk  Spirit  upon  oub  Lord  accounts

FOB     THE     UNIQUE     RESULTS    WHICH     FOLLOWED    HIS    MISSION    TO    EARTH.        ThuS :    1.

Christ's  ministry  was  perfectly  acceptable  to  the  Father,  who  both  commissioned  and
qualified  him  to  become  the  Mediator.  2,  The  perfect  efficiency  of  this  wonderful
ministry  was  thus  secured.  3.  The  glorious  results  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world
were  thus  accounted  .  for.  Why  did  the  Pentecostal  effusion,  and  the  subsequent
dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  follow  the  exaltation  of  the  Mediator  to  the  throne  of
dominion  ?    Evidently  because  in  ChrisK  the  Spirit  overflowed   from  himself  to  his


cfl.  m.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  149

people,  and  to  the  race  for  whom  he  dieil ;  because  he  "  received  gifts  for  men."
Himself  participating  in  unlimited  supply  in  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  became
the  glorious  agent  through  whom  copious  blessings  were  conferred  upon  the  Church  and
upon  the  world.  He  received,  not  for  himself  merely,  but  for  us  also.  The  gifts  were
unto  him,  but  they  were /or  us. — T.

Yer.  16. — The  greatnest  of  QitS*  love  to  the  world.    This  will  be  teen  if  we

consider —

I.  The  object  of  his  love.  "The  world" — the. fallen  human  family.  1.  There
wcu  nothing  in  the  world  to  attract  and  deserve  Ma  love.  For  he  loved  the  world,  not
as  he  made  it,  but  as  it  made  itself  by  sin.  God  loves  all  holy  beings.  This  is  natural,
as  natural  as-it  is  for  a  virtuous  father  to  love'  a  dutiful  son.  But  God  loved  the  world
in  its  disobedience  and  sin.  It  was  the  magnitude  and  gravitalion  of  his  love,  and  not
the  attraction  of  the  world.  2.  There  was  much  in  the  world  to  repel  his  love.  Not  only
it  was  not  attractive,  but  it  was  most  repelling.  Its  fall  was  deliberate  and  wilful,  and
it  was  indifferent,  and  even  rebellious  in  its  fallen  state.  The  magnitude  of  any  force  is
measured  by  the  opposing  forces  it  conquers.  In  this  light,  how  great  must  be  the  love
of  God  to  the  world  I  He  conquered  the  mightiest  oppositions — the  sin,  the  disobedience,
the  bitterest  enmity,  and  the  cruelest  antagonism  of  the  worli  He  loved  the  world  In
spite  of  itself.  3.  Tlie  world  deserved  punishment— perdition.  This  punishment  was
hanging  over  It.  Justice  called  and  demanded  vengeance,  but  mercy  triumphed  over
judgment,  took  justice  into  its  con6dence,  made  a  treaty  with  it,  and  became  responsible
for  all  its  heavy  claims.  What  must  be  the  greatness  of  the  love  that  did  this !  4.  He
loved  the  whole  world.  Not  a  part  of  it,  or  a  few  of  its  inhabitants,  but  all  alike,  and
altogether.  He  might  have  made  a  selection,  but  the  selection  of  Divine  love  was  the
whole  world.  This  reveals  it  as  a  boundless  and  fathomless  ocean,  inexhaustible  in  its
riches,  and  infinite  in  its  kind  impulses.  The  arms  of  his  love  are  so  everlasting  that
they  took  hold  of  the  fallen  world  and  fondled  it  in  their  safe  and  warm  embrace.

II.  The  gift  of  his  love.  ,  Love  is  measured  by  the  gifts  it  presents  and  the
sacrifice  it  makes.  Ii)  this  light,  how  great  is  God's  love  to  the  world  f  1.  He  gave  his
Son.  Think  of  him  as  a  mere  Son — good,  dutiful,  and  holy.  How  great  is  the  gift  1  To
give  •  holy  being,  such  as  an  angel,  would  be  a  great  gift  and  a  manifestation  of  great
love ;  but  he  gave  his  Son.  2.  He  gave  his  only  begotten  Son.  To  give  one  son  out  of
many  would  be  a  manifestation  of  great  love ;  but  he  gave  his  only  Son,  and  his  only
begotten  Son — his  equal — ^who  was  one  with  him  in  essence,  mind,  and  heart ;  the  Son
of  his  love,  who  was  ever  with  him  and  ever  his  delight.  Such  a  gift  he  never  gave
before,  and  can  never  give  again.  The  gift  is  royal  and  .matchless,  the  sacrifice  is
Divine  and  unique — an  index  of  love  too  high,  too  broad,  too  deep,  too  Divine  for
mortals. to  comprehend.  3.  Ee  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  as  a  sacrifice.  To  send  his
Son  would  be  a  manifestation  of  great  love,  but  to  give  him  is  a  manifestation  of  a  far
greater ;  for  he  sent  his  Son  to  the  world  as  a  Messenger  of  peace,  but  he  gave  him  as  a
Sacrifice  for  the  world's  sin.  Divine  love  in  the  Incarnation  appears  like  a  brilliant
star,  like  that  star  the  "  wise  men  "  saw  in  the  east ;  but  in  the  Crucifixion,  with  all  its
indignities  and  agonies,  it  appears  like  a  sun  all  ablaze,  and  filling  the  universe  with  its
matchless  radiance.  On  Calvary  God's  love  is  on  fire,  and  the  flames  envelop  the
world,  and  even  the  throne  of  glory;  so  that  in  view  of  this,  how  natural  is  the
exclamation  of  the  evangelist  elsewhere.  "  God  is  love "  1  When  we  gaze  upon  it  in
sacrifice,  we  are  completely  dazzled,  so  that  we  can  see  nothing  but  love  Divine  and
infinite.

III.  The  FiniposE  of  his  loyb.  This  is  twofold.  1.  To  save  the  human  race
from  the  greatest  calamity.  "  Should  not  perish."  (1)  7'heir  perdition  was  inevitable
without  God's  interference.  If  the  Law  were  left  to  take  its  course,  its  transgressors
would  be  summarily  punished ;  they  were  already  in  the  hands  of  justice,  and  the
verdict  was  "perdition."  (2)  Ood  was  under  no  obligation  to  inteifere.  He  fully
performed  his  part  of  the  covenant,  and  surrounded  man  with  all  the  possibilities  and
advantages  of  an  obedient  and  consequently  a  happy  life;  but  man  wilfully  neglected
his  own  part,  and  transgressed  the  Law  of  his  Creator,  and  brought  upon  himself  his
awfiil  but  righteous  doom ;  and  there  was  no  stipulation  as  to  mercy,  to  there  was  no
obligation  on  the  part  of  God  to  intercede.    (3)  Qod  was  wider  n»  neoesnty  to  interfere.


ISO  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [ch.  in.  1-5^.

Ill  the  exercise  of  bis  matchless  love  in  Christ,  he  was  absolutely  free  and  independent,
for  the  world  to  him  is  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance,  and  its  inhabitants  as  mere
grasshoppers.  He  would  be  eternally  glorious  and  happy  if  the  guilty  world  were  left
to  its  horrible  fate.  Consequently,  his  love  is  as  pure  and  unselfish  as  it  is  glorious  and
infinite;  for  what  but  the  most  unselfish  and  intense  love  could  prompt  him  to  hold  this
guilty  world  in  his  arms,  and  prevent  it  from  falling  over  the  awful  precipice  ?  2.  To
hring  within  the  reach  of  all  the  greatest  good.  "But  have  eternal  life."  (1)  That
man  may  enjoy  the  greatest  good.  "  Life."  Every  life  is  good  in  itself  and  very  precious ;
but  this  life  is  the  highest  and  best  of  all ;  it  is  spiritual  life — the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,
and  represents  all  good  and  happiness  which  the  soul  needs  and  is  capable  of  enjoying.
(2)  That  man  may  enjoy  the  greatest  good  /or  ever,  "  Eternal  life  " — endless  good  and
happiness.  To  save  the  guilty  world  from  perdition  manifests  great  love;  but  Divine
love  shines  more  brilliantly  still,  when,  at  the  greatest  possible  sacrifice,  not  merely
saves  the  world  from  the  greatest  calamity,  but  brings  within  its  reach  the  greatest  good,
"eternal  life."

IV.  The  condition  ox  WBiiiH  the  BLESsiiros  or  bi8  lote  kat  be  obtained.
There  are  many  good  human  measures,  offering  great  advantages,  but  containing
disadvantageous  clauses,  which  debar  most  from  the  benefit.  But  throughout  the
great  scheme  of  redemption,  God's  love  shines  with  steady  and  ever-increasing
brilliancy.  Even  in  the  condition  on  which  its  blessings  are  offered,  simple  faith  in
Christ—"  whosoever  believeth  in  him."  1.  J%m  condition  is  essential.  The  blessings
offered  could  not  be  received,  appropriated  effectively,  without  faith,  which  means
trustful  and  hearty  reception.  "  w  ithout  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God ; "  and  it  is
quite  as  impossible  without  it  to  save  and  bless  man.  2.  This  condition  is  reasonable.
Is  it  not  reasonable  that  those  who  stand  in  need  of  salvation  should  believe  and  trust
their  Saviour?  Are  not  the  faith  and  trust  demanded  by  Divine  love  continually
exercised  in  the  affairs  of  our  daily  life,  as  conditions  of  temporal  well-being  ?  Reason
is  on  the  side  of  faith  and  against  unbelief.  3.  3%e  eondtWon  is  easy.  Divine  love
could  not  fix  upon  an  easier  condition.  A  higher  condition  doubtless  could  be
demanded  ;  but  such  is  the  greatness  of  Divine  love,  and  the  intensity  of  the  Divine
will  that  all  should  avoid  perdition  and  obtain  eternal  life,  that  they  are  offered  on  the
easiest  condition  possible— simple  faith,  simple  trust,  and  a  grateful  acceptance  of  the
benefit.  This  condition  is  in  the  power  of  all ;  and  in  view  of  what  God  has  done  through
Christ,  one  would  think  that  it  is  easier  far  to  believe  than  not.  4.  The  same  condition
is  for  cUl,  and  all  partake  of  the  benefit  on  the  same.condition,  "  Whosoever  believeth,"
etc.  There  is  no  distinction  of  any  kind,  no  partiality,  no  limit.  He  might  make  a
distinction — he  had  perfect  right ;  but  such  is  the  infinitude  of  his  love  that  he  makes
none,  no  distinction,  no  limit ;  he  leaves  this  to  man  himself,  but  not  without  every
effort  of  Divine  love  to  direct  his  conduct  and  guide  his  choice.

Lessons.  1.  The  tale  of  Ood's  love  m  most  doquently  told  hy  its  own  deeds.  If  it
Vie  asked  how  much  God  loved  the  world,  the  simple  answer  is,  "  God  so  loved  the
world  that  he  gave,"  etc.  The  gift  and  sacrifice  of  love  answer  with  Divine  and  ever-
increasing  eloquence.  2.  Man's  ruin  is  entirely  of  himself;  his  salvation  is  entirely  of
God.  The  simple  progeny  of  his  grace,  the  pure  offspring  of  his  love.  3.  It  is  far
easier  now  for  man  to  enter  life  than  fall  into  perdition.  For  between  him  and
perdition  there  are  Divine  barriers — God's  love,  in  the  agonies  of  ■uS'ering  and  the
eloquence  of  sacrifice,  warning  and  beseeching  him.  Between  him  and  life  there  is
nothing  but  his  own  unbelief.  4.  J[f  anything  can  hring  man  to  repentance  and  faith,
it  is  the  love  of  God  in  the  sacrifice  of  his  Son.  If  this  cannot,  nothing  can.  5.
Nothing  can  show  IhJe  moral  resisting  power  and  perversity  of  man  as  much  as  his
going  to  perdition  in  spite  of  Ood's  love  in  Christ.  What  power  of  madness  1  What  a
terrible  fall — to  fall  to  perdition  over  the  infinite  love  of  God ! — B.  T.

Ver.  17. — 3%«  great  purpose  of  Ood  in  the  mission  of  his  Son.  Consider  it —
I.  In  its  negative  aspect.  "  For  God  sent  not  his  Son,"  etc.  This  implies :  1.
That  Ood  might  have  sent  him  for  purposes  of  judgment.  (V)  The  world  amply  deserved
this.  The  Jewish  world  had  abused  its  great  and  special  privileges,  and  the  heathen
world  had  not  lived  up  to  the  light  it  possessed,  and  had  become  guilty  and  abominably
wicked.    Hypocrisy,  infidelity,  and  vice  were  rampant.    (2)  This  would  le  strictly  JuA,


OH.  m.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDINS  TO  ST.  JOHN.  151

If  the  Son  were  sent  to  condemn  and  destroy  the  world,  the  ends  of  justice  would  be
strictly  answered ;  for  even  the  Jewish  world  was  disimproving  under  the  preliminary
dispeDsation  of  mercy,  and  loudly  called  for  judgment.  (3)  The  world  expeated  and
fecured  this.  The  world,  being  guilty  naturally,  expected  and  feared  punishment.  It
was  suspicions  of  any  communication  from  the  other  side.  It  feared  that  it  might  be
a  message  of  vengeance.  It  was  so  in  Eden,  and  throughout  the  old  dispensation  and
at  the  beginning  of  the  new.  Friendly  angels  were  suspected  of  being  the  executors  of
justice,  and  even  the  Messiah  himself  was  expected  to  appear  as  a  Judge.  2.  Ood  did
not  do  what  he  might  have  Justly  done.  "  For  Ch>d  sent  not,"  etc.  (1)  Ee  had  a
sufficient  reason  for  this.    The  reason  doubtless  was  the  gracious  purpose  of  his  love.

(2)  The  world  is  ignorant  and  guilty  and  seyish,  so  as  to  be  blind  to  the  gracious  pur-
poses and  the  merciful  movements  of  Jehovah.     The  pure  in  heart  can  only  see  him.

(3)  Ood  moves  i.i  an  infinitely  higher  groove  than  man.  Therefore  man's  surmises  and
anticipations  of  the  Divine  purposes  are  often  false.  He  is  better  than  we  think,  and
more  gracious  than  we  expect.  "  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are
my  ways  higher  than  your  ways,"  etc.  3.  Much  of  Qod!s  goodness  to  the  world  con-
sists in  not  doing  what  he  might  Justly  and  easily  do.  (1)  This  is  seen  in  natwe.  In
thousands  of  instances  we  see  how  mighty  forces  would  be  destructive  if  not  checked
by  the  laws  of  nature,  which  are  but  the  almighty  and  gracious  and  ever-present  energy
of  the  Divine  wilL  (2)  This  is  seen  tn  providence,  as  illustrated  in  the  recorded
dealings  of  God  towards  his  people,  as  well  as  in  the  experience  of  all  who  seriously
think  and  reflect  in  eveiy  age.  "  He  has  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,"  etc.  (3)
This  is  especially  seen  in  redemption.  "  For  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to
condemn  the  world,"  etc.  Althoi'gh  the  world  deserved  this,  G-od  might  have  sent  his
Son  for  the  purpose  of  judgment,  but  in  his  goodness  he  averted  the  calamity.  He  sent
him  not  for  this  purpose.

II.  In  its  affibmattve  asfbct.  "  But  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved."
1.  The  gracious  purpose  of  Ood  in  Christ  is  salvati«n.  (1)  This  is  suggested  by  the  fact
of  the  Incarnation.  God  might  have  sent  his  Son  into  the  world  to  judge  it,  to  puni»h
it.  He  had  a  perfect  right  to  do  this,  but  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would  do  it.  The
Incarnation  does  not  seem  essential  to  judge  and  punish.  He  could  do  this  without  it.
The  fact  suggests  that  the  Divine  purpose  was  not  vengeance,  but  salvation;  not
judgment,  but  mercy.  (2)  This  is  proved  by  the  mission  tf  the  Son  in  the  world.  It
was  "  peace  on  earth,  and  good  wiU  to  men."  He  appeared  not  with  the  sword  of
vengeance,  but  with  the  golden  sceptre  of  mercy;  and  rather  than  kill  any  one
physically  or  morally,  he  voluntarily  submitted  to  be  killed  himself,  and  from  death
offered  life  to  the  world,  even  to  his  crudest  foes.  (3)  This  is  proved  by  the  effects  of
his  mission  in  the  world.  The  effects  were  not  destruction,  but  reformation ;  not  death,
but  life ;  not  vengeance,  but  salvation.  His  ministry  and  Divine  energy  healed  multi-
tudes physically  and  spiritually.  He  cheered,  quickened,  and  saved  them.  2.  The
purpose  of  Ood  is  the  salvation  of  the  world,  and  the  whole  world.  "That  the  world
should  be  saved."  His  purpose  is  as  gracious  and  tmiversal  as  his  love.  It  embraces
the  world.  Without  any  distinction  of  nationality,  race,  character,  education,  or
position,  the  purpose  is  worthy  of  Grod  as  a  Divine  Philanthropist.  3.  The  purpose  of
God  tB  the  salvation  of  the  world  through  the  Son.  "  That  the  world  through  him,"  etc.
(1)  He  is  the  Medium  of  salvation,  the  great  Agent  and  Author  of  eternal  salvation.
Through  him  the  world  was  created,  is  supported,  and  through  him  it  will  be  saved.
What  he  has  done  and  is  doing  has  made  the  salvation  of  the  world  possible,  and
through  him  already  the  world  is  potentially  saved.  (2)  He  is  the  orily  Medium  oj
talvation.  He  is  the  only  Saviour.  There  is  no  other,  and  no  other  would  do.  If
some  one  else  would  sufBce,  the  Son  would  not  be  sent.  The  world  could  be  con-
demned and  destroyed  through  other  means,  but  could  be  saved  through  the  Son  alone.
(3)  He  is  an  all-efficient  Medium  of  salvation.  The  Divine  purpose  of  salvation,  in  its
self-sacrificing  love,  its  greatness,  universality,  its  difSculties,  found  in  him  an  efficient
Medium.  He  is  equal  to  the  task.  He  has  authority  to  save :  (}od  sent  him.  He  is
mighty  to  save :  the  Son  of  God.  An  almighty  Saviour  by  nature,  by  birth,  by  Name,
by  experience,  and  by  ample  proofs  and  Divine  and  human  testimonials,  he  intends  to
save ;  he  was  sent  for  that  purpose,  and  his  purpose  and  love  are  one  with  those  of  Oroi
who  sent  him.    4,  The  gracious  purpose  of  Ood  to  save  the  world  through  the  Son


152  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  xu.  l-3«.

makes  its  salvation  very  hopeful.  "  For  God  sent  not,"  etc.  In  view  of  this,  in  spite
of  the  world's  sin  and  terrible  unbelief,  we  see  infinite  possibilities  of  its  salvation.  It
is  now  a  glorious  possibility.  Shall  it  become  a  practical  fact  ?  This  is  the  Divine
purpose.  Shall  it  fail?  God  has  answered,  it  shall  not  fail  on  his  part.  Let  the  world
answer.

CoNCLtTSiON.  1.  What  Ood  did  to  the  world  was  infinitely  more  difficult  than  what
he  might  have  done.  He  could  easily  punish  it,  but  to  save  it  cost  him  infinite  sacri-
fice. 2.  What  he  did,  when  contrasted  with  what  he  might  have  done,  stands  forth  as  a
brilliant  illustration  of  Ms  grace  and  a  monument  of  his  love.  3.  What  he  did  will  be
a  greater  condemnation  of  the  impenitent  world  than  what  he  might  have  done.  It  has
placed  the  world  under  obligations  and  responsibilities  which  neither  time  nor  eternitv
can  obliterate.  The  punishment  of  love  will  be  more  severe  than  the  punishment  of
justice,  4.  What  he  did  will  bring  greater  glory  to  his  Name.  He  will  be  infinitely
more  glorious  in  the  anthems  of  a  saved  world  than  he  would  have  been  In  the  walls
of  a  lost  one. — B.  T.

Vers.  25 — 30. — The  Bridegroom's  friend  true  to  the  last.    Notice —

I.  The  disciples'  complaint.  It  is  the  embodiment  of  a  blind  and  angry  zeal.  And
as  such :  1.  It  is  ever  disparaging  in  its  language.  "  He  that  was  with  thee  beyond
Jordan."  They  address  their  own  master  as  "  Rabbi,"  but  speak  of  Jesua  as  "  he  that
was,"  etc.,  as  if  he  had  no  name ;  and,  if  he  had,  it  was  not  worth  mentioning  compared
with  their  master's.  The  memory  of  angry  zeal  is  very  short,  and  its  respect  for  sup-
posed opponents  or  rivals  is  shorter  still.  2.  It  is  ever  contradictory  in  its  language.
"To  whom  thou  hast  borne  witness."  This  part  of  their  complaint  contradicts  the
whole;  for,  had  they  reflected  a  little,  they  would  find  that  the  present  actions  of  Jesus
were  in  perfect  harmony  with  John's  past  testimony.  Blind  zeal  is  ever  contradictory,
contradicting  truth,  God,  the  ministry,  and  even  itself.  3.  It  is  ever  inaccurate  in
its  language,  "Behold,  the  same  baptizeth."  This  was  virtually  true,  but  literally
False.  It  was  a  hearsay  mistake  of  the  Pharisees,  which  the  evangelist  had  to  correct.
Neither  cruel  opposition  nor  angry  zeal  is  over-careful  about  the  niceties  of  truth  and
accuracy  of  statement.  To  hear  a  thing  is  quite  enough  for  its  purpose.  4.  It  is  ever
exaggerating  in  its  language.  "  And  all  men  come  to  him."  Would  this  were  true  1
He  invited  all,  and  they  ought  to  come.  Doubtless  Jesus  was  more  popular  new  than
John.  The  popular  flow  was  towards  him ;  but  that  all  men  came  to  him  was  an
exaggeration,  as  proved  by  the  evangelist's  statement,  "And  no  man  receiveth  his
testimony."  Jealous  zeal  is  ever  exaggerating.  It  sees  a  crowd  in  a  few,  and  sometimes
only  a  few  in  a  large  crowd.  There  is  a  vast  difference  between  its  reports  and  tho^«
of  calm  and  unbiased  truth.  5.  It  is  ever  calculated  te  do  much  harm.  It  was  calcu-
lated, in  this  instance,  to  prejudice  John  ag^iinst  Jesus,  and  create  in  his  breast  a  spirit
of  jealousy  and  rivalry,  especially  if  we  consider  the  plausibility  of  the  complaint.  (1)
It  is  ecBprensed  in  a  plausible  language  and  manner.  He  to  whom  thou  barest  witness
has  set  up  in  opposition  against  thee.  Behold,  he  baptizeth  in  the  very  place  where  thou
used  to  baptize;  and  this,  after  all,  is  his  treatment  to  thee  for  thy  favour  and  friend-
ship. (2)  It  is  made  by  warm  friends.  His  old  disciples,  in  an  enthusiastic  and  kind
spirit  and  from  good  motives.  And  this  will  go  very  far  to  influence  most  teachers.
(3)  It  is  made  in  a  very  critical  period.,  John's  position  was  altogether  unique
and  mysterious.  His  popularity  was  now  on  the  wane,  and  he  was  but  a  man.  And
such  a  complaint  made  at  such  a  period  was  calculated  strongly  to  tempt  him  to
doubt  and  melancholy,  if  not  to  a  spirit  of  rivalry  and  jealousy.  And  what  an  incal-
culable harm  would  this  be  I  It  would  be  a  source  of  joy  to  infidelity  and  atheism
through  ages,  and  most  damaging  to  the  gospel,  if  its  first  great  herald  gave  way  in  the
hour  of  temptation,  prtved  unworthy  of  his  mission,  and  unfaithful  to  his  trust.

II.  Johk's  triumphant  defence.  He  stood  firm  as  a  rock  and  majestically  calm  in
the  sudden  and  sweeping  storm.  His  character  as  the  forerunner  of  the  Messiah  never
8hone  more  brightly  than  on  this  occasion,  and,  being  his  last  public  testimony  to
Jesus,  it  reaches  a  glorious  climax  and  a  grand  peroration.  His  defence  reveals:  1.  The
spirituality  of  his  private  conceptions.  (1)  He  looks  at  heaven  as  the  source  qf  spiritual
ftfts.  "A  man  can  receive  notliing,"  etc.  This  is  the  starting-point  of  his  noble
(letionce.     Before  the  breath  of  jealousy,  the  sugger^ons  of  rivalry,  and  the  stormt  ef


oH.ni.  1— 36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  158

strife,  he  goes  up  at  once  into  bis  native  air,  the  birtViplace  of  his  mission,  the  nursery
of  good  and  holy  thoughts,  and  the  source  of  spiritual  power  and  influence.  (2)  He
looks  at  heaven  as  the  only  source  of  ^rituai  gifts.  "  A  man  can  receive  nothing,"
etc.  You  may  get  the  same  kind  of  article  in  different  warehouses ;  but  spiritual  power
is  the  gift  of  God,  and  of  him  alone.  Divine  commissions  are  issued  only  from  the
Divine  throne,  and  spiritual  endowments  come  only  from  on  high ;  so  that  neither  John
nor  Jesus  could  exercise  any  spiritual  power  but  what  he  had  received.  (3)  From  this
standpoint  all  is  harmonious.  There  is  no  room  for  pride  or  dejection,  and  the  jealous
complaint  of  the  disciples  is  entirely  swept  away.  John  and  Jesus  were  exactly  what
Heaven  made  them^^Tohn  the  herald  and  Jesus  the  coming  Messiah.  All  things  which
proceed  from  heaven  are  harmonious ;  and  if  we  want  to  see  them  in  their  harmony  and
beauty  we  must  view  them  from  above.  If  we  wish  to  rise  above  the  mists  and  storms
of  party  jealousy  and  rivalry,  we  must  ascend  into  the  home  of  love,  peace,  and  order,
and  look  at  things  in  the  Ught  of  heaven.  From  this  altitude  there  can  be  no  rivalry
between  John  and  Jesus.  All  Divine  agencies  are  harmonious.  There  can  be  no
jealousy  between  the  morning  star  and  the  blazing  sun.  Had  John  remained  down,
and  viewed  things  from  his  disciples'  standpoint,  be  would  see  and  feel  as  they  did.
But,  like  an  eagle,  he  flew  up  to  the  vicinity  of  the  sun,  the  central  light  of  the  king-
dom of  heaven,  and  all  was  harmony.  2.  27ie  consistency  of  his  public  testimony  vnth
regard  to  the  Messiah  and  himself,  (1)  As  to  what  lie  was  not.  "  I  am  not  the
Christ."  Such  were  the  character,  the  popularity,  and  the  circumstances  of  John  that
he  was  naturally  suspected  of  being  the  Messiah.  Consequently,  much  of  his  testimony
was  negative,  and  with  all  his  might  he  iterated  and  reiterated,  "  I  am  not  the  Christ,"
etc.  (2)  As  to  what  he  was.  His  forerunner.  "  I  am  sent  before  him."  Twice  he
dii-ectly  pointed  him  out,  but  as  a  rule  he  spoke  of  him  in  general,  but  characteristic,
terms,  that  they  might  know  him  rather  by  his  character  and  deeds.  (3)  As  to  the
evidence  of  his  consistency.  Such  was  the  consistency  of  his  testimony  to  the  Messiah
that  he  could  most  confidently  appeal  to  his  disciples,  and  even  to  the  complaining  ones,
"  Ye  yourselves  bear  me  witness,"  etc,  "Even  in  your  jealous  complaint  you  bear  me
witness."  The  invariable  uniformity  of  his  testimony  to  Christ  made  him  now  strong
in  the  hour  of  trial.  One  wrong  step  or  wrong  expression  may  lead  to  another.  All
the  links  make  up  the  chain.  One  weak  link  a^ects  the  whole.  It  is  a  great  source  of
strength  to  the  preacher  if  he  can  summon  his  audience  to  bear  witness  to  the  con-
sistency of  his  ministry.  One  part  of  life  affects  the  other.  John  in  the  wilderness
was  a  great  help  to  John  at  ^non.  If  we  wish  our  public  testimony  to  be  consistent,
let  our  private  conceptions  be  spiritual  and  heavenly.  3.  The  reasons  of  his  continued
attachment.  (1)  The  relationship  of  Christ  to  believers.  He  is  the  Bridegroom;  they
are  the  bride.  As  such,  the  bride  is  his ;  "  For  be  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  Bride-
groom," and  no  one  else.  His  claims  are  absolute,  sacred,  and  indisputable.  The  bride
is  his.  (2)  His  ovm  relationship  to  Christ.  His  frienii.  "  The  friend  of  the  Bride-
groom." As  such,  his  duty  was  to  set  forth  his  excellences  so  as  to  win  the  heart  of
the  bride.  The  Bridegroom  was  partly  a  stranger.  He  required  a  friend  to  introduce
him.  Such  he  found  in  John.  He  realized  his  position  and  duties.  By  his  own
superiority,  and  the  plausible,  but  evil,  suggestions  of  his  disciples,  he  was  tempted  to
take  the  place  of  the  Bridegroom  and  win  the  bride's  affections  for  himself;  but  he  felt
that  in  this  he  would  not  be  a  friend,  but  the  meanest  foe.  He  realized  his  relation-
ship to  Christ,  and  performed  its  obligations  with  increasing  firmness  and  happiness.
He  had  no  higher  ambition  than  to.  be  the  Bridegroom's  friend.  4.  The  sources  of  his
joy.  "  Bejoiceth  greatly,"  and  why  ?  (1)  At  a  fuller  recognition  of  Jesus.  Before
there  was  expectation,  and  therefore  anxiety  and  doubt ;  but  these  are  gone.  He  hears
his  voice — the  first  notes  of  his  public  ministry.  He  recognized  him  before  by  appear-
ance, and  pointed  to  him  as  the  "  Lamb  of  God ;  "  but  now  recognizes  him  by  his  voice,
and  his  voice  filled  the  land  with  Divine  music  and  his  soul  with  ecstatic  joy.  (2)  At
(Tesus*  success.  His  success  in  vrinning  the  affections  of  the  bride.  The  joy  of  having
won  the  bride  is  the  Bridegroom's,  but  his  friend,  standing  by  and  hearing,  shares  it.
The  voice  of  the  Bridegroom  with  the  bride  is  joyous — ^the  joy  of  mutual  satisfactiou
and  delight,  There  is  no  joy  to  be  compared  with  that  of  triumphant  and  ardent  love.
Christian  joy  is  common  and  contagious.  The  success  of  the  Master  produces  joy  in  all
ihe  disciples.    At  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  all  the  good  wish  him  joy,  and  are' joyous


154  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [uh.  m.  1-^6.

with  him,  especially  his  friends  and  forerunners.  Jesus  is  introduced  to  the  soul ;  but
a  long  time  of  anxiety  often  elapses  between  the  introduction  and  success.  When  the
success  comes,  what  a  joy  1  (3)  At  thefvlfllment  of  his  own  mission.  When  he  heard
the  voice  of  the  Bridegroom  he  heard  the  first  victorious  notes  of  his  own  mission ;  for
his  mission  was  to  bring  the  Bridegroom  and  the  bride  together,  and  prepare  for  the
Lord  a  ready  people.  He  rejoiced  that  the  great  One  he  iad  heralded  had  come.  He
was  often  anxious  and  hesitating,  but  now  joyous.  If  we  herald  Christ's  coming  faith-
fully, there  will  be  no  disappointment  on  his  part ;  and,  when  come,  every  expectation
will  be  more  than  filled  and  every  want  more  than  satisfied.  John  was  joyous  because
his  mission  was  fulfilled.  The  match  was  made  between  the  King's  Son  and  the
captive  daughter  of  Zion — ^between  heaven  and  earth,  between  Jesus  and  believing
souls ;  and  it  was  a  very  happy  one  on  both  sides.  The  Bridegroom  said  of  the  bride,
"  As  the  lily  among  thorus,  so  is  my  love  among  the  daughters,"  and  the  bride  said
of  hira,  "Thou  art  the  Eose  of  Sharon,  and  the  Lily,"  etc;  and  the  bridegroom's  friend,
standing  by,  heareth,  and  rejoiceth  greatly.  What  was  intended  to  fill  him  with
jealousy  filled  him  with  joy,  and,  being  filled  with  holy  joy,  he  had  no  room  for  any-
thing else.  5.  Eta  thorough  self-renunciation.  "He  must  increase,"  etc.  (1)  The
necessity  of  this  is  recognized.  John  saw  the  "  must "  of  the  case.  It  was  becoming  and
nei  essary — ^the  natural  course  of  things.  He  must  increase  personally,  officially,  repre-
sentatively, itnd  dispensationally.  He  must  increase  in  his  influence  in  the  hearts  of
humanity,  in  the  institutions  of  the  world,  and  in  the  songs  of  the  redeemed.  And
John  must  decrease  officially.  He  had  introduced  the  Bridegroom  to  the  bride  and
the  bride  to  the  Bridegroom,  and  his  work  was  at  »n  end,  (2)  The  necessity  of  this
b  willingly  recognized.  "  He  must,"  etc.  It  is  one  thing  to  see  the  necessity  of  an
event,  it  is  another  to  submit  to  it  willingly.  John  not  only  saw  the  necessity  and
recognized  the  law  of  increase  u  the  lot  of  Jesus  and  of  decrease  as  his,  but  accepted  its
fiat  even  wiih  joy  and  delight.  It  is  not  only  the  logic  of  his  head,  but  the  langunge  of
his  heart.  "I  am  willing;  I  am  glad.  Let  him  ascend  and  shine;  I  joyously  disap-
pear that  he  may  be  manii'ested."  A  noble  self-sacrifice  of  the  friend,  and  a  befitting
introduction  to  the  even  nobler  one  of  the  Bridegroom.

Lessons.  1.  Every  true  minister  it  a  forerunner  of  Christ,  i«eparing  souls  tc  receive
him.  When  Christ  enters  the  soul  by  faith,  the  office  of  the  forerunner  is,  to  a  great
extent,  at  an  end.  2.  Ministers  should  not  go  hetween  Jesus  and  helievera.  The  frier  d
of  the  Bridegroom  should  nut  attempt  to  take  his  place  in  the  esteem  and  affections  of
the  bride.  This  is  the  essence  of  the  great  apostasy.  The  friend  should  act  as  a  friend
all  through,  and  nothing  more.  3.  There  should  he  no  jealousy  or  rivalry  between  the
disciple  and  the  Master,  nor  between  any  of  the  disciples  themselves.  Their  interests
are  identical,  and  their  duty  is  to  elevate  Christ  and  bring  humanity  into  living  fellow-
ship with  him.  4.  Ministers  should  avoid  the  temptations  of  declining  years,  waning
popularity,  and  Jealousy  of  a  popular  contemporary.  All  this  should  be  kept  down  by
a  spirit  absorbed  in  the  sacred  mission.  Many  can  act  on  the  sta^^e  with  better  grace
than  they  can  leave  it.  The  last  notes  are  often  out  of  harmony  with  the  tune  of  life.
Let  the  end  be  a  sunset  like  that  of  John,  beautiful  and  glowing — a  convincing  proof  of
an  earnest  and  a  sincere  life. — B.  T.

Vers.  1,  2. — Coming  to  Jesus  by  night.    I.  The  simple  fact  is  stated.    We  are

left  to  draw  our  own  inferences.  Evidently  we  are  meant  to  think  the  worse  of  Nico-
denius  for  coming  by  night,  and  we  may  draw  inferences  without  riiaking  Nicodemus
out  to  be  an  exceptionally  bad  character.  Just  the  average  man  of  the  world,  with  a
position  made  for  him,  having  much  to  lose  by  taking  up  boldly  with  new  ways,  and
therefore  feeling  he  could  not  be  too  cautious  in  his  first  approach  to  Jesus.  He  did
not  want  to  be  compromised.

IL  JeSTTS  did  not  send  aw  at  the  HAN  WHO  CAME  BY  NIOHT.  He  did  not  stand
upon  his  dignity.  He  did  not  say,  "  Go  away  again,  and  come  by  daylight."  Jesus  is
the  most  accessible  of  beings.  It  is  better  to  come  by  day  than  by  night,  because  such
a  coming  indicates  a  brave,  determined  mind,  bent  on  getting  at  the  truth,  and  so
much  the  better  placed  for  reaching  the  truth,  because  it  has  risen  above  that  fear  of
raaa  which  brinseth  a  snare.  But  it  is  better  to  come  by  night  than  not  at  all ;  and
111  matters  a  great  deal  to  us  to  know  that  Jesus  did  not  sen  i  this  man  away  becaitse


en.  Til.  I- 3-^.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  165

he  came  by  night.  Thus  we  have  illustration  how  Jesus  does  not  break  the  bruiseil
reed  or  quench  the  smoking  flax.  If  weak  ones  are  to  make  headway  in  the  path  of
faith  and  righteousness,  they  must  not  be  dealt  with  hardly  in  the  beginning.

ni.  Jbbus  hab  thb  same  message  whenever  wb  may  comb.  Whatever  hour
Nicodemus  may  choose,  it  is  the  same  truth  lie  will  have  to  hear,  the  same  process  he
will  have  to  go  through.  Come  at  midnight  or  come  at  noonday,  the  announcement  is
the  same, "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."

IV.  C0NTBA8T  THE  coMiNO  OF  NiooDEMUs  WITH  HIS  DBPAKTaKE.  Not  that  We  are
told  how  he  departed.  He  may  have  succeeded  in  his  immediate  desire.  His  visit  to
Jesus  may  have  remained  unknown  to  everybody  but  Jesus  and  himself.  He  came  in
the  darkness  of  physical  night,  and  in  the  darkness  of  physical  night  he  probably  went
away.  But  nevertheless,  uncomfortable  consequences  must  have  come  to  him  in  ways
he  did  not  at  all  expect.  He  came  in  the  gross  darkness  of  spiritual  ignorance,  but  he
can  hardly  have  gone  away  without  some  dim  rays  of  spiritual  light  upon  his  path.
There  must,  at  all  events,  have  been  a  disturbing  sense  of  a  larger  world  than  he  had
been  heretofore  accustomed  to.  He  had  been  brought  face  to  face  with  more  searching
views  of  life.  You  may,  perhaps,  choose  what  you  will  begin  and  how,  but  how  you  wiU
end  is  beyond  your  choice.  The  one  thing  that  everybody  now  knows  about  Nico-
demus is  that  he  is  the  man  who  came  to  Jesus  by  night.  What  a  commentary  on  the
vain  wisdom  and  expectations  of  men  1  The  very  means  Nicodemus  takes  to  ensure
secrecy  end  in  the  widest  publicity.  And  yet  it  is  a  publicity  that  does  not  hurt  Nico-
demus, and  it  is  for  the  world's  good.  It  is  long,  long  ago  since  it  could  matter  in  the
least  to  Nicodemus  who  knew  the  way  of  his  coming  to  Jesus. — Y.

Vers.  2,  3. — Jesus  humlling  vaunted  knowledge.  I.  Thk  vauutbd  knowleoob  op
NiooDEMTia.  Nicodemus  wants  to  come  to  Jesus  with  safety  to  his  own  position,  and
he  gets  over  the  difficulty,  as  he  thinks,  by  coming  at  night.  But  such  a  proceeding  may
produce  greater  difficulties  than  it  removes.  Now  he  has  come,  what  shall  he  say  ?  His
aim  is  to  sound  Jesus  a  little,  and  find  out  if  it  will  be  politic  to  encourage  him.  We
may  be  toUrablj  sure  that,  with  such  aims,  Jesus  would  not  make  his  task  the  easier.
Imagine  Nicodemus,  after  going  through  the  usual  salutations  and  beginnings  of  con-
versation, making  his  way  to  the  business  that  has  brought  him.  How,  then,  ought  he
to  have  begun  ?  Surely  something  after  this  fashion :  "  You  will  think  it  a  strange
thing  for  me  to  come  under  cover  of  the  dark,  but  you  must  know  that  I  am  a  Pharisee
and  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  and  so  I  cannot  come  just  at  any  hour  I  please.  Coming  in
the  daylight,  my  coming  woidd  get  known,  and  all  the  good  things  I  have  worked  so
hard  to  gain  would  speedily  vanish.  So,  before  I  risk  them,  I  want  to  know  a  little
more  about  you."  But  instead  of  beginning  with  simple  truth,  he  says  the  very  thing
he  ought  not  to  have  said — the  very  thing  which  was  in  plain  contradiction  to  the  way
of  his  coming.  He  says  he  knows  Jesus  has  come  from  God,  and  these  Pharisees,  one
and  all  of  them,  were  professed  servants  of  God,  ostentatious  even  in  their  service.  If,
then,  Nicodemus  had  really  believed  Jesus  to  have  come  from  God,  would  he  have
sought  conference  with  him  in  this  ignominious  fashion  ?  Nicodemus  feared  men  more
than  he  feared  God.  He  really  knows  nothing  at  all  about  God.  As  yet  he  is  a  mere
player  with  woriis  instead  of  an  earnest  dealer  in  deep  realities.  Talking  about  words
and  names  must  not  be  confounded  with  real  searching  into  things.  Nicodemus  should
have  gone  to  Jesus,  saying,  "  Thou  doer  of  marvels,  whence  hast  thou  come  ?  what  hast
thou  brought?  what  dost  thou  ask  for?"

II.  The  way  to  trde  knowledob.  Nicodemus  must  have  his  mind  cleared  of  cant
and  illusion  and  empty  tradition.  Jesus  does  this  at  once  by  one  of  those  fundamental
declarations  going  down  to  the  heart  of  human  need.  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,
he  cannot  see  the  kmgdom  of  God."  Thus  an  indication  is  given  as  to  the  sort  of
people  who  profit  by  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  Nicodemus  is  right  in  calling  Jesus  a
Teacher ;  but,  then,  he  can^  only  teach  certain  people.  Jesus,  who  came  to  establish
a  spiritual  kingdom  of  God,  can  as  yet  do  nothing  for  Nicodemus,  whose  notions  of  a
kingdom  are  of  something  having  a  power  and  splendour  to  be  perceived  by  the  bodily
.eye.  Both  Jesus  and  Nicodemus  can  talk  about  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  they  mean
very  different  things.  Jesus  knows  well  what  the  Pharisee  has  come  for.  He  suspects
that  Jesus,  unlikely  as  he  looks,  may  he  a  great  one  in  the  expected  kingdom,  and  if  «o


15«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  BT.  JOHN.     [«M,  m.  1— 36.

Nicodemus  may  get  the  first  chance  of  a  good  position.     So  the  heart  of  the  man  must
be  altogether  altered  before  he  can  listen  sympathetically  to  the  teaching  of  Jesus. — Y.

Ver.  6. — "Born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit."  I.  Obsebvb  thb  tbub  teaohgb.
This  verse  is  in  answer  to  a  question.  The  first  word  of  Jesus  to  Nicodemus  is  a  word
that  brings  a  question.  The  true  teacher  seeks  to  provoke  activity  of  mind  and  curiosity
in  the  learner.  The  question  is  certainly  a  most  absurd  one,  but  Nicodemus  had  no
time  to  prepare  a  sensiHe  one.  It  is  easy  for  us  to  be  wise  over  the  introductory  decla-
ration of  JesuB,  because  we  look  at  it  wil^h  plenty  of  illustrations  and  explanationi
shining  upon  it.  But  Nicodemus,  in  all  his  previous  thinking,  had  nothing  to  make  him
expect  Jesus  woiild  thus  speak  ;  and  so  it  is  little  wonder  to  find  him  staggered,  con-
fused, utterly  bewildered,  to  hear  Jesus  speaking  thus  calmly  of  such  a  wondrous
experience.  The  question,  however  absurd,  leads  on  to  a  piece  of  most  practical
information.

II.  The  furthbe  explanation  of  Jesus.  We  are  not  likely  to  suppose  that  being
bom  agiiin  means  to  live  natural  life  over  again.  Pew  would  care  for  that,  travelling
OTer  the  old  road,  meeting  the  old  difficulties,  fighting  the  old  battles.  Jesus  explains
that  to  be  bom  again  is  to  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit.  Being  born  of  water
means,  of  course,  passing  through  the  experience  of  repentance.  The  true  disciple  of
John  the  Baptist  was  born  of  water.  He  repented,  changed  from  his  old  view  of  life,
manifested  that  changed  view  by  changed  habits  and  practices,  and,  for  sign  of  all  this,
was  baptized  with  water.  Nicodemus  evidently  had  this  experience  still  to  go  through.
He  had  not  been  a  disciple  of  John  the  Baptist.  He  had  yet  to  see  what  a  poor  shallow
affair  an  outward  kingdom  is.  But  beins  born  of  water  takes  us  only  a  small  way  into
the  regeneration.  You  must  follow  up  discipleship  of  John  with  discipleship  of  Jesus.
You  may  cease  to  care  for  the  old,  and  yet  not  have  found  your  way  to  possession  of  the
now.  The  only  new  creature  wurth  calling  such  is  the  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.
You  must  fell  on  yonr  heart  the  breath  of  him  who  has  eternal  life.  By  repentance,
old  things  pass  away ;  by  spiritual  birth,  all  things  become  new.  The  spiritual  man
looks  on  a  virtually  new  world.  The  precious  becomes  worthless,  and  the  worthless
precious ;  the  once  neglected  is  sought  for,  and  the  once  sought  for  i»  neglected. — T.

Vers.  14, 16.— 2%*  lifting  up  of  the  Son  of  man.  These  are  probably  the  closing
words  of  Jesus  to  Nicodemus.  Jesus  has  had  to  teach  him  great  spiritual  truths  from
the  analogies  of  natural  birth  and  the  wind  blowing  where  it  listeth.  Now  he  will
conclude  with  an  historical  parallel.

I.  An  EONOtJKED  NAME  IS  MENTIONED.  Nicodemus  and  his  sect  proressed  to  glorify
Mdses.  Jesus  did  glorify  him  in  reality.  Perhaps  Nicodemus  is  beginning  to  think
that,  after  all,  there  is  nothing  in  Jesus  likely  to  be  of  much  service,  no  correspondence
between  outward  appearance  and  desired  results.  And  now  he  is  made  to  understand
that  Jesus  is  well  acquainted  with  all  the  proceedings  of  Moses,  and  can  use  them  just
when  they  are  wanted.  Moses  is  not  only  giver  of  laws,  prescriber  of  ceremonies,
fountain  of  honoured  traditions ;  he  is  also  a  saviour,  and  a  saviour  by  methods  that  to
the  natural  eye  look  to  have  nn  salvation  in  them.

IT.  A  PKESsiNO  NEED  18  suaGESTED.  There  must  be  deliverance  from  destruction.
Something  had  to  be  done  for  the  bitten,  dying  children  of  Israel,  and  God  gave  Moses
instructions  according  to  his  own  wisdom.  Other  means  might  have  been  employed,  but
those  means  actually  were  employed  which  served  the  largest  ends.  Why  Moses  had
to  raise  the  brazen  serpent  is  not  seen  till  Jesus  is  lifted  on  the  cross.  Then  we  under-
stand how  God  has  his  eye  on  perishing  individuals  still.  Nicodemus  is  not  yet  bitten
of  a  guilty  conscience.  His  aims  are  earthly  and  limited.  He  wants  something  for
Iiig  own  temporal  advantage — something  ministering  to  his  pride  as  a  Jew.  And
now  Jesus  hints  to  Nicodemus  how  he  must  discover  his  spiritual  danger,  if  he  is  to
get  the  full  blessing  from  Jesus.  Jesus  is  a  Saviour  as  well  as  a  Teacher.  He  would
have  men  learn  first  their  need  of  salvation,  and  then,  being  saved,  they  will  go  on
to  learn  from  him  how  best  to  use  the  life  that  has  been  saved.

III.  The  DEMAND  FOB  8IMPLB  FAITH.     Such  a  demand  must  not  be  loft  out  of  such  -
a  discourse.    There  are  many  things  Jesus  cannot  yet  explain  to  Nicodemus.    Even
wero  Nicodemui  a  spiritual  man,  he  would  have  to  wait  while  Jesus  goes  on  through  all


OH.  ra.  1—36.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  157

the  transactions  of  his  great  work.  How  mysterious  the  announcement  of  the  lifting
up  of  Jesus  would  seem  when  it  was  first  maJe!  But  Jesus,  we  may  be  sure,  made
that  announcement  with  a  view  to  all  in  future  ages  who  should  read  of  his  lifting  up
on  tho  cross.  Nioodemus  might  not  come  again,  so  Jesus  sends  him  away  with  as
much  of  essential  truth  as  possible.  Let  us,  too,  be  deeply  thankful  for  the  parallel
Jesus  draws  between  the  brazen  serpent  and  himself.  It  makes  us  see  the  power  residing
in  simple  faith  when  that  faith  goes  out  to  an  object  of  God's  own  appointment. — Y.

Ver.  16. — The  love  of  Ood  in  deed  and  truth.  Here  the  producing  cause  of  the
gospel  is  briefly  stated — why  men  need  it,  and  why  God  sends  it.  How  God  regards
the  world  and  what  he  would  do  for  it  are  here  sot  before  us.

I.  The  world  is  a  pbeishingi  wokld.  If  those  believing  in  the  Son  of  God  will  not
perish,  the  conclusion  is  plain  that  those  who  remain  unbelieving  in  Christ  will  perish.
The  word  might  have  been,  "God  so  loved  the  world  as  to  fill  it  with  all  manner  of
things  pleasant  to  eye  and  ear  and  taste,  comforts  various  and  numberless  for  the
temporal  life  of  man."  But  the  awful  word  "  perish  "  is  brought  in,  and  so  we  are
forced  to  think,  first  of  all,  not  of  comforts  and  blessings,  but  of  perils.  Drop  the  word
"  perish  "  out  of  the  text,  and  the  profit  of  all  the  rest  is  gone.  The  world  is  a  perishing
world,  and  we  are  perishing  in  the  midst  of  it.  The  assumption  that  man  is  a  perishing
being  without  Christ  underlies  every  page  of  the  Scriptures,  and  is  implied  in  every
doctrine  of  the  gospel.  The  very  fact  that  there  is  a  gospel  is  the  very  proof  that  the
gospel  is  needed.  None  but  he  who  made  us  can  have  an  adequate  sense  of  the  ruin
of  our  nature  through  sin.  Only  he  knows  all  the  glory  aud  perfection  of  which  we
are  capable  without  sin;  only  he  can  estimate  the  correspmding  shame  and  corruption
when  sin  has  gotten  the  mastery.     God  only  knows  all  we  can  enjoy,  all  we  can  suffer.

II.  The  FEBLDtO  OF   OVS,  DAKQBR   NEEDS   TO  BE   PRODaOED  AND   INTENSIFIED  IN  TJ8.

It  gets  hidden  from  our  eyes  by  present  comforts  and  enjoyment  And  God  knows  how
indifferent  we  are,  how  we  trifle  with  the  danger,  and  style  those  who  would  impress  us
with  it  fanatical  and  impertinent.  And  so  we  need  God's  grace  opening  our  eye»  to
spiritual  danger  as  well  as  offering  to  us  spiritual  salvation.  The  feeling  of  danger  will
never  come  of  itself.  The  danger  is  a  spiritual  one,  and  hence  only  as  the  Spirit  of ,
God  takes  hold  of  us  shall  we  feel  how  real  and  great  the  danger  is.  There  will  be  no
fear  of  our  failing  to  see  the  danger  when  once  the  Holy  Spirit  gets  full  control  in  our
life.  We  are  ever  to  remember  that  part  of  hii  work  is  pressing  home  upon  us  our  need
of  salvation  and  our  debt  to  a  Saviour,

III.  The  danger  seen,  the  Saviour  will  bk  welcomed.  We  cannot  look  to  ona
another  for  salvation.  The  peiishing  cannot  help  the  perishing.  We  need  a  Saviour
who  does  not  need  to  be  saved  himself.  It  is  a  grand  thinj;  to  point,  not  to  a  feeble,
uncertain  earthly  friend,  but  to  a  heavenly  one.  When  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  perishing,
we  shall  rejoice  in  being  able  to  look  to  such  a  Saviour.  Faith  grows  gradually  and
strongly  when  the  peril  and  the  Saviour  are  continually  present  to  our  thoughts.  Then,
with  salvation  ever  more  anil  more  present  to  us  as  a  reality,  the  souse  of  God's  love  to
the  world  will  be  also  more  and  more  an  inspiring  power  in  our  hearts. — ^T.

Ver.  30. — John  and  Jesns.    We  have  here —

I.  A  MAN  putting  self  IN  ITS  PROPEE  PLACE.  Johu  is  a  man  ready  to  say,  "  I
must  decrease."  If  he  had  not  been  a  man  ready  to  say  it,  he  would  never  have  got
the  chance  of  saying  it.  Ability  to  speak  in  this  spirit  does  not  spring  up  all  at  once.
MuQh  in  John's  position  was  very  tempting  to  self.  It  is  easily  seen  how  painful  it
might  have  been  to  hear  friends  coming  to  say  that  the  crowds  once  wont  to  flock
round  John  were  now  flocking  round  Jesus.  But  John  liad  self  well  in  check  and
discipline.  And  we  must  have  the  same  attainment,  or  self-humiliation  in  some  shape
will  assuredly  come.  The  truly  humble  man  never  can  be  humiliated.  John  must
ever  have  borne  himself  humbly,  not  forgetting  his  own  sins  while  so  earnest  in
denouncing  the  sins  of  others.  We  must  bo  willing  to  accept  any  kind  of  decrease  that
is  for  the  world's  good  and  Christ's  gloryl  Put  self  in  the  proper  place;  that  is,
always  keep  it  out  of  the  first  place.

IL  A  MAN  PUTTING  Christ  in  his  proper  plaok.  The  increase  of  Christ  and  the
decrease  of  John  were  all  of  a  piece.     John's  work  was  soon  done.     His  message  was


158


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOKDING  TO  8X.  JOHN.      [oh.  iv.  1—64.


soon  given,  and  then  he  could  only  begin  over  again.  Witli  all  his  greatneis  he  was
only  one  among  the  company  of  witnesses.  He  did  his  own  work  in  his  own  generation,
and  then  passed  away.  He  had  his  time  of  increase — disciples  increasing,  influence
increasing,  name  more  widely  known;  and  then  Jesus  comes  on  the  scene,  and  there
is  no  room  for  Jesus  and  John  together.  But  in  his  own  decrease  John  can  rejoice,  for
it  ia  a  consequence  of  the  increase  of  Jesus.  The  day  never  came  when  Jesus  had  to
look  upon  some  successor  to  himself  and  say,  "He  must  increase,  and  I  must  decrease."
That  is  the  only  satisfactory  decrease  in  any  of  us  which  comes  by  the  increase  of
Christ.  He  can  never  have  too  much  authority,  never  be  too  much  spoken  about.  As
life  goea  on,  the  feeling  should  deepen  that  we  cannot  do  without  him.

III.  A  MAN  PHTTING  HIS  FELLOW-MBN  IN  THEIB  PBOPEB  FULOK.     One  cau  SCO  a  Certain

chivalry  and  nobleness  in  these  disciples  of  John,  a  certain  intention  not  to  desert  their
master.  But  John  intimates  that  going  to  Jesus  in  the  right  spirit  is  advance  and  not
apostasy.  It  is  going  from  a  lower  school  to  a  higher.  Jotin  can  only  begin  j  Jesus
must  finish.  Swearing  by  human  teachers  and  authorities  is  a  miserable  business.  It
is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  who  is  to  lead  us  into  truth.  There  is  no  true
getting  of  understanding  unless  we  understand  from  Jesus  what  he  wishes,  what  he
claims,  what  he  proposes.

IV.  A  MAN  WHOM  Jbsos  WILL  PUT  IN  HIS  TRUE  PLACE  AT  LAST.  It  is  Only  relatively
that  John  deci  eases.  Ceasing  to  serve  in  a  way  that  draws  great  public  attention,  he
yet  goes  on  with  real  service  just  as  much.  Jesus  will  glorify  in  his  own  way  those
who  glorify  him,  and  it  will  be  the  best  way.  Not  a  servant  of  Christ,  however  obscure
his  sphere,  however  self-forgettiug  his  life,  slips  to  the  grave  without  his  Master's  notice.
There  is  a  sense  in  tvhich  we  are  able  to  say,  and  bound  to  say,  "  He  must  increase,
and  I  must  increase  too." — Y.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  IV.


Vers.  1 — 42. — 7.  The  miniilry  and  rete-
lation  of  the  Lord  to  those  hey  and  the  etricl
compass  of  the  theoeraoy.  This  passage  de-
scribes an  incident  of  consummate  interest,
and  records  a  specimen  of  our  Lord's  inter-
course with  individuals,  and  the  reaction
of  that  instruction  upon  the  disciples.  The
event  is  a  solitary  chink  through  which  the
light  of  historical  fact  falls  upon  an  other-
wise darkened  and  unknown  period  of  the
Saviour's  life.  When  we  sldrt  a  forest  we
see  at  intervals,  where  by  some  accident  of
growth  the  light  falls  upon  a  narrow  space,
a  miniature  world  of  life  and  loveliness  of
every  kind,  suggesting  what  might  happen
if  every  square  yard  of  the  forest  could
receive  a  similar  illumination.  Every  day
of  that  wondrous  life  of  Cluist  may  have
been  equally  full  of  meaning  to  some  souls.
"  These  things  are  written,  that  we  may
believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God ;  and
that  believing  we  may  have  life."

The  relation  of  the  Jews  to  tire  Samari-
tans gives  a  special  character  and  both
typical  and  symbolical  meaning  to  the  inci-
i.  lit.     The  lifelike  reality  of  thr  scene,  the


extreme  nnlikelihood  of  inch  an  event
having  been  fabricated  with  oousummate
art  to  establish  any  specific  theological  con-
clusion, the  natural  appropriateness  of  the
transaction,  all  confer  a  high  value  and  his-
toricity upon  this  paragraph.  Thoma,  after
the  manner  of  Strauss,  finds  the  origin  of
every  detail  in  the  story  of  Eliezer  at  the
well ;  but  there  are  no  limits  to  what  alle-
gorists  may  dream,  if  the  reins  are  thrown
on  the  neck  of  imagination.  The  story  of
Philip's  ministry  in  Samaria  and  the  suc-
cesses of  the  gospel  in  the  early  days  of
Christianity  are  also  supposed  to  have  aided
the  composition  of  the  story.  In  our
opinion,  Acts  viii.  is  better  explained  from
Jolin  iv.  than  the  reverse  process.  Baur's
supposition,  that  the  author  sought  to  con-
trast the  cautious  hesitation  of  the  Jetrisii
doctor  with  the  susceptible  emotional- dis-
jiosition  of  the  Samaritan  woman  as  the
representative  of  the  Gentile  world,  is  an-
reiisonable.  The  woman  is  represented  as  a
believer  in  Divine  revelation  and  worship,
in  tlie  early  traditions  of  the  Jews  them-
selves, and  even  in  their  Mtssianic  hopes,
which,  in  this  instance,  were  more  spiritual
than  those  of  the  Jews.


CH.  IV.  1—54.]     THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


159


There  are  numerong  debates  as  to  the
oi'igin  of  the  Samaritan  nation,  and  opinions
waver  as  to  whether  they  were  the  descend-
ants of  those  remnants  of  the  kingdom  of
Israel  who  were  left  in  the  district  once
oecupied  by  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and
Hanasseh,  after  the  final  deportation  under
Shalmaneser  (or  Sargon,  as  the  Assyrian
insorij)ti(ins  make  probable),  together  with
the  heathen  settlers  who  had  been  mixed
up  with  them,  or  were  solely  and  purely
of  Assyrian  origin,  as  they  appear  to  main-
tain (Ezra  iv.  2).  The  narrative  of  2
Kings  XXV.  12  implies  that  all  the  in-
habitants were  carried  away  to  cities  of  the
Medes,  but  it  is  tolerably  clear  and  emi-
nently probable  (2  Obron.  xxxiv.  9)  that
there  were  some  of  the  people  left  behind ;
so  that  the  extent  to  which  Israelitish  blood
and  ideas  prevailed  in  the  mongrel  race  is
very  difficult  to  determine.  We  know  that
heathen  notions  of  Jehovah,  and  the  worship
of  graven  images,  were  curiously  blended  (2
Kings  xvii.  28—41 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  6,  7).
But  this  is  only  what  might  be  anticipated
if  their  moral  and  religious  degeneration
corresponded  with  the  charges  brought
,  against  them  by  Hnsea  and  Amos.  In  the,
time  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  efforts  on  their
part  to  share  in  the  honours  and  indepen-
dence of  Judah  were  sternly  interdicted,
and  the  interdict  avenged  by  angry  re-
criminations which  delayed  the  progress
of  reconstruction.  The  antagonism  com-
menced then  was  deepened  into  a  deadly
rivalry  by  the  erection  of  a  temple  to  Je-
hovah on  Mount  Gerizim  (b.o.  409),  and  by
Manasseh,  brother  of  the  high  priest  of
Judah,  being  driven  from  Jerusalem  by  his
refusal  to  renounce  Sanballat's  daughter,
and  by  his  becoming  high  priest  of  the  here-
tical temple.  This  temple  on  Gerizim,  in
close  proximity  with  the  site  of  Sheohem,
the  abode  of  the  first  patriarchs,  gave  dig-
nity and  solidity  to  some  of  their  traditions
and  claims ;  and  the  modifications  they  had
introduced  into  the  text  of  the  Pentateuch
in  their  celebrated  version  of  it  helped  to
aggravate  the  schism  between  the  two
peoples.  The  district  of  country  was  lield
during  the  quarrels  of  the  Ptolemies  and
Seleucidn  alternately  by  both.  Samaritan
hatred  of  the  Jews  led  them  to  purcbuse
peace  during  the  cruel  oppression  of  Judah


under  Antioehus  Epiphanes,  by  dedicating
their  temple  to  Zeus  (Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xii.
5,  5),  and  again  by  siding  with  the  Syrians
against  the  Maccabees.  Their  temple  wag
destroyed  by  John  Hyrcanus,  B.o.  130,  and
its  ruins  only  were  visible  in  the  time  of
Christ.  The  city  of  Sebaste  was  built  by
Herod,  on  the  site  of  the  city  of  Samaria,
and  Flavia  ^eopoKs,  now  called  Nabhus,  was
erected  on  the  site  or  close  neighbourhood
of  the  ancient  Shechem.  Theie  were
mutual  recriminations  between  Jews  and
Samaritans,  which  led  to  strained  relatione
and  fierce  condemnation,  and  yet,  strange  to
say,  the  rabbis  did  not  treat  the  land  as
"  unclean "  (Edersheim,  '  Life  of  Jesus  the
Messiah,'  bk.  iii,  c.  7),  and  consequently
the  disciples  were  not  precluded  from  pur-
oliasing  articles  of  food  from  the  Samaritan
village.  Tliey  were  the  "foolish  people,"
"  abhorred  "  of  devout  Jews  (Eoclus,  1.  25,
26);  and  Eabbi  Ghuda  treated  them  as
heathens,  yet  Simon  ben  Gamaliel  regarded
them  as  Israelites,  and  the  '  Mishnah '  shows
that  in  many  of  their  customs  they  re-
sembled the  Jews.  It  is  doubtful  whether
they  denied  the  resurrection,  and  it  is
certain  that  their  principal  tenets  and  prac-
tices were  derived  from  the  old  revelation.
The  opposition  was  felt  so  strongly  by  some
Jews  in  the  northern  province  of  Galilee
tliat  they  travelled  to  Jerusalem  through
Perssa  in  order  to  avoid  it.

Our  Lord's  treatment  of  Samaritans  in
this  narrative  seems  at  first  sight  inconsis-
tent with  Matt.  X.  5,  where  the  apostles  are
advised  to  avoid  cities  of  the  Samaritans  on
their  first  experimental  journey.  Still,  there
is  a  difference  between  Christ's  "passiug
through "  Samaria,  on  his  way  to  Galilee,
and  his  limiting  the  early  proclamation  of
tlie  kingdom  to  "  the  lost  sheep  of  the
house  of  Israel."  The  disciples  were  not
then  to  be  entrusted  with  a  commission
which,  not  until  after  Pentecost,  they  would
fulfil  with  so  much  joy  (Acts  viii.).  The
success  of  Philip,  Peter,  and  John  may  have
been  due  to  the  first  sowing  of  the  heavenly
seed  by  the  Lord  himself.

That  Christ  should  have  chosen  a  woman
of  doubtful  reputation  from  a  semi-alien  and
accursed  race  to  have  received  some  of  his
greatest  teaching  (albeit  there  was  no  less
an  ear  than  John's  at  hand  to  record  the


160


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  nr.  1—64


marvel)  ii  altin  to  many  of  the  mysteries  of
his  life.  Why,  it  is  sometimes  asked,  did
he  not  proclaim  his  sublimest  thouglits  in
the  Bohools  or  temple  courts  ?  Why  did  he
confine  them  to  Nicodemus  and  the  Samari-
tanesB?  There  la  no  reason  to  compel  us  to
any  such  conclusion.  The  simple  fact  btfore
us  is  full  justification  of-  the  belief  that
on  many  another  occasion  as  well  as  on  this,
he  uttered  like  things.

Vers.  1 — 6. — (1)  The  contrast  hetteeen
Jewish  unsusceptibility  and  Samaritan  pre-
disposition to  faith.

Vers.  1,  2. — When  therefore  the  lord'
— a  few  occasions  are  found  in  the  Gospels
where  this  appellative,  without  any  proper
name,  is  used  for  Jesus  (oh.  vi.  23;  xi.  2;
Luke  z.  1 ;  zvii.  5;  xxii.  61),  and  on  these
occasions  some  special  suggestion  is  made
of  the  Divine  rank  and  personality  of
Jesus — knew  that  the  Pharisees  heard ;  i.e.
were  taking  notice,  after  their  wont,  with
secret  miichination  and  with  open  licjstility,
of  the  course  which  he  was  pursuing.  The
treatment  which  John  the  Baptist  received
at  their  hands  was  pointedly  referred  to  by
our  Lord  on  two  occasions  (Matt.  zvii.  12,
13 ;  xxi.  23—32).  They  did  not  believe  in
John's  baptism.  The  publicans  and  harlots
had  repented  and  pressed  into  the  kingdom
before  them.  This  "  generatioli "  did  what-
ever it  listed  to  the  Elias.  Therefore  we
judge  that  Herod's  persecution,  stimulated
by  his  guilty  passiqns,  was  assisted  by  "  the
offspring  of  vipers."  They  had  probably
broken  up  the  baptismal  enthusiasm  of  the
multitudes,  and  aided  Herod  to  shut  up
John  in  the  castle  of  Machserus,  and  hence
their  present  "hearing"  meant  immediate
and  hostile  action.  Jesus  had  left  the
temple,  and  retired  to  the  courts  and
homes  and  neighbourhood  of  Jerusulem ;  and
then  was  only  visited  at  night  by  solitary
men,  who  ought  to  have  come  in  crowds.
He  left  Jerusalem  itself  for  some  point  in
Judsean  territory,  and  there  continued  for  a
season  the  preparatory  call  for  repentance
and  conversion.  The  extraordinary  success
of  Jesns  at  this  period  exulted  the  special
iittention  of  the  Pharisees.  The  matter
that  came  to  their  ears  was  that  Jesus
makes  and  baptizes  more  disciples  than  John,
lu  other  words,  they  heard  of  an  extraor-

'  'O  Kiptos,  with  A,  B,  C,  33,  Hdvplean
Syriao,  T.E.,  E.T.,  Alford,  Tregelk^i.  West-
oott  and  Hort;  d  'ItjitoSj,  with  N,  D,  some
cursives,  Vulgate,  Syriao,  Coptic,  is  read  by
Tiachendorf  (8th  edit.),  and  is  placed  in  the
margin  by  Alford,  Tregelles,  and  Bale
Revise™.


dinary  wave  of  popular  excitement,  yet  of
nothing  answering  to  the  Baptist's  imagi-
nation of  what  ousjlit  to  have  taken  place.
John's  ideas  corresponded  more  closely  than
the  teaching  of  Jesus  did  with  the  tenets
and  methods  of  the  Piiarisees.  We  find  that
the  disciples  of  John  are  coupled  with
Pharisees  in  the  matter  of  fasting  (Matt.
ix.  14  and  parallel  passages),  yet  that
John's  preaching  and  baptism  were  distaste-
ful to  the  Pharisees.  A  fortiori  the  baptism
of  Jesu.s  would  be  still  more  offensive,  for  it
was  doubtless  accompanied  by  more  search-
ing demands.  It  had  invaded  the  temple
precincts,  it  had  advanced  more  conspicuous
pel  sonal  claims.  John  said,  "  I  am  come  to
prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord ;"  Jesus  said,
"  I  am  come  down  from  heaven."  (Although
(and  yet)  Jesus  himself  (in  person)  baptized
not,  but  his  disciples  performed  the  act.)
This  parenthetical  clause,  explanatory  of  the
statement  of  ch.  iii.  22,  as  well  as  of  the  pre-
vious \erse,  is  justified  on  the  simple  f;roimd
that  Jesus  baptized  with  the  Spirit,  and
not  with  water.  For  him  to  baptize  into  hii
own  name  would  have  been  to  darken  the
mystery ;  for  him  to  baptize  into  One  who
should  come  would  in  a  way  have  hidden
the  fact  that  he  had  come.  Tlie  adminis-
tration of  the  rite  by  the  few  disciples  who
were  with  him  would  preserve  all  the  sym-
bolism of  the  new  obsei-vance.  We  have
no  repetition  of  this  statement,  nor  tto«
faintest  hint  that  the  apostles  continued
this  Johannine  ceremonial.  Moulton  and
some  others  lay  emphasis  on  the  present
tenses,  "  makes  and  baptizes,"  and  there-
from argue  that  tlie  ministry  of  John  had
not  yet  been  brought  to  a  termination,  that
John  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison,  and  that
the  journey  into  Galileo  does  not  correspond
with  that  described  in  Matt,  iv.,  but  that
our  Lord  removed  from  Judaea  simply  to
avoid  the  apparent  rivalry  between  the  two
baptismal  and  evangelistic  ministries.  When
Jesus  knew  that  the  Pharisees  had  heard,  etc.,
he  resolved  upon  a  new  and  startling  eonrse.
Ver.  3. — He  left  Judsea,  and  departed
again  into  Galilee.  But  it  should  be  ob-
served that  cif^Ke  ia  a  very  peculiar  word
for  a  simple  departure.  The  verb  dipin/u  is
used  when  KaTaAt/irto  might  have  been  ex-
pected (Weslcott).  The  wonl  means  "  to
leave  a  thing  to  itself,"  to  its  own  ways,  to
treat  it  as  no  longer  exercising  an  influence
on  the  mind.  (It  is,  with  the  noun  &<peiris,
used  for  " forgive,"  "forgiveness,"  of  sins.)
Jesus  left  Judsea,  which  had  so  imperfectly
accepted  his  claims.  The  word  suggesU
that  his  departure  was  a  consequence  of  the
action  of  the  Pharisees;  And  he  departed
again.*    This  refers  to  the  first  departure

'  The  vdhiv  is  not  found  in  A,  B*,  r,  A,


OH.  IV.  1—64.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.


161


after  the  early  testimonies  of  John,  when
Jesus  went  to  Gana  and  Gapemanm  (oh.i.  43).
Whetlier  this  journey  corresponded  with  that
mentioned  in  Matthewand Mark,  as  following
the  baptism  and  temptation  of  Jesus,  or  not,
it  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  journey
which  John  had  already  recorded.

Ver.  4. — And  he  mnst  needs  go  through
Samaria.  There  was  no  physical  necessity
about  It.  He  might,  as  bigoted  Jews  were
accustomed  to  do,  have  crossed  the  Jordan
and  passed  through  Persea  instead.  There
was  no  such  animus  in  the  heart  of  Jesus,
and  a  Divine  and  providential  monition  was
the  occasion  of  his  taking  the  direct  road.
Geikie  has  drawn  a  vivid  picture  of  the
difficulties  to  which  Jewish  travellers  on  the
borders  of  Samaria  were  exposed  (see  Hos.
vi  9;  Josephus,  'Ant.,'  xx.  6. 1 ;  •  Bell.  Jud.,'
ii.  12.  i;  'Yit.,'  52),  and  also  of  the  physical
features  of  the  land.  Samaria,  as  a  name
of  the  small  district  of  central  Palestine,
arose  from  the  name  of  the  city  **  Samaria,"
built  by  Omri,  and  made  the  site  of  the
kingdom  of  Israel  (1  Kings  xvi.  21),  and
that  of  the  Baal-  and  of  the  oalf-worship.
Samaria  suffered  from  the  siege,  and  the
city  was  depopulated  by  Slialmanezer  (Sar-
gon),  and  colonized  with  Assyrians  under
Esarhaddon.  It  was  destroyed  by  Hyr-
canuB,  and  rebuilt  in  splendour  by  Herod
the  Great,  and  by  him  dedicated  to  Augus-
tus, and  called  Sehaite  after  him.  Though
Shechem  (equivalent  to  Sichem)  was  the
more  famons  site,  and  overshadowed  Herod's
city  by  its  historical  interest,  yet  "Sa-
maria" was  the  name  which  has  survived
all  others,  and  covered  a  larger  space.
Jesus  was  probably  on  the  borders  of  Sa-
maria, in  the  Judsean  country,  before  he
commenced  his  journey.  Samaria  was  in-
cluded in  the  tetrarchy  of  Archelaus,  and
formed  part  of  the  province  under  the  pro-
curatorsbip  of  Pontius  Pilate ;  while  Herod
Antipas  reigned  over  GalUee  and  Peraea.
The  Lord  was  fulfilling  the  Divine  will,  in
commencing  his  Galilsean  ministry,  in
leaving  Judsea  proper  for  the  present,  and
passing  through  Samaria.  It  is  worthy  of
notice  that  John  here  attributes  to  "  the
Pharisees,"  rather  than  "the  Jews,"  the
opposition  which  indicated  the  wisdom  or
necessity  of  this  course.

Ver.  5. — He  oometh  therefore  to  a  city  of
Samaria,  called  Sychar  (Sv^^dp,  with  all  the
principal  uncials ;  not  Six^p,  as  read  by
the  Elzevir  edition  of  Stephens,  with  one

nor  in  many  cursives,  and  was  at  one  time
omitted  by  Griesbaoh  and  Tischendorf ;  but
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hori,
Revised  Version,  retain  it,  on  the  authority
of  X,  B*,  0,  D,  L,  the  best  cursives,  and  nu-
merous versions.

JOHN.


cursive,  69);  not  "the  city"  Shechem —
the  Sox^ii  of  Acts  vii.  16,  or  S/u/ia  of  Jose-
phus (Gen.  xxxiiL  18 ;  Josh.  xx.  7 ;  Judg.
ix.  7)— -not  Sebaste  (Samaria),  but "  a  city,"
one  of  the  cities  requiring  special  designa-
tion beyond  its  mere  name,  which  would
hardly  have  been  necessary,  if  so  renowned
a  spot  as  the  metropolis  of  the  ancient
kingdom,  or  the  ancient  patriarchal  city  of
Shechem  or  Syohen,  had  been  thought  of.
The  similarity  of  tne  names  Sychar  and
Sichem  led  many  to  suppose  that  John  con-
founded either  the  names  or  the  places.
Those  who  were  anxious  to  undervalue  the
accuracy  of  the  author  have  attributed  it  to
mistake.  Schenkel  still  sees  the  error  of  a
Gentile  Christian.  Others  have  supposed
that  the  word,  meaning  "  town  of  drunkards  "
(Isa.  xxviii.  1, 13^),  or  "  town  of  liars "
(Hab.  iL  18,'ipe^,  was  intentionally  applied

by  John  to  Shechem,  or  that  some  provincial

Eronuuciation  of  the  name  of  the  old  city
ad  thus  been  commemorated.  Hengsten-
berg  suggested  that  Sychar  was  a  suburb  of
Sichem  or  Shechem,  and  Robinson  placed
the  latter  much  nearer  to  Jacob's  well  than
the  present  Ndbloua.  Tholuck  gave  a  phi-
losophical solution — that  m  and  r  in  the  two
words,  being  liquid$y  were  interchanged ;
and  Meyer  at  one  time  held  that  John
simply  applied  the  vulgar  name.  Jerome
('  Qusest.  Heb.  in  Gen.  xlviii.')  said  it  was  a
corruption  of  the  name  Sichem.  But  Euse-
bius  discriminated  Shechem  from  Sychar
in  his  '  Onomasticon,'  tub  voce  ;  and  a  place
called  Bochar  or  Sichra  is  mentioned,  and
also  its  "  well,"  in  the  Talmud.  Delitzsoh
('Zeitsehrift  fiir  Luth.  Theol.,'  1856)  has
quoted  seven  passages  which  refer  to  the
place  as  the  birthplace  of  rabbis,  and  as
having  been  alternately  occupied  by  Jews
and  Samaritans.  Moreover,  in  late  years,
Palestine  explorers  have  found,  within  half
a  mile  of  Jacob's  well,  a  village.  El  'Atkar,
preserving  to  the  present  day  the  old  name.'
Nor  has  the  name  been  in  late  years  drawn
from  this  narrative  and  given  to  this  insig-
nificant village,  for  a  Samaritan  chronicle,
dating  from  the  twelfth  century,  preserves
the  name  as  lakar.  A  priori  it  is  far  more
probable  that  a  woman  of  Sychar,  than  one
of  Shechem,  should  have  come  to  draw
water,  in  consequence  of  the  nearer  proxi-
mity of  the  former  "city"  than  of  the
latter  to  Jacob's  well  It  is  further  char
racterized  as  near  to  the  parcel  of  ground

"  Captain  Conder  ('Tent- Work  in  Pales-
tine,' i.  71,  etc.),  and  '  Pict.  Palestine,'  voL  i.
236,  have  described  it  at  length.  Oanon
Williams  advocated  this  solution.  Eder-
sheim  ('Life  of  Christ,'  App.  xv.  voL  iL
761),  Westcott,  and  others  defend  it.


162


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDmG  TO  ST.  JOUN.      [oh.  iv.  1—64


whioh  Jacoli  gave  to  his  son  Joseph.  In
Gen.  xxxiii.  19;  xxxiv.  25;  xlviii.  22
(LXX.) ;  Josh.  xxiv.  32,  we  see  that  Jacob's
treaty  with  the  sons  of  Hamor,  and  the
summary  violence  of  his  sons  in  punishment
of  Dinali's  dishonour,  were  treated  by  him
as  givinu;  him  special  possession  in  Shechem
(the  LXX.,  in  Gen.  xlviii,  22,  have  trans-
lated the  word  for  "  portion,"  ddk'  as  Siici/no,
erroneously  supposing  that  tlie  word  was  a
pruper  name,  instead  of  an  allusive  play  on
the  word  "  Shechem "),  and  he  solemnly
bequeathed  it  tu  Joseph.  In  Josh,  xxiv.  32
we  find  the  bones  of  Joseph  were  deposited
there.  (Knobel  translates  Gen.  xlviii.  22
as  the  portion  which  he,  Jacob,  (by  his
Bona)  teould  win  (not  had  won)  with  sword
and  bow.)  Geiger,  '  Urschrift.,'  p.  80  (re-
ferred to  by  Edersheim,  I.e.,  i.  404),  shows
that  St.  John's  interpretation  of  Genesis  is
perfectly  in  harmony  with  rabbinic  tradi-
tion.

Ver.  6. — BTow  Jacob's  well  was  there;
more  literally,  now  there  was  a  spring  there,
Jacob's.  The  word  generally  translated
"  well "  is  (jypeap,  the  representative  of  1H2^
puteus !  but  irj|77i,  the  word  here  used,  cor-
responds with  ]%  fans.  In  vers.  11,  12  the
word  ipp^np  is  used  of  the  same  place.  To
the  present  day  this  indubitable  site  goes
by  both  names.  This  district  abounds  in
springs  (Dent.  viii.  7),  and  the  digging  of
tliis  deep  well  was  a  work  of  supererogation,
such  as  might  be  performed  by  a  stranger
in  the  land.  The  well  is  indeed  fed  hy
fountains  of  water  in  the  neighbourhood.
It  has  been  known  as  Jacob's  well  by  a
continuous  tradition,  and  is  situated  in  tlie
plain  of  Mukhhan,  under  the  rough  sides  of
Gerizim,  just  beyond  the  spot  where  tlie
plain  is  entered  almost  at  right  angles  by
the  eastern  end  of  the  vale  of  Shechem.
The  latter  vale  is  constituted  by  the  two
mountain  ridges  of  Gerizim  on  the  south
and  Ebal  on  the  north.  Nablous,  or  She-
chem. is  not  visible  from  the  well  of
Sychar,  being  hidden  by  the  spur  of  Geri-
zim fiom  view,  and  higher  up  the  valley  of
Shechem  are  the  present  ruins  of  Sebastieh
or  Samaiia  proper.  Dean  Stanley  said  it  was
one  of  the  most  beautiful  spots  in  Palestine.
Sychar  lies  half  a  mile  to  the  north  of  the
traditionnl  well.  The  well,  two  hundred
years  ago,  was  declared  by  Maundrell  to  be
a  hundred  and  five  feet  deep,  and  built
of  solid  masonry.  In  1866  Lieutenant  An-
derson found  it  seventy-five  feet  deep,  and
quite  dry .  It  is  nine  or  ten  feet  in  diameter ;
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  indubitable  spots
where  we  may  feel  ci  rt&in  that  the  feet  of  the
blessed  Lord  havetrod.  Effbrtsare  now  being
made  by  the  Palestine  Exploration  Society
to  protect  and  restore  the  well,  Jesus  there-
Core,  being  wearied  (jcmidm  is  "to   liihoui


unto  weariness,"  from  kottos,  exhausting  toil)
with  his  journey.  A  long,  exhausting  mai-oh
told  upon  him,  and  he  felt  the  weakness  of
our  humanity.  Thoma  suggesta  that,  because
the  woman  that  Jacob  found  at  the  well
was  Baehel,  the  mother  of  Joseph,  the
Samaritans'  special  patriarch,  and  because
Leah  was  the  mother  of  Levi  and  Judah,
and  her  name  means  "  wearied,"  so  Jesus  is
represented  as  weary  with  his  journey  unto
the  home  of  Eachel !  It  is  far  more  impor-
tant to  notice  that  the  author  of  this  Gbspel,
whose  main  idea  was  that  Jesus  is  "the
only  begotten  Son  of  the  Father,"  "the
Word  made  fiesh,"  yet  impresses  upon  us
continually  his  realization  of  the  full  hu-
manity, the  definite,  concrete  human  exist-
ence of  Jesus.  His  life  was  no  phantasm
of  tlie  imagination,  no  mere  docetio  mani-
festation, as  the  Tubingen  school  attribute
to  the  Johannine  Christ,  but  veritable  man.
This  Gospel  alone  records  his  presence  and
miracle  at  Cana,  his  travel-worn  sympathy
witli  our  weakness,  his  making  clay  with
spittle,  his  weeping  over  the  grave  of  a
friend,  his  thirst  upon  the  cross,  the  blood
that  issued  from  his  wounded  side,  and
the  obvious  physical  reality  of  his  risen
body,  and  thus  furnishes  the  Churoh  with
the  grounds  on  which  the  apostle  main-
tained his  Divine  humanity.  Je»ut  was
seated  thus — or,  sai  thus;  i.e.  wearied,
exhausted — on  the  well;  or  on  the  low
parapet  of  the  well,  which  protected  its
mouth.  He  sat  there  comparatively,  if
not  quite,  alone.  The  position  of  the  word
"  thus "  after  "  sat "  would,  in  classic
Greek,  make  tlie  oStms  mean  "simply,
without  other  preoccupation;"  but  there
is  no  logical  reason  to  deprive  the  oSras  of
its  full  meaning  (Hengstenberg).  The
Lord,  taking  his  seat  by  this  memorable
spot,  rich  in  varied  associations,  becomes  at
once  a  type  of  the  richer  and  diviner  supply
of  life  which  he  is  able  and  ready  to  dis-
pense to  mankind.  The  weariness  and  wait-
ing of  the  Lord  at  the  well  was  a  sublime
hint  of  the  exhaustless  supply  of  gmce  which
was  ever  flowing  from  the  broken  heart  of
the  Son  of  God.  It  was  about  the  sixth
hour.  The  author  is  remarkable  for  his
repeated  mention  of  tlie  hours  at  whioh  some
of  the  most  memorable  crises  of  his  life
took  place,  and  thus  gives  a  vivid  impres-
sion of  reality  and  of  the  presence  of  the
eye-witness.  He  must  himself  have  waited
by  the  side  of  the  Lord,  and  overheard  the
conversation  which  followed,  jnst  as  he  did
the  conversation  with  Nicodemus.  Great
difference  of  opinion  prevails  as  to  his
method  of  computing  time ;  i.e.  whether  he
adopted  the  Jewish  computation,  frum  sun-
rise  to  sunset  into  twelve  variable  hours,  of
I   the  Boman  method  of  computation,  from


CH.  IV.  1— 54J       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ   TO  8T.  JOHN.


163


midnigUt  to  midday,  &om  noon  to  midnight,
into  twelve  hours  of  equal  length.  Some
difficulties  are  reduced  by  the  latter  hypo-
thesis (see  M'Clellan  and  Westoott,  'Ad-
ditional N'otes  to  John  six. ; '  Edersheim,
I.e.,  i.  405;  Moulton,  in  loco;  Townson,
'Disoourses  of  the  Four  Gospels,'  p.  215).
The  hour  referred  to  would  then  be  alout
six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  very  time
when  purchases  would  be  made,  and  when
women  are  in  the  habit  of  drawing  water.
The  difficulty  that  presents  itself  is  the
brevity  of  the  time  remaining  for  all  that
happens  as  described  in  vers.  27—38,
broad  daylight  being  almost  presupposed
in  ver.  85.  Still,  if  "  about  the  sixth  hour  "
was  five  o'clock,  even  in  January  there
would  be  possible  time  for  the  conversatioa,
for  the  return  of  the  disciples,  and  also  for
the  approach  of  the  Samuritans ;  though  it
must  be  remembered  that  twilight  in
Palestine  is  very  brief,  and  that  the  whole
narrative  suggests  the  idea  of  leisure  rather
than  hurried  converse.  If  the  Boman
method  of  interpretation  were  adopted,  the
sixth  hour  might  mean  six  o'clock  in  tlie
morning,  which  was  the  hour  intended,  if
the  Boman  computation  mnst  be  supposed
in  oh.  xix.  11.  'This  suggestion  has  further
difficulties.  The  weariness  of  the  Lord  at
that  early  hour  would  imply  a  long  journey
before  daybreak,  which  is  extremely  im-
probable (see  ch.  xi.  9).  Besides,  though
Townson  and  M'Clellan  lay  emphasis  on
i'his  Boman  computation  of  time  in  Asia
Minor,  and  advance  some  proof  of  it,  yet
some  of  their  authorities  are  far  from  proving
it.  Luthardt  says  we  have  no  right  to  sup-
pose that  John  would  deviate  from  the
current  Jewish  computation.  "  About  the
sixth  hour  "  would  therefore  mean  "  about
noon,"  the  very  time  when  it  ia  so  com-
mon to  rest  after  a  morning  journey.  Liicke,
Meyer,  Hengstenberg,  Godet,  Lange,  Schaff,
Geikie,  Watldns,  all  press  the  same  inter-
pretation of  the  words.  LUcke  justly  says
that  there  is  no  hint  of  the  Lord  and  Ids
disciples  intending  to  remain  by  the  well,
but  to  pursue  their  .journey  after  rest  and
food.  This  is  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of
an  evening  halt.

Vers.  7 — 26. — (2)  The  revelaliont  and
mi»undentandings  comprieed  in  the  intervieu
aith  the  Samaritaness.

Vers.  7— 9.— (o)  The  Giver  of  aU  aiJit
almt,  tubmitting  to  conditione  of  humanity.

Ver.  7. — There  cometh  a  woman  of  Samaria
to  draw  water.  The  Ik  t^s  ^ofiapeias  un-
doubtedly qualifies  the  word  yvvti,  and  not
IpX^'''"' '  therefore  the  countiy,  not  the  city,
of  Samaria  is  referred  to.  Besides,  that  city
was  at  much  too  greut  a  distance  to  be  the
home  of  this  Samaritaness.  Therfc.  «?ere
tther  spriugs   still   nearer   to   the  city  of


Sychar,  which  the  women  of  the  place  would
frequent.  We  nc  ed  not,  with  Hengstenberg,
suppose  that,  from  a  religious  motive,  one  of
reverence  for  the  well  of  Jacob,  this  woman
had  chosen  the  longer  walk  and  greater
exertion,  in  the  heat  of  the  day.  No  hint
of  the  kind  occurs.  The  simple  supposition
that  her  liome  was  hard  by  the  well  is  suffi-
cient to  explain  the  somewhat  unusual  cir-
cumstance that  she  should  have  come  alone
and  at  midday.  No  longer,  as  in  ancient
times,  did  women  of  social  position  perform
this  duty  (Gen.  xxiv.  15 ;  Exod.  ii.  16).  She
by  her  action  proclaimed  her  humble  station
in  life.  Hard  work  Is  performed  by  women
at  the  present  day  in  the  East  and  South.
Jesus  saith  to  her,  Give  me  to  drink.  This
form  of  expression  is  not  nncommon.  The
Lord  was  not  only  weary,  but  veritably
thirsty.  He  had  taken  upon  himself  all  our
innocent  desires  and  cravings.  "  He  would
know  all,  that  he  might  succour  all,"  and  was
intent  upon  conferring  a  blessing  by  asking
a  favour.  He  put  it  into  her  power  to  do  him
a  kindness,  just  as  when  God  evermore  says,
"  Give  me  thy  heart,"  when  he  is  yearning
to  give  himself  to  ns.  "  It  is  more  blessed
to  give  than  to  receive."  He  will  at  once
confer  on  this  poor  "waif  and  stray"  the
unspeakable  privilege  of  bestowing  the  cup
of  cold  water  on  the  Lord  of  all.  U  is  not
that  in  the  first  instant  he  implied  that  be
was  thirsting  for  her  salvation ;  that  inter-
pretation would  almost  lift  the  narrative  into
the  purely  symbolic  region,  greatly  to  its
injury,  and  to  the  damage  of  the  entire
Gospel.

Yer.  8. — For  hia  disciples  had  departed
into  the  city  to  buy  food.  This  is  stated  as
a  reason  why  he  asked  water  from  the  chance
wayfarer,  who  bad  obviously  with  her  the
"water-pot"  and  the  &vT\nna(yei.  11),  a
word  used  for  the  rope  with  which  the  bucket
or  water-jar  was  let  down  into  the  well.
There  are  very  discordant  statements  as  to
the  degree  of  separation  which  the  Jews
insisted  upon  between  themselves  and
Samaritans.  The  later  rabbis  gieatly
aggravated  the  feeling.  They  refused  to  eat
the  bread  of  Samaritans,  as  though  it  were
more  defiling  than  swine's  flesh;  objected
to  drink  their  wine  or  vinegar ;  and,  if  this
animosity  at  the  time  of  Christ  had  been
equally  pronounced,  would  have  limited  the
disciples  in  their  choice  of  food  to  uncooked
eggs,  fruits,  and  vegetables,  and  possibly  to
meal  and  wine.  But  it  seems,  from  the  earlier
rabbinical  books  (Edersheim  quotes  several,
which  modify  Lightfoot's  authorities),  that
the  meat  of  a  Samaritan  was  lawful  food  if  an
Israelite  had  witnessed  its  killing,  and  that
their  bread,  wine,  etc.,  were  not  forbidden.
We  see  no  reason  for  thinking  that  Jesus
was  left  absolutely  alone  on  this  occasion,


164


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  it.  1—64,


and,  {rom  John's  habitual  method  of  avoid-
ing direct  mention  of  himself,  it  becomes
perfectly  possible  that  he  was  there  listening
silently  to  all  these  gracious  words.  Moulton
cannot  doubt  tliat  the  beloved  disciple  sub-
iequently  received  the  whole  from  the  Lord's
own  lips ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  conclude
that  he  must  liave  been  absent,  and  very
much  to  suggest  his  quiet  presence  (Weiss,
'  Life  of  Christ,'  ii.  34).

V«i.  9. — The  Samaritan  woman  therefore
gaith  to  him.  How  is  it  (compare  this  "  how"
with  that  of  Nicodemus.  Jesus  had  at  once
provoked  inquiry,  which  he  was  not  unwill-
ing to  gratify)— How  is  it  that  thou,  being  a
Jew  t  She  would  have  known  that  he  was
a  Jew  by  his  speech,  for  the  Samaritans  were
accustomed  to  turn  the  sound  of  th  into  that
of  8;  and  so,  when  Jesus  said  in  Jewish
Aramaic,  Tent  lish'koth,  "  Give  me  to  drink,"
while  she  would  Lerself  have  said,  Teni  Use-
Jcotli,  his  speech  would  betray  him.  Again,
the  contour  of  the  Jewish  face  differs
greatly  from  that  of  the  Samaritan,  and  the
customary  fringes  on  their  robes  were  of
different  national  colours.  Moreover,  his  ap-
pearance, travel-stained,  weary,  and  thirsty,
on  the  great  highway  between  Galilee  and
Judsaa,  would  liave  suggested  at  once  that
he  was  no  Samaritan.  Askest  drink  from
me,  who  am  a  Samaritan,  and  a  woman,  too  1
Already  this  was  a  startling  puzzle,  for  her
experience  so  far  had  only  shown  her  that
Jews  have  no  dealings  (a  word  only  once  and
here  used  in  the  Kew  Testament)  with  Sama-
ritans.' Host  commentators  suppose  that
this  is  an  explanatory  remark  of  the  evange-
list, pointing  to  the  absence,  in  a  hostile  and
haughty  spirit,  of  all  pleasant  relations  be-
tween the  peoples  (see  note  at  commeiioe-
ment  of  chapter).  We  are  not  compelled  to
this  conclusion.  The  words  may  just  as
likely  have  been  the  port,  half-ironical  tone
of  the  woman,  who  was  drawing  a  contrast
between  the  current  profession  of  Israelites
and  the  request  which  the  need  of  Jesus
had  extorted  (Moulton).  The  eighth  verse
had  just  said  that  the  disciples  liad  clearly
some  dealings  with  Samaritans,  and  had  gone
to  purchase  food  at  Sychar,  taking  with  them
the  apparatus  used  for  drawing  water.  This
last  fact  is  the  evangelist's  reason  for  intro-
ducing the  remark  of  the  woman.  He  would
hardly  have  made  it  himself.

Vers.  10 — 15. — (6)  The  living  water  offered
and  misunderetoud.

Ver.  10. — Jesus  answered  and  said  unto
her,  If  thou  hadst  known  the  gift  of  God

•  The  Revised  Version  has  indicated  in
the  margin  that  this  clause  is  omitted  by
ancient  authorities.  Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.)
omits  it,  with  N*,  D,  a,  b,  e;  'I'regelles,  Wet.t-
cott  and  Hort,  retain  it,  with  T.B.,  B,I.,  etc.


(but  thou  dost  not ; — this  oonchision  it  In-
volved in  the  form  of  the  coTulitioual  sen-
tence), and  who  it  is  that  saith  unto  thee,
Give  me  to  drink.  Many  suggestions  are
offered  as  to  the  meaning  here  of  the  "  gift
of  God."  BIsewhere  (oh.  iiL  16)  Christ  is
himself  God's  Gift,  and  St.  Paul  apeaks
of  Christ  as  God's  unspeakable  Gift
(Hengstenberg).  Paul  also  declares  that
"the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through
Jesus  Christ."  The  living  water,  the  re-
freshing, life-giving  stream  of  blessedness
which  Christ  is  opening  in  this  wilderness,
is  the  meaning  put  back  by  some  into  these
memorable  words  as  they  first  fell  from  the
lips  of  Jesus.  So  Lampe  and  Godet.  But
Augustine  and  others  point  to  oh.  vii.  39,
where  John  tells  us  that  the  living  water  of
which  Jesus  speaks  as  welling  up  like  a
river  in  the  heart  of  a  believer,  in  the  bosom
of  one  who  has  come  to  him  to  slake  bis
otherwise  quenchless  thirst,  is  "  the  Spirit,"
which  those  who  believe  on  him  shoidd  re-
ceive when  Jesus  would  be  glorified.  This
sublime  renewal  of  the  greatest  gift  of  God
by  the  Spirit  is  set  forth  under  similar  ima-
gery in  Isa.  xliv.  3  and  Joel  ii.  28.  However,
words  are  functions  of  two  minds;  what  they
must  or  might  have  meant  to  her  must  have
been  Christ's  meaning  when  he  uttered  them.
The  explanatory  clause.  Who  it  ia  that  taith
to  thee,  Qive  me  to  drink,  solves  the  per-
plexity. That  the  Son  of  God,  that  the  Logos
in  flesh,  should  have  so  emptied  himself  of
his  eternal  glory  as  to  ask  for  water  from  >
Samaritan,  and  a  woman,  is  in  itself  ft  gift,
the  supreme  gift,  of  God.  She  did  not  know
the  fulness  of  his  nature.  So  Lange,
Grotius,  and  others.  A  remark  by  Dr.
Yeomans  is  singularly  suggestive :  "  The
context  shows  that '  the  gift  of  God '  is  a  gift
which  God  had  already  given,  rather  than
one  yet  held  in  reserve — ^the  actual  gift  of  his
condescension,  rather  than  the  offered  gift  of
living  water,  or  the  Holy  Ghost."  Had  she
known  it  and  put  the  two  thoughts  together
in  the  rudest  fashion,  she  would  have  known
the  gift  of  God,  and  she  would  have  become
the  suppliant  at  once,  and  he  the  Giver.
Thou  wouldest  have  asked  (prayed,  taken  the
position  of  the  inferior)  of  him,  and  he  would
have  given  to  thee  living  water,  (For  the
plirase,  "living  water,"  see  Gen.  xxvi,  19;
and  for  its  application,  Zech,  ziv.  8 ;  Jer,  ii.
13;  Rev.  viL  17;  xxi.6;  xxii.  1.)  The  Divine
supply  of  heaven-sent  lite,  which  will  slake
all  thirst  for  lesser  gifts,  and  which  will
constitute  the  perennial  blessedness  of  saved
and  glorified  spirits.  The  gift  of  God  ia  the
full  discovery  of  personal  relations  with  the
veritable  Source  of  all  lite.  This  becomes
life  eternal  as  it  leadu  to  knowledge  of  the
only  God  and  Jesus  Clirist  whom  he  haa
sent;  and  assists  a  full  realization  of  the  lifei


OH.  nr.  1—54.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACGORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


16S


the  Source  and  End  of  which  are  God.  It  is
interesting  to  notice  that  Philo,  in  many
places,  declares  these  wells  of  water  (Gen.
xxix.  2)  to  mean  "true  philosophy  or  wisdom,
deep  and  only  with  difficulty  dmwn  upon."
"Flowing  water  is  the  Logos  himself,
' oisterns '  represent  memoiies  of  past  know-
ledge ; "  but  the  Old  Testament  usage  quoted
above  is  a  far  more  rational  justification  of
the  language  used  by  our  Lord.

Ver.  11. — The  answer  of  the  woman  shows
that,  thougli  startled  as  Jesus  meant  her  to
be  by  his  self-assertion,  she  had  not  moved
out  of  the  limited  region  of  her  own
thoughts — her  physical  thirst,  her  daily
needs,  and  common  appliances  for  meeting
them.  There  is  a  touch  of  humour  fur  this
light-hearted  creature  in  the  contrast  be-
tween the  large  oifer  and  the  apparent  help-
lessness of  the  Offerer.  God's  folly  is  com-
pared with  man's  wisdom ;  God's  weakness
is  set  over  against  man's  strength.  Sir  (my
master — a  phrase  here  of  simple  courtesy,  yet
showing  some  advance  on  what  had  gone  be-
fore, "  'Thou  being  a  Jew  "),  neither  hast  thou
the  vessel  to  draw  with,  and,  moreover,  the
well  is  deep  (see  above  on  ver.  6).  The  water  of
this  well  cannot  be  lifted  without  an  &vT\Tiij.a,
and,  when  the  water  is  reached,  it  is  still
open  to  question  whether  it  be  living,  flow-
iug  water  or  not.  Whence  then  hast  thoa
the  living  water  of  which  thou  hast  spoken?
Ver.  12. — Art  thou  greater  than  our  father
JTaoob,  who  gave  us  the  well,  and  drank
thereof  himself,  and  his  sous,  and  his  cattle  ?
We  observe  here  the  Samaritaness's  claim  to
be  a  descendant  of  Bphraim,  of  Joseph,  of
Jacob  himself  "who  dug  the  well.  By  rising
up  behind  the  family  of  Ephraim  to  the
father  of  Judah  as  well  as  of  Joseph,  the
woman  claims  a  kind  of  kinship  with  Jesus.
The  "our"  in  this  case  is  not  a  monopoly
of  the  honours  of  Jacob  for  herself  and  her
people.  Her  national  pride  is  softening
under  the  glance  of  the  great  Son  of  David,
and  she  has  a  growing  sense  of  the  claims
and  dignity  of  the  Person  she  is  addressing,
though  her  thought  is  couched  in  words
that  may  be  ironical.  This  was  the  kind
of  challenge  which  our  Lord  never  refused
to  honour.  Just  as  on  other  occasions  he
claimed  to  be  "greater  thau  the  temple,"
and  "  Lord  of  the  sabbath,"  and  "  before
Abraham,"  and  "greater,  than  Moses,
Solomon,"  or  "Jonas,"  so  here  he  quietly
admits  that  he  is  indeed  greater  thau  "  our
father  Jacob."  The  lifelike  reality  of  the
scene  is  evidenced  in  the  alertness  and
feminine  loquacity  of  the  final  clause  (Bpffi-
fiara  are  "cattle,"  not  "servants,"  as  seen
in  passages  quoted  by  Meyer  from  Xeubphon,
Plato,  Josephus,  etc.).  The  nomadic  con-
dition of  the  first  fathers  of  this  rac«  is
brilliantly  touched  ofl'  by  the  sentence.


Ver.  18. — Jesus  anawered  and  said  to  hei
— leaving  the  question  of  his  superiority  to
"our  Ihther  Jacob"  to  be  settled  when  she
should  understand  him  better — Every  one
who  driuketh  (is  in  the  habit  of  drinking)
from  this  water,  or  any  similar  fountain,
will  thirst  again.  Earthly  desires  obtain
temporary  satisfaction,  and  then  resunle
their  sway.  Our  whole  life  is  made  up  of
intermittent  desires  and  partial  satisfaction,
of  passion  and  satiation,  of  ennui  and  then  of
some  new  longing.  This  flow  and  ebb,  ebb
and  flow,  of  desire  belong  to  the  very  nature
of  human  appetite.  More  than  that,  human
desire  is  never  really  satiated.  Our  souls
can  never  be  at  rest  till  they  find  rest  in
God.  This  water,  even  from  the  well  pf
Jacob,  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.

Ver.  14. — But  whosoever  shall  have
drnuk  of  the  water  which  I  will  give  him
(of  which  I  am  speaking)  shall  not  (by  any
means,  ou  ij.ii)  thirst  again  for  ever.  How
.different  from  the  words  of  the  son  of
Sirach  (Ecclus.  xxiv.  21),  "  Tliey  who  drink
of  me,"  says  "Wisdom,  "  shall  thirst  again  "  I
They  will  experience  neither  continuity  nor
completeness  of  enjoyment,  but  periods  of
incessant  and  recurrent  desire.  Jesus  speaks
of  a  Divine  and  complete  satisfaction.  The
spiritual  thirst  once  slaked,  the  heavenly
desire  once  realized  by  appropriating  the
gift  of  God,  is  fundamentally  satisfied.  The
nature  itself  is  changed.  How  closely  this
corresponds  with  the  idea  of  birth  into  a
new  world!  and  how  nearly  akin  to  the
promise  of  living  water  in  ch.  vii.  37,  etc.  (see
also  the  language  of  oh.  vi.  85)  I  But  the
water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  become  in
him  a  fountain  of  water  leaping  up  (welliug,
bubbling  up  and  forth)  into  eternal  life.
This  is  the  explanation  of  the  full  satisfac-
tion of  desire.  I  do  not  give  a  simple
"  drink  of  water,"  but  I  cause  a  spring,  a
perennial  fountain,  a  river  of  Divine  pleasure
to  issue  and  flow  from  that  inward  satisfac-
tion which  follows  a  reception  of  my  gifts ;
and  it  is  so  abundant  that  it  is  enough  for
everlasting  needs.  The  water  that  I  give
becomes  a  fountain,  and  the  fountain  swells
into  a  river,  and  the  river  expands  into  and
loses  itself  in  the  great  ocean  of  eternity.  The
beauty  of  the  image  is  lost  if,  with  Luthardt
and  Moulton,  we  attach  the  eh  C"^"  aidviov
to  TTijy^  rather  than  aWofiepov  (oXA^irSai  is
not  elsewhere  applied  to  water,  and  this
use  of  it  gives  the  metaphor  all  the  more
force).  The  imagery  is  not  without  its
difficulty.  We  are  tempted  to  conclude  from
it  that  the  Divine  life,  once  given,  becomes
consciously  a  self-dependent  force  within
the  soul ;  but  this  would  not  be  justified  by
all  the  analogy  of  the  Divine  working  in  hu-
i  manity,  wliich,  though  abundant,  efficacious,
I   and  satisfying,  never  repudiates  its  Divine


ie«


TttB  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  Vr.  1—64.


wnine,  but  continually  proclaims  it.  If  the
desire  for  what  God  alone  can  supply  ig
eager  and  quenchless,  and  if  God  meet  the
craving,  then  the  desire  is  absolutely  satis-
fied. There  is  a  superfluous  fulness  in  the  gift
of  God  which  will  transcend  all  the  needs  of
this  life,  and  be  enough  for  eternity.

Ver.  15. — ^The  woman  has  not  yet  emerged
out  of  the  region  of  her  physical  desires  and
her  daily  requirements,  and  neerls  a  deeper
apprehension  of  her  real  necessities.  By
reason  of  the  subsequent  narrative  she  ought
not  to  be  credited  now  with  impeiiinence
or  irony  (Lightfoot,  Tholuck).  She  could
not  understand  the  miraculous  water  of
which  the  Stranger  spake,  but  had  some  dim
notion  that  he  might  be  able  to  deliver  her
&om  her  toilsome  and  exhausting  life.  She
replies  to  him,  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that
I  tbirst  not,  neither  acme  all  the  way  hither
to  draw.  The  Lord  had  spoken  of  eternal  life,
and  she  ig  content  to  have  temporal  satisfac-
tion to  the  extent  of  thirsting  no  more.  Some
commentators,  with  Lange  and  Hengsten-
berg,  suppose  that  the  journey  to  Jacob's
well  was  in  her  mind  a  quasi-religious  act,
the  insufficiency  of  wliich  to  meet  her  case
is  at  length  becoming  apparent.  This  view
aeemg  to  us  inconsistent  with  the  sudden
change  of  metaphor  and  alteration  of  hig
methodofapproaolitothis  woman's  conscious-
ness and  need.  He  resolved  rather  to  search
her  heart  and  reveal  her  to  herself — ^to  bring
forth  from  its  hiding-place  the  torpid  con-
science, and  reveal  to  her  the  grievous  need
in  which  she  stood  of  that  Divine  cleansing,
healing,  nutrition ,  refreshment,  which  he  had
been  sent  into  the  world  to  supply.  This  re-
flection renders  the  reply  of  Jesus  less  obscure
than  its  abrupt  transition  seems  to  imply.

Vers.  16 — 20. —  (o)  The  heart-searching
issuing  in  perception  of  the  prophetic  rank
of  Jesus.

Ver.  16. — [Jesus] '  saith  unto  her,  Go,  call
thy  husband,  and  come  hither.  Our  Lord,
by  that  Divine  penetration  and  thought-
reading  which  the  evangelist  attributes  to
him  (ch.  ii.),  knew  exactly  what  manner
of  woman  this  wus,  and  wished  to  bring  her
secret  sins  to  the  light  of  her  own  conscience.
The  demand  touched  her  heart  at  its  most
tender  place,  and  was  indeed  a  partial
answer  to  her  prayer,  "  Give  me  this  water."
Conviction  of  sin  is  the  beginning  of  the
great  work  of  the  Paraclete ;  it  will  end  in
full  assurance  of  faith  (so  Neander,  Stier,
Tholuck,  Luthardt,  Weiss,  and  Edersheim).
Numerous  have  been  the  explanations  of
the  Saviour's  demand,  but  none  of  them  .'^o
congruous  as  this :  eg.  (1)  Liioke  supposes

«  T.E.  and  R.T.  here  read,  i  'ir/o-ouj,  but
it  is  omitted  by  B,  C,  by  Tisohendorf  (8th
•dit.),  All'ord,  and  Westcott  and  Hort.


that  Christ  would  have  the  husband  share
in  the  bounty.  (2)  Meyer  suggests  that
the  Lord,  by  proving  to  her  his  prophetic
glanr-e  in  a  region  she  could  verify,  was
preparing  her  for  similar  confidence  in  him-
self in  a  higher  and  more  momentous  region.

(3)  Hengstenberg  makes  it  part  of  his
curious,  mystical  interpretation  of  the  entire
nairative,  and  by  "husband"  thinks  that
Jesus  meant  the  true  Lord  and  Hasband  of
the  kingdom  of  God,  in  contrast  to  tho
heathen  lordships  and  polluting  idolatries
which  Samaritans  had  blended  with  their
Jehovism  (of  which  more  in  the  next  verse).

(4)  Lange  has  supposed  that  Jesus  here
conforms  to  law  and  custom  with  reference
to  the  superior  claim  of  the  husband,  and
declares  that  the  wife  must  submit  to  it  in
receiving  the  gift  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;
and  Godet  says,  "Jesus  did  not  wish  to
influence  a  dependent  person  withoat  the
participation  of  the  man  with  whom  she
was  united."  Jesus  surely  never  waits  upon
conventionalisms,  sabbatic  rules,  current
fashions  of  any  kind ;  and  some  deeper  reason
than  this  is  more  than  apparent  from  the
startling  response.

Vers.  17,  18. — The  woman  answered,  and
said  to  him,  I  have  no  husband.  Jesus
saith  unto  her,  Thou  said  correctly,  Hnsband
have  I  none :  for  thou  hast  had  five
husbands;  and  he  whom  thou  now  hast  is
not  thy  husband.  This  true  thing  hast  ttam
spoken.  The  woman  resists  the  description
which  Jesus  assumes  that  she  bears  to  the
man  with  whom  she  stands  in  illegal  rela-
tions. Convinced,  brought  to  bay,  she
cannot  lie  to  Jesus.  She  says,  in  penitence
and  shame,  "  I  have  no  husband."  There
is  no  concealment  of  the  fact ;  she  must  need
the  cleansing  of  the  life-giving  stream.
Jesus,  not  without  a  toue  of  solemn  remon-
strance, accuses  her  of  a  life  of  loose  morals.
It  is  implied  that  the  first  five  husbands
were  conventionally  allowable ;  but  the  sug-
gestion is  that,  either  by  divorce  or  wanton
rushing  to  further  nuptials  if  the  former  had
been  ruptured  by  death,  her  character  had
been  ever  deteriorating  until,  under  j»esent
circumstances,  she  was  committing  an  overt
act  of  illegality  and  impurity.  "  In  saying
thou  hast  no  hnsband,  tiiou  hast  spoken  to
the  point,  and  for  the  reasons  1  recite  thou
hast  mad  e  a  true  statement."  As  the  woman
in  ver.  27  tells  her  friends  "  He  told  me  all
things  that  ever  I  did,"  we  may  easily
believe  that  she  felt,  under  his  searching
glance,  that  d>  folly,  no  weakness,  no
rebellious  deed,  no  damning  compromise,
was  hidden  from  him.  How  mnoh  more  he
said  we  can  only  conjecture.  The  revela-
tion thus  recorded  is  akin  to  other  events
in  our  Lord's  life,  which  we  cannot  account
for  by  the    supposition    tkat   information


OH.  nr.  1—54.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


167


oonoeming  her  hnd  been  conveyed  by  Bome
rumour  which  thus  be  flashed  upon  her.
This  would  suffer  from  the  intolerable  Bop-
position  that  his  claim  to  have  prophetic
light  was  a  Belf-conscious  fiaud,  and  that
by  Buoh  a  subterfuge  the  entire  Samaritan
mission  had  been  characterized  and  con-
trolled. Lange  thought  that  the  definite
traces  of  the  five  marriages  were  in  some  mys-
terions  fashion  hieroglyphed  upon  her  face.
Tliis  is  a  great  extravagance  of  the  working
of  natural  law,  to  avoid  the  supernatural
perception  which  our  Lord  exercised  when-
ever he  chose  to  draw  upon  the  inexhaustible
resources  and  powers  at  his  disposal.  Heng-
stenberg  ('  Contributions  to  Genuineness  of
the  Pentateuch,'  and  in  his 'Commentary  '),
while  he  recognizes  the  historical  fact  here
mentioned  and  penetrated  by  onr  Lord,  con-
sidered that  there  was  a  twofold  meaning
in  our  Lord's  reply.  Thou  hast  had  live
husbands  ;  i.e.  there  were  five  gods — those  of
Cuthah,  Babylon,  Ava,  Hamath,  and  Sephar-
vaim  (Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  ix.  11.  3 ;  2  Kings
xvii.  24),  whose  worship  by  spiritual  adultery
the  Samaritan  people  (of  wliich  you  are  a
representative)  have  tolerated,  and  he,
Jehovah,  whom  thou  now  hast  by  surrep-
titious claim,  is  not  tiiy  covenanted  Lord.
Unfortunately,  this  too  ingenious  interpre-
tation fails,  first  of  all  in  this,  that  to  the
five  nations  seven  gods  are  reckoned  (2  Kings
xvii.  30, 31).  Again,  it  is  inconceivable  that
the  worship  of  Jehovah  should  be  represented
as  on  a  par  wltli  these  idolatries,  and  that
Jehovah  himself  should  be  set  forth  as  the
sixth  and  worst  of  the  theocratic  husbands
of  the  Samaritan  state.  Nor  can  we  suppose
that  Christ,  who  said  such  wondrous  things
about  the  spirituality  and  the  love  of  God
to  man,  and  was  in  the  same  breath  about  to
utter  one  of  the  grandest  of  them,  should
thus  have  poured  contumely  on  the  Samari-
tan worship  of  Jehovah.  Thoma  practically
adopts  Hengstenberg's  speculative  interpre-
tation. Strauss  (1st  and  2Md  edit.  '  Leb.
Jes.')  made  use  of  Hengstenberg's  admission
to  find  in  the  whole  narrative  a  mythical
fiction;  and  Keim  has  only  made  matters
worse  by  ascribing  the  entire  narrative  to
the  unknown  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.
Christ'B  own  Divine  penetration  revealed
the  woman  to  herself,  and  she  knew  how
hateful  her  life  must  have  been  in  his  sight.
She  made  no  attempt  at  denial,  or  conceal-
ment, or  self-justification.  The  events  re-
ferred to  had  burnt  themselves  on  her
memory,  and  her  only  refuge  is  in  a  bold
admission  of  the  right  of  the  unknown
Stranger  to  teaih.  She  concedes  his  claim
to  solve  perplexities,  and  penetrate  other
mysteries  as  well  as  the  depths  of  lier  own
heart.
¥er.  19. — Sir,  I  perceive  that  thon  art  a


prophet.  This  meant  more  from  a  Bamari-
tanesB  than  from  a  Jewess.  The  Samaritans
accepted  the  books  of  Moses,  and  did  not
adopt  the  teaching  of  the  historical  or  pro-
phetical books,  on  which  the  Jews  had
built  up  their  exaggerated  and  carnal  views
of  the  Messiah  and  his  kingdom.  They  were
not  anticipating  a  King,  but  a  "Prophet
like  unto  Moses."  They  placed  the  great
Prophet  above  the  King,  as  a  peer  of  their
legislature,  and  as  superior  to  their  rabbis
and  priests.  The  sense  of  standing  in
the  presence  of  One  who  looked  down  into
human  hearts,  justified  her  in  putting  the
great  case  of  her  people  and  her  own  sins
before  him.  Li  t  him  speak  further.  Per-
adventure  he  will  set  the  relative  claims  of
Zion  and  Gerizim  at  rest,  bo  far  as  approach
to  the  Holy  One  is  concerned.  Mure  than
ordinary  candour  was  required  to  make  the
admission  that  a  Jew  might  decide  the
agelong  controversy.

Ver.  20.— Our  fathers.  The  "  our  "  refers
here  to  the  Samaritans,  just  as  the  "  ye  "
does  to  the  Jews.  She  may  be  going  back
once  more  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,
who  worshipped  and  laboured  at  Shechem
— but  the  mountain  itself  was  not  the  site
of  a  temple  until  the  days  of  Nehemiah,
and  the  temple  in  which  the  apostate
Manasseh,  son  of  Jaddua,  offered  sacrifices
had  been  destroyed  for  nearly  a  hundred  and
fifty  years.  A  chronological,  if  not  more
serious,  difference  is  apparent  between
Nehemiah  and  Josephus  (Josephus,  '  Ant.,'
xi.  8.  2 ;  Neh.  xiii.  28).  According  to  the
former,  the  Samaritan  schism  which  led  to
the  erection  of  the  temple  was  a  hundred
years  before  the  period  assigned  by  Jose-
phus. For  whereas  Nchemiah  says  that
the  apostate  priest  whom  he  chased  away
was  son-in-law  of  Banballat,  the  Persian
satrap  in  Samaria,  Josephus  makes  San-
ballat  contemporary  with  Alexander,  and
represents  the  Cbtablishment  of  the  Samari-
tan temple  as  originating  with  his  approval.
Josephus  further  ('  Ant.,'  xiii.  9.  1)  says
that  the  temple  was  deslroyed  by  Hyrcanus,
about  B.C.  129,  and  adds  that  it  had  stood
two  hundred  years.  The  temple  was  de-
stroyed, but  "the  mountain  of  blessing"
remained  for  the  Samaritans  as  a  place  of
prayer  ('  Ant.,'  xviii.  4.  1 ;  '  Bell.  Jud.,'
i.  2.  6).  This  was  conserved,  on  the
ground  that  Abraham  and  Jacob  had  here
built  altars  (Deut.  xi.  26;  xxvii.  4 — 13).
In  Deut.  xxvii.  4,  however,  Mount  Ebal  is
mentioned  as  the  place  where  an  altar
had  been  first  built  to  Jehovah,  In  the
Samaritan  Pentateuch  the  word  "  Gerizim  "
had  in  this  place  been  substituted  for
*Kbal;"  and  bo  it  came  to  pass  that
Gerizim  had  been  a  place  of  prayer
throughout  the  long  interval.    When  Jesua


168


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  BT.  JOHN.      [oh.  rr.  1—64


was  at  Jacob's  well,  he  conld  see  the  ruins
of  the  edifice  where  sacrifice  and  praises
were  being  offered.  Indeed,  these  have
continued  to  the  present  day.  The  oldest
shrine  in  the  world  for  local  worship  still
holds  its  own,  hard  by  the  very  spot  where
the  most  complete  overthrow  of  the  prin-
ciple of  sacred  places  fell  in  divinest  words
from  the  lips  of  the  Holy  One.  Our  fathers
worshipped  in  this  mountain  —  Gerizim,.
where  the  ruins  of  the  temple  still  abide —
and  ye  say,  that  in  Jerusalem  is  the  place
where  men  must  worship.  Jerusalem  ii
not  mentioned  in  their  sacred  books — Jeru-
salem, whose  unity  of  sanctuary  was  recog-
nized at  length  as  the  rifTros  where  the
Lord  would  put  his  Name, 'and  where  alone
the  sacrifices  could  possess  their  historic
and  symbolic  validity.  Whensoever  the
Pentateuch  may  have  been  finally  edited,
all  critics  will  allow  that,  at  the  time  of  the
Lord,  and  in  the  Samaritan  Version  of  the
Pentateuch,  the  idea  of  such  unity  of  sanc-
tuary was  a  fixed  principle.  The  Samari-
tans claimed  Gerizim,  and  the  Jews  Moriah,
as  the  place  where  Abraham  offered  his
typical  tacrifiee,  and  both  regarded  the  wor-
ship celebrated  in  their  favourite  shrine-^the
daily  offering,  the  annual  feasts  (the  Passover
especially) — as  giving  worthiness  to  all  tlie
prayers  and  praises  which  they  might  be
induced  to  offer  in  all  places  where  Ihey
might  sojourn.  The  woman  does  not  submit
to  our  Lord  that  he  may  settle  this  great
question  for  her,  but  she  makes  it  clear
enough  that  she  would  like  to  know  his
verdict.  The  worsliip  was  the  sacrificial
worship  where  sin  such  as  hers  could  alone
be  cleansed,  and  where  her  conscience  could
be  set  free  for  calm  and  continuous  com-
munion with  God.

Vers.  21 — 24. — (d)  The  spiritual  nature
of  God  and  his  worship.

Ver.  21. — Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Woman,'
believe  me — a  unique  expression  of  Jesus,
auswering  to  the  'A^nVi  "Sj"^",  of  many  other
passages,  where  the  acknowledgment  of  his
Divine  commission  had  been  virtually  ceded ;
this  expression  is  peculiarly  suitable  to  the
occasion — that  an  hour  is  coming.  He  does
not  add,  as  in  ver.  23,  "  and  now  is."  The
Divine  order  which  links  the  events  of
God's  providence  together,  has  not  made  it
possible  as  yet  in  ite  fulness,  aa  it  will  do

•  T.E.  reads,  yivai  irlirTfv(r6y  fnot,  with  a
large  number  of  uncials,  and  with  Italic  and
Syriao  VorsionH ;  but  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),
TregellcB,  and  Eevised  Version,  Westcott
and  Hort,  on  the  authority  of  N,  B,  C,  D,
L,  3,  cursives,  read,  iriarevi imi  yivai;  the
former  implies  a  full  and  complete  deference
to  the  Lord's  authority,  and  seems  most  in
harmony  with  the  circumstances.


when  the  terelation  ii  emnplete,  but  the
hour  is  drawing  near,  when  neither  in  thii
mountain,'  nor  in  Jerusalem,  will  ye  wor-
ship the  Father.  Christ  did  not  say  that
either  Samaritans  or  Jew!  were  exclusively
right  in  their  preference  for  one  loctd
sluine  or  place  of  saciiflcial  worship;  bat
he  declared  the  sublime  truth  that  the  wor-
ship of  the  Father  would  soon  prove  itself
to  be  independent  of  both  alike  and  of  all
the  limitations  of  place  and  ceremony.
Every  place  would  be  as  sacred  and  ai
hallowed  as  these  notable  shrines,  when
the  full  character  and  real  nature  of  the
object  of  worship  became  fully  known.
The  Father  was  a  name  for  God  not  un-
known to  Jew  or  Gentile ;  but  so  overlaid,
suspected,  defamed,  forgotten,  that  the  em-
phasis which  Jesus  laid  upon  it  came  with
the  force  of  a  new  revelation  of  God's  rela-
tion to  man.  Man  is  bom  in  the  image  of
God,  and  partakes  of  the  nature  and  es-
sence of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  it  is  in  God's
true  nature  and  veritable  relations  with
men  that  he  will  be  eventually  adored.
When  Christ  speaks  of  "my  Father"  he
refers  to  the  specialty  of  revelation  of  the
fatherhood  in  his  own  incarnation.  The
Father  was  only  partially  known  in  and
by  all  the  dispensations  of  nature  and  grace,
but  he  was  especially  revealed  in  the  whole
of  the  prolonged  series  of  facts  and  symbols
and  prophetic  teachings  which  constituted
the  religion  of  Israel ;  and  Christ  will  not
allow  this  great  revelation  of  the  Father  to
pass  unaccredited  or  to  be  ignored  by  one
whom  he  essays  to  teach.

Ver.  22 — ^Te  worship  that  which  (not
"  him  whom  ")  ye  know  not  "  That  which  "
points  to  the  essence  and  inner  character  of
the  object  of  their  worship.  They  gave  him
a  name,  but  they  were  comparatively  igno-
rant of,  and  confessedly  hostile  as  a  people
to,  the  revelation  that  the  Father  had  made.
They  foil  back  on  a  past  of  rigid  orthodoxy
but  of  limited  range.  They  rejected  every
portion  of  the  Old  Testament  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  Pentateuch,  i.e.  the  entire
historical  treatment  of  the  primeval  faith;
even  that  very  essence  of  it  which  involved
the  progressive  and  expanding  conception
of  the  character  of  God — the  perpetuity
and  continuous  renovation  of  relations,  the
prophetic  insight  into  providence,  the  sub-
lime litui'gy  of  a  ceaseless  worship,  the  pre-
diction of  a  Messianic  glory  which,  in  the
fulness  of  the  times,  should  complete  and
complement  all  that  preceded.  They  were,
by  tlieir  prejudices  and  hostility,  kept  igno-
rant of  and  unacquainted  with  the  Name
that  was  above  every  name.    In  contradis-

'  See  remarks  at  the  commencement  of  the
chapter.


em.  IV.  1—54.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST,  JOHN.


168


tinoMon  from  tUs,  we  Jews,  to  yrhom  as  a
nation  you  rightly  conclude  I  belong,  and
as  a  representative  of  whom  I  speak — We
worship  that  which  we  know.     Christ  in
this  place,  more  distinctly  perhaps  than  in
any  portion  of  the  four  Grospels,  places  him-
self as  a  worshipper  side  by  side  with  his
hearers.    Here,  moreover,  he  identifies  him-
self with   the  Jews — becomes  their  inter-
preter and  mouthpiece  and  representative.
When  a  question  arises,  which  of  the  two
has  the  larger  amount  of  truth,  Jew  or  Gen-
tile, Jew  or  Samaritan,  he  pronounced  in
stringent  terms  in  favour  of  tlie  Jew.    The
revelation   advancing    beyond  the  narrow
limitations  of  Samaritan  nationality  as  to
place,  and  time,  and  historic  fact,  with  its
pregnant  ritual,  has  revealed  the  Father
to  us  Jews,  in  this  respect  and  because  the
salvation  of  which  Moses  partly  dreamed,
but  which  has  been  the  burden  of  every  pro-
phecy and  psalm— the  "  salvation  "  which
gives  meaning  to    all  our  knowledge,   is
from  {ix,  not  "  belonging  to,"  but  "  proceed-
ing from,"  ch.  i.  46;   vii.  22,  52)  the  Jews.
The  Jews  have  been  the  school  where  the
highest    lessons    have    been    taught,  the
ricliest  experiences  felt,  the  noblest  lives
lived,  the  types  and  shadows  of  good  things
to  come  most  conspicuous.   We  cannot  avoid
reading  between  the  lines  the  sublime  en-
thusiasm which  Paul   gathered  from   this
class  of  teaching  ("  To  whom  pertaineth  the
adoption, .  .  .  and  covenant, .  . .  whose  are
the  fathers,,  and  to  whom  were  committed
the  oracles  of  God,  .   .  .   and  from  whom
as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came  ").    The
utterance  is  profoundly  significant,  as  it  is
a  powerful  repudiation  of  the  theory  which
makes  the  author  of  this  Fourth  Gospel  a
Gentile    of  the    second   century,   with    a
Gnostic  antipathy  to  Judaism  and  Jews.
The  contradiction  to  this  theory  indubitably
involved  in  this  verse  has  led  to  the  wildest
conjectures  —  even    the    suggestion    of    a
Jewish  gluss  on  some  ancient  manuscripts
of  the  Gospel  has  been  one  desperate  device
to  save  the  theory.     Tant  pu  pour  lae  fails.
Ver.  23. — But  the  hour  Cometh,  and  now
is — already  the   day  has  dawned,  the  new
conception  is  breaking  like  "  awful  rose  of
dawn  "  upon  the  minds  of  some — when  the
veritable  '  worshippers — ^those  who  answer
to  the  idea  of  worshippers,  those  who  ac-
tually draw  near  to  the  Father  in  living
fellowship  and  affectionate  appreciation  of
his  eternal  Name— shall  worship  the  Father
in  spirit  and  in  truth.    An  old  misreading
of  this  text,  accepted  by  some  Fathers,  and
based  upon  the  idea  expressed  in  ch.  xvi..
13,  has  found  expression  in  the  Sinaitio

>  See  note  on  ch.  i,  9  for  the  difference
between  &Ari^s  and  i\rieiv6s.


Codex,  "in  the  spirit  of  the  truth."  •  3nt
"spirit"  here  does  not  refer  to  the  Holy
Spirit,  but  to  the  spirit  of  man — that  part
of  man's  constitution  through  which  he
most  especially  bears  the  image  of  God,
and  with  which  the  Divine  Spirit  deals,
and  in  which  he  dwells  (Bom.  viii.  26).
The  worship  in  spirit  is  worship  con-
trasted with  all  mere  carnal  coucomitants,
all  mere  shadows  of  the  good  things  to
oome,  all  mere  ritual,  all  specialties  of
place,  or  time,  or  sacrament,  or  order.  It
need  not  be  in  despite  of  a  genuine  rever-
ence for  days,  or  seasons,  or  postures,  or
washings,  but  in  absolute  independence  of
them,  and  they,  without  this,  will  be  ac-
tually valueless.  And  in  truth ;  i.e.  as  deal-
ing with  reality,  the  adequate  and  veracious
expression  of  genuine  desires  and  veritable
emotions;  kh)  yap,  nam  et  (ver.  9).  Tor
indeed  also  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  be  his
worshippers.  Luthardt  and  Meyer  differ
as  to  the  emphasis.  Meyer  insists  that  the
Kol  ■yij)  lays  stress  on  the  word  which  im-
mediately follows,  and  he  refers  to  1
Cor.  ziv.  8  as  not  contradicting  the  rule.
He  would  render,  "  For  the  Father  also  on
his  part  seeketh,"  etc.  Luthardt  says  that
the  new  thought  is  to  be  found  in  fTjTci,
and  therefore  upon  this  the  emphasis  is
laid.  Westcott,  by  many  passages,  such  as
Matt.  viii.  9  ;  xxvi.  73 ;  Mark  x.  45 ;  Luke
vi.  32,  etc.,  urges  that  koI  yap  "alleges  a
reason  which  is  assumed  to  be  conclusive
from  the  nature  of  the  case."  The  whole
sentence  is  therefore  covered  by  the  expres-
sion, "For  the  Father  also  on  his  part
seeketh  those  as  worshippers  of  him  who
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  A
slight  contrast  is  felt  between  the  regimen
of  TrpoaKvvsiv  with  accusative,  here  again  in-
troduced, following  upon  that  with  dative  in
the  first  clause.  Moultou  would  render  the
first  clause,  "offer  worship  to  the  Father,"
and  the  second  by  "  worship  him."  The
Father  is  now  seeking,  by  the  ministry  of  his
Son,  by  the  gift  of  his  Spirit,  for  those  who
approach  him  with  deeply  felt  need  and  true
affection,  in  spirit,  not  in  ceremony,  in
truth,  not  in  hypocritical  or  heartless  pro-
fession. This  is  another  indication  of  the
high  truth  taught  in-  the  prologue  (ch.  i.  4,
9;  iii.  21;  xviii.  38,  see  notes)  that  there
are  vast  differences  among  men,  even  an-
terior to  their  reception  of  the  perfect  reve-
lation of  the  Father's  heart  in  Christ  Jesus.
"  The  life  is  the  light  of  men."  There  are
those  who  "  do  the  truth  "  and  ate  "  of  the
truth,"  who  "  worship  God  in  spirit  and  in
truth."  The  whole  gospel  dispensation  is
a  search  for  these.
Ver.  24. — A  still  more  explicit  asd  ocmpre-

'  8  leads,  h  Trrei/iaTt  iJiiifttas.


170


TUB  GOSPEL  ACCOKDINO  TO  BT.  JOHN.       [oh.  iv.  1—54.


henaiTe  reason  ii  giren  for  the  previous
assertioii,  based  on  the  essential  nature  of
God  himself  in  the  fulness  of  hia  eternal
Being.  Ood  is  Spirit  (ncfS/ua  i  9e6s ;  cf.  oh.
L  1,  @(is  ^y  6  A6yos, — the  article  indicates
the  subject,  and  the  predicate  is  here  generic,
and  not  an  indefinite ;  therefore  we  do  not
render  it,  "God  ii  a  Spirit").  The  most
oomprehensiTe  and  far-reaching  metaphor
or  method  by  which  Jesus  endeavoured  to
portray  the  fundamental  essence  of  the
Divine  Being  is  "  Spirit,"  not  body,  not  SXri,
not  Kiaiios,  but  that  deep  inner  verity  pre-
sented in  self-oonsoious  ego ;  the  tuhttantia
of  which  mind  may  be  predicated,  and  all  its
states  and  faculties.  The  Father  it  Spirit,  the
Sou  is  Spirit,  and  Spirit  is  the  unity  of  the
Father  and  the  Son.  St.  John  has  recorded
elsewhere  tliat  "  God  is  Light,"  and  "  God
is  Love."  These  three  Divine  utterances
tae  the  sublimest  ever  formed  to  express  the
metaphysical,  intellectual,  and  moral  essence
of  the  Deity.  They  are  unfathomably  deep,
And  quite  inexhaustible  in  their  suggestions,
•nd  yet  tbey  are  not  too  profound  for  even
•  little  child  or  a  poor  Samaritaness  to
grasp  for  practical  purposes.  If  God  be
Spirit,  then  they  who  worship  him,  the
Spirit,  must  by  the  natme  of  the  case,  mvA
by  the  force  of  a  Divine  arrangement,  worship
him,  if  they  worship  him  at  all,  in  spirit  and
in  trillji.  The  trutli  which  our  Lord  uttered
was  not  uuknown  in  the  Old  Testament.
From  Genesis  to  Malachi,  in  the  Psalms,  in
the  histerical  books,  in  Judges,  Samuel,  and
Kings,  the  Spirit  and  the  spirituality  of  God
are  presupposed ;  but  the  Lord  has  general-
ized these  teachings,  cited  them  from  darkness
and  neglect,  combined  them  in  one  eternal
oracle  of  Divine  truth.  The  Galilaean
Peasant  has  thus  uttered  the  profoundest
truth  of  ethic  and  religion — one  which  no
sage  in  East  or  West  had  ever  surpassed,
and  towards  which  the  highest  minds  iu  all
the  ages  of  Christendom  have  been  slowly
maklug  approach.  Forms,  postures,  cere-
monial, lacraments,  liturgiei,  holy  days,  and
places  are  not  condemned,  but  they  all  are
incfScacious  if  this  prime  condition  be  not
present,  and  they  can  all  be  dispensed  with
if  it  be.  Only  the  spirit  of  man  can  really
touch  or  commune  wiih  the  Spirit  of  spirits,
and  tbe  history  of  the  new  dispensation  is
the  history  of  a  progress  from  forms  to
realities,  from  the  sensuous  to  the  spiritual,
from  tbe  outward  to  the  inward,  from  the
earthly  to  the  heavenly.

Vers.  25,  26.— <e)  The  ChrUt  at  conceived
hy  Samaria.

Ver.  25. — ^We  probably  do  not  possess  here
the  whulii  of  the  conversation.  It  is  clear,
however,  that  strange  presentiments  of  some-
thing more  precious  than  any  sanctuary,  or
^y   ritual,  dawned    upon    the  Samaritan


woman.  "A  prophet"  might  tell  her  and
her  people  whert  men  ought  to  worship.
The  Prophet  she  discovered  answered  ■
desire  for  the  "  where "  by  revealing  the
*'how"  they  are  to  worship.  But  there  are
many  other  lessons  they  need,  and  she  gives
expression  to  an  idea  of  tbe  Messiah,  and
of  liis  coming,  which  startles  us  by  its  bold-
ness. The  woman  saith  unto  him,  I  know
(oTSa,  I  know  as  a  matter  of  current  opinioi.
and  with  intuitive  certainty)  that  Messias
oometh  (which  is  called  Christ).  [This
parenthetical  clause  by  the  evangelist  is
the  explanatory  translation  into  Greek  of
the  Aramaic  word.  This  must  be  so,  unless
we  could  be  certain,  with  Hug,  Diodati,
Mid  Roberts,  that  Jesus  and  the  woman
were  speaking  Greok  to  each  other.]  The
woman  turns  from  a  theme  which  she  has
partially  understood.  How  should  a  woman
have  been  able  at  a  moment  to  discharge
and  dispense  with  the  traditions  of  a  life,  and
the  prejudices  hoary  with  age  ?  We  know
that  the  Samaritans  anticipated  One  who
should  be  a  "converter,"  or  "restorer"
(Gesenins,  'Anecdota  Samaritana,'  p.  65,
translates  the  Samaritan  word  ariB'n  by  eon*
venor  (so  Ewald);  Hengstenberg,  Tholuck,
Meyer,  by  re»Ututor),  and  clierished  a  hope
of  his  appearance,  upon  the  faith  of  the  great
promise  (Deut  xviii.  15)  that  One  would
arise  who  would  make  known  to  them  th«
Divine  will.  It  is  remarkable,  but  not  un-
reasonable, that  she  should  have  adopted  the
Hebrew  word  in  common  use  among  all  the
Jewish  people.  In  ver.  29  it  is  given  in
Greek  without  any  reference  to  the  original
speech.  Samaritans  and  Jews  alike  antici-
pated a  Christ  an  Anointed  One,  a  Pleni-
potentiary, B  Guide.  Tbe  more  spiritual
apprehension  which  follows  becomes  some
explanation  of  the  fact  that  our  blessed
Lord  should  have  admitted  to  her  what
he  afterwards,  in  Galilee,  kept  reticently  in
reserve.  The  Galilseans  would  have  come,
on  his  slightest  encouragement,  and  against
his  will  have  made  him  a  king.  This  would
have  forced  on  him  a  position  and  dignity
which,  from  their  standpoint,  wonld  have
wrecked  his  spiritual  mission  and  frustrated
his  design.  This  woman,  here  and  later  on,
made  it  obvious  that  her  notion  of  the
"  Kcstitutor  "  or  "  Messiah ''  was  One  who,
when  he  is  come,  will  declare  to  us  aU  things ;
in  ver.  29  One  who  can  read  the  secrets  of  the
heart,  and  knows  her  and  otiiers  altogether;
while  from  ver.  42  we  learn  that  she  and  her
friends  were  anticipating  there  and  then  "  the
Saviour  of  the  world."  Luthardt  here  points
back  to  Gen.  v.  29  as  part  of  the  origin  of
the  Samaritan  idea.

Yer.  26. — Jesus  saith  unto  her,  I  that  am
talking  with  thee  am  he.  Jesus  does  uttei
to  the  Samaritan  woman  the  truth  about


ch.it.  1—54.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  «T.  JOHN.


171


hiiBBelf  whioh  he  Trithholds  from  the  sen-
suous Galilseans  and  the  carping  scribes.
Throughout  she  is  susceptible,  inquiring,
anxious  for  her  own  sake  to  know.  The
idea  sh*  entertained  about  Messiah  would
put  no  obstacle  in  the  way  of  our  Lord's
admission,  whereas  the  opposite  idea,  the
passionate  longing  for  a  political  rcTolution,
led  him  to  silence  others,  and  even  among
his  disciples  to  icserve  the  sublime  fact  as
their  sacred  secret  (cf.  Matt.  viii.  4 ;  zvi.  20  ;
xvii  _  9 ;  Mark  viii.  30).  The  truth  com-
municated to  this  woman  was  of  supreme
importance  and  of  nniversal  interest.  Out
Lord  admitted  his  Messiahship,  but  of  the
deeper  truths  of  his  incarnation,  of  the
nature  of  the  birth  from  above,  of  the  Divine
life  and  love,  of  the  means  of  redemption,
and  the  principles  of  judgment,  he  says
nothing.  Nicodemus  learns  of  both  "  earthly
and  heaTenly  things ; "  the  Samaritaness
receives  some  practical  principles.  Yet  the
two  conversations  are  complementary  to  each
other,  and  throw  upon  each  other  recipro-
cally floods  of  light.  Moreover,  there  is
the  same  parabolic  speech  in  both;  the
same  habit  of  mind.  It  is  the  8:ime  Teacher
who  uses  "the  wind"  and  "the  water  of
the  well "  to  illustrate  great  spiritual  ideas.

Vers.  27 — 38. — (8)  Bevelatian  and  mw-
understanding  involved  in  the  conduct  of  the
disciples.  The  next  paragraph  records  the
effects  of  this  conversation  upon  the  disciples,
upon  the  woman  herself,  and  upon  her
friends.

Ver.  27. — ^Hereupon  his  disciples  came;
they  returned,  {.e.  those  of  them  who  had
gone  to  Bychar,  bringing  their  provisions
and  their  &i/tKtiim  with  them,  and  they
marrelledi  that  he  was  talking  with  a
woman.  Such  •  proceeding  was  contrary
to  the  etiquette  of  a  rabbi,  who  contended
that  "a  man  should  not  salute  a  woman
in  a  public  place,  not  even  his  own  wife "
(c£  Lightfoot,  Edersheim,  Wettstein).  One
of  the  daily  thanksgivings  was,  "Blessed
art  thou,  O  Lord  .  .  .  who  hast  not  made
me  a  woman"  (Westcott).  Yet  (adds  the
eye-witness,  one  intimately  acquainted  with
the  innermost  sentiments  of  the  disciples)
noonesaid,'niiatseeke8tthoaT  Whytalkest
thou  with  herl  They  looked  on  with  awe
and  reverence  as  well  as  wonder.  They
wondered  whether  he  lacked  aught  which
they  could  not  supply.  They  marvelled  (or,
if  we  take  the  B.T.,  they  hept  marvelling)  at
the  unwonted  scene,  that  One  so  great  as
their  Babbi  and  Master  should  condescend  to

>  T.B.  reads  4eaiiuuray,  with  B,  S,  U,  V,
and  the  cursives;  but  Revised  Yersion,
Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),  with  tt.  A,  B,  C,  D,
(i,    etc.,    Italic,   Vulgate,   iCthiopic,    read


teach  or  converse  with  a  woman  at  all ;  but
tliey  held  their  peace,  with  the  conviction
that  what  he  did  must  be  gracious,  holy,
and  wise.  One  of  the  miracles  of  the  Lord's
ministry  was  to  break  down  the  wretclied
rabbinical  prejudice  against  the  spiritual
capacities  of  woman,  and  the  Oriental  folly
which  supposed  that  she  contaminated  their
sanctity.  He  lifted  woman  to  her  true
position  by  the  side  of  man.  Women  were
his  most  faithful  disciples.  They  ministered
unto  him  of  their  substance.  They  shared
his  miraculous  healing,  feeding,  and  teaching.
They  anointed  his  feet,  they  wept  over  his
agony,  they  followed  him  to  the  cross,  they
were  early  at  the  sepulchre.  They  greeted
him  as  the  risen  Lord.  They  received  the
baptism  of  the  Spirit.  In  Christ  there  is
neither  male  nor  female.  Both  are  one  in
him.

Vers.  28,  29. — The  woman  then  («.e.  iu
consequence  of  the  arrival  of  the  disciples)
left  her  water-pot  (dijniite) ;  left  it  to  itself,
forgot  the  object  of  her  visit  to  the  well,
so  engrossed  was  she  with  the  new  teaching,
so  amazed  with  his  revelations ;  or  perhaps,
with  womanly  tact,  left  it  that  the  disciples
might,  if  they  would,  make  use  of  it  for
their  Master.  Most  commentators  suggest
that  she  left  it,  intending  by  the  very  act  to
come  back  again  shortly  for  water.  But
this  is  scarcely  the  idea  conveyed  by  lupiJKe.
Archdeacon  Watkins  truly  says  that  this
notice  "is  a  mark  of  the  presence  of  him
who  has  related  the  incidents."  And  she
went  her  way  to  the  city^probably  beyond
her  home  (see  note,  ver.  7),  constituting  her-
self at  once  the  messenger  and  missionary  of
the  new  Teacher  and  Prophet,  who  had  de-
clared himself  to  be  theMessiah — andsaithto
the  men  whom  she  found  in  the  market-place
or  highway.  Come,  see  a  man  who  told  me  all
tilings  that  ever  I  did,'  This  exaggeration
of  tlie  self-revelation  was  due  to  the  deep
conviction  of  her  mind  that  the  Prophet  had
read  her  whole  life— its  weakness  and  its
follies,  and  it  may  have  been  its  sins  and
crimes,  not  unknown,  alas !  to  others  as  well.
Chrysostom  says,  "She  might  have  said,
'  Come  and  see  One  that  prophesieth ; '  but
when  the  soul  is  aflame  with  holy  fire  it
looks  then  to  nothing  earthly,  neither  to
glory  nor  to  shame,  but  belongs  to  one  thing
alone,  the  flame  which  occupieth  it."  There
is  a  touch  of  naivete,  of  loquacity,  of  im-
petuous womanhood,  about  this,  that  thrills
with  life.  She  was  not  afraid,  in  the  first
gush  of  her  new-found  joy,  to  brave  the

'  X,  B,  C*,  Eevised  Version,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort,  with  Italic
and  Coptic,read  a.insteadof  8(raof  T.B.,with
A,  C,  V,  and  vorj-  numerous  quotations  and
versions,  with  Alfoid,  Tregelles  (margin).


172


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO   ST,  JOHN.       [ch.  iv.  1— 64


unflattering  Bcorn  of  the  men  to  whom  such
a  coufeesion  was  made ;  and  then,  in  most
natural  and  appiopiiate  fashion,  added.
He  is  not  however  the  Christ,  is  he  ?  The
question,  by  its  form,  suggests  a  negative
answer;  "but,"  Westcott  says,  "hope  bursts
through  it  (of.  Matt.  xii.  23)."  She  knows
that  he  ts  the  Christ,  but  she  wishes  the
townspeople  to  guess  it — to  come  to  a  like
conclusion  with  herself.

Ver.  30. — They  went  out '  of  the  city,  and
were  coming  on  their  way  towards  him.
The  vividness  of  the  picture  is  remarkable,
and  is  made  more  so  by  observing  the  tense
of  iipxavTo.  The  men  weie  already  crossing
the  green  fields  that  lay  between  Sychar
and  Jacob's  well.  This  remarkable  touch
explains  the  conversation  that  immediately
follows.  We  have  the  twofold  scene  de-
picted :  on  the  one  side,  the  disciples  eager
for  their  meal,  and  absorbed  for  the  moment
with  thoughts  of  "  tei-rene  provender,"
unconscious  of  the  vast  yearnings  of  their
Lord,  and  his  passion  for  the  regeneration
and  saving  of  men ;  and  on  the  other  side,
the  immediate  effect,  produced  neither  by
signs  nor  wonders,  but  by  h  is  word  only,  on
a  few  susceptible  souls,  who  appeared  to
him  living  representatives  and  firstfruits  of
a  redeemed  humanity.

Ver.  31. — ^In  the  mean  while  (xpiff  under-
stood)— ^while  the  men  of  Sychar  were  coming
across  the  green  corn-fields  in  excited  and
eager  longing  for  the  bread  of  Ufe  and  the
water  of  life  eternal — his  disciples  besought
him ;  rather,  toere  entreating  him — the  verb
ipayrAin  is  used  for  question  and  interrogation,
and  is  generally  used  of  one  who  feels  on
terms  of  equality  with  the  person  addressed
on  the  matter  in  hand  (cf.  oh.  xiv.  16 ;  xv.  7 ;
xvi.  19, 23 ;  zvii.  15,  for  its  distinctness  from
aiTeoi)— Baying,  Rabbi,  eat.  Have  we  not
gone  to  Sychar  to  find  provisions  for  thee  ?
Do  not  despise  our  effort.

Yer.  32. — But  he  saith  to  them,  I  have  food
to  eat  that  ye  know  not;  of  which  you  are
ignorant,  but  which  you  may  come  to  know
by-and-by.  Bpairtv  and  PpHiia  are  both
used.  The  first  denotes,  strictly  speaking,
the  act  of  eating;  and  the  second  the
material  for  food ;  but  they  are,  in  Greek
literature,  generally  used  almost  interchange-
ably. There  were  Divine  desires  and  sacred
satisfactions  which  discriminated  the  Lord's
consciousness  from  that  of  his  disciples.
Thoma  refers  to  the  mighty  fasts  of  the
great  lawgiver  and  prophet  as  the  literary
antecedent  of  this  significant  event ;  but  this
superiority  to  food  is  true  of  every  great  soul.
The  men  of  the  spirit  are  consumed  with

•  Olv  is  omitted  by  modem  editors ;  it  is
found  in  K,  A,  and  in  1,  88,  but  all  the  other
uncials  omit  it.


desires  which  dwarf  the  desires  of  the  flesh,
and  they  forget  to  eat  their  bread,  Kor  can
we  forget  that  the  synoptic  narrative  places
the  forty  days'  fast  in  this  very  epoch  of
Christ's  life,  chronologically  speaking.  (See
note  at  end  of  this  chapter'.)

Ver.  33. — Therefore  the  disciples  (almost
as  obtuse  as  was  Nicodemus,  or  the  Samari-
taness,  or  as  the  Jews  generally  were,  in
penetrating  the  hidden  meaning  of  the
Lord's  words)  unintentionally  illustrate  the
parabolic  method,  the  tissue  of  symbolic  and
metaplioric  phrase  which  Jesus  adopted
througliout  his  ministry;  they  did  not  ven-
ture to  question  him  liirther,  but  said  one  to
another,  Hath  any  one  brought  him  aught
to  eat  1  Did  that  Samaritan  woman  or  any
other  ?  They  could  not,  or  did  not,  rise  to  the
spiritual  or  unseen,  nor  for  the  moment  did
they  get  beyond  the  pressing  needs  of  the
flesh.  Still,  in  the  form  of  their  question
they  leave  room  for  doubt,  whether  ho  had
not  been  able  to  satisfy  the  craving  of  the
flesh,  to  make  stones  into  bread,  or  water
into  wine.  Surely  noti  (The  ^^tiv  suggests
a  negative  answer.)

Ver.  34. — Jesus  said  to  them.  My  food —
that  which  satisfies  my  strongest  desire,  and
quenches  all  other  desire — is  that  I  may
do  continuously  <  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me
on  my  mission  to  this  people  and  to  this
world.  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O
God,"  was  the  motto  and  burden  of  his  life.
"Not  my  will,  but  tliine,"  was  the  sacrificial
cry  which  redeemed  the  world.  To  teach
man  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father  is  the
motive  which  sustained  him,  and  the  prayer
he  put  upon  human  lips  was,  "  Thy  will  be
done."  Meyer  here  rightly  says  that  tva  is
not  equal  to  2ti.  Some  expression  is  given
by  it  as  to  the  end  and  purpose  of  the
mysterious  life  of  wliich  we  have  these
sacred  illustrations.  The  doing  of  the  will
of  God  is  a  perpetual  and  sublime  activity,
a  continuing,  ceaseless  purpose ;  while  the
completion  of  the  work  wiU  be  one  consum-
mating act,  towards  wliioh  all  the  daily
doing  of  tile  will  is  a  preparation,  and  of
which,  in  some  sense,  every  day  we  discern
a  prelibation  and  forthsliadowing.  In  ch.
xvii.  i  he  says,  T(\(tii<ras,  "having  com-
pleted the  work  thou,"  etc.      This  passage

'  Tisoliendorf  (8th  edit.)  and  Meyer  do
not  accept,  with  Eeviscd  Version  and  West-
cott and  Hort,  toi^o-m  in  place  of  iroiS.  The
authority  for  T.E.  here  is  vei-y  strong,  N,
A,  r.  A,  etc.,  witli  numerous  quotations ;
while  TToi^troi,  though  read  by  B,  C,  D,  etc.,
and  quotations,  is  more  likely  to  have
been  the  correction  with  the  view  of  bring-
ing it  into  more  apparent  harmony  \vith
tcAei^ctiu,  but  the  beauty  of  the  two  tenses
would  thus  be  lost.


ch.it.  1—64.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  .TOUN.


173


points  on  to  that  (of.  also  oh.  v.  30 ;  vi.  38 ;
vii.  18 ;  viil.  50;  ix.  i ;  xii.  49,  50;  xiv.  31,
etc.).

Ver.  85. — Say  not  ye — has  not  your  talk
with  one  another  been,  as  you  have  passed
through  the  springing  corn,  There  are  yet
four  months,  and  then  cometh  the  harvest  1
This  cannot  be  a  proverbial  expression  for
the  time  which  elapses  between  sowing  and
liarvest,  as  some  (Liioke  and  'I'holuok)  have
supposed,  because,  firstly,  there  is  no  mention
of  sowing  at  all ;  and  secondly,  because  six
months  was  the  customary  period  between
seed-time  and  ingathering ;  and  also  because
the  "say  not  ye?"  would  then  be  inappro-
priate.    I  cannot  doubt   that   it   was    a
chronological  hint  that  the  time  st  which
Jesus  spake  was  four  months  from  either
the  barley  or  wheat  harvest.  These  harvests
generally  occurred  between  the  middle  of
March  and  the  middle  of  April.      The  time
must,  therefore,  have  been  either  the  middle
of  November  or  of  December.      Tristram
(Westcott)  says  the  (wheat?)  harvest  began
about  the  middle  of  April  and  lasted  till  the
end  of  May.   This  would  bring  the  time  for-
ward another  month.  This  makes  our  Lord  to
have  spent  some  eight  months  since  the  Pass-
over, either  in  Jerusalem  or  in  the  Judsean
land^  on  hid  earliest  mission,  which  as  yet
had  brought  no  obvious  results.    Men  had
come  to  his  baptism,  but  had  not  appreciated
or  accepted  his  claims.    The  faith  already
awakened  had  been  of  the  evanescent  cha-
racter, based  on  "signs,"  outward  not  inward,
a  "  milk  faith,"  to  which  he  did  not  entrust
himself  (ch.  ii.  24).   Behold,  I  say  to  you,  lift
up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields ;  they  are
whitening  unto '  harvest.     Our  Lord  now
uses  another  metaphor — he  bids  the  disciples
glance  across  these  rich  corn-fields,  to  observe
the  obvious  effect  already  produced  by  the
lowing  of  good  seed  in  Samaritan  soil.    The

Eeople  are  fiocking  towards  him.  The
arvest  of  souls  is  ripening,  and  it  is  great.
You  must  wait  four  months  before  this
springing  corn  will  need  the  sickle.  But
I  say  unto  you.  The  time  is  come.  The
kingdom  is  come.  The  reaper  must  prepare
for  instant  service.  Again,  we  have  a  note
of  personal  identity  between  the  Jesus  of
the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  Author  of  the
parables  of  the  sower  and  the  harvest.  The
vary  rapidity  with  which  he  passes  from
the  symbolism  of  water  to  the  symbolism
of  food,  and  then  to  that  of  leed-time  aiul

•  The  transference  of  ijSri  from  the  end  of
ver.  35  to  the  commencement  of  ver.  36,  in
place  of  the  xai  there,  is  the  marginal
emendation  of  Revised  Version,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  and  doubtfully  adopted  by  West-
cott, but  not  by  Tregelles.  The  authorities
Mte  balanced.


harvett,  reminds  ns  of  One  who  "without
a  parable  spake  not."  The  words  so  far
have  universal  application  in  every  age.
The  harvest  has  always  been  ripening.  The
word  \€vk6s  is  used  in  this  place  only  for
the  aspect  of  ripening  com.  It  has  else-
where the  meaning  of  glittering,  translucent
whiteness,  and  perhaps  it  is  used  here  for
•'dead  ripe."  The  golden  grain  in  late
summer  becomes  white,  and  this  intensifies
the  force  of  the  image.  It  seems  to  say,
"  These  fields  will  be  sacrificed,  these  fruits
will  be  wasted,  these  souls  will  be  lost,
unless  they  are  reaped  and  brought  into  the
heavenly  gamer."

Ver.  36. — Then    partially    dropping,  or
rather  explaining,  his  metaphorical  language,
he  added.  Already  he  that  reapeth  receiveth
wages;  i.e.  receiveth  from  the  great  Ownen
of  all  souls  the  reward  of  fellowship  with
his  purpose,  and  the  recompense  of  entering
into  the  supreme  joy  of  the  Lord  of  the
harvest.    The  disciples  might  at  once  enter
upon   their   harvesting.      The   work   was
itself  "  payment,"  but  it  has  a  distinct  aim
beyond  mere  ti.ur66s — he  who  reaps  in  this
harvest  of  souls  is  gathering  in  fruit  unto
eternal  life.    The  water  that  Jeaus  gives,
the  refieshment  of  soul  he  is  able  to  supply,
becomes  a  well,  a  fountain,  a  river,  an  ocean
of  life,  an  eternity  of  blessedness ;  and  now
this  &uit  of  souls,  this  harvest  of  saved  men,
is  a  Divine,  eternal  treasure,  which  the
reaper  houses  in  the  gamer  of  Gk)d.    The
final  clause  is   introduced   by  tva,  which
certainly  suggests  here  the  "contemplated
result "  rather  than  the  end  of  this  ingather-
ing.    The  "  end "  would  be  greater  and
nobler  than  what  is  here  mentioned ;   the
result  is  that  even  the  sower  and  also  the
reaper  may  rejoice  together.    Westcott  here
says  that  Christ  does  not  speak  of  himself
as  "  the  Sower,"  but  as  "  the  Lord  of  tlie
harvest."    If  it  be  so,  the  sowers  of  whom
he  thinks  are  all  the  preparatory  processes,
all  the  prophetic  men,  all  the  testifiers  to
the  Light  whose  testimony  was  crowned  in
John,  all  the  way  by  which  Judsea,  Samaria,
and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  have
been  prepared  for  the  kingdom  of  the  Spirit ;
and  they  will  all  rejoice  togetlier  with  your-
selves who  now  begin  your  harvest-joy.     If
so,  the  vista  opens  first  into  the  long  future
of  Christian  enterprise,  to  be  consummated
at  last  in  the  heavenly  world,  where  parted
hands  may  meet  again,  and  those  who  have
never  met  before  shall  "clasp  inseparable
hands  in  joy  and  bliss  in  overmeasure  for
ever  I "    All  this  may  be  proleptically  con-
tained in  the  words,  but  the  special  force  of
them   would  be  severed  &om  the  circum-
stances which  manifestly  gave  birth  to  them.
These  seem  to  me  to  be,  primarily,  Christ's
own  ministry  of  sowing  on  that  retj  day.


174


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  it.  1—64.


The  reaping  of  the  harvest  may  begin  at
once,  and  bo  Ihe  Sower  (the  Son  of  God)
and  reapers  who  gather  fruit  unto  life
eternal  may  and  will  rejoice  together.

Ver.  37. — For  herein — ^in  this  harvest-field,
already  whitening  before  your  eyes — ^is  the
word  veritably  realized — It  finds  an  ideal
illustration  of  its  meaning — One  is  the  sower,
and  another  is  the  reaper.  It  belongs  to  all
common  experience  in  such  things ;  the  first
stone  is  laid  by  one,  the  topstone  by  another.
The  toil  and  tears  of  the  sower  with  the
precious  seed  are  often  the  reason  why
another  returns  with  joy,  bringing  his  sheaves
with  him.  It  is  an  all-biU  universal  law.
Children  inherit  the  toil  of  their  fathers.
We  all  stand  where  the  shoulders  of  the
mighty  dead  have  lifted  us.  Still,  though
one  be  the  sower  and  another  is  the  reaper
in  this  Samaritan  field,  yet,  since  "  already  "
the  reaper  is  busy  with  the  sickle,  the  sower
and  reapers  may  rejoice  together.  The  law
will  be  established  on  a  grander  scale  by-
and-by,  when  the  great  Sower,  who  is  the
Lord  of  the  harvest,  shall  send  forth  all  his
reapers  to  their  great  enterprise,  and  he
and  they  will  rejoice  together.

Ver.  38.— If  this  be  the  meaning,  then,  in
the  following  verse,  the  whole  conception  of
their  relation  to  the  past  and  dependence
upon  it  is  singled  out  for  additional  com-
ment. I  have  sent  yon,  and  am  now  sending
you,  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  have  not  toiled
to  weariness.  The  idea  of  sowing  (trirelpeiv)
is  now  expanded  to  (kottiSj')  exhausting  toil ;
i.e.  to  all  the  laborious  preparation  of  the
soil  for  the  seed,  clearing  of  the  forest,  and
ploughing  on  the  rooky  places,  the  cultivation
of  the  jungle  and  fen.  Much  has  been  done
by  those  who  have  gone  before  you.  Others
have  toiled  thus ;  their  footmarks  are  red
with  blood,  their  tears  have  watered  the
earth,  and  ye  have  entered  (and  are  now
entering)  into  their  toil.  There  is  no  limi-
tation here  to  the  cycles  of  work  and  suffer-
ing, of  disappointment  and  apparent  failure
which  have  preceded  you.  The  "  others  "
is  surely  not  a  pleonasm  for  himself  He
does  verily  associate  with  himself  all  his
forerunners.  This  K6iros  is  far  more  than
the  mere  sowing  of  seed  or  diffusion  of
truth,  and  they  who  have  during  many
centuries  contributed  of  their  life  to  the
cieation  of  the  state  of  mind  which  makes
these  people  susceptible  to  the  trutli,  have
prepared  the  way  of  the  disciples.  In  a  fit
place,  and  in  the  fulness  of  the  times,  he
came.  The  disciples  of  Jesus,  moreover,
have  always  had  a  greater  or  less  degree
of  pioneer  work  to  do.  The  efforts  of  the
missionary  Church  may  be  represented  at
all  times  as  toiling  as  well  as  sowiug.  Each
generation  of  labourers  in  the  groat  field
of  love  to  Bun  enters  upon  work  and  toil


which  its  precursors  have  originated.  The
Tubingen  critics  here,  true  to  fiieir  theory  of
the  origin  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  the  second
century,  Buppose  that,  by  the  "  others,"  Jesug
is  supposed  to  mean  Philip  the  evangelist,
and,  by  the  "reapers,"  Peter  and  John,  who
entered  into  his  labours,  in  Acts  viii.  15.
Hilgenfeld  thinks  by  the  "others"  wa»
meant  Paul,  and  by  the  *'  reapers "  the
twelve  apostles,  who  sought  to  enter  upon  his
work  and  appropriate  its  fruit.  Thoma  has
followed  vigorously  along  the  same  lines,  and
supposes  that  the  Pauline  thought  1  Cor.  iii.
6—8,  and  the  story  of  the  conversion  of  the
Samaritans  and  of  the  heathen  world  to
the  Church,  are  here  forthshadowed  by  the
fourth  evangelist.

Vers.  39— 42.— (4)  Th«  harvest  of  the
Lord's  sowing,  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world,

Ver.  39.— This  harvest  is  described  in
vers.  39 — 42.  As  this  sublime  discourse  was
proceeding,  the  impression  produced  by  the
word  of  the  woman  was  becoming  deeper.
The  breath  of  God  was  moving  them  mightily.
They  wore  prepared  by  a  thousand  imtraoe-
able  influences  for  faith  in  the  great  Deliverer
and  Teacher.  Many  of  the  Samaritans  from
that  city,  in  the  first  instance,  had  been
summarily  convinced  of  the  presence  among
them  of  the  long-lookedfor  Prophet,  and
believed  on  him  by  reason  of  the  word  (or,
discourse)  of  the  woman,  who  testified,  He  told
me  all  things  that  I  ever  '  did.  Not  merely
is  this  one  saying  referred  to,  but  the  whole
report  of  the  words  of  Jesus  of  which  that
saying  was  the  crowning  or  most  startling
expression.  They  are  the  first  specimens  of
men  who  believe  by  the  testimony  of  tliose
wlio  know.  "Blessed  are  they  who  have
not  seen,  but  yet  believe."

Ver.  40. — They  were  already  convinced ;
but  they  did  more — they  came  to  him.  So
when  the  Samaritans  came  to  him,  they  con-
tinued asking  him — they  persistently  prayed
that  he  would  abide  with  them.  Haw  unlike
the  treatment  of  Jews  ami  Gadarenes,  of
scribes  and  Pharisees!  There  were  some
who  besought  him  to  depart  from  them,
others  who  stoned  him,  Herodians  and  Phari-
sees who  plotted  to  destroy  him.  But  these
hated  Samaritans  yearned  for  more  of  his
fellowship,  more  of  his  words  and  searching
glance,  more  of  the  Word  of  life.  So-called
heresy  and  heterodoxy  may  sometimes  show
itself  more  suseeptible  to  the  mind  and
Spirit  of  Christ  than  a  bigoted  and  self-
satisfied  orthodoxy.  The  Lord  responded  to
the  request,  and  he  abode  there  two  days.
Why  should  a  biographer  of  the  second
century  have  limited  this  visit  to  "  two
days,"  when  it  is  obvious  that  he  posses


'  Nearly  the  same  authorities  read  I  for
iaa,  as  in  ver.  28.


OH.  nr.  1—64,]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  JOHN.


175


over  months  in  silence?  It  would  have
been  aa  easy  to  >ay  "  two  months  "  as  to  aay
"  two  days,"  and,  to  ordinary  human  jadg-
ment,  more  natural.  These  "  two  days  "  left
an  ineffaceable  memory  on  the  heart  of  one
at  least  of  these  disciples,  and  the  mention
of  it  has  upon  the  face  of  it  the  mark  of
historicity.

Vers.  41,  42.— And  very  many  more  be-
lieved, during  that  visit,  by  reason  of  his  word
— Christ's  own  word.  Wo  know  not  what
the  word  was,  but  the  specimens  which
John  has  recorded  make  us  certain  that
torrents  of  living  water  flowed  from  his  lipa.
He  was  moving  in  the  full  power  of  the
Spirit  He  was  unveiling  the  nature  of
that  "  salvation  "  which  was,  as  he  said,
"from  the  Jews;"  but  a  salvation  which
affected  and  was  adapted  to  the  whole  world.
And  they  (repeatedly)  said  to  the  woman  (the
play  of  aorist  and  imperfect  tenses  through-
out this  passage  is  very  noteworthy).  No
longer  do  we  believe  by  reason  of  thy  speak-
ing, The  word  AaAici  does  not  generally
connote  so  serious  a  meaning  as  K6yos.  The
first  word  is  used  for  "  utterauce"  pure  and
simple  (Matt.  xxvi.  73),  and  for  the  inarticu-
late voices  of  lower  creatures  as  well,  while
\6yos  and  \4yetv  never  have  the  latter
meaning ;  but  still  Aa\ii  is  used  in  classical
Greek  for  "discourse,"  and  in  oh.  viii.  43
is  used  by  Christ  of  his  own  "utterance."
Meyer  says  tlie  term  is  purposely  chosen
ftom  the  standpoint  of  tlie  speaker,  while  in
ver.  39  Kiyos  is  used  of  the  same  AoAitJ  by
St.  John  as  narrutor.  The  above  are  the
only  times  the  term  is  found  in  the  New
Testament.  For  we  have  ourselves  heard,
and  we  know — ^fully,  by  personal  intuition
(we  might  have  expected  iyvafiev  here)—
that  this  is  indeed  the  Saviour  of  the  world,'
This  sublime  desoiiptiun  only  occurs  in  one
other  place  in  the  New  Testament  (viz.  1
John  iv.  14),  and  here  it  fills  from  the  lips
of  a  Samaritan.  There  is  no  improbability
that  it  should  have  expressed  the  thought
of  Samaritans,  for  they  entertained  wider
and  less  nation:dized  views  than  did  the
Jews.  Baur's  notion,  that  the  author  wished
to  contrast  heathen  or  Gentile  susoeptibi-

'  6  xp'<rTit  does  occur  in  some  manuscripts,
Eandll6.  Tisdieudorf (8th  edit.)introiiuce3
a\i)Sas,  on  very  email  authority;  but  Tre-
gelles,  Lachmann,  Tischendorf  (ijth  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  Eevised  Version
omit  d  XptarAs  of  T.E.,  wliioh  has  sixteen
uncial  manuscripts  and  many  cursives  and
some  Fathers  in  its  favour,  on  tlie  authority
of  K,  B,  0,  etc.,  Italic,  Vulgate,  Coptic,  and
quotations  by  Origen,  Irenseus,  and  tlera-
deou.  Godet  here  admits  that  it  is  more
easy  t«  account  for  the  addition  than  for
the  rejection  of  i  Xfurrit,  "'     ^


lity  with  Jewish  narrowness  and  reserve,  is
out  of  keeping  with  the  facts.  A  genuine
heathen  would  liave  been  as  easy  to  invent
as  a  susceptible  Samaritan.  "  The  Saviour
of  the  world  "  is  one  of  the  noblest  aiid  most
accurate  terms  in  all  the  Bible  to  denote
the  work  of  Christ.  It  is  the  outcome  of  a
discourse  and  of  teaching  which  led  men  to
the  idea  of  spiritual  and  sincere  worship  of  the
Father,  which  searched  for  moral  conditions
ratlier  than  orthodox  ritual,  which  demanded
purity  of  life  more  than  outward  observance,
and  treated  doing  the  will  and  work  of  the
Father  as  more  indispensable  than  necessary
food.  We  need  not  be  surprised  (Acts  viii.)
to  find  the  outcome  of  this  sojourn  of  the
Divine  Lord  among  the  misunderstood  and
hated  Samaritans.  The  effort  of  theTiibingen
school  to  find  in  this  narrative  an  idealization
of  tlie  synoptic  tradition  of  Christ's  special
beneficence  towards  the  Samaritans  is  very
unfortunate,  because,  iu  Matt.  x.  5,  the
"twelve"  were  forbidden  to  enter  into  cities
of  the  Samaritans,  and  advised  to  occupy  all
their  eneigies  in  evangelizing  the  cities  of
Israel.  The  record  of  Acts  viii.  affords  very
slender  basis  for  a  coi-responding  enlarge-
ment. The  narrative  before  us  shows  tbkt,
in  answer  to  the  receptivity  of  the  Samaritans,
the  Lord  made  the  richest  and  fullest  and
most  explicit  and  immediate  revelation  of
himself.  The  extension  of  the  kingdom  of
grace  to  Samaritans,  and  tlieir  incorporation
into  the  body  of  Christ,  was  arrested  by  the
need  of  the  visit  of  the  apostles,  by  the  magio
and  hypocrisy  of  Simon ;  of  which  there  is
not  here  the  slightest  trace.

Vera.  43 — 54. — 8.  The  commencement  of
the  Galilsean  ministry.  We  read  the  details
of  the  Galilssan  mini^tl  y  in  the  synoptists,
who  descriiie  our  Lord's  public  entrance,  in
the  power  of  the  Spirit,  into  Galilee  (Matt,
iv.  12;  Mark  i.  14;  Luke  iv.  14).  They  are
sileut  with  reference  to  these  earliest  wit-
nesses to  his  method  and  varied  specimens
of  his  work.  Just  as  in  the  Revelation  of
St.  John  we  have  a  proem,  and  a  series  of
visions  which  rehearse  the  entire  develop-
ment of  the  kingdom  and  glory  of  the  Lamb
of  Gud  until  the  day  of  his  triumph,  hig
wrath,  and  his  great  glory ;  so  in  these  earlier
chapters  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  we  have  an
anticipation  of  the  entire  ministry  of  Messiah.
Specimens  and  illustrations  are  given  of  hia
creative  might,  of  his  purifying  energy,  of
his  forecast  of  the  cross,  of  his  demand  for
inward  and  radical  renewal  of  his  promise-
and  gift  of  litie.  We  can  read  in  these
«r)nts  his  principles  of  judgment  and  hi«


17«


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDma  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [ch.  iv.  1— 54


revelrttion  of  the  Father,  his  mission  to
mankiad  as  a  whole,  and  his  victory  and
drawing  of  souls  to  himself.  We  see,
moreoTer,  his  relation  to  the  theocracy  and
to  the  outlying  world,  to  the  learned  rahbi
and  to  the  woman  that  was  a  sinner.  We
see  the  Lord  in  his  glory  and  in  his  humilia-
tion. A  very  brief  hint  is  given  in  the
following  verses  of  the  character  of  his
Galilsean  ministry,  wherein  mighty  works
and  words  alternate,  and  the  fiist  storm  of
direct  opposition  to  him  begins  to  make  its
appearance,  upon  which,  while  much  light
is  east  by  the  narrative  of  ch.  v.,  we  have
no  indistinct  trace  in  the  synoptic  narrative.

Vers.  43— 45.— Now  after  the  two  days
— i.e.  the  two  days  of  our  Lord's  sojourn  in
Sychar  (ver.  40 J — he  went  forth '  thence  into
Galilee.  Here  the  author  takes  up  the
narrative  of  ver.  3.  The  delay  in  Samaria
was  parenthetical  to  the  chief  end  of  his
journey,  which  was  to  leave  Judsea  and
commence  his  ministry  in  Galilee.  He  now
enters  it  a  second  time  from  Judiea.  For
Jesns  himself  testified,  that  a  prophet  hath
no  honour  in  his  own  country.  When  there-
fore he  came  into  Galilee,  the  Galilseans
wUlingly  received  him,  having  seen  all
things  whatsoever  he  did  in  Jerusalem,  at  the
feast :  for  they  themselves  also  went  to  the
feast,  These  words  bristle  with  difficulties,
and  hardly  two  commentators  entirely  agree
in  tlieir  interpretation  of  them.  Christ's
visit  to  Galilee  is  here  accounted  for  by  the
principle  embodied  in  the  proverb,  or  apart
at  least  of  the  proverb,  which  he  used  (ac-
cording to  the  synoptic  naiTative)  with  re-
ference to  his  visit  to  and  reception  in
Nazareth,  about  this  same  period  in  his
career.  Apart  from  that  reference,  the  most
simple  explanation  of  the  quotation  would
be  that  our  Lord  regarded  Jerusulem  and
Judsea  as  in  one  sense,  and  a  very  deep  one,
"his  country,"  not  simply  his  birthplace,  and
which  he  felt  at  twelve  years  of  age  was  to
contain  his  Father's  house  and  kingdom  and
work  ;  and  of  which  he  afterwards  said,  "  O
Jerusalem,  that  kiUest  the  prophets, .  . .  how
oft  would  I  ■  .  .  but  ye  would  not  I "  The
Fourth  Gospel  records  our  Lord's  various
Judsean   ministries  with  such  striking  in-

'  Kol  AirriKOev  is  omitted  by  Oriesbaoh,
Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott
and  Hort,  Bevised  Version,  and  bracketed
by  Lachmann,  on  the  authority  of  K,  B,  0,
D,  13,  69,  Curetonian  Syriao,  Origen,  etc.
It  is  found  in  A,  r.  A,  A,  and  numerous  ver-
■ions.  The  doubled  verb  would  be  contrary
to  the  simelioity  of  John's  style  (Meyer).


ddents  and  impressive  discourse,  that  his
claim  upon  tlie  loyalty  of  the  metropolis  was
repeatedly  urged  and  as  repeatedly  rejected.
True  that  in  vers.  1 — 3  we  are  told  that  oni
Lord  left  Judosa  because  the  Pharisees,  the
influential  religious  parly,  were  in  a  hostile
sense  comparing  his  ministry  with  that  of
the  Baptist.  This  may  only  be  another
way  in  which  the  comparative  unfruitful-
ness  of  his  early  ministry  in  J  udaja  is  stated.
"  The  propliet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own
country."  If  this  was  the  meaningof  Christ's
recurrence  to  the  proverb,  then  we  can  un-
derstand the  oiv  of  ver.  45,  as  well  as  the
■)dp  of  ver.  44.  The  Galilseans  who  had
been  .up  to  Jerusalem,  and  been  favourably
impressed — perhaps  more  so  than  any  Ju-
dseans,  having  formed  the  bulk  of  those
who  received  baptism  at  his  hands — ^re-
ceived him  graciously  on  his  entrance  into
Galilee.  The  whole  passage  thus  would
hang  together ;  a  subsequent  and  similar  and
more  acute  experience  where  he  was  best
known  by  face,  in  Nazareth,  drew  from  him
an  expanded  form  of  the  proverb,  in  sad  and
melancholy  iteration,  "A  prophet  is  not
without  honour  save  in  his  own  country,
and  amongst  his  kindred,  and  tn  hit  own
house"  (Mark  vi.  4;  Matt.  xiii.  57).  [In
Luke's  enlarged  account  of  the  visit  to
Nazareth  (iv.  16 — 30),  possibly  an  event
which  is  perfectly  distinct  from  the  visit  to
his  "  own  country  "  cited  by  Matthew  and
Mark,  the  proverb  appears  in  its  shorter
form.]  This  interpretation  is  that  preferred
by  Origen,  Maldonatus,  Wieseler,  Baur,  etc,
formerly  by  Ebrard  and  Liicke,  and  now  by
Westcott,  Moulton,  and  Plummer.  In  my
opinion  it  is  the  most  satisfactory  and  least
encumbered  interpretation.  It  does  not
seem  satisfactory  to  Meyer  and  others,  who
urge  that  iraTpls  can  only  mean  what  it
obviously  does  in  the  synoptic  narrative,
viz.  Galilee  as  represented  by  Nazareth.
Meyer  also  interprets  the  yip  as  introducing
a  reason,  not  only  for  our  Lord's  present
return  to  Galilee,  but  for  his  earlier  de-
parture from  Oalilee  to  Judsea  ;  and  Meyer
supposes  that  he  must  have  uttered  the
words  then.  On  this  supposition,  the  Gali-
lasans  in  the  first  instance  must  have  failed
to  appreciate  his  prophetic  claims.  Christ
had  gone  to  Jerusalem ,  and  Judeea,  and
there  acquired  the  fame  of  a  prophet,  and
subsequently  these  Gk^lilasans  were  ready  to
recognize  it  second  hand,  on  the  occasion  of
bis  return.  Godet  adds  to  this  the  joyful
emotion  that  wag  felt  when  the  plan  of
Jesns  had  been  successful  as  far  as  the
Galilseans  were  concerned.  Moreover,  he
gives  a  pluperfect  sense  to  kixacpTvpna-t,
"  he  had  testified."  Against  this  we  ob-
serve that  our  Lord  must  have  soon  found
that,  in  a  narrower  and  closer  sense,  hif


ra.  nr.  1— 54.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


177


nearest  friends  and  neighbours  had  learned
nothing  by  their  journey  to  the  feast;  and
that  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel  must
have  been  ignoiant  of  the  kind  of  reception
BO  soon  accorded  to  our  Lord  at  Nazareth.
Bruckner  and  Luthardt  suppose  by  the  yip
that  Jesus  either  sought  the  struggle  with
his  unbelieving  compatriots  or  the  solitude
induced  by  the  absence  of  sympathy.  There
is  not  the  faintest  trace  of  this  in  the  narra-
tive. Then,  again,  Cyril,  Calvin,  Bongel,
OlBha<iuen,  Hengstenberg,  suppose  that  by
naTpis  is  meant  his  own  dty,  Nazareth,
which  is  here  contrasted  with  Galilee  in
general,  including  Capernaum,  which  be-
came the  missionary  centre  of  his  early
ministry.  These  commentators  suppose  that,
when  we  are  told  "  he  went  to  Galilee,"  it
means  (as  we  see  from  ver.  46)  he  went  to
Cana,  "  for  he  testified,"  etc. ;  and  there-
fore that  in  this  forty-fourth  verse  comes
the  tragic  scene  described  in  Luke  iv.  16 —
30.  Lange  has  supplemented  this  theory
by  another  that  removes  part  of  the  di£Q-
oulty,  viz.  that  by  irarpis  was  meant  Lower
Galilee,  including  Nazareth,  and  by  the
Galilee  of  ver.  44  was  meant  Upper  Galilee
and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  lake,  in-
eluding  Capernaum,  to  which  we  find  that,
after  his  cruel  treatment  at  Nazareth,  he
retired.  So  Geilrie.  Now,  there  are  di£B-
culties  in  either  of  these  views,  which  give
great  awkwardness  to  the  expression,  "  So
he  came  to  Cana  again,"  in  ver.  46.  Tho-
luok,  De  Wette,  Lucke,  in  various  ways,
urge  that  the  yip  of  ver.  44  may  mean
namely,  that  is  to  say,  etc.,  pointing  onwards
to  the  kindly  reception  which  the  Galilseans
gave  him  being  due  to  the  ligni  which  they
beheld,  and  not  to  the  words  of  life  which
he  had  spoken.  Every  view  seems  to  us
far-fetched  and  inconsistent,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  first  interpretation.  The  only
objection  that  is  at  all  urgent,  arises  from
the  fact  that,  in  the  synoptic  narrative,
Nazareth  is  spoken  of  as  his  country.
But  if  this  were  so,  we  do  but  see  in  the
reception  accorded  to  him  in  Nazareth  a
further  illustration  of  the  very  same  spirit
which  was  shown  to  him  in  the  metropolis.
In  both  places  "he came  to  his  own, and  his
own  received  Um  not."  There  is  nothing
improbable,  if  so,  that  in  both  places  Jesus
should  have  appealed  to  the  homely  pro-
verb. On  the  second  occasion  he  added  to
it, "  his  kindred  and  his  home,"  as  well  as
"  hif  country."

Ver.  46. — He '  oame  therefore  again  unto
Cana  of  Galilee,  where  he  made  the  water
wine.     The  oiv  of  this  verse  is  best  ex-


•  X.B.,  with  numerous  cursives,  here  rcaas
S  'lii<roSs,  but  the  words  are  omitted  by  ail
modem  editors,
jomr.


plained  by  the  simple  supposition  that
Cana  lay  in  his  way.  In  Cana  of  Galilee,
not  Judiea,  ho  had  manifested  forth  his
glory,  and  his  disciples  believed  on  him.
He  came,  then,  to  Galilee,  to  Cana,  and  for
a  while  tarried  there,  long  enough  for  the
floo-iAiKiis  to  have  heard  of  his  healing
power  and  prophetic  gifts.  There  have
been  numerous  attempts  to  identify  this
narrative  of  the  nobleman's  son  with  the
healing  of  the  centurion's  servant  as  re-
corded in  Matt.  viii.  5  and  Luke  viL  2.
Recently  Weiss  and  Thoma  have  laid  em-
phasis upon  this  identification.  Strauss,
Baur,  and  all  the  opponents  of  John's  Gos-
pel, are  eager  to  press  this  subjective  haud-
ling  of  the  synoptic  tradition.  But,  as
Edersheim  has  observed,  they  are  here  in
hopeless  contradiction  with  their  own
theory;  for  we  find  that  the  Hebrew  Gospel
here  confers  the  loftiest  encomium  upon  a
Gentile,  and  the  Hellenic  Fourth  Gospel
makes  the  hero  of  this  scene  to  be  a  Jew.
True,  in  both  cases  a  man  of  higher  rank
than  that  of  fishermen  and  taxgatherers
approaches  our  Lord  with  a  request  an  behalf
of  another.  But  it  should  be  observed  that  in
the  one  case  we  have  a  Roman  centurion,  a
heathen  man,  coming  with  great  faith,  one
who,  though  "  not  in  Israel,"  recognizes  the
imperial  claims  of  Jesus;  in  the  present
narrative  we  have  an  Herodiau  officer,  some
person  of  Jewish  blood  attendant  on  the
tetrarch's  court,  who  displays  a  weak  faith,
reproved  though  rewarded  by  the  Master.
The  one  asks  for  a  dying  slave  afflicted  with
paralysis ;  the  other  for  a  dying  son  suffei-
ing  from  deadly  fever.  Jesus  meets  the
centurion  as  he  comes  down  from  the
mountain,  after  the  delivery  of  the  great
sermon ;  the  Lord,  when  he  receives  the
request  of  the  nobleman,  was  a  resident  in
Oaua.  Both  cures  are  said  to  take  place  at
Capernaum  by  the  utterance  of  a  word,  but
the  centurion  disclaims  the  right  to  a  visit,
and  asks  for  a  word  only.  The  nobleman
entreats  that  the  Lord  would  travel  from
Cana  to  Capernaum  to  heal  his  son.  Thus
the  two  narratives,  with  certain  resem-
blances, are  still  strongly  contrasted.  The
$acrt\tK6s  is  one  in  the  service  of  a  king.
The  title  of  a  king  was  given  to  Herod  in
later  times  (Mark  vi.  14),  and  characterized
other  references  to  him.  And  there  was  a
certain  nobleman,  whose  son  was  siok  at
Capernaum.

Yer.  47. — This  man,  when  he  heard  that
Jesus  was  come  out  of  Judssa  into  Galilee,
went  unto  him.  This  statement  implies
that  Jesus  had  been  in  Capernaum  before,
and  left  there  the  impression  of  his  power
to  beal  and  save.  The  rumour  of  trans-
actions of  this  kind  wrought  at  Capemauiii
bad  been  carried  from  Capernaum  to  Naza-


1?8


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOUN.      [oh.  i*.  1—64.


nth  (see  Ltike  iv.),  and  now  the  retorn  of
Jesus  from  Judsea  was  soon  known  in  the
cities  along  the  shore  of  the  lake.  And  he
besought  him  (pbs.  iipira,  indicating  to  some
extent  a  kind  of  conscious  right  to  seek  the
favour)  that  (tea,  in  John,  often  pives  the
purport  of  a  prayer  or  a  command)  he
would  come  down  (from  the  highlands  of
Giililee  to  the  borders  of  the  lake,  sunk  as
it  is  in  a  deep  depression)  to  Capernaum,
and  heal  his  son:  for  he  was  on  the  point  of
death  (Vulgate,  tnctpie&at  mori;  compare
and  contrast  ch.  xii.  33).

Ver.  48. — Then  said  Jesus  to  him — as  re-
presenting the  whole  class  whose  faith  rested
upon,  and  was  nourished  by,  the  outward
sign,  with  a  certain  amount  of  reproof  if
not  of  irony  in  the  strength  of  his  phrase —
Except  ye  see  (there  is  no  special  emphasis
laid  on  tlie  iii\re,  as  distinct  from  the  mere
report  or  testimony  of  such  things)  signs
and  wonders,  ye  will  by  no  means  believe.
This  is  tlie  only  occasion  in  John's  Gospel
where  these  two  terms  are  conjoined.  They
are  frequently  brought  together  in  Acts  (ii.
22,  43 ;  It.  30 ;  y.  12,  etc.),  and  used  in  con-
junction in  Matt.  xxiv.  24 ;  llilark  xiii.  22  ;
Kom.  XV.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  12,  John  ordi-
narily uses  (ipya)  "  works  "  to  denote  those
objective  tangible  facts  which  were  "  signs  "
(iTTjiitcia)  of  the  Lord's  higher  nature  and
claims.  Here  Tipara,  a  word  meaning  "  por-
tents," remarkable,  inexplicable  events  out
of  the  common  order,  accompanies  "  signs,"  i
to  complete  the  notion.  The  craving  for
"  signs  and  wonders  "  did  absorb  the  higher
life  of  Judaism.  "  The  Jews  require  a  sign  "
(1  Cor.  i.  22),  and  minds  that  are  yet  in  the
Jewish  stage  of  partial  discipline,  for  spiri-
tual revelation,  still  do  the  8:ime.  There  is
still  in  many  of  us  the  weak  faith  which
needs  the  stimulating  diet  of  the  "  sign  "
before  there  is  any  full  recognition  of  the
Divine  fulness  of  blessing.  Christ  does  not
condemn,  tliough  he  mourns  over,  this  spiri-
tual babyhood ;  and  while  he  says  (ch.  x.  38 ;
xiv.  1 1 ;  XV.  24)  that  belief  for  the  works'  sake
may  lead  up  to  true  faith,  yet  the  language
addressed  to  Tliomas,  "Blessed  are  they
that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed,"
reveals  his  deepest  thought  of  their  com-
parative worth.  The  demand  for  "signs
and  wonders"  in  Galilee  contrasts  with
the  ready  reception  which  the  Samaritans
had  given  to  his  word.  Many  of  the  diiH-
oulties  of  these  narratives  arise  from  the
obvious  fact  that  they  are  so  closely  com-
pressed. Weiss  has  a  hard  task  to  make
what  he  calls  this  "  harsh  answer "  tally
with  Matthew's  account  of  the  reception  of
the  centurion,  and  of  the  "great  faith"
which  in  his  case  preceded  the  miracle.  A
single  sentence  in  the  urgent  request  of  the
nobleman,  implying  that  at  Capernaum  tuey


needed  the  same  kind  of  proof  that  had  been
given  at  Jerusalem  of  tlie  Lord's  prophetic
claims,  would  account  for  all  the  emphasis
laid  upon  the  inperfec  t  faith  of  the  Gal  i  Iseans.
He  who  "  knew  what  was  in  man  "  knew  in
what  way  to  rouse  in  this  suppliant  an
adequate  recognition  of  the  Divine  ia  him-
self.

Ver.  49. — ^The  nobleman  saith  onto  him,
Lord,  come  down  before  my  little  boy  (my  only
son)  die  (comp.  Mark  ix,  24, "  Lord,  I  believe ;
help  thou  my  unbelief;"  and,  again,  the
words  of  the  woman  of  Syro-Fhoanicia,  who
will  not  be  put  off,  "  Even  the  dogs  eat  of
the  crumbs,"  Matt.  xv.  27,  etc.).  This
touching  stroke  shows  how  love  triumphs
over  the  desire  for  signs  and  wonders,  and
already  helps  to  create  the  faith  in  the
grace  and  power  of  the  Divine  Helper.

Ver.  50. — Jesus  saith  to  him,  Go  on  thy
way;  thy  son  liveth.  The  use  of  the  dimi-
nutive iraiStov  in  the  previous  verse  is  not
sustained  by  Codex  A,  which  reads  vi6f,  while
K  reads  walSa.  Jesus  adopts  in  his  gracious
response  the  more  dignified  word  whicli  had
been  already  on  the  lips  of  the  father.
He  did  not  "need  the  passionate  appeal"
(Moulton).  The  rationale  of  the  miracle  is
impossible.  The  will  of  Jesus  was  in  abso-
lute coincidence  with  the  Divine  will,  and
he  knew,  by  the  inward  conformity  of  his
own  will  with  the  Father's  will,  that  what
he  willed  the  Father  willed,  and  that  at  the
very  moment  tlie  crisis  of  the  fever  had
passed  and  the  change  was  wrought.  On
this  occasion  he  did  not  say,  "  I  will  come
and  heal  him,"  but,  "  Go ;  thy  son  liveth ; "
he  is  no  longer,  as  thou  thoughtest,  on  the
point  of  death.  The  man  was  fain  to  believe
the  word  of  Jesus,  and  for  a  while  at  least,  to
believe  by  that  alone.  The  man  believed
the  word  which  Jesaa  spake  to  him,  and
went  on  his  way  to  Capernaum.

Ver.  51. — Now  as  he  was  going  down  to
Capernaum  (if  we  take  any  of  the  more
recent  determinations  of  the  site  of  Gana  (see
ch.  ii.  1,  2),  this  means  thai  he  had  traversed
a  distance  of  between  twenty  and  twenty-five
miles,  so  that  there  is  no  reason  to  treat
with  ridicule  or  regard  as  inexplicable  the
time  taken  for  the  return  journey,  or  that  a
night  should  have  been  spent  in  the  transit
from  Cana),  bis  servants  met '  him,  saying,'

'  "rwfivTrirttv  is  read  by  Tregelles,  Alford,
Westcott  and  Hort,  Tischcndorf  (8th  edit,),
Revised  Version,  with  N,  B,  0,  D,  K,  L,
while  the  reading  of  T.E.,  arr-fimritrav,  is
sustained  by  A,  r.  A,  A,  n,  other  uncials,  and
several  quotations  by  Origen,  Chrysostom,
and  Cyril.

'  This  alteration  of  the  text  is  consider-
able. First,  Westcott  and  Hort,  Eevised  Ver-
non, omit  Ka)  iirtiyyfiiMyf  which  is  sustMned


Ch.it.  1—64.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


179


that  Ms  boy  lived.  The  oblique  fonn  ii
certainly  far  more  reasonable,  less  mechani-
cal, and  more  likely  to  have  been  altered
into  the  direct  form  by  an  incautious  copyist
from  the  previous  verse,  than  to  liave  con-
stituted the  original  text.  Note  that  Jesus
user!  the  most  dignified  title,  "  son  "  (yi6s) ;
the  father  employs  the  tender  diminutive
(ttmSIoi/')  ;  while  the  servants  use  the  domestic
term  (irais).

Ver.  52.— The  father  is  full  of  joy  at  the
blessed  intelligence,  but  naturally  seeks  at
once  to  link  tlie  event  with  the  word  and  will
of  Jesus.  He  therefore  inquired  from  them
the  hour  in  whioh  he  began  to  amend  (_K0fii\p6-
repop  ?ffxO-  (This  peculiar  phrase  is  suit-
able on  the  lips  of  a  man  of  rank ;  literally,
"he  did  bravely,  exceedingly  well;"  and
K6iJL^as  EXEi"  is  occasionally  used  in  contradis-
tinction with  K&Koii  EX€l^'  in  a  similar  sense.
Bpictetus, '  Diss.,'  iii.  10—13.)  Xhey  say  to
hun,  therefore,  Yesterday  daring  the  seventh
hour  the  fever  left  him.  The  advocates  of
John's  adoption  of  the  Boirinn  computation
of  time  suppose  that  this  was  seven  p.m.,  and,
therefore,  that  a  night  had  intervened  on  the
return  journey  (so  Westoott,  Edersheim,  and
Moulton).  This  is  not  necessary,  because,
even  on  the  Jewish  computation,  from  sun-
rise to  sunset,  though  the  seventh  liour  must
then  mean  between  noon  and  one  p.m.,  it
could  not  have  happened  that  much  before
midnight  he  should  have  broken  into  the
streets  of  Capernaum.  At  that  hour  the
noon  might  be  spoken  of  as  "yesterday."
This,  however,  is  not  imperative ;  for,  if  the
distance  between  Captrnaum  and  Cana  was
from  twenty  to  twenty-five  miles,  and  if  the
nobleman  had  travelled  to  Cana  on  the  day
that  he  presented  his  request,  it  is  clear  thai
a  night's  halt  might  easily  have  been  re-
quired. Baur  and  Hilgenfeld  make  the  note
of  time  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  vraiter
to  exaggerate  the  marvel,  as  if  the  distance
through  which  the  will  of  Christ  asserted  it-
self could  augment  the  wonder,  or  that  the
real  supernatural  could  be  measured  by  mil  e-
stones.  And  Thoma  thinks  so  poorly  of  the
originality  of  the  Johannist,  that  he  imagines
him  to  have  worked  into  his  narrative  some
of  the  small  details  of  the  Cornelius  and
Peter  interviews  in  Acts  x.

Ver.  53. — The  father  then  knew  (came  to
know,  by  putting  the  facts  together)  that  his
son  began  to  amend  in  the  same  hour  in
whioh  Jesns  said  to  him,  Thy  son  Uveth.
The  word  was  mighty,  none  other  than  that
very  voice  of  the  Lord  "which  healeth  all
our  diseases,"  and  "redeemeth  our  lives  from

by  A,  B,  0,  p ;  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)  sub-
stitutes for  it  Kol  ijyyeiKap,  with  N,  T> ;  and
they  all  add  \eyovTes,  omitted  by  K,  D,  and
avTov  for  (Tov,  with  K,  A,  B,  0.


destruction.''  No  mere  coincidence,  no  com-
mon accident.  And  himself  believed  and
his  whole  household ;  believed  in  the  Divine
cl  aims  of  Jesus.  This  is  the  earliest  mention
of  "  liousehold  faith  "  (cf.  Acts  x.  44 ;  xvi.
15,  34).  In  this  case  a  whole  picture  rises
before  our  eye.  The  mother,  the  sisters,  the
servants,  the  entire  family,  had  shared  in  iho
anxiety,  had  sympathized  in  the  journey  to
Cana,  and  now  accepted  the  exalted  claims
of  Jesus.  Faith  is -graciously  contagious.
The  nearness  of  the  unseen  world  often  re-
veals the  features  of  the  God-Man.  The
suggestion  has  frequently  been  hazarded
that  this  0cun\tK6s  was  Chuza,  the  house-
steward  of  Heiod,  whose  wife,  Joanna,
ministered  to  Jesus  (Luke  viii.  3  and
xxiv.  10).

Ver.  54. — ^This  is  again  a  second  sign  which
Jesus  did,  when  he  had  come  out  of  Judaea
into  Galilee.  The  point  is  that  each  return
from  Judsea  to  Galilee  had  been  charged  with
special  emphasis  b  the  occurrence  of  a
"  sign."  We  are  told  (ch.  ii.  23 ;  iii.  2)
of  signs  wrought  in  Jerusalem,  and,  con-
sequently, it  could  not  be  meant  to  be  the
second  sign  wrought  by  him.  The  Tr&\iv
refers  to  the  4>\.Biii/  clause,  i.e.  to  the  repetition
of  his  entrance  on  work  in  Galilee.  The
first  sign  was  the  transformation  of  the
water ;  the  second,  under  similar  conditions,
was  the  healing  a  dying  chUd  by  his  word
(so  Godet,  Lange,  and  Westcott).

This  passage  of  St.  John's  Gospel  which  we
have  now  reviewed  is  a  distinct  period  of  our
Lord's  life  and  ministry,  concerning  which
the  synoptists  were  silent;  and  it  is  mar-
vellously complete  in  itself.  It  is  an  epitome
of  the  wliole  life  of  the  blessed  Lord,  and
presents  an  outline  and  specimen  of  his
method  and  his  work.  The  disciple  unnamed
seems  always  at  the  side  of  the  Lord.  A
mighty  spell  had  fallen  on  him ;  and  he  was
beginning  already  to  discern  in  him  the
ehai-acteristios  which  ultimately  directed
him  to  compose  the  prologue.  The  penetra-
tion of  the  hidden  secrets  of  all  hearts — first
his  own, then  those  of  Cephas  and  Nathanael,
and  the  motives  of  Mary,  and  the  spirit  of
Nicodemus,  the  intentions  of  the  Pharisees,
the  secret  life  of  the  Samaritaness,  and  the
inchoate  and  imperfect  faith  of  the  nobleman.
Jesus  is  presented  to  us  In  marvellously
different,  yet  mutually  complementary,  re-
lations. (1)  Gathering  susceptible  spirits  to
himself,  and  judging  men  by  the  reception
they  were  giving  or  not  giving  to  his  word  ;
4.0.  Nathanael,  Nicodemus,  tfa«  Jews,  tbt


190


THE   GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  iv.  1—54


Samaritans,  tlie  Galilffians.  (2)  Accepting  or
revealing  the  mightiest  and  most  enduring
names—"  The  Son  of  God,"  "  the  Lamb  of
God,"  the  Baptizer  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
"the  King  of  Israel,''  the  Opener  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  the  Creator  of  all  things,
the  Head  of  the  theocracy,  the  Eebuilder  of
the  temple  of  his  body,  the  Teacher  of  the
teacher  of  Isi-ael,  the  "  Son  of  man,"  the
Saviour,  the  Giver  of  eternal  life,  the
Light,  the  Bridegroom  of  the  true  bride,
the  Object  of  the  eternal  Father's  love,  the
Revealer  of  the  Father  in  his  most  essen-
tial features  and  most  perfect  will,  the
"Prophet  that  should  come  into  the
world,"  the  "Saviour  of  the  world,"
the  "  Christ  of  God."  (3)  We  see  him,  in
the  majesty  of  his  omnipotence,  hiding
himself,  as  the  Almighty  always  does,
behind  and  in  his  works;  we  see  liim  hal-
lowing and  heightening  the  joys  of  nuptial
love,  and  again  purifying  the  house  of  God
from  all  contaminating  adjuncts ;  we  see  him
in  his  exalted  mood  consumed  by  holy  zeal,
and  also  weary  and  thirsty  by  the  well,
asking  for  water  from  an  alien,  and  making
to  her  the  most  astonishing  revelations,
hushing  the  pride,  as  they  have  secured
the  reverence,  of  all  after-ages  by  their
spirituality  and  refinement.  (4)  We  have
specimens  of  every  kind  of  reception  and
non-reception  accorded  to  his  teaching.
Some  at  once  perceive  his  extraordinary
claims,  and  pour  forth  their  homage;
others  are  silent,  and  pass  out  of  sight
for  ever.  Some  are  cold  and  reserved,
oritical  and  puzzled ;  others  glow  and  gush
with  initantaneous  conviction.  We  see  in
these  chapters  the  shadow  of  the  cross,  and
gleams  also  of  the  crown  of  Jesus.  (5)  We
have,  moreover,  remarkable  forthshadowing
of  the  immense  human  personality  which  is
sustained,  not  only  by  what  follows  in  this
Gospel,  but  by  what  was  well  known  and
widely  circulated  when  this  Gospel  was
written,  e.g.  the  impression  which  he  spon-
taneously gave  of  reserves  of  power  and
truth.  A  necessity  seems  imposed  upon
him  of  speaking  in  parabolic,  enigmatic
langnage.  He  continually  rises  from  the
commonest  incident  and  material  to  the
Divinest  truth;  utilizing  for  his  purpose
the  flg  tree,  the  wine-cup,  the  temple  courts
and  sanctuary,  the  roaring  wind,  the  Sowing


water,  the   rising  com,  and   the   coming
harvest.

One  remarkable  aspect  of  this  preliminary
ministry  is  the  light  it  throws  upon  the  pro-
foundly difficult  passage  in  the  synoptics,
descriptive  of  the  temptation  of  Jesus — a
subject  on  which  thisevangelist  says  nothing.
Later  on,  indeed,  he  tells  us  that  Jesus  said,
"  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath
nothing  in  me ; "  and,  "  Now  is  the  crisis  of
this  world :  now  is  the  prince  of  this  world
cast  out.  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw
all  men  to  me"  (ch.  xii.  31 ;  xiv.  30).  In  these
chapters  the  evangelist  records  certain  events
which  correspond  in  a  remarkable  way  with
the  threefold  temptation  of  the  devU,  which
we  knowto  have  preceded  the  public  ministry
in  Galilee.  Thus,  (1)  over  against  the  devil's
temptation  to  make  stones  into  bread  for  his
own  sustenance,  and  as  proof  of  his  sonship
to  himself,  we  find  that  Mary  his  mother  said
to  him,  at  the  marriage-feast,  "  They  have
no  wine."  His  reply  was,  "  Not  in  the  way
which  you  propose  will  I  make  myself  known
to  the  world."  "  Mine  hour  [for  that]  is  not
yet  come."  He  did,  however,  in  a  manner
bafBing  to  all  but  his  disciples,  turn  water
into  wine  for  the  behoof  of  poverty  and  the
hallowing  of  earthly  joy,  and  the  manifes-
tation, not  BO  much  of  the  glory  of  his
power  as  of  the  fulness  and  sweetness  of  his
love.  Compare  with  this  his  asking  for
water  from  the  well  for  his  own  refreshment
as  a  weary,  thirsting  man,  and  also  the  spirit
of  his  reply  to  his  disciples,  "  I  have  meat
to  eat  which  ye  know  not  off;"  "My  meat
is  to  do  the  wiU  of  him  who  sent  me."  (2)
Over  against  tbedevU's  temptation  to  descend
in  splendid  supernatural  effect  from  the
pinnacle  of  the  temple  upon  the  astonished
multitude,  trusting  in  the  mean  while  to  the
hands  of  angels  to  hold  him  up,  we  have
John's  account  of  his  sudden  appearance
in  the  temple,  when,  consumed  by  holy  zeal
for  its  purity,  instead  of  loud  acclaim,  he  en-
countered the  first  muttering  of  the  storm
which  culminated  on  Calvary,  and  made  it
evident  tliat  he  only  looked  to  victory  oror
their  prejudices  by  eventually  building  np
that  temple  of  his  body  which  they,  by  theit
obtuseness,  were  beginning  to  destroy,  (8)
Over  against  the  temptation  to  win  tiie
powers  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  tiiem
by  a  sinful  compromise,  ijt  by  admitting  th«


OH.  IT.  1-U.}      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


181


legitimsoy  of  the  power  of  the  devil  in
human  polity,  John  tells  us  that  Jesus,  by
uncompromising  fidelity  to  his  great  mission
as  spiritual  Healer,  waved  oiT  the  half-
homage  of  the  ruler  of  tlie  Jews  and  master  of
the  schools,  and  pointedly  declared  his  need
of  personal,  individ'iM  regeneration.  Then
we  read  that  he  quietly  began  his  humble
career  of  persuasion,  that  he  grappled  with
and  discarded  the  presumptuous  claim  of
nationality,  and  announced  the  nature  of
spiritual  worship.  Not  by  the  pomp  of  na-
tional homage  won  by  truckling  to  the  power
of  evil,  but  by  the  conversion  of  the  simple
liearts  of  Samaritans  through  their  personal
conviction  tliat  he  was  indeed. the  Saviour
(not  the  Caesar)  of  the  world,  he  would  win
the  world.  Such  obvious  comparisons  are
not  fortuitous.  These  events  set  forth,  on  a
magnificent  scale  of  converse  and  action,  the
deep  lessons  of  the  temptation,  and  show,  as
the  eynoptists  tell  us,  that  he  was  fiUed  with
the  Holy  Ghost  (see  Introduction).

Yet,  notwithstanding  all  this,  it  wei|e  a
great  mistake  to  suppose  that  he  had  ex-
hausted his  resources  or  his  teaching ;  he
has  simply  uttered  the  alphabet  of  the  whole
gospel  which  he  is  about  to  disclose.  The
teaching  of  the  valedictory  discourse  is  pro-
digiously in  advance  of  tliis  introduction  to
his  ministry.  The  truths  absolutely  revealed
are  the  need  of  a  complete  purification  of
man  and  temple,  the  imperative  necessity
of  heavenly  birth,  of  spiritual  worship,  of
implicit  faith  in  the  Father's  love,  and  of
patient  waiting  for  God.  We  have  two  inci-
dents of  the  Lord's  ministry  in  Galilee,  but
also  impressive  hints  of  the  adaptation  of
his  gospel  to  that  world  of  strangers  and
outcasts  that  he  has  come  to  seek  and  save.
Our  great  difficulty  is  in  the  silence  which
the  Fourth  Gospel  preserves  concerning  the
continuous  ministry  of  our  Lord  in  Galilee
after  this  preparation  for  it.

In  oh.  vi.  4  we  learn  that  the  Jews'  Pass-


ovor  was  at  hand,  and  we  find  ourselvei  In
the  midst  of  a  group  of  facts  in  which  some
chronological  hints  may  be  gained.  The
multiplication  of  the  loaves,  the  walking
upon  the  sea,  are  events  which  are  recorded
by  the  synoptists,  and  which  appear  there
to  have  followed  the  execution  of  John  the
Baptist,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  trial
mission  of  the  twelve  disciples.  We  must,
therefore,  conclude  that,  between  the  Pass-
over of  ch.  ii.  13  and  ch.  vi,  4,  one  year  must
have,  at  least,  elapsed.  (It  is  true  that
Browne,  in  his  '  Ordo  Sseoulorum,'  has  en-
deavoured to  obliterate  this  reference  to  the
Passover  as  a  gloss,  but  without  any  autho-
rity from  codices,  or  versions,  or  other  diplo-
matic evidence.)  This  period,  moreover,
includes  a  vast  amount  of  incident  in  the
synoptic  narrative ;  all  that,  e.g.,  which  is
recorded  in  Mark  between  i  14  and  vi.
56.  Now,  it  is  obvious  that,  after  a  period
of  general  response  to  his  claims,  our  Lord
encountered  (according  to  the  synoptists)  an
organized  opposition  from  the  Pharisees  (see
Mark  ii.,  iii.,  and  parallels,  and  especially
from  ii.  23  to  iii.  6),  in  particular  a  bitter  and
deadly  persecution  on  the  ground  of  his
heterodoxy  of  word  and  conduct  with  refer-
ence to  the  rabbinic  interpretation  of  the
sabbatic  law.  There  are  also  other  indica-
tions of  a  rising  storm  of  indignation,  even
in  Galilee,  to  modify  the  popular  enthu-
siasm. Concerning  this  John  says  nothing,
but  he  does  record  the  origin  of  the  storm
in  the  metropolis  in  his  account  of  a  journey
to  Jerusalem  taken  in  tlie  course  of  this
period.  It  was  his  obvious  purpose  to  detail
the  history  of  the  conflict  with  the  hier-
archical party  at  JerusHlem.

The  metropolis  was  the  great  focus  of  the
antagonism  to  Christ,  and  John  describes
those  scenes  which  appeared  in  Jerusalem
to  have  stimulated  the  assault,  and  thereby,
elicited  the  self-revelation  of  Jesoi.


HOMILETICS.

Vem.  1 — 6. — The  journey  of  our  Lord  through  Samaria.     Wo  are  now  to  leo  the
firstfruits  of  Gentile  conversion.

L   CONSIDBB  THE  CAUSE  OF  ChRIBT'S  DEPARTURE  PROM  JUDiBA  TO  GaLILBE.      "When

therefore  the  Lord  knew  how  the  Pharisees  had  heard  that  Jesus  made  and  baptized
more  disciples  than  John,  he  left  Judsea  and  departed  again  into  Galilee."  1,  The  anger
<jf  the  Pharisees  was  roused  by  the  greater  success  of  Jesus.     "  All  men  were  coming


182  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  it.  1—64,

to  him  "  (ch.  ili.  26),  to  be  bis  disciples  and  to  receive  his  baptism.  John  was  now
in  prison.  Nothing  more  was  to  be  apprehended  from  the  rousing  ministry  of  the
Baptist.  Rut  a  more  formidable  Teacher  had  appeared  in  the  land,  who  commanded  a
still  wider  acceptance.  The  fact  that  the  Baptist  had  borne  testimony  to  Jesus,  and
that  our  Lord  was  more  independent  of  Pharisaic  traditions  in  the  spirit  of  his  work,
made  him  vastly  more  dangerous  to  the  dominance  of  the  leading  religious  party.
2.  It  argued  no  cowardice  on  the  ptrt  of  Christ  to  leave  Judsea  in  circumstances  oj
danger.  He  himself  counselled  his  apostles  to  follow  his  example:  "When  they  per-
secute you  in  this  city,  flee  ye  into  another  "  (Matt.  x.  23),

II.  The  necessity  that  diekctbd  his  egad  through  Samabia.  "And  he  must
needt)  go  througli  Samaria."  This  was  necessarily  the  direct  route  to  Galilee,  but  was
usually  avoided  through  the  particularistic  spirit  of  the  Jews,  if  not  from  an  apprehen-
sion of  Samaritan  hostility.  1.  We  remark  how  the  hostility  of  the  Pharisees  in  Judsea
■was  overruled  for  the  conversion  of  the  Samaritans.  2.  This  visit  of  mercy  to  Samaria
is  not  inconsistent  with  the  original  commission  given  to  the  apostles,  "  Go  not  into  the
way  of  the  Gentiles,  and  into  any  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not:  but  go  ratlier
to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel "  (Matt.  x.  5, 6).  (1)  The  limitation  in  the  com-
mission is  confined  to  that  one  mission  only,  for  in  the  final  commission  (Acta  i.  8)
Jesus  says,  "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me  both  in  Jerusakm,  and  in  all  JudiBa,  and
in  Samaria,  and  to  the  nttermost  part  of  the  earth."  (2)  The  commission  recognizes
merely  the  prior  claim  of  the  Jew  in  order  of  time.  "To  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the
Gentile."  (3)  The  apostles  needed  to  be  gradually  disciplined  to  more  catholic  ideas
by  the  action  of  our  Lord  himself  in  inaugurating  the  mission  to  the  Samaritans.  (4)
Consider  how  persistent  Jesus  was  in  well-doing.  He  has  no  sooner  ceased  to  labour
in  Judc-ea  than  he  resumes  his  task  by  the  way  to  Galilee.  Truly  he  "  went  about  every
day  doing  good."

III.  The  scene  of  hib  Samabitan  laboubs.  "  Then  cometh  he  to  a  city  of  Samaria,
which  is  called  Sychar,  near  to  the  parcel  of  ground  which  Jacob  gave  to  hia  son
Joseph."  1.  The  city  is  the  modern  Nuhlous,  where  the  Samaritans  still  live.  2.  The
peojfie  were  a  mixture  of  five  nations,  transported  from  the  East  to  occupy  Samaria
after  the  exile  of  its  native  inhabitants.  They  were  more  hated  by  the  Jews  than  the
Gentiles  themselves,  and  were  never  received  as  proselytes.  Hate  begat  hate.  The
moral  separation  was  complete.  3.  Jacob's  well  was  the  spot  where  the  first  word  of  grace
was  spoken  to  the  Samaritans.  "  Nuw  Jacob's  well  was  there,  Jesus  therefore,  being
wearied  with  his  journey,  sat  thus  upon  the  well."  (1)  Jesus  was  weary  with  travel
in  the  heat  of  the  day ;  lor  "  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour  " — one  o'clock  in  the  day.  (a)
It  was  a  mark  of  his  poverty  that  he  travelled  on  foot.  (6)  It  was  a  mark  of  his  true
humanity  tliat  he  had  full  experience  of  its  infirmities.  (2)  Mark  how  Divine  provi-
dence -brings  together  the  Saviour  and  the  sinner  at  the  "  meeting-place  of  destiny."
The  woman  comes  to  diaw  water ;  Jesus  sits,  a  wearied  traveller  by  the  well,  seeking
the  relief  of  his  thirst.

Vers.  7 — 14. — The  conversation  with  the  Samaritan  woman.  I.  The  first  approach
IS  MADE  ON  OUB  Lobd's  SIDE.  "  Give  me  to  drink."  1.  Consider  the  person  addressed.
"  There  cometh  a  woman  of  Samaria  to  draw  water."  (1)  It  was  a  woman.  Babbinic
prejudice  discouraged  the  fuller  religious  instruction  of  woman,  but  Jesus  trampled
such  a  prejudice  underfoot.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  a  woman  was  the  first
convert  in  Bauiaria,  as  Lydia  was  the  first  convert  in  Europe.  (2)  It  was  a  Samaritan,
"  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel ; "  yet  Jesus  passed  beyond  the  limits  of
Judaism  in  his  errand  of  mercy.  (3)  It  was  a  poor  woman,  for  drawing  water  was  no
longer,  as  in  more  ancient  times,  the  work  of  women  of  rank  ;  yet  Jesus  preaches  the
gospel  to  the  poor.  (4)  She  was  degraded.  She  was  an  adulteress ;  yet  Jesus  had
mercy  to  offer  to  this  sinner.  2,  Consider  how  he  seeks  to  elicit  her  thought  and  to
gain  her  soul.  He  asks  a  favour.  "  Give  me  to  drink."  This  was  to  recognize  her
momentary  superiority.

II.  The  quick  becollection  on  her  bide  of  the  wall  of  separation  between
Jew  and  Samabitan.  "  How  is  it  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest  drink  of  me,  which
am  a  woman  of  Samaria  ?  "  1.  She  identified  Jesus  as  a  Jew  ty  his  dress  or  his  accent
or  by  beih.    2.  dmiidvr  the  embitlering  alienation*  tanught  by  religiova  differences.


OH.IV.  1— 54.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOHDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  183


"  For  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans."  Yet  the  Galilseans,  like  our
Lord  and  his  disciples,  may  have  been  less  influenced  by  the  policy  of  isolation  than  ths
people  of  Judaa,  for  while  Jesus  asted  a  drink  from  a  Samaritan,  his  disciples  went  to
a  Samaritan  city  to  buy  meat.  3.  Mark  the  perpetuity  of  religious  hatred.  It  dated
from  the  ago  of  the  Captivity,  It  still  exists  to  separate  Samaritans  both  from  Jews
and  from  Christians.

IIL  OuB  Lord's  offer  of  the  best  gift  to  the  Samaritan  woman.  "  If  thou
knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink;  thou
wouldest  have  asked  of  him,  and  he  would  liave  given  thee  living  water."  1.  The  gift  of
God  is  the  living  water,  as  he  who  speaks  to  her  is  the  Agent  of  imparting  it  to  the  sonE
'Sf  man.  (1)  The  living  water  is  eternal  life  (vers.  13,  14).  (2)  It  is  adapted  to  satisfy
Ihe  thirst  of  the  human  soul  for  fellowship  with  God.  (3)  It  is  ever  fresh,  as  it  springs
from  an  snfailing  source  (Gen.  xsvi.  19).  2.  Marie  how  it  is  to  he  obtained.  "  Thou
wouldest  have  asked  of  him."  It  is  by  prayer — the  prayer  of  faith.  Some  say  that  we
are  not  to  pray  for  salvation,  but  simply  to  believe  in  order  to  salvation.  (1)  But  our
Lord  here  sanctions  prayer  for  it,  and  Peter  enjoins  it  upon  Simon  Magus:  "  Pray  God,
if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine  heart  may  be  forgiven  thee."  (2)  It  is  the  duty  of  an
unconverted  man  to  pray,  as  it  is  his  duty  to  believe.  His  unbelief  is  no  excuse  for
the  neglect  of  this  duty.  Why  otherwise  is  the  neglect  of  prayer  charged  as  a  sin  (Zeph.
i.  6;  Hos.  vii.  7)?  (3)  If  a  sinner  takes  salvation  before  he  prays,  and  does  so  because
he  has  not  faith  to  pray,  he  is  saved  before  he  has  faith.  It  is  absurd,  then,  to  counsel
the  sinner  against  praying  because  prayer  implies  faith,  and  yet  to  exhort  him  to  take
salvation  which  is  impossible  without  faith.  On  such  a  principle  a  sinner  can  neither
pray  nor  believe.  3.  Marh  the  cause  of  the  sinner  not  receiving  the  gift  of  Ood.  "  If
thuu  knewest  the  gift  of  God."  Ignorance  of  the  worth  of  Christ  is  the  great  cause  of
the  gift  not  being  appropriated.  The  Samaritan  woman  has  so  little  idea  of  the  import
of  our  Lord's  words  that  she  thinks  only  of  the  water  of  Jacob's  well,  and  therefore  our
Lord  has  to  set  the  truth  in  a  new  and  striking  light  before  her.

IV.  Tub  true  natore  of  the  living  water  that  is  in  Christ's  disposaIi.  1.
It  satisfies  more  than  mere  momentary  wants.  The  water  of  Jacob's  well  would  satisfy
a  thirst  that  would  recur  again.  Tliis  living  water  would  fully  satisfy  the  thirst  of  the
iiiimoi'tal  spirit,  and  finally  end  the  inward  unrest.  "Whosoever  shall  drink  of  this
water  shall  thirst  again :  but  whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him
bhall  never  thirst."  Earthly  satisfactions  leave  an  emptiness  in  the  soul  which  needs
an  ever-fresh  supply  from  external  sources.  2.  The  living  water  is  (1)  a  well  more
inexhaustible  than  Jacob's  well,  for  it  is  supplied  by  the  fountain  of  God's  grace.  (2)
It  is  a  fountain  leaping  up  in  abounding  plenty,  so  as  to  supply  all  the  vast  variety  of
human  need.  (3)  It  springs  up  to  eternal  life  in  its  issue.  "  The  fountain  itself  is
Jesus  glorified  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit."

Vers.  15 — 20. — A  serious  turn  to  the  conversation,  L  The  arrested  attitude  of
the  Samaritan  woman.  "  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not,  neither  pass  this
way  to  draw."  She  is  still  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  his  words,  but  she  begins  to
have  a  dim  apprehension  of  something  behind  them  profoundly  touching  her  life.
We  cannot  otherwise  understand  the  next  phase  of  the  conversation.

IL  Our  Lord  lifts  the  veil  from  her  past  life,  and  thus  reveals  himself
AS  A  JProphet,  and  more  THAN  A  PROPHET.  "  Go,  Call  thy  husband."  1.  Ee  drsins
to  Unie  with  her  in  the  coming  blessing  the  man  whose  life  was  thn  unworthily  linlced
with  her  own.  (1)  He  aims  to  purify  family  life.  (2)  He  desires  to  make  the
regenerate  family  the  nucleus  of  evangelistic  effort.  2.  Marh  the  sincerity  of  her
answer.  "  I  have  no  husband."  It  signifies  that  she  was  not  wholly  depraved,  or  that
Ijer  heart  had  already  begun  to  respond  to  the  searching  ordeal  of  Christ.  There  is
sadness  in  the  confession.  3.  The  answer  of  Jesus  lays  bare  the  secrets  of  her  past  life.
"  Thou  hast  well  said,  I  have  no  husband  :  for  thou  hast  had  five  husbands ;  and  he
whom  thou  now  hast  is  not  thy  husband."  (1)  She  had  probably  lost  her  five
husbands,  not  by  death,  but  by  her  personal  misconduct,  as  may  be  inferred  from
the  circumstances  of  her  present  relation ;  for  the  Samaritans,  unlike  the  Jews,  allowed
divorce  for  no  other  cause  than  adultery.  (2)  The  conduct  of  Christ  in  this  case
buggesta  that  («)  private  sins  are  to  be  rebuked  privately;    (b)  without  passion  or


184  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  nr.  1—54.


ceverity ;  (c)  and  with  a  particular  application  of  the  Word  to  the  conscience  of  the
transgressor.

III.  The  binqulab  tubn  which  the  woman  gives  to  the  conversatioh.  "  Sir,  I
perceive  that  thou  art  a  Prophet.  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  mountain;  and  ye  say,
that  in  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to  worship."  1.  The  words  may  have
been  spoken  to  parry  the  stroJce  at  her  conscience,  though  slie  implicitly  confesses  her
sin,  and  does  not  attempt  to  deny  or  excuse  it.  2.  Tet  her  discovery  of  a  prophet,  who
knows  the  depths  of  her  soul,  suggests  the  religioui  question  that  seems  to  have  already
occupied  her  mind  (ver.  25),  and  especially  the  question  respecting  the  true  worship  of
the  Lord.  3.  She  submits  to  our  Lord  the  antagonism  between  Samaritan  tradition
and  Jewish  practice.  {V)  Gerizim,  which  was  the  centre  of  Samaritan  worship,  dated
its  sacredness  from  the  time  of  Nehemiah.  Though  it  had  an  earlier  history,  it  was
dear  to  the  Samaritans  as  the  site  of  their  worship  for  at  least  five  hundred  years.  (2)
'  She  is  fully  aware  of  the  exclusive  claims  of  the  Jewish  temple  at  Jerusalem.  (3)  She
looks  to  the  Prophet,  who  has  disclosed  her  inner  life,  to  determine  the  rival  ouimB  of
Gerizim  and  Jerusalem.

Vers.  21 — 24. — The  tpirit  of  the  true  worship.  Our  Lord  acta  a  prophet'*  p«rt  in
answer  to  her  inquiries.

I.  The  univbrsalitt  op  the  new  worship.  "  Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour
cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the
Father."  1.  All  localized  worship  t«as  soon  to  end,  (1)  The  Samaritan  would  no
longer  worship  at  Gerizim,  nor  the  Jew  at  Jerusalem,  as  two  centres  of  worship.  (2)
Nor  would  Jerusalem  become  the  fixed  centre  of  worship  for  all  people  through  all  time.
Our  Lord  foresaw  the  coming  destruction  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  desolation
of  Samaria  itself.  (3)  Thti  Christian  dispensation  knows  nothing  of  holy  places  or
shrines.  The  holiness  of  a  Christian  Church  belongs,  not  to  the  place,  but  to  the  body
of  -worshippers.  Men  are  to  lift  holy  hands  in  every  place,  from  the  rising  to  the  settmg
of  the  sun  (Mai.  i.  11).  (4)  The  hour  for  the  establishment  of  the  new  worship  was
to  date  from  the  resurrection  or  the  ascension  of  Christ.  2.  The  fatherhood  tf  Ood
emancipates  worship  from  every  limitation  of  time  and  space.  Men  will  worship  God
as  a  Father.  The  title  is  characteristic  of  this  Gospel.  (1)  God  was  the  Father  of  all
men  by  creation.  "  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ?  "  (Mai.  ii.  10).  (2)  But  he  is  specially
the  Father  of  all  believers,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles.  "  Ye  are  all  the  children  of
God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Gal.  iii.  26).  (3)  The  common  fatherhood  of  adopting
grace  obliterates  all  distinctions  of  nation  and  custom  and  privilege.  Jew  and  Gentile
stand  henceforth  on  a  platform  of  equal  priority.

II.  The  object  op  the  new  worship.  "  Ye  worship  ye  know  not  what :  we  know
what  we  worship  :  lor  salvation  is  of  the  Jews."  1,  The  Samaritans  were  ignorant  of
Ood's  character,  though  they  worship/ ed  God.  (1)  It  was  said  of  their  ancestors  that
"  they  knew  not  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  land."  (2)  They  were  themselves  cut
off  from  all  the  prophetic  revelations  after  Moses,  and  especially  from  the  more  spiritual
developments  of  Jewish  history.  Their  relation  was  little  better  than  a  strictly  legalistic
monotheism.  2.  The  Jews  understood  the  character  of  the  Ood  whom  they  worshipped.
(1)  There  was  no  break  in  tho  continuity  of  historical  revelation  to  the  Jews,  for  they
remained  as  pupils  in  Gud's  school,  though  with  varying  fidelity,  all  the  way  from
Moses  to  John  the  Baptist.  The  language  implies  their  superior  advantages  as  the
possessors  of  a  larger  Bible.  "  Much  every  way ;  chiefly  because  that  unto  them  were
committed  the  oracles  of  God  "  (Rom.  iii.  2).  (2)  Mark  the  close  connection  that  exists
between  the  revelation  of  God's  will  and  the  possession  of  salvation.  "  For  salvation  is
of  the  Jews."  (a)  The  promises  of  salvation  come  to  us  through  the  Jews.  (6)  The
means  of  salvation  were  revealed  to  them,  (c)  The  Author  of  the  salvation  was  a  Jew,
a  descendant  of  Abraham  and  Son  of  David,  (d)  Hitherto  the  bulk  of  the  saved  were
Jews.

III.  The  spirit  of  the  true  worship.  "  The  hour  comoth,  and  now  is,  when  the
true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth."  1.  Tht  eharacteristio
of  true  worship.  (1)  Spirituality,  (o)  as  opposed  to  all  carnal.  Gentile  ideas  of
God;  (6)  as  opposed  to  the  idea  of  a  God  worshipped  in  temples  made  with  hands,
pr  worshipped  with  carnal  ordinances,     (c)  It  signifies  a  worship  in  which  the  human


OH.  IT.  1—64.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  185


Boul  holds  intimate  communion  with  the  Divine  Spirit.  Thus  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks
of  *'  the  God  whom  I  serve  in  my  spirit "  (Eom.  i.  9),  and  of"  praying  in  spirit "  (Eph.
vi.  18).  Thus  Christians  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  (2)  Truth,
(a)  as  opposed  to  the  false  worship  of  the  Samaritans  or  the  Gentiles  generally ;  (i)  as
opposedto  Jewish  ordinances,  which  were  hut  shadows  without  substance ;  (c)  as  dis-
tinguished from  sincerity,  for  a  false  worship  may  be  perfectly  sincere,  (d)  It  is  a
worship  regulated  (o)  by  the  true  ideas  of  the  gospel ;  (0)  by  the  manifestation  which
Christ  has  made  of  his  Father's  character.  2.  The  ground  or  reason  of  this  trtie
loorship.  "  God  is  a  Spirit."  The  worship  must  correspond  to  the  nature  of  God.
(1)  He  is  a  Spirit,  without  body,  parts,  or  passions,  therefore  free  from  all  the  limita-
tions of  time  and  space.  "  Behold,  the  heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain
thee ;  how  much  less  this  house  that  I  have  builded  I "  (1  Kings  viii.  27).  (2)
Believers  ought  to  worship  God  truly  because  of  his  spirituality.  (3)  It  is  God's  desire
to  be  worshipped  spirituiilly.  "  For  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  him."  He  is
thus  worshipped  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  his  will  and  suitable  to  his  nature.

Vers.  25 — 29. — Our  LorcFs  revelation  of  himself,  and  Us  remarkable  effects.  The
woman  longs  for  fuller  information.

I.  Her  pbbsbnt  idea  of  the  Messiah.  "  I  know  that  Messiaa  cometh."  1.  She
expected,  like  ail  the  Samaritans,  the  advent  of  a  Messiah,  according  to  the  ancient  pro-
phecy, "  God  will  raise  them  up  a  Prophet  from  among  their  brethren,  like  unto
thee"  (Deut.  xviii.  18).  2.  Ber  conception  of  his  character  and  office  entirely  differed
from  that  of  the  Jews.  "When  he  comes,  he  will  tell  us  all  things."  She  recognized
him  as  a  Prophet,  not  as  a  King.  (1)  Her  idea  was  true,  but  incomplete  ;  for  Messiah
possesses  dominion  as  well  as  truth.  (2)  Her  growing  faith  sees  in  him  (a)  an  authori-
tative Expounder  of  truth,  as  the  Greek  word  signifies ;  (h)  and  assigns  no  limits  to  the
extent  of  his  revelations.

II.  Odb  Lokd's  revelation  of  himself  answers  to  the  receptivity  of  her
FAITH,  "I  that  speak  unto  thee  am  he."  1.  He  reveals  himself  to  her  as  he  never
revealed  himself  to  the  Jews  till  the  last  moment  (ch.  xvii.  S  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  64),  because
he  saw  that  she  was  not  subject  to  the  dangerous  illnsions  of  the  Jews.  She  did  not
ask,  like  the  Jews,  "  If  thou  be  the  Messias,  tell  us  plainly  "  (ch.  x.  24).  2.  It  is  the
Lnrd's  delight  to  reveal  himself  fully  to  those  with  an  honest  simplicity  of  heart/jioho
desire  to  know  him.

in.  The  woman's  silent  but  expressive  response  to  the  revelation.  1.  She  made
no  answer  to  Jesus,  but  her  soul  was  immediately  filled  with  a  new  hope,  and  her  life
took  on  a  new  interest.  2.  She  communicated  at  once  to  her  neiyhhours  the  substance
of  her  own  remarkable  discovery.  "  She  left  her  water-pot,"  as  a  sort  of  pledge  of  her
speedy  return,  "  and  went  her  way  into  the  city,  and  saith  to  the  men,  Come,  see  a
man  who  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did.     This  cannot  be  the  Christ,  can  he  ? "

(1)  She  becomes  the  missionary  of  Jesus  to  her  countrymen,  not  to  her  husband  only.

(2)  She  is  not  ashamed  to  awaken  painful  memories  of  her  own  past  life.  (3)  She
believes  more  than  her  words  imply,  for  her  question  suggests  the  affirmative  answer
of  hope.

Vers,  31 — 38. — </e«JM  and  his  disciples.  The  surprise  of  the  disciples  at  our  Lord's
talking  with  the  woman  at  the  well  did  not  break  forth  into  question;  they  rather
resolved  to  bide  their  time  for  an  explanation.

I.  The  spiritual  meat  of  the  Son  of  God.  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  my
Father,  and  to'finish  his  work."  1.  The  disciples  were  naturally  anxious  to  supply  his
bodily  wants;  for  tbey  knew  that  he  was  both  hungry  and  thii>ty.  2.  The  interview
with  the  woman  had  for  the  time  put  his  physical  wants  in  abeyance ;  for  he  was  filled
with  an  extraordinary  elation  of  spiritual  joy.  3.  The  delight  of  success  had  brought  a
new  strength  to  his  spirit.  "I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of."  The  disciples
did  not  then  understand  the  true  virtue  or  efficacy  of  this  meat.  4.  As  meat  is  pleasant
to  the  appetite  and  refreshing  to  the  lady  of  man,  so  was  it  to  Jesus  to  do  the  wUl  of  hit
Father.  The  deeply  suggestive  phrase  marks  how  natural  and  how  easy  was  the
obedience  that  Jesus  rendered  to  the  Divine  will.  (1)  He  did  his  Father's  will  (o)
exactly,  with  all  faithfuli;ess;  (S)  with  supreme  wisdom  and  prudence;  (c)  with  con-


186  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  JOHN.      [ch.  iv.  1— 64.


Btanoy.  (2)  He  finished  his  Father's  work"  (o)  in  preaching  the  gospel ;  (5)  in  working
miracles  of  healing ;  (c)  in  giving  his  life  at  last  for  his  sheep.

II.  The  eapid  eipbning  of  the  bpibitual  habvbst.  "  Say  not  ye,  There  are  yet
fonr  months,  and  then  cometh  harvest?  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and
look  on  the  fields ;  for  they  are  white  to  harvest."  1.  These  words  fix  the  time  of  this  con-
versation. As  harvest  occurred  in  the  end  of  April,  it  must  then  have  been  about  the
middle  of  December,  Jesus  must,  therefore,  have  remained  eight  months  in  Judsea.  2.
The  spiritual  harvest,  which  was  in  our  Lord's  mind,  was  obvious  in  the  large  hody  of
Samaritans,  who  were  at  that  moment  crossing  the  fields  from  Sychar  to  profess  their
faith  in  him.  The  thought  of  Jesus  was  the  ripeness  of  the  people  to  be  gathered  into
the  kingdom.  8,  This  harvest  i$  very  rapid ;  and  the  seed  germinates  and  matures  in
«n  instant,

III.  The  ENCOURAaBMENT  OF  THE  SOWEB  AND  THE  BEWABD  OF  THE  BEAPBB,      "  And

he  that  reapeth  receiveth  wages,  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  life  eternal :  that  both  he  that
Boweth  and  he  that  reapeth  may  rejoice  together,"  1.  The  sowers  are  in  this  case  John
the  Baptist  and  our  Lord  himself ;  the  reapers  are  the  apostles,  who  are  to  receive  these
Samaritan  disciples  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  The  worker  in  this  field  has  the
prospect  of  reward;  for,  besides  being  "a  labourer  worthy  of  his  hire,"  he  (1)  has  a
special  delight  in  the  conversion  of  souls  ;  (2)  and  wUl  receive  the  crown  of  righteous-
ness, and  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.  3.  The  sower  dots  not  always  live  to  see
the  fruit  of  his  labour,  "And  herein  is  that  saying  true,  One  soweth,  and  another
reapeth."  (1)  All  God's  servants  are  not  to  encounter  the  same  difficulties,  nor  to  meet
with  the  same  success.  "  I  sent  you  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  labour  " —
the  disciples  had  not  laboured  among  the  Samaritans  at  all — "  other  men  laboured  " —
the  Baptist  and  the  Redeemer  himself — "  and  ye  are  entered  into  their  labours."  The
lesson  would  be  fruitful  of  comfort  as  well  as  warning  in  the  future  history  of  the
disciples.  (2)  Yet  there  is  no  room  for  complaint;  for  the  work  is  the  Lord's,  not
theirs ;  they  are  responsible  for  work,  not  for  results.

Vers.  39 — 42. — Jesus  and  the  Samaritam,  The  woman  was  the  instrumaut  ol
bringing  her  townspeople  to  the  Saviour.

I.  The  fibst  degeee  op  Samasitan  faith  was  dependent  on  testimony.  "  Now
many  of  the  Samaritans  of  that  city  believed  on  him  because  of  the  saying  of  the
woman,  who  testified,  He  told  me  all  that  ever  I  did."  1.  Faith  is  essentially  the  belief
of  testimony.  It  thus  depend*  upon  evidence.  "  Faith  is  the  substance  of  things  licped
fur,  tie  evidence  of  things  not  seen  "  (Heb.  xi.  1).  2.  The  Samaritans  were  entitled  to
the  higher  blessing.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  We
must  receive  the  facts  of  the  gospel  history  upon  testimony,  or  we  cannot  receive  them
at  all.  3.  Faith  rests  firmly  upon  testimony  that  is  thoroughly  verified  by  experienoe.
This  Samaritan  woman's  experience  ended  all  doubt.

II.  The  faith  or  the  Samaritans  sought  a  closer  contact  with  Jesus.  "  They
besought  him  that  he  would  ta  ry  with  them."  1.  Though  faith  resU  on  knowledge,  it
longs  for  fuller  knowledge.  2.  Though  Jesus  was  a  Jew,  they  sought  immediate  fellon  ship
with  him.  3.  Their  cmiduct  is  very  different  from  that  <f  the  Jews,  who  asked  no  such
interview  during  his  eight  months'  stay  in  their  midst.  4.  Jesus  complied  with  tlieir
request,  though  he  knew  that  it  might  involve  him  in  the  imputation  of  being  a
Samaritan  (ch.  viii.  48).

HI.  The  faith  of  the  Samaritans  was  strengthened,  and  more  disciples  webb
MADE,  BY  the  TWO  DAYs'  SOJOURN  AT  Sychar.  "  And  many  more  believed  because
of  his  own  word."  1.  They  did  not  ask  for  signs,  like  the  Jews  (ver.  48),  neither  were
miracles  wrought  for  their  benefit.  2.  His  word  was  effectual  to  confirm  their  faith :
it  came  to  them,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power ;  for  it  was  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation.  "  For  we  have  heard  him  ourselves."  (1)  This  is  the  language  of  personal
experience.  (2)  Their  personal  experience  was  final  and  satisfactory.  "  And  know  that
this  is  indeed  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  (a)  Mark  the  absence  of  all  narrow
particularism.  They  knew  from  their  Scriptures  that  in  "  Abraham  and  his  seed  all
nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed."  Jesus  might  have  brought  this  ancient  promise
under  their  notice.  (6)  'i'hev  recognize  Jesus  no  longer  as  a  mere  prophet,  but  as
Riddeemer.    "  Salvation  may  be  of  the  Jews,"  but  the  Samaritans  are  the  first  to  accept


OH.iv.  1— 54.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  187


it  in'  the  mass,    (c)  The  faith  of  the  Samaritans  is  the  condemnation  of  the  Jews'
unbelief

Vers.  43 — 45. — Owr  Lord's  return  into  Galilee.  He  was  now  about  to  enter  on  the
scene  of  his  longest  ministry.

I.  Thm  kbason  of  his  return  to  Galilee.  "For  Jesus  himself  testified,  that
a  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  country."  1.  This  might  appear  to  ie  a  reason
for  his  avoiding  Oali/ee,  which  was  undoubtedly  his  own  country.  2.  He  meant  that,
though  he  might  have  no  reputation  in  Oalilee,  he  could  carry  into  it  the  reputation  he
acquired  in  Judxa  and  Jerusalem.  These  places  might  be  regarded  as  setting  the
fashion  to  Galilee  by  the  high  estimate  they  put  upon  his  achievements.  3.  Theproverh
implies  that  a  prophet,  or  any  one  who  speaks  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  is  entitled  to
special  honour  by  virtue  of  his  office.  He  ought  to  receive  (1)  reverence,  (2)  obedience,
(3)  and  maintenance.

II.  The  welcome  op  the  Galil^an8.  "  The  Galilseans  received  him,  having  seen
all  the  things  that  he  did  at  Jerusalem  at  the  feast."  1.  The  Qalilseans  were  not  religious
aliens  in  Palestine.  "  For  they  also  went  unto  the  feast."  (1)  They  were  less  pre-
judiced than  the  Jews  of  Judsea,  and  more  accessible  to  religious  instruction.  (2)  They
were  more  patriotic  than  their  southern  countrymen.  All  the  worst  revolts  against  the
Eomaii  power  had  their  origin  in  Galilee.  2.  The  reason  of  the  Oalilsean  welcome  to
Christ  was  the  impression  made  upon  them  by  the  miracles  at  Jerusalem.    This  fact

-uiarki  their  spiritual  inferiority  to  the  Samaritans,  who  believed  on  him  forLhis
word.

Vers.  46 — 54. — The  second  miracle  of  Cana.  Our  Lord  is  led  to  open  his  Galilsean
ministry  at  the  scene  of  his  first  miracle,  at  the  spot  where  he  had  attached  his  first
band  of  disciples  more  closely  to  himself.

I.  A  fatheb's  peatek  k)b  his  dying  child.  "  He  besought  him  that  he  would
come  down,  and  heal  his  son :  for  he  was  at  the  point  of  death."  1.  The  petitioner  was
a  royal  officer  of  the  household  of  Herod  Antipas,  Tetrarch  of  Galilee,  probably  Chuza,
"Herod's  steward,"  whose  wife  afterwards,  in  gratitude  for  her  child's  recovery,
ministered  to  our  Lord  of  her  substance  (Luke  viii.  3).  2.  It  was  affliction  that
brought  him  to  Jesus.  Many  persons  never  think  of  Christ  till  they  are  driven  to  him
by  sickness  or  sorrow.  3.  He  had  faith  enough  to  believe  in  our  Lord's  power  to  save  his
child's  life.  This  faith  was  based  upon  testimony ;  for  the  Cana  miracle,  as  well  as  the
signs  done  at  Jerusalem,  must  have  been  noised  all  over  Galilee.

II.  Our  Lord's  testing  answer  to  his  application.  "  Except  ye  see  signs  and
wonders,  ye  will  in  no  wise  believe."  1.  The  words,  through  addressed  to  the  royal
officer,  are  really  designed  for  the  Jews,  who  wish  to  see  him  as  a  Worker  of  miracles.
They  desire  to  see  miracles,  not  as  the  mere  manifestation  of  facts  of  the  invisible  world,
as  "signs,"  but  as  "wonders"  calculated  by  their  strangeness  to  arrest  attention.  2.  The
Jewt  represent  a  lower  type  of  faith  than  the  Samaritans,  who  asked  for  no  miracle,
but  merely  believed  in  Chiist's  word.  3.  Yet  the  Lord  condescends  to  the  demands  of
a  faith  which  is  m</re  sight  than  faith.

III.  The  inorbasing  urgency  of  a  father's  sorrow.  "  Sir,  come  down  ere  my
child  die."  1.  He  did  not  regard  owr  Lord's  words  as  any  rejection  of  his  prayer.
2.  His  powerlessness  leads  him  to  a  more  unreserued  dependence  upon  the  Lord's
power.

IV.  OuB  Lord's  answer  to  his  pbayer.  "  Go  thy  way ;  thy  son  liveth."  1.  A
word  is  enough,.  Divine  power  acts  through  a  word.  2.  The  Lord  gives  us  often  more
them  we  ask  for.  3.  Jesus  strengthens  the  faith  of  the  royal  officer  by  shifting  his  faith
from  the  testimony  of  others  to  faith  in  himself.  It  rests  now  on  a  better  foundation,
even  in  Jesus  Christ  himself.

V.  The  triumph  of  faith.  "And  the  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus  had
spoken  'unto  him,  and  he  went  his  way."  1.  He  believed  in  Christ's  power  to  heal  his  son
a  distance  of  twenty-Jive  miles  from  Capernaum.  This  fact  marks  the  rapid  growth
of  his  faith.  2.  His  faith  received  a  speedy  confirmation.  "  And  as  he  was  now  going
down,  his  servants  met  him  and  told  him,  saying,  Thy  son  liveth."  His  faith  has  now
reached  its  highest  point,  that  of  personal  experience.


188  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  iv.  1—54

VI.  Thb  faith  of  the  royal  orncER  extends  to  his  household.  "  And  himself
believed,  and  his  whole  house."  1.  A  weak  faith  has  in  it  the  elements  of  growth.
2.  The  faith  of  a  father  often  leads,  through  the  Divine  blessing,  to  the  conversion  qf  hi$
household.

HOMILIES  BY  VAKIOTJS  AUTHORS.

Yer.  9.— Patriotism  and  Christianity.  In  human  affairs  the  scale  upon  which  thingi
are  done  ^ves  them,  not  only  their  interest  and  importance,  but  much  also  of  their  rery
character.  The  same  spirit  which  in  petty  communities  is  local  jealousy  may  in  nations
claim  the  dignified  appellation  of  patriotism.  The  differences  and  di^'putes  between
Jews  and  Samaritans  may  possess  for  us  but  little  real  interest ;  whilst  the  sentiments
not  very  dissimilar,  which  are  cherished  by  great  nations,  claim  dignity  and  grandeur.
This  passage  in  the  gospel  narrative  is  suggestive  with  regard  to  the  relations  between
Christianity  and  the  love  of  country.

I.  There  is  a  good  side  to  patriotism  which,  as  compared  with  selfishness,
IS  A  viRTDK.  The  love  of  country  is  both  greater  and  more  difficult  than  the  love  of
family  or  the  love  of  self.  It  is  morally  elevating  for  a  man  to  lose  regard  for  his  own
interests  in  an  absorbing  desire  for  the  welfare  of  bis  tribe  or  nation.  Great  deeds  have
been  wrought,  and  great  characters  have  been  shaped,  by  love  of  fatherland.

II.  There  ib  a  bad  bide  to  patriotism  which,  as  contrasted  with  philantheopt,
IS  A  fault.  The  love  of  country  may  be  magnified  selfishness.  When  it  renders  a
man  insensible  to  the  merits  of  those  of  alien  blood  or  of  different  education,  it  warps
the  nature,  and  is  often  the  occasion  of  injustice.  Crimes  have  been  done,  and  that
sincerely,  in  the  name  of  patriotism.  Envy  and  jealousy,  hatred,  malice,  and  revenge,
have  sprung  from  spurious  patriotism — ^tiiat  is,  from  a  too  exclusive  regard  to  the
interests  or  the  honour  of  a  nation.

III.  Christianity,  whilst  not  inimical  to  true  patriotism,  ktroduoeb  a  obeat
Divine  unitinq  power  into  human  society.  1.  The  religion  of  Christ  teaches  the
unity  of  the  human  race.  It  represents  humanity  as  united  by  common  origin  and
participation  in  a  common  nature.  2.  The  religion  of  Christ  bases  human  unity  upon
the  fatherhood  of  Grod.  The  family  is  one,  because  acknowledging  one  Head.  3.  The
Incarnation  reveals  and  establishes  this  unity.  Christ  is  the  Son  of  man,  the  Friend
of  man,  the  Brother  of  man,  the  Saviour  of  man,  the  Lord  of  man.  In  him  provision
is  made  for  the  restoration  of  that  unity  which  sin  has  broken.

IV.  Christianity  thus  bncoubagbs  such  patriotism  as  is  good,  and  checks
the  evilb  often  cloaked  under  the  name.  1.  On  the  one  hand,  the  religion  of
Christ  fosters  the  feeling  of  duty  which  has  its  scope  in  political  relationships.  The
duty  nearest  us  is  first,  and,  as  we  must  not  neglect  our  own  household  for  the  sake  of
strangers,  so  neither  must  we  prefer  foreigners  and  their  interest  to  the  welfare  of  our
"kindred  according  to  the  flesh.''  A  spurious  philanthropy  is  a  poor  substitute  for
a  genuine  patriotism.  2.  On  the  other  hand,  our  religion  forbids  us  to  limit  our  regard
to  our  immediate  neighbours ;  and  requires  us  to  sweep  with  our  spiritual  vision  the
vast  horizon  of  humanity.  There  is  a  homely  proverb,  "  Charity  begins  at  home ;"  to
which  a  homely  addition  lias  been  made,  "  but  does  not  end  there."  The  patriotism
that  takes  us  out  of  self  is  good ;  yet  alutie  it  is  insufficient.  It  should  broaden  until
our  regard  and  our  interest  and  our  love  reach  far  as  the  virtue  of  Christ's  sacrifice,
far  as  the  range  of  Christ's  gospel.  Suspicions  and  contentions  are  alien  from  the  Spirit
of  Christ.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  Saviour's  pity ;  there
should  he  no  limit  to  the  comprehensiveness  of  his  people's  love. — ^T.

Ver.  10.^"  if  thou  knewest  I "  How  easily  and  how  skilfully  in  these  words  did
Jesus  turn  the  conversation  with  the  Samaritan  woman  from  the  water  of  the  well  to
those  blessings  which  that  water  symbolized  1  What  more  fitted  to  provoke  curiosity
and  further  inquiry  ?  What  more  fitted  to  suggest  reflection  upon  spiritual  wants,  and
spiritual  satisfaction,  than  this  reply  of  our  Lord  to  the  woman's  strange  and  almost
unfriendly  remark  upon  his  application  ?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  language  of  Jesus
did  serve  to  raise  and  to  sustain  a  conversation  to  which  we  owe  some  of  the  most
precious  and  the  most  sublime  utterances  which  fell  from  our  Saviour's  lips.     What


CH.  IT.  1— W.J      THE  GOBPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  189

was  sjdd  to  this  woman  was  really  spoken  by  him  for  the  benefit  of  all  who  fall  to  gain
from  him  the  blessings  which  are  at  his  command  and  disposal,  and  are  within  their
reach.

I.  What  men  fail  to  bee  and  to  hear.  1.  The  unenlightened  and  uospiritual
do  not  recognize  in  Christ  the  Gift  of  God.  They  do  not  look  beneath  the  surface,  and
consequently  do  not  recognize  the  true  ?}ovy,  the  Divine  power,  which  are  the  real
attributes  of  the  Son  of  man.  2.  They  do  not  discern  in  the  tones  of  the  Saviour's
voice  the  Divine  authority  with  which  he  ever  speaks.  In  every  word  of  his  may  be
perceived,  bv  the  spiritually  cultured,  "  grace  and  truth,''  the  utterance  of  superhuman
wisdom  and  superhuman  love.  But  to  multitudes  his  speech  has,  alas!  no  Divine
significance.

II.  What  men  consequently  fail  to  ask.  Had  the  woman  of  Samaria  known
more  of  Jesus,  she  would  have  asked  of  him,  and  thus  have  received  the  "  living  water."
And  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  ignorance,  more  or  less  culpable,  is  the  reason  why
many  remain  unblest  when  blessing  is  within  their  reach.  They  do  not  ask,  either
(1)  because  they  do  not  feel  the  need  of  the  "  living  water,"  which  alone  can  bring  life,
satisfaction,  and  refreshment  to  the  soul ;  or  (2)  because  they  do  not  think  of  the  Lord
Jesus  as  of  the  One  Being  who  alone  can  supply  the  wants  experienced.

III.  What  men,  teeeefoke,  pail  to  bnjov.  It  is  observable  that  Jesus  gave  the
woman  to  understand  that  asking  would  have  secured  the  supply  of  her  deepest  needs.
As  the  conversation  proceeded,  the  Saviour  unfolded  the  nature  of  ths  blessings  he  came
to  bring,  and  which  men  withhold  from  themselves  only  by  restraining  faith  and  prayer.
These  blessings  are  within  the  reach  of  all  whose  hearts  are  athirst  for  the  water  of  life,
and  are  obtainable  upon  the  simple  condition  of  compliance  with  the  terms  appointed
by  Divine  wisdom.  Free  as  the  streams  which  flow  from  mountain  springs  are  the
blessings  of  the  gospel  of  God.  Yet  to  multitudes  these  blessings  are  inaccessible,
simply  from  their  want  of  knowledge,  their  want  of  spiritual  appreciation,  and  their
want  of  believing  prayer. — ^T.

Ver.  11. — "  From  whence  f"  A  remark  or  inquiry  sometimes  suggests  more  than
was  intended  by  the  speaker.  Words  often  unconsciously  imply  far  more  than  appears
upon  the  surface.  We  have  an  instance  of  this  in  the  question  put  to  the  Lord  Jesus
by  the  Samaritan  woman.  She  only  half  understood  what  the  Divine  Prophet  meant
when  he  spoke  of  living  water.  And  the  inquiry,  "  From  whence  then  hast  thou  that
living  water  ?  "  is  suggestive  of  considerations  most  interesting  and  most  serious.

I.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  would  obtains  many  and  great  blessings  theough
jEsns  Chbist.  The  living  water  is  the  emblem  of  personal,  social,  and  general  benefits
which  have  been  experienced  through  long  centuries  in  virtue  of  the  advent,  the
ministry,  and  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  man.

II.  It  is  unreasonable  to  attribute  these  blessings  to  ordinary,  earthly,
AND  HUMAN  SOURCES.  An  examination  of  their  quality  proves  them  to  be  different
from  any,  superior  to  any,  which  other  teachers,  other  religions,  provide.  Every  attempt
to  refer  the  blessings  of  Christianity  to  human  origin  has  failed;  either  by  depreciating
the  value  of  the  streams  or  by  exaggerating  the  virtue  of  the  sources.

III.  The  question  is  thus  pokcbd  upon  reflecting  minds,  "  From  whence  ? "
There  is  a  general  desire  to  know  the  causes  of  great  effects.  And  men  have  a  special
interest  in  a  case  which  so  nearly  concerns  themselves.  There  is  no  fear  lest  men
should  resign  themselves  to  contented  ignorance  upon  matters  of  so  high  moment.
Agnosticism  is  self-condemned.

IV.  The  only  satisfactory  answer  to  this  inquiry  is,  "From  above  1"  The
Divine  origin  of  the  sacred  blessings  procured  by  Christ  for  man  is  apparent  from  their
nature.  They  are  fraught  with  spiritual  life  and  spiritual  refreshment,  such  aa  this
world  cannot  yield.  It  is  apparent  also  from  the  abundance  and  ]  erjietuity  of  these
blessings.  They  come  leaping  up  as  from  an  exlianstless  spring.  They  come  falling
down  as  in  an  unceasing  shower.  All  other  explanations  fail.  The  world  yields  nought
but  an  echo  to  the  heart's  eager  cry,  "From  whence?"  The  true  answer  is  that  which
revelation  afibrds.  The  source  of  the  spiritual  blessings  which  Christianity  confers
upon  mankind  is  heavenly  and  Divine.  This  reply  is  completely  and  for  ever
sufficient. — T.


190  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDI^'G  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  it.  1—54

Ver.  15. — The  Suppliant  supplicated.  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  so  truly  Divine  that  he
had  only  to  be  in  the  society  of  human  beings  who  had  any  spiritual  susceptibility  and
power  of  appreciation,  in  order  to  awaken  their  reverence  and  to  call  forth  their  con-
fidence.    Such  proved  to  be  the  case  in  this  memorable  incident.

l.  A  CHANGE  OP  spmiTUAL  ATTITUDE  IS  HERE  EXHIBITED.  At  first  Josus  had  asked
water  from  the  Samaritan  woman,  who  seemed  almost  reluctant  to  grant  so  small  a
favour,  and  who  laid  stress  upon  nationality  rather  than  upon  humanity.  But  a  short
conversation  wrought  a  marvellous  change.  And  soon  the  woman  came  to  beg  for
living  water  from  him  who  had  just  before  asked  from  her  a  draught  from  Jacob's  well.
How  many  have  listened  to  the  gospel,  have  turned  their  gaze  towards  Christ,  with
indifference,  and  even  with  a  kind  of  ignorant  condescension,  who,  upon  knowing  more
of  him,  have  exchanged  indifference  and  contempt  for  reverence  and  faith  !  There  are
those  who  consider  that  a  favour  is  asked  from  them  by  the  ministers  of  religion  when
they  are  urged  to  accept  the  Lord  Jesus ;  who  seem  to  suppose  that  their  adhesion  would
he  a  boon,  if  not  to  the  Saviour,  yet  to  his  people.  Let  such  persons  really  come  into
spiritual  contact  with  Christ,  and  the  case  will  be  altogether  changed.  They  will  then
see  that  they  have  nothing  to  give,  and  all  to  gain,  and  the  Divine  Benefactor  of
humanity  will  be  approached  with  humble  entreaty.

IL  The  atteaotion  exercised  by  the  Divine  water  of  life  is  hehb  illus-
trated. 1.  We  discern,  on  the  part  of  the  Samaritan  woman,  the  desir«  for  personal
satisfaction.  "That  I  thirst  not"  is  a  plea  that  personal  cravings  may  be  stilled  and
personal  wants  supplied.  Let  Christ's  gift  be  understood,  and  the  approach  of  it  will
excite  the  longing  of  the  needy  spirit.  2.  We  perceive  also  the  desire  to  take  to  others,
by  a  ministry  of  help,  a  Divine  satisfaction.  "Neither  come  hither  to  draw"  is
language  which  reminds  us  that  the  woman  came  to  the  well,  not  only  to  supply  her
own  need,  but  to  fetch  water  for  her  household.  Could  Jesus  help  her  to  minister  to
the  wants  of  others  in  some  way  more  satisfactory  and  less  tedious  than  that  to  which
she  was  accustomed  ?  Experience  shows  that  to  realize,  not  only  our  own  wants,  but
the  wants  of  those  connected  with  and  dependent  upon  us,  is  increasingly  to  appreciata
that  spiritual  provision  which  is  symbolized  by  the  living  water.

ni.  Application  to  the  tbue  soubob  fob  the  wateb  op  life  is  hbke  exem-
plified. With  all  her  faults,  there  were  in  this  woman  a  clearness  of  thinking,  a
directness  of  language,  and  a  candour  of  disposition  which  we  cannot  but  admire.  Once
convinced  that  the  mysterious  Stranger  before  her  had  great  gifts  to  con  fer,  she  promptly
sought  the  promised  good.  The  directness  of  her  apjieal,  in  which  was  no  qualification,
is  an  example  to  all  who  approach  Christ.  Those  whom  the  gospel  reaches,  and  who
are  convinced  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Spring  of  life  eternal  to  mankind,  are  reminded
that  they  should  apply  without  delay  to  the  Personal  and  Divine  Source  of  the  highest
blessing,  with  the  assurance,  which  his  character  inspires,  that  they  cannot  ask  of  him
in  vain.— T.

Ver.  21. —  Worship  and  holy  places.  The  superstition  of  the  Samaritan  woman  gave
occasion  to  the  utterances  by  Christ  of  his  sublime  revelation  regarding  the  spirituality
of  worship.  There  was  competition  between  the  Samaritans,  who  performed  their
devotions  upon  the  summit  of  Gerizim,-and  the  Jews,  to  whom  Jerusalem  was  the  hol3'
city  and  the  temple  the  house  of  God.  Jesus  put  aside  this  controversy  and  rivalry,
and  passed  from  it  to  the  enunciation  of  specially  Christian  truth.

L  There  is  a  natural  tendency  in  men  and  in  nations  to  regard  certain
PLACES  AS  SACRED.  V\  here  is  the  country  in  which  there  have  not  been  consecrated
mountains,  valleys,  and  groves  ?  Where  the  religion  which  has  not  boasted  its  sacred
oracles,  its  solemn  temples,  its  spots  hallowed  by  memorable,  by  awful  associations?
Devotion,  at  all  events  of  a  kind,  is  stimulated  by  local  assistance.  The  buildings
where  one  has  experienced  unusual  emotions  acquire  sanctity  and  elicit  reverence.

IL  The  satisfaction  of  this  tendency  often  obscures  the  spirituality  of
TRUE  WORSHIP.  The  means  are  mistaken  for  the  end;  the  place  for  the  purposes  it
is  intended  to  promote.  Hence  it  has  often  come  to  pass  that  those  who  are  most
employed  about  sacred  places,  and  who  become  most  familiar  with  them,  have  less  than
others  of  the  sentiment  of  true  devotion.  There  is  a  proverb,  "  The  nearer  to  Borne,
the  further  from  God."


canr.  1— 54.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  191

IIT.    DtmiNQ   THE   PEEPABATOBT  DISPENSATION,   IT   PLBA8ED   GOD  IN  HIS   WISDOM  TO

MAKE  USB  OF  THIS  TRNDBNCY  TO  PROMOTK  EDuoATiONAii  ENDS.  The  temple  at  Jeru-
salem actually  was  the  house  of  God ;  in  it  was  the  holiest  place  ;  its  beauty  was  the
beauty  of  holiness.  Such  a  provision  was  adapted  to  the  religious  childhood  of
humanity.  Thus  reverence  was  inculcated,  the  consciousness  of  a  Divine  presence  was
elicited,  and  the  minds  of  men  were  drawn  on  to  more  elevated  and  spiritual  conceptions.

IV.  The  Incarnation  superseded  all  local  sanctity.  Our  Lord  Jesus  became
the  true  Tabernacle,  the  true  Temple.  In  him  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead
bodily.  The  temple  of  his  body  was  taken  down,  but  in  three  days  was  reared  again.
On  the  other  hand,  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  destroyed,  never  to  be  replaced.

V.  The  tendency  op  tritb  ebligion  is  not  so  much  to  de-consecbatb  any  place
AB  to  conseckatb  ALL  PLACES.  Doubtless,  as  our  Lord  declared,  spiritual  worship  is
independent  of  localities.  Yet  all  places  where  Christians  meet,  and  where  the  Master
i>  spiritually  present,  become  "holiness  unto  the  Lord."

"  Jesus,  where'er  thy  people  meet.
There  they  behold  tliy  mercy-seat ;
Where'er  they  seek  thee  thou  art  found,
Aud  every  spot  is  hallowed  ground  I "

rr.

Vers.  23, 24. —  Worship  and  worshipper*.  In  some  form  worship  is  all  but  universal.
Wherever  ou  earth  man  is  found,  there  he  presents  to  the  Power  above  the  offerings  of
his  devotion.  Doubtless  there  are  cases  without  number  in  which  worship  has  degene-
rated into  mere  superstition.  Yet,  where  worship  is  at  its  best,  it  is  one  of  the  very
highest  manifestations  and  exercises  of  human  nature.  Much  has  been  said,  by  philo-
sophers, by  poets,  by  theologians,  concerning  the  nature  and  the  virtue  of  worship.
But  more  light  has  been  cast  upon  this  subject  by  Jesus,  in  the  few  words  recorded  to
have  been  spoken  by  him  to  the  poor  Samaritan  woman  at  the  well  of  Sychar,  than  has
been  yielded  from  every  other  source.  Tew  portions  of  our  Lord's  discourses  have  been
more  quoted  or  more  admired  than  this.  But  the  world  has  still  much  to  learn  from
these  memorable  sayings.  -

I.  Christ  tells  us  whom  we  are  to  worship.  Idolaters  offer  their  adoration,  in
some  cases  to  the  great  and  imposing  objects  of  nature,  as  the  sun,  the  moon,  etc. ;  in
other  cases  to  the  works  of  their  own  hands,  as  to  images  of  silver,  of  gold,  of  wood,
etc.  The  perplexed  in  mind  have  worshipped  "the  Unknown  God,"  and  agnostics
profess  to  venerate  "  the  Unknowable."  But  it  is  the  happy  privilege  of  Christians  to
worship  the  God  who  is  revealed  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  1.  As  the  Spirit,  apprehended,
not  by  the  senses,  but  by  the  soul.  The  Divine  Being,  spiritual  in  nature,  everywhere
present,  everywhere  conscious,  everywhere  acting,  is  the  proper  Object  of  human  wor-
ship. 2,  As  the  Father,  who  is  not  distant  and  unapproachable,  but  very  near,  to
whom  we  owe  our  being,  who  supplies  our  wants,  exercises  over  us  a  constant  care,  and
trains  us  for  the  future  by  a  moral  discipline.  Such  is  the  affectionate  relation  which
is  sustained  to  us  by  the  great  Object  of  our  adoration.

II.  Christ  tells  us  how  we  are  to  worship.  There  have  been  devised  by  men's
ingenuity  and  superstition  many  methods  by  which  it  has  been  thought  worship  might
be  acceptably  offered.  Bodily  posture,  ascetic  rites,  unholy  ceremonial,  painful  pilgrim-
ages, and  cruel  sacrifices  have  been  deemed  acceptable,  and  have  accordingly  been
practised.  In  contradistinction  from  such  modes  of  service,  Christ  bids  his  disciples
worship :  1.  In  spirit.  Man's  spirit,  because  created  in  the  likeness  of  the  heavenly
Father,  possesses  the  power  of  honouring,  praising,  thanking,  and  loving  the  living
God.  The  heart  is  the  seat  of  loyalty,  of  gratitude,  of  love.  Not  that  worship  is  to
be  locked  up  in  the  secrecy  of  the  breast ;  it  may  and  will  find  expression  in  solemn
speech  and  joyful  song.  But  all  utterances  and  forms  of  worship  derive  their  value  and
their  power  from  their  being  the  manifestation  of  spiritual  life  and  spiritual  aspirations.
2.  In  truth ;  i.e,  with  a  just  conception  of  the  Being  worshipped,  and  in  sincerity  and
reality.  Such  worship  will  be  personal,  and  not  merely  formal  or  vicarious.  The  priest
must  not  arrogate  the  functions  of  the  worshipper.  And  true  worship  will  be  of  the
life,  as  well  as  of  the  lips^  tat  both  alike  wiU  be  accepted  as  the  revelation  of  deep  and
■piritual  feeling.


192  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  iv.  1—64.

m.  Chkibt  tells  us  when  and  where  we  abb  to  worship.  Upon  these  pointi
his  lessons  differ  from  the  maxims  and  the  practices  of  those  who  follow  the  narrow
ordinances  of  superstition.  For  whereas  men  have  usually  set  apart  special  places  and
ipecial  seasons  as  peculiarly  suitable  for  worship,  as  peculiarly  acceptable  to  God,  the
Lord  Christ  speaks  on  these  subjects  with  a  breadth  and  freedom  quite  superhuman.

1.  At  all  times,  irrespective  of  human  ordinances  and  customs.  There  are  special  sea-
sons when  it  is  well,  when  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  practice  of  the  Church,  and  even
with  the  authority  of  the  primitive  Christians,  to  offer  stated,  solemn,  and  spiritual  sacri-
fices. But  both  the  precepts  and  the  example  of  Jesus  assure  us  that  we  are  not  con-
fined to  such  times,  but  that  there  is  no  season  when  sincere  vvorshi|)  is  not  acceptable
to  God.  2.  In  every  place  worship  may  be  presented  to  the  omnipresent  Creator.  No
longer  on  the  heights  of  Gerizim  or  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  i.e.  exclusively  and
specially,  is  the  Eternal  Father  worshipped.  Wherever  God's  people  meet  together  in
a  devout  and  lowly  attitude  of  mind,  and  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  there
is  a  consecrated  place.  Nay,  the  scene  of  retired  and  solitary  worship  is  holy ;  for  a
worshipping  nature  and  a  worshipped  Deity  are  together  there.

IV.  Christ  tells  us  why  we  are  to  worship.  1.  One  reason  is  to  be  sought  in
ourselves — in  our  own  nature ;  we  have  been  made  capable  of  this  lofty  exercise.  This
is  a  prerogative  denied  to  the  inferior  creatures  of  God.  We  live  beneath  the  high
possibilities  of  our  being,  if  we  restrain  worship  and  draw  not  near  unto  the  Father  of
our  spirits.  2.  Another  reason  is  to  be  found  in  God  himself ;  his  nature  and  character
are  such  as  to  command  and  to  invite  our  worship.  Our  heavenly  Father  cannot  be
known  by  any  who  are  capable  of  right  judgment  and  right  feeling  vrithout  appearing
to  such  deserving  of  the  lowliest  and  most  fervent  adoration.  3.  God  seeks  believ  ing
worshippeVs.  An  amazing  proof  both  of  condescension  and  compassion  1  How  can  we
withhold  from  God  that  which  he,  the  Almighty  Lord,  deigns  to  seek  from  us  ? — T.

Ver.  23. — The  Divine  search.  That  we  shoiJd  seek  God  seems  most  natural  and
proper.  Poor,  ignorant,  sinfid,  helpless  creatures  that  we  are,  we  should  be  insensible
and  infatuated  if  we  did  not  seek  him  who  alone  can  supply  our  wants,  pardon  our
errors,  and  seciire  onr  happiness.  But  that  God  should  seek  us  seems  passing  strange.
This  is  like  the  king  seeking  the  rebel,  the  philosopher  seeking  the  boor.  Yet  we  have
here  an  instance  of  the  truth  that  "  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways."

I.  Whom  God  seeks.  1.  Spiritual  natures  are  the  object  of  his  quest.  To  him
nothing  is  more  precious  than  the  souls  of  men.  2.  They  whom  he  seeks  are  his
children.  When  once  we  realize  the  fatherhood  of  God,  the  difficulty  disappears  io
the  way  of  believing  that  the  Eternal  can  concern  himself  with  such  a  quest  as  this.

II.  What  God  seeks.  It  is  the  true  worship  of  his  people,  his  children,  that  the
Father  desires.  He  seeks  :  1.  Sincere  worship ;  that  which  is  not  of  the  lip  merely,  but
of  the  heart.  2.  Intelligent  worship ;  that  which  is  not  superstitious  or  formal,  or
traditional,  but  such  as  proceeds  from  a  nature  convinced  of  the  Divine  existence,  and
appreciative  of  the  Divine  attributes.  3.  Sympathetic  worship ;  rejoicing  in  the  faith-
fulness, the  righteousness,  the  love,  of  that  adorable  Being  who  is  justly  praised  and
honoured.  4.  Consistent  worship ;  i.e.  such  as  is  suppoited  by  a  life  and  conduct  truly
harmonious  with  the  language  and  the  sentiments  of  devotion.

III.  How  God  seeks.  The  Omnipotent  can  be  at  no  loss  to  devise  means  by  which
his  purposes  may  be  brought  to  pass.  Men,  indeed,  often  seek  what  is  dear  to  them  in
a  manner  which  defeats  their  own  aims ;  but  it  cannot  be  so  with  the  All-wise  and
Almighty.  1.  God  seeks  true  worshippers  by  manifesting  himself.  If  he  be  not
known,  or  be  not  known  aright,  those  ignorant  of  him  cannot  render  suitable  and  accept-
able worship.  One  great  purpose  of  revelation,  and  especially  of  the  Incarnation,  is
this — that  God  may  so  be  seen  and  known  that  he  may  be  duly  glorified  and  served.

2.  By  removing  the  obstacles  whicii  prevent  sinful  men  from  worshipping  aright  their
holy  Creator  and  Lord.  The  great  work  of  ledmnption  must  be  regarded  as  the  chief
and  most  admirable  method  by  which  the  King  of  glory  seeks  to  secure  the  homage
and  loyalty  of  his  sinful  subjects.  3.  By  the  actual  invitations  of  his  Word.  luasmuch
as  he  is  infinitely  the  Superior,  any  advances  must  come  from  him.  And  the  commanda
such  as,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve,"  are
intended  to  press  upon  us  what  it  his  good  pleasure ;  whilst  the  invitations  such  as,


OH.  IV.  1—54.]     THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  193

"  0  come,  let  ub  worship  and  bow  down  :  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker,"  are
designed  to  encourage  us  to  lay  aside  our  fears,  and  to  worship  him  "  in  the  beauty  of
holiness."

IV.  Wht  God  seekb.  It  is  sometimes  objected  to  Christian  worship  that  it  assumes
a  Being  •delighting  in  his  own  praises,  and  so  partaking  of  the  infirmity  of  human
vanity.  It  is  said  that  if  even  wise  men  are  above  this  weakness,  it  is  dishonouring  to
the  Eternal  to  ascribe  to  him  any  desire  to  delight  himself  la  the  adoration  of  his
creatures,  whose  praises,  after  all,  may  be  very  little  worthy  of  his  acceptance.  But  it
is  a  misapprehension  to  attribute  such  littleness  to  Jehovah.  He  "  inhabiteth  the  praises
of  Israel;"  but  he  simply  claims  what  it  is  right  for  him  to  have,  and  protituble  for
men  to  offer.  To  withhold  worship  from  the  All-worshipful  would  evince  the  grossest
insensibility  and  ingratitude.  And  experience  shows  that  there  is  no  attitude,  no
exercise,  of  the  human  spirit  so  fitted  as  is  worship  to  exalt  and  reSne  the  affections,
and  to  purify  and  dignily  the  whole  nature. — ^T.

Ver.  29. — The  power  of  a  personal  revelation.  The  narrative  makes  it  evident  thai
this  Samaritan  woman  was  a  person  of  very  decided  character.  The  sympathetic  spirit
in  whioti  she  received  Ohrist's  toachinj,  her  adroitness  in  changing  the  inconvenient
course  of  the  convwsation,  her  vigorous  action  in  directing  the  attention  of  the  people
of  the  city  to  the  Divine  Visitor,  all  indicate  the  woman's  intelligence  and  independence.
It  is  most  of  all  remarkable  that  what  weighed  chiefly  with  her,  in  arriving  at  a
just  conviction  regarding  the  claim  of  Jesus,  was  his  insight  into  her  own  life  and
character — his  ability  to  reveal  her  to  himself.  A  great  spiritual  principle  is  here
exemplified.

I.  PbrsonaIi  revelation  the  chief  agency  in  produoino  conviction.  1.  It  is
noticeable  that  our  Lord  chose  to  utter  to  this  woman  of  Samaria  some  of  his  sublimest
revelations  of  religious  truth.  To  her  he  declared  himself  to  be  the  "  living  water  "
which  alone  can  assuage  the  thirst  of  humanity.  To  her  he  communicated  the  glorious
and  ever-memorable  truth,  "  God  is  a  Spirit."  To  her  he  revealed  the  necessity  of
spiritual  worship.  All  these  revelations  made,  it  is  clear,  an  impression  on  the  woman's
mind.  She  was  an  interested  and  thoughtful  listener.  Declarations  such  as  these
could  not  but  fill  her  mind  with  amazement,  could  not  but  raise  her  thoughts  heaven-
wards. 2.  Yet  the  text  makes  it  plain  that  what  chiefly  produced  conviction  of  Jesus'
Messiahship  was  his  penetration  into  her  heart,  his  perusal  of  her  history,  his  revelation
to  her  of  her  own  character,  her  own  conduct,  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  Law,  and
doubtless  also  in  the  light  of  his  own  pity  and  loving-kindness.  It  is  not  to  be
imagined  that  the  power  of  this  revelation  lay  simply  in  its  correspondence  with  the
actual  facts  of  the  woman's  life.  Christ  detected  the  moral  significance  of  all  she  had
done,  and  made  all  apparent  to  her  in  the  light  of  a  very  tender,  but  a  very  faithful
criticism.  This  made  her  feel  towards  him  as  she  had  felt  towards  none  other.  That
he  should  enter  into,  and  interest  himself  in,  what  she  had  been,  what  sort  of  life  she
had  led  and  was  lending, — this  was  wonderfuL  But  that  he  should  deal  with  her
conscience  and  heart  as  he  did — though  we  are  left  to  conjecture  how — that  he  should
open  up  to  her  sinful  nature  the  glory  and  the  grace  of  the  Eternal  Father, — this  was
convincing,  this  was  effective  in  bringing  about  her  bold  acknowledgment,  for  such
virtually  was  the  inquiry,  "  Is  not  this  the  Christ  ?  "  The  same  principle  holds  good
to-day.  The  witness  that  chiefly  issues  in  the  enlightenment  and  conversion  of  sinful
men  is  the  witness  which  the  Saviour  bears  to  their  sinfulness  and  need,  and  to  hit  own
Divine  sufficiency  to  meet  their  case  and  bring  them  back  to  God.

II.  Personal  revelation  the  chikp  agency  prompting  to  evangelization.
We  should  have  expected  that  when  the  woman  returned  to  the  city,  and  conversed
with  the  townspeople,  her  chief  endeavour  would  have  been  to  give  them  some  idea  of
the  transcendent  wisdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus — some  evidence  of  his  Messiahship.  But
such  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  case.  She  acted  upon  the  principle,  "  We  believe,
therefore  we  speak."  Like  the  apostles,  she  testified  of  what  she  bad  seen  and  heard
and  handled,  etc.  Enlightened  and  impre!?sed,  benefited  and  purified,  this  woman
became  a  missionary  to  her  countrymen.  The  same  principle  is  applicable  to  otur  own
time.  We  need  not  expect  men  to  become  bearers  of  glad  tidings  to  their  fellow-men
merely  because  impressed  with  the  grandeur  of  Divine  truth.    The  impulse  that  leads

iohn.  0


IM  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  nr.  1—54

to  sach  testimony  must  come  from  a  personal  experience  of  the  power  of  the  gospel,
and  from  a  personal  faith  and  affection  towards  the  Divine  Eedeemer. — ^T.

Ver.  34. — Spiritual  work  and  spiritual  food.  The  incident  in  our  Saviour's  ministry
recorded  in  this  narrative  pictures  him  as  possessed  and  engrossed  by  the  very  purest
devotion  to  the  great  ends  of  his  ministry.  He  had  been  thirsty ;  but  he  had  lost  all
thought  of  bodily  thirst  in  his  absorbing  interest  in  the  living  water  and  in  the  satisfac-
tion of  spiritual  aspirations.  He  was  in  need  of  food ;  yet  when  his  disciples  brought
him  food  from  the  city  he  was  indifferent  to  it,  for  he  had  meat  to  eat  which  they  knew
not  of.  The  work  of  his  Father  was  the  food  of  his  souL  Christ's  language  here
exhibits —

I.  The  hiohbst  view  op  spnirniAL  and  benevolent  effobt.  This  is  all  the
more  strikiug  and  wonderful  when  we  remember  the  dignity,  the  Divinity  of  the  Speaker.
1.  All  he  did  had  reference  to  his  Father.  The  "will"  of  the  Father  was  for  him
supreme ;  the  Father  had  "  sent "  him  into  the  world  for  a  definite  purpose.  2.  His
mission  was  one  of  active  service.  Jesus,  no  doubt,  came  to  live ;  to  he  himself,  to  suffer
for  our  sins.  But  although  his  mere  living  among  men  was  an  incomparable  lesson,
though  his  death  was  vi  incomparable  value,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  his  activity,
his  ministry  of  energetic  service.  3.  His  aim  was  to  bring  the  undertaking  committed
to  him  to  a  conclusion  honourable  to  himself  and  to  the  Father.  In  accomplishing,  in
finishing,  his  work,  he  found  a  Divine  satisfaction.  Allowing  for  the  difference  between
Master  and  servants,  we  may  recognize  in  Christ's  view  of  his  life-work  the  model  for
our  own.  To  think  thus  of  our  human  vocation  wiU  add  a  dignity  to  our  life,  an
effectiveness  to  our  ministry.

II.  The  place  which  a  life  of  spiritttal  and  benevolent  effobt  holds  in
the  affections.  1.  Work  for  God  is  the  necessity  of  the  Master  and  of  the  servants
alike.  As  the  body  cannot  live  without  food,  so  the  higher  nature  cannot  be  maintained
ia  health,  in  life,  without  work  for  God.  It  was  so  with  Christ,  who  could  forget  water
and  bread,  though  thirsty  and  hungry,  but  who  could  not  exist  without  labouring  for
the  cause  of  human  well-being.  2.  Work  for  God  affords  the  servant  of  God  the  purest
satisfaction  and  delight.  The  thirsty  and  famishing  traveller  is  revived  and  gladdened
when  he  comes  where  he  can  quench  his  thirst  and  satisfy  his  hunger.  Greater  joy
did  our  Lord  find  when  there  opened  up  before  him  some  opportunity  of  doing  the  will
of  God  in  securing  the  enlightenment,  the  conversion,  the  consolation,  of  some  poor
human  soul.  3.  Work  for  God,  like  food,  strengthens  for  new  and  larger  efforts.  Work
is  its  own  wages.  They  who  toil  eat,  and  they  who  eat  are  the  fitter  for  renewed  and
happy  work.  If  it  was  thus  with  the  Master  and  Lord,  shall  it  not  be  thus  with  the
disciple,  the  follower,  the  servant,  the  friend?  We  are  encouraged,  not  only  to  take
a  high  view  of  Christian  service,  but  to  seek  in  it  our  purest  satisfaction,  and  the  means
of  unceasing  devotedness  and  usefulness. — T.

Ver.  42. — "  The  Saviour  of  the  world."  This  witness  was  a  glorious  close  to  our  Lord's
brief  ministry  among  the  Samaritans.

I.  The  marvel  of  this  witness  to  Cbeist.  Nothing  in  the  gospel  narrative  can
be  to  the  thot^htful  reader  more  surprising  than  that  this  view  of  our  Lord's  office
should  have  been  taken  and  expressed  by  persons  in  the  position  of  these  Samaritans
in  the  village  of  Sychar,  and  especially  at  this  early  stage  of  our  Lord's  ministry.  This
is  the  more  marvellous  when  we  remember  that  neither  the  Jews  generally,  nor  even
Christ's  own  disciples,  had  attained  to  such  a  conception  of  Jesus,  and  when  we
remember  also  that  the  Samaritans  occupied  a  position  of  inferior  privilege,  for
"  salvation  was  from  the  Jews."

II.  The  means  which  led  to  this  witness  to  Christ.  1.  The  testimony  of  the
woman  who  had  been  favoured  with  a  long  and  intimate  conversation  with  the  Divine
Prophet,  and  whose  conscience  had  testified  to  his  acquaintance  with  her  character  and
moral  life.  2.  Their  own  acquaintance  with  his  religious  doctrines,  gained  during  the
two  daj's'  residence  among  them.  3.  The  impression  which  his  presence  and  demeanoar
had  made  upon  their  niinds;  for  they  could  not  but  perceive  his  superiority  to  all
others  whom  they  had  known.

m.  The  fulness  of  this  witness  to  Christ.     It  is  remarkable  that  none,  how-


OH.  IV.  1—64.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDTNG  TO  ST.  JOHN.  196

ever  advanced  in  religions  knowledge,  can  go  beyond  this  testimony.  That  Jesus
was  a  Saviour,  and  not  a  mere  Teacher, — this  was  a  truth  which  it  was  creditable  to
the  Samaritans'  discernment  to  attain.  But  that  he  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world, —
this  was  a  truth  which  only  the  truest  insight,  the  fullest  sympathy,  of  a  spiritual
kind  could  reveal.  There  was  in  this  profession  an  anticipation  of  our  Lord's  own
words,  "  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  myself,"  and  a  justification  for  the  most  admiring
reverence  of  Christ,  and  for  the  most  extensive  and  glorious  prospect  for  mankind. — T.

Vers.  46 — 54. — The  growth  of  faith.  Li  this,  as  in  so  many  of  our  Lord's  miracles,
the  external  circumstances  and  incidents,  interesting  though  they  are,  are  less  so  than
the  spiritual  lessons  they  teach,  the  spiritual  processes  they  unfold.  Whut  manner  of
Saviour  Christ  is;  how  he  deals  with  the  souls  of  men  for  their  good;  what  blessings
he  brings  to  those  whom  he  prepares  to  receive  them ; — these  great  lessons  are  brought
before  us  in  this  narrative,  so  simple  and  so  natural  in  itself,  yet  so  deep  in  its
significance.

I.  How  FAITH  tK  Chbist  ARISES  IN  THE  SOUL.  1.  Look  at  this  uobleman's  circum-
stances :  his  son  was  sick  and  at  the  point  of  death.  Sickness  and  death  are  evils,  but  not
unmixed  evils.  They  may,  when  they  come  into  men's  homes,  be  the  means  of  saving
them  from  selfishness  and  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  and  from  indifference  to  spiritual  and
eternal  realities.  This  man  felt  his  need  of  a  Helper,  but  none  appeared,  and  he  was
brought  to  a  sense  of  his  helplessness  and  utter  distress.  In  all  this  was  a  preparation
for  faith  in  a  Divine  Physician.  2.  Look  now  at  the  timely  appearance  upon  the  scene
of  the  very  Friend  whom  the  nobleman  needed.  Jesus,  at  this  very  crisis,  had  returned
from  Judaea  to  Galilee,  and  had  taken  up  his  abode  for  a  time  at  Cana,  within  easy
reach  of  Capernaum,  the  afSicted  nobleman's  home.  The  eSect  was  like  the  preaching
of  the  gospel  to  a  person  overwhelmed  with  the  sorrows  of  life  or  stricken  with  a  sense
pf  sin.  3.  Look  at  the  effect  of  these  tidings  in  these  circumstances.  Fatherly  affec-
tion and  anxiety  render  the  nobleman  alert  and  alive  to  any  prospect  of  help.  The
rumour  of  Christ's  mighty  works  suggests  to  him  the  possibility  that  the  power  of  the
Prophet  may  be  used  for  the  healing  of  his  son.  Thus  relative  solicitude  becomes
a  means  of  grace.

IL  The  fibst  step  to  which  faith  prompts.  1.  Remark  the  approach  and  the
appeal.  The  nobleman  goes  to  the  Prophet,  and  begs  him  to  come  down  and  heal  his
son.  There  was  faith  here  ;  for  perhaps  to  no  one  else  in  the  land  could  this  entreaty
have  been  addressed.  Though  the  applicant  did  not  fully  understand  what  Jesus
could  do,  he  yet  had  confidence  both  in  his  power  and  willingness,  so  far  as  he  could
understand  them.  2.  Observe,  too,  the  repetition  and  urgency  displayed  in  the  renewed
entreaty  used  by  the  nobleman,  even  after  a  somewhat  discouraging  reception  on  the
part  of  Jesus.  This  spirit  of  persistency  and  importunity,  disagreeable  to  many,  seems
always  to  have  been  welcomed  by  Jesus,  who  saw  in  it  an  earnestness  allied  to  faith.

III.  The  rebuke  of  vteak  faith.  1.  The  feebleness  of  the  nobleman's  faith  seems
to  have  been  detected  in  his  request  that  the  great  Physician  should  go  down  to  Caper-
naum to  visit  the  patient.  The  faith  of  the  centurion  was  no  doubt  far  stronger  than
that  of  the  courtier;  yet  we  cannot  wonder  that  it  should  not  have  occurred  to  this
applicant  that  Jesus  should  "  speak  the  word  only."  2.  But  this  feebleness  of  faith  was
made  still  more  apparent  by  the  censure  implied  in  Christ's  reply,  "  Except  ye  see
signs  and  wonders,  ye  will  in  no  wise  believe."  Our  Lord,  and  his  Apostle  Paul  after-
wards, were  evidently  and  most  painfully  aft'ected  by  the  demand  of  the  Jews  for  signs
and  womiers.  Instead  of  believing  on  Christ,  and  then  looking  for  miracles  as  the
natural  exercise  of  his  Divine  power,  these  prodigy-loving  Hebrews  asked  for  marvels
and  portents,  as  the  things  of  chief  concern,  withholding  faith  until  these  shoiild  be
granted  them.

IV.  The  reward  of  sincere  faith.  It  is  c'ear,  from  this  and  other  passages,  that
Jesus  distinguished  between  no  faith  and  litth  faith.  He  saw  that  the  applicant's
fmth  was  growing,  for  this  was  evinced  by  the  repetition  of  the  urgent  entreaty.  The
rebuke  of  Jesus  rather  stimulated  than  repressed  what  measure  of  confidence  the  noblo-
man  possessed.  The  brevity  of  the  reply  was  the  brevity  of  authority  and  command,
"  Go  thy  way ;  thy  son  livetb."

v.  Faith  is  further  strenqthbnbb  bt  personal  contact  with  Jesus.    Ther«


19«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  it.  1—64.

was  a  virtue  in  the  Lord's  presence,  language,  and  tones — s  virtue  which  was  felt  by
this  applicant.  He  believed  the  word,  and  acted  in  accordance  with  his  belief;  and
immediately  went  his  way.  There  are  some  who  have  enough  faith  to  bring  them  to
Christ  with  their  petitions,  but  not  en'iugh  to  rest  in  Christ's  words  in  which  their
application  is  answered.  There  is,  however,  every  reason  why  the  suppliant  should
unhesitatingly  confide  in  the  assurance  of  the  Savipur,  which  his  very  anxiety  and
eagerness  may  possibly  lead  to  his  doubting.

VI.  Experience  makes  faith  PBRrECT.  The  nobleman  appears  not  to  have  hasted
on  his  return.  "He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  He  hurried  to  Christ  with
his  request.  It  was  well  that  he  should  not  hurry /rom  Christ,  now  that  the  boon  was
granted.  Yet,  when  he  met  his  servants,  there  may  have  been  some  eagerness  to  know
how  it  was  with  the  boy.  And  when  he  learned  that  the  hour  of  Christ's  utterance
was  the  hour  of  his  son's  cure,  there  remained  no  cloud  to  shade  the  brightness  of  his
faith.  He  believed  n(iw,  not  simply,  as  at  first,  the  report  of  Christ ;  not  even,  as  after-
wards, the  word  of  Christ,  but  Christ  himself.  This  was  the  faith  of  a  full  surrender
and  devotion.  Henceforth  the  Lord  was  all  to  him.  His  life  became  a  brisihter,  purer,
nobler,  stronger  thing,  because  Christ  was  his,  and  he  was  Christ's.  The  memory  of
his  Lord's  mercy  could  never  fade  from  his  mind.  "What  the  Lord  Jesus  does  for  us
and  for  ours  should  and  must  strengthen  our  confidence  in  him  for  all  purposes,  for  all
the  circumstances,  duties,  and  trials  of  life.

VII.  Faith  spreads  from  one  member  of  the  family  to  the  rest.  The  whole
household  believed ;  for  all  had  the  same  evidence,  and  all  partook  of  the  same  joy.
The  presence  of  the  restored  and  healthy  boy  would  be  a  perpetual  reminder  of  the
obligation  under  which  Jesus  laid  the  whole  family.  A  believing  household  is  a
microcosm  of  the  household  of  faith.

Phaotioal  lessons.  1.  Christ's  discernment  of  human  character.  2.  His  com-
passion for  human  suffering  and  sorrow.     3.  His  appreciation  of  human  faith. — T.

Vers.  31 — 34, — The  physical  and  spiritual  food  of  man.    Notice —

I.  The  food  of  the  body.  "  Master,  eat."  1.  The  body  must  have  food.  It  is
true  that  "man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone,"  but  it  is  quite  as  true  that  he  cannot  live
without  bread.  Man's  physical  nature  requires  suitable  physical  support.  If  we  wish
to  live,  we  must  eat — eat  to  live,  but  not  live  to  eat.  2.  The  hody  must  have  food  at
stated  times.  "  In  due  season."  There  is  physical  waste,  there  is  a  continual  demand,
and  there  must  be  a  continual  supply.  There  is  a  law  of  health  and  life,  and  should
be  observed.  The  prayer  of  the  disciples,  "  Master,  eat,"  was  quite  timely  and  natural.
The  meal-time  had  passed,  and  he  was  hungry  and  fatigued,  and  their  request  was  the
natural  language  of  propriety,  want,  and  kindness.  3.  ITie  claims  of  the  body  are  recog-
nized hy  Christ :  (1)  In  the  provisions  of  nature.  In  their  fulness  and  variety  he
was  the  Provider,  and  there  is  no  way  so  eflectual  to  recognize  the  claims  of  the  body
as  to  provide  amply  for  it.  (2)  Under  human  conditions,  he  was  thoroughly  human.
He  knew  by  experience  what  were  hunger,  thirst,  and  fatigue;  and,  as  such,  he  could
sympathize  with  the  cravings  of  others.  He  had  sent  his  disciples  unto  the  city  to
buy  meat ;  not,  perhaps,  so  much  for  his  own  sake  as  that  of  his  disciples.  In  little
things  he  was  more  concerned  for  others  than  for  himself.  (3)  He  was  sociable  and
simple  in  his  diet.  There  was  not  one  table  for  the  Lord  and  another  for  the  servants ;
but  he  shared  with  them,  and  his  fare  was  simple  and  homely.  And  this,  perhaps,
was  better  for  mental  and  spiritual  labour.  Eatinj;  and  drinking  were,  secondary
matters  with  him.  Nevertheless,  by  example,  by  actions  and  words,  he  fully  recog-
nized the  claims  of  the  body.

II.  The  food  of  the  soul.  1.  Doing  the  Divine  will.  "My  meat  is  to  do  the
will,"  etc.  (1)  This  involves  self-sacrijicing  service.  A  service  devoted  entirely  to
God.  Self  is  altogether  ignored.  Jesus  was  rapt  in  the  will  of  him  that  sint  him.
He  lived  in  his  Father,  and  fed  on  his  will.  (2)  This  service  involves  the  whole  of  hit
Divine  will.  "His  work."  Including  his  will  in  its  minutest  details — the  brief
mission  of  Samaria;  and  also  in  its  most  comprehensive  purpuses — the  salvation  of  the
human  family,  the  great  scheme  of  redemption.  (3)  This  service  involves  tlie  carrying
out  the  Divine  wUl  to  its  final  and  proper  issites,  "  And  to  finish  his  work."  The
completion  of  the  work  inspires  and  (supports  the  Worker  all  through.     It  is  the  wins


OH.  rv.  1—54.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  197


of  the  spirit  and  the  -eviverof  the  soul.  Tliis  was  Jesus'  meat.  And  it  is  ever  the  true
food  ol'  the  soul.  2.  At  soul-food,  many  are  ignorant  of  it.  Even  the  disciples  were
so  now.  "  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of."  (1)  There  is  ignorance  of  its
nature  and  origin.  It  is  spiritual  and  heavenly.  In  the  disciples  as  yet  the  material
was  in  the  ascendant.  They  were  babes  in  Christ,  dependent  on  the  nurse.  The  soul
had  scarcely  opened  its  eye,  was  scaicely  oonscions  of  its  real  wants.  (2)  There  is
ignorance  of  its  value  and  effects.  From  the  beginning  tire  will  of  God  is  the  real
food  of  the  soul ;  but  on  account  of  sin,  materialism,  animalism,  and  indifference,  the
realization  of  it  was  exceptional,  and  ignorance  of  its  true  value  and  effect  was  tlie  rule.
This  was  specially  the  case  at  the  time  of  Christ's  eartlily  history.  Its  value  and  effect
must  be  known  by  experience.  (3)  It  was  the  mission  of  Christ  to  reveal  it,  to  intro-
duce it,  create  a  craving  in  humanity  for  it,  and  to  supply  them  with  the  knowledge
of  its  nature  and  value.  This  he  did  by  precept  and  example.  "  My  meat  is  to  do
the  will,"  etc.  His  whole  life  and  death  were  brilliant,  but  most  familiar  and  telling
illustratioQB  of  the  Divine  will  as  the  only  genuine  food  of  the  human  soul.  3.  A$
soul-food,  it  is  essential  and  perfectly  adapted.  (1)  The  soul  is  spiritual  in  its
essence  and  wants,  and  must  be  supplied  with  spiritual  food,  else  it  cannot  thrive  and
grow  and  be  useful  and  happy.  The  will  of  God  is  adapted  to  supply  all  this.  It  is
spiritual  and  Divine.  (2)  The  soul  is  immortal,  and  must  have  immortal  nourishment.
The  will  of  God  ig  the  imperishable  meat,  and  calculated  to  satisfy  the  immortal
cravings  of  the  soul.  Christ  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  Let  the  soul  feed
on  him,  and  its  immortal  instincts  will  be  nourished ;  and  this  is  only  the  will  of  God.
(3)  The  soul  is  an  emanation  of  the  Divine  will.  Its  parentage  suggests  at  once  its
only  proper  food.  The  babe  feeds  and  thrives  on  its  mother's  milk.  What  but  the
will  of  God  can  feed  the  offspring  of  that  will  ?  (4)  It  is  essential  and  adapted  to  the
well-being  wnd  Jirial perfection  of  the  soul.  What  is  its  well-being  and  final  perfection?
Growth  in  its  original  direction,  holiness,  perfect  love,  as  much  God-likeness  and
happiness  as  it  is  capable  of.  To  do  the  will  of  God  will  effect  all  this.  As  a  proof,
look  at  Christ.  What  made  his  character  perfect  and  his  manhood  complete  ?  The
proper  answer  is  in  his  own  words :  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him,"  etc.  4.'  A»
soul-food,  it  is  delightful.  "  My  meat."  To  do  the  will  of  God  is  not  a  burden,  but  a
delight ;  not  sacrifice,  but  pleasure.  It  is  like  food  to  the  hungry  or  water  to  the  thirsty.
It  is  not  a  mere  duty,  but  a.  natural  instinct  and  cravin":,  a  passion  and  the  highest
gratification  of  being.  "  My  meat."  Never  a  man  enjoyed  the  daintiest  dish  as  well
as  the  believing  soul  enjoys  doing  the  will  of  God.  It  is  his  meat.  5.  As  soul-food,  it
is  absorbingly  satisfying.  The  claims  of  God  and  the  spiritual  interest  of  humanity
are  stronger  than  any  other.  They  are  supreme.  (1)  Stronger  in  this  case  than  social
custom.  It  was  custbmary  among  the  Jews,  as  among  all  nations,  to  partake  of  food  at
stated  times  of  the  day.  Jesns  and  his  disciples  generally  observed  and  provided  for
this.  The  custom  was  strong ;  but  doing  the  will  of  Gk)d,  to  Christ,  was  infinitely
stronger.  The  custom  was  ignored.  (2)  Stronger  than  the  solicitations  of  friends
The  disciples  begged  and  even  prayed  him  to  eat.  This  was  done  out  of  pure  kind-
ness and  sympathy,  and  Jesus  was  by  no  means  unimpressive  to  this.  Even  human
kindness  had  great  influence  on  him,  but  could  not  prevail  now.  He  had  fed,  and  was
ev«n  then  feeding,  on  a  higher  and  more  satisfying  food.  (8)  Stronger  than  the
cravings  of  nature.  Jesus  was  fatigued  and  hungry  when  the  disciples  lelt  for  the  city
to  buy  meat,  but  meanwhile  he  was  fed  with  food  from  the  city  of  the  great  King.  In
a  higher  sense  the  disciples  were  right  in  surmising  that  some  one  had  brought  him
aught  to  eat.  God  had  fed  him  with  his  will,  and  he  had  partaken  of  food  by  doing
his  will.  The  snccess  of  his  brief  and  almost  accidental  mission  in  Samaria  satisfied  him,
and  the  spiritual  impression  on  the  woman  and  the  siglit  of  Samaritan  citizens  already
streaming  to  him  over  the  plain  so  filled  his  soul  with  satisfaction  and  joy  that  bodily
food  was  forgotten,  and  the  thought  of  it  almost  distasteful.  The  material  was  lost  in
the  spiritual,  the  personal  in  the  general,  and  the  human  in  the  Divine.  The  cravings
of  his  own  bodily  wants  were  completely  neutralized  by  the  unspeakable  delight  of  doing
the  will  of  God  in  supplying  the  spiritual  wants  of  others.

Lbssoh*.  1.  The  claims  of  the  body,  although  important,  are  nothing  to  those  of  the
mml.  The  fenuer  are  rejn-esented  by  the  disciples  on  this  occasion,  the  latter  by  Qtrist.
"  Master,  eat,"  tiny  said.    "  Disciples,  sst,"  he  said;  but  ptrinted  them  to  tMr  higher


198  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  iv.  1—64

nature  and  its  true  nourishment.  2.  We  should  cultivate  the  spiritual  appetite  to  feed
w»  the  unU  of  Ood.  For  this  is  the  proper  food  of  the  soul,  adapted  here  and  hereafter.
From  the  altitude  of  spiritual  satisfaction  and  joy  earthly  things  appear  gross,  and
material  food  becomes  too  distasteful  for  even  thought,  much  more  for  participation.
This  points  to  a  state  where  material  food  will  not  be  required,  nor  can  it  be  procured.
Let  the  soul  fiee  itself  from  all  gross  influences  and  from  the  dominion  of  bodilj
appetites  and  passions,  and  this  will  discipline  it  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  purely
spiritual.  3.  We  should  fed  tJiankful  to  Christ  for  introducing  to  us  the  true  food  of  tht
soul.  He  made  our  physical  nature  and  provided  for  it ;  he  made  our  spiritual  nature
and  supplied  it  with  proper  nurture — the  will  of  God.  4,  If  we  tuish  to  lecome  Christ-
like,  we  must  feed  on  the  same  meat  as  Christ.  If  we  wish  to  be  God-like,  we  must  do
his  will.  Food  has  great  influence  ou  the  growth  of  the  soul.  laferior  and  adulterated
food  dwarfs  it,  causes  it  to  grow  downwards.  Doing  the  will  of  God  causes  it  to  grow
heavenwards.  Holy  activity  whets  the  spiritual  appetite  and  supplies  it  with  nourish-
ment. The  soul  feeds  by  doing,  by  activity,  by  the  sweat  of  its  brow.  If  we  want  to
be  benevolent,  like  Christ,  we  must  not  feed  on  ourselves,  but  the  wiU  of  God— on  the
love  of  Christ  and  the  welfare  of  our  fellow-men. — B.  T.

Vers.  35 — 38. — The  Christian  harvest.    Notice —

I.  Its  natubb.  It  is  spirituaL  "  Lift  up  your  eyes,"  etc.  To  see  the  temporal
harvest  you  look  dowL  and  around,  but  to  see  this  you  must  look  up;  it  is  in  the
spiritual  region,  and  concerns  the  spiritual  nature  and  mterestof  mau.  It  is  the  harvest
of  souls — the  harvest  of  Jesus'  soul.  It  is  spiritual  in  its  processes,  its  sphere,  its  aim,
and  its  results.  It  means  the  spiritual  quickening,  the  germinal  ion,  the  giowth,  the
cultivation  and  ripening  of  human  souls.  Think  not  that  this  world  is  only  for  material
and  physical  purposes.  Its  chief  end  is  the  production  of  holy  and  perfect  souls.  And
as  the  system  of  nature  is  adapted  to  produce  diflFerent  grains  in  perfection,  bo  there  is
a  spiritual  system  of  Divine  grace  adapted  to  produce  perfect  souls.

II.  The  ope KATI0N8  of  the  harvest.  1.  There  are  preparatory  operations.  As  in
the  material,  so  in  the  spiritual  harvest,  the  soil  of  the  soul  is  ploughed,  cultivated,  by
wamingsi  by  judgment  and  mercy,  by  Divine  threatenings  and  promises  ;  and  the  seed
of  the  Divine  Word  is  sown  with  much  prayerfulness  and  tears,  and  then  left  in  hope
and  anxiety.  2.  There  are  the  secret.  Divine  operations.  Once  the  seed  is  deposited
carefully  in  the  soil,  the  husbandman  can  do  nothing  more  but  hope,  watch,  and  trust.
It  is  now  in  the  custody  of  God;  he  alone  can  make  it  grow.  The  Christian  husband-
man can  only  commit  the  Divine  seed  to  the  soil ;  he  must  there  leave  it  to  the  secret
and  quickening  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  There  are  the  subsequent  Divine  and
human  operations.  As  soon  as  the  seed  begins  to  bud,  it  is  partially  given  back  to
human  care.  As  soon  as  the  Divine  Word  begins  to  bud  in  repentance  and  faith,  and
grow  in  grace,  it  is  at  once,  to  scjme  extent,  under  human  discipline  and  supervision.
The  Divine  and  human  operations  join  in  its  development  and  progress.  4.  These
operations  are  very  great  and  various..  There  is  infinite  thought,  sacrifice,  and  life,
and  there  is  much  toil  and  labour,  and  there  are  various  agencies.  "  One  soweth,  and
another  reapeth."

III.  The  vastness  of  the  harvest.  1.  Vast  in  relation  to  space.  The  space  of  the
harvest  is  the  whole  earth.  The  field  is  the  world.  But  there  are  fields.  Human
geography  is  recognized.  "  Look  on  the  fields."  Judtea,  Galilee,  and  especially  Samaria,
were  in  the  eye  of  Jesus  now.  Human  geography  fits  in  well  with  the  Divine  pur-
poses. The  whole  earth  is  the  Lord's  farm,  and  the  harvest  covers  it  all ;  but  it  is  well
for  the  purpose  of  spiritual  cultivation  that  it  is  divided  into  fields.  Thus  labour  and
vastness  are  distributed  so  as  to  suit  finite  comprehension  and  energy.  Through  the
parts  the  whole  will  be  reached.  Field  after  field  will  be  cultivated  till  the  vi-hole  earth
be  covered  with  waving  corn  fit  for  harvest.  2.  Vast  in  relation  to  time.  It  reaches
from  the  first  moment  of  the  "day  of  grace"  to  the  last,  and  in  results  stretch  forward
to  the  endless  eternity.  Men  have  a  series  of  harvests,  but  Jesus  has  only  one  great
harvest,  embracing  aU  time  and  all  ages.  3.  Vast  in  relation  to  the  labour  and  agencies
employed.  These  embrace  all  Divine,  human,  and  angelic  agencies  from  the  first
tower  to  the  last  reaper.  Abel,  Paul,  and  Luther  worked  in  the  same  harvest.
All  the  spiritual  energy  brought  to  bear  upon  this  world  belongs  to  the  san?«.    The


CH.  IV.  1—54.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  199


spiritual  harvest  is  infinitely  vast,  its  labour  infinitely  great,  and  agencies  infinitely
various.

IV.  The  ripeness  of  the  harvest.  "  Look  on  the  fields ;  for  they  are  white,"  etc.
1.  Whiteness  is  the  colour  of  ripeness,  the  colour  of  the  ripe  com.  It  is  the  colour  of
heaven.  All  is  white  there,  for  all  is  ripe  and  perfect.  Eipeness,  when  applied  to  souls
here,  is  used  relatively.  Its  fuU  meaning  must  be  realized  hereafter.  2.  Souls  are  ripe
to  harvest  when  they  begin  to  manifest  a  genuine  concern  for  their  spiritital  welfare.
Then  they  begin  to  blush  with  the  first  colour  of  ripeness,  and  naturally  call  for  har-
vesting. 3.  As  in  the  natural  harvest,  so  in  the  spiritual,  some  fields  ripen  more  qwickly
than  others.  As  in  soils,  so  in  souls,  some  bring  forth  fruit  sooner  than  others.  This
was  the  case  now  in  Samaria  as  compared  with  Jud«a  and  even  Galilee,  and  it  is  ever
so.  4.  There,  is  a  difference  between  the  natural  harvest  and  the  spiritual  indicated
here.  (1)  In  the  natural  there  is  ever  a  certain  stated  period  between  the  sowing  and
the  reaping.  In  the  East  there  was  generally  four  months.  But  it  is  not  invariably  the
case  in  the  spiritual  harvest.  There  may  be  more  than  four  months,  and  there  may  be
less  than  so  many  hours.  "  The  fields  are  white  already."  No  sooner  is  the  seed  sown
than  it  begins  to  germinate  and  grow.  So  it  was  in  the  Samaritan  womaa  now,  and
others.  (2)  Men  are  entirely  dependent  on  the  appointed  season  of  harvest.  They  cannot
by  any  effort  make  it  come  a  day  sooner.  It  comes  according  to  fixed  laws.  Not  so
the  spiritual  harvest.  The  servants  of  Goi^,  under  him,  may  bring  about  a  harvest  of
souls  at  any  time.  The  Divine  Spirit  quickens  and  causes  souls  to  grow  and  ripen
through  our  earnest  and  faithful  eiforts.  He  blesses  our  earnest  labour,  so  that  the
spiritual  harvest  is  not  limited  by  seasons  and  climates,  but  is  carried  on  continually  as
we  labour.     There  are  fields  ever  white  to  harvest.

V.  The  SEWARD  of  the  harvest.  "  Eec'eiveth  wages,*  etc.  1.  The  reward  it  partly
present.  Especially  with  regaid  to  the  reaper — ^in  the  fruit  gathered,  which  is  very
precious;  in  the  holy  pleasure  of  doing  the  will  of  God,  and  saving  souls.  2.  The  reward
will  be  chiefly  in  the  future.  At  the  great  harvest  home.  For  the  fruit  is  gathered
unto  life  eternal.  Every  effort  can  only  be  fully  rewarded  at  its  final  issues.  The  final
issue  of  spiritual  harvesting  is  "eternal  life,"  which  can  only  be  fully  enjoyed  in  the
future.  3.  The  reward  of  the  future  will  consist  of  the  highest  and  greatest  happiness.
Like  the  jov  of  the  harvest.  (1)  The  happiness  of  a  perfect  life.  Spiritual  life,  "  life
eternal."  Can  a  man  be  happier  than  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  all  he  can  desire,  and  of
all  he  is  capable  of?  This  will  be  reached  in  eternal  fife — the  perfect  ripeness  of  the  soul,
and  the  climax  of  being,  the  fulfilment  of  our  sublimest  hopes,  and  _the  reward  of  our
best  efforts  with  Diiine  interest.  (2)  The  happiness  of  abundance.-  The  thought  of
famine  will  be  for  ever  buried  in  the  consciousness  of  plenty.  All  the  labourers  in  the
harvest  will  be  more  than  satisfied,  and  their  satisfaction  will  leap  into  joy.  (3)  The
happiness  of  safety.  Like  the  joy  of  the  harvest,  when  all  the  produce  of  the  fields  is
secured,  there  will  be  the  joy  of  personal  salvation,  and  the  salvation  of  all.  Let  the
storm  rage,  and  the  rain  descend  in  torrents, — aU  wiH  be  safe  and  .infinitely  happy  in
consequence.  (4)  The  happiness  of  gratitude.  Gratitude  to  the  great  Lord  of  the
harvest,  for  all  his  defence  and  loving-kindness.  .  After  the  "  harvest  home  "  there  will
be  the  great  thanksgiving  service.  And  it  will  be  quivering  with  happiness  and  singing
with  joy.  4.  All  will  be  rewarded.  "He  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth."  Every
one  that  bestowed  any  labour  on  the  harvest  will  be  remembered.  Even  the  most
insignificant  labourer  will  not  be  overlooked.  5.  AM  will  be  rewarded  simultaneously.
"He  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth  shall  rejoice  together" — together  in  time,  in  place,
in  mutual  benefit  and  reciprocity.  There  will  be  no  partiality,  no  disadvantage,  but  as
in  the  labour  so  in  the  joy  of  the  harvest,  every  one  shall  help  himself  to  the  full.
The  lonely  sower  who  ages  ago  sowed  in  tears  without  reaping  scarcely  any  will  suffer
no  disadvantage,  but  will  be  fully  compensated — his  joy  will  be  all  the  more.  Every
one  will  be  happy  in  himself  and  in  others.  All  will  be  happy  in  the  Lord  of  the
harvest,  the  chief  Sower  and  Reaper,  and  all  will  be  happy  in  him.  The  joy  of  the
redeemed  throng  will  be  really  personal,  but  intensely  mutual,  so  as  to  make  one
anthem  of  leaping  joy.  6.  The  reward  will  be  everlasting.  The  fruit  is  gathered  uato
life  eternal ;  and  the  happiness  will  be  as  eternal  as  the  life,  as  lasting  as  the  fruit.
The  fear  of  its  coming  to  an  end,  even  at  the  remotest  period,  shall  never  pass  as  a  cloud
over  its  bright  disc,  nor  cause  a  discord  in  its  ever-harmonious  and  thrilling  music.


200  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO   ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  it.  1—54.

LlssoNS.  1.  Let  us  realize  our  relationship  to  all  past  and  futwre  agenciw,  that  w«
may  feel  our  indebtedness  to  the  former,  and  our  responsibijities  to  the  latter.  We  reap
much  which  others  have  sown.  Let  us  not  be  elated  with  pride,  but  with  gratitude
remember  the  tearful  sowers.  Let  us  sow  faithfully,  even  if  we  reap  not;  and  remember
the  reward  and  joy  of  the  harvest.  Let  us  leave  the  same  legacy  of  fruitful  labour
to  our  successors  as  our  predecessors  left  to  us.  2.  Let  us  he  very  diligent  in  spiritual
service.  It  is  harvest.  And  in  reflation  to  us  is  very  short — ^it  will  be  soon  over.  3.
Let  us  he  punctual  and  prompt.  "  The  fields  are  white."  It  will  he  too  late  soon.
There  is  danger  that  some  corn  will  spoil  for  want  of  timely  harvesting.  Procrastination
is  a  besetting  sin.  We  cannot  say, "  There  are  yet  four  months,"  etc.  No ;  "  the  fields
are  white  already."  They  call  us  now  to  work.  4.  Let  us  he  very  earnest  and  watchful.
"  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look,"  etc.  Spiritual  cultivation  demands  earnest  and  con-
tinual watchfulness.  The  spiritual  eye  should  be  keen,  and  ever  on  the  look  out  on
the  old  fields  and  new  ones.  Let  us  watch  lest  we  lose  an  opportunity,  lest  the  fields
be  riper  than  the  husbandman — he  green  and  they  white.  The  harvest  of  souls — the
harvest  of  Jesus — ^is  infinitely  great,  important,  valuable,  and  promising. — B.  T.

Vers.  6 — 15. — The  fountain  of  living  water.  I.  An  evidbnt  physical  need.  This
chapter  connects  spiritual  truth  with  one  great  physical  need  of  men,  even  as  ch.  vi.
connects  spiritual  truth  with  another  great  need.  Both  Jesus  and  the  woman  were
exactly  in  the  position  to  appreciate  the  value  of  water,  and  the  opportunity  of  getting
it  easily  and  freely.  Jesus  is  a  thirsty  Traveller ;  the  woman  is  one  who  has  frequent
journeys  from  her  home  to  get  tlie  indispensable  supply  for  every  day's  needs.  We
cannot  all  get  the  same  amount  of  good  out  of  the  conversation  between  Jesus  and  the
woman.  Those  whose  toil  often  makes  them  thirsty,  and  those  who  get  their  supplies
of  water  with  difficulty,  they  will  be  the  people  to  relish  the  figure  by  which  spiritual
benefits  are  here  set  forth.  Our  very  difficulty  in  profiting  by  this  conversation  should
he  a  matter  for  thankfulness.  If  we  are  thirsty  we  very  soon  get  a  drink ;  and  if  others
in  their  thirst  ask  from  us,  we  very  soon  get  them  the  requisite  supply.

II.  An  unfblt  spiritual  need.  This  woman  is  an  excellent  specimen  of  a  very
large  class.  They  feel  the  physical  need  so  much  that  the  spiritual  need  is  altogether
overlooked.  It  is  httle  wonder  that  the  woman  talked  as  she  did  in  this  conversation.
How  was  she  to  know,  without  a  good  deal  of  instruction  and  experience,  whence  Jesus
came  and  what  he  meant  ?  By  this  conversation,  as  well  as  other  recorded  ones  of  his,
Jesus  would  evidently  stir  us  up  to  consider  whether  there  be  not  other  wants  just  as
necessary  to  be  met  in  their  way  as  the  wants  that  are  met  by  a  supply  of  water.  When
we  are  hungry  we  all  know  the  use  of  bread ;  when  we  are  thirsty  we  all  know  the  use
of  water;  why  is  it,  then,  that  we  know  not  the  use  of  Jesus?  It  is  either  that  we
have  not  yet  felt  the  deeper  thirst  of  the  heart,  or,  having  felt  it,  we  do  not  yet  under-
stand how  in  Jesus  alone  that  thirst  can  be  effectually  quenched.  This  woman  was
wholly  and  solely  occupied  with  the  idea  of  getting  natural  water  more  easily.  Her
journeys  to  the  well  must  have  been  very  frequent  ones,  and,  though  they  might  not  be
long  ones,  yet  they  might  be  quite  enough  to  add  very  considerably  to  the  toil  and
burden  of  the  day.  What  a  warning  there  is  for  us  in  this  woman's  gross  spiritual
ignorance,  her  inability  to  comprehend,  even  in  the  very  least  degree,  what  Jesus  was
talking  about  1  She  had  come  out  to  get  as  much  water  as  she  herself  could  carry  back.
There  she  stood  before  Jesus,  and  so  ignorant  was  she  of  his  mission  and  his  power,  that
at  the  moment  she  could  think  of  nothing  better  to  ask  him  than  the  opening  up  of
some  natural  fountain  of  waters  such  as  would  render  needless  any  more  toilsome
journeys  to  Jacob's  well.

III.  The  continual  beadiness  op  Jesus  to  supply  all  spiritual  need.  He  is
weary  with  travel  and  heat,  and  needs  rest.  But  the  need  of  this  ignorant,  degraded
woriian  is  far  greater  than  his,  and,  more  tlian  that,  in  speaking  the  words  that  may  go
for  in  instructing  her  as  to  her  need,  he  speaks  the  words  that  may  instruct  many  others
also.  The  physical  want  of  Jesus  is  soon  supplied;  a  draught  from  Jacob's  well  will
do  that.  But  the  want  of  the  woman  is  not  so  easy  to  supply.  It  would  be  easy
enough  if  she  were  only  in  the  right  state  of  mind ;  but,  first  of  all,  what  ignorance,
misconception,  and  wrong  desires  have  to  be  lemoved !  A  deal  has  to  be  done  for  us
before  we  care  to  appropriate  our  share  in  that  fountain  which,  because  of  its  unfailing


on.  IV.  1—54,]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  201

fulness,  can  do  nothing  else  but  leap  forth  to  everlasting  life.  But  what  an  encourage-
ment to  know  that  Jesus  is  so  ready  to  do  all  when  we  are  willing  to  have  it  done !  If
we  are  unsaved,  unblessed,  unbelieving,  unhoping,  unloving,  if  no  fresh,  deep  spiritual
stream  runs  through  our  nature,  it  is  because  we  keep  away  from  the  fountain  that
Jesus  has  opened  up.  It  is  not  he  who  has  to  discover  the  need  and  make  the  prepara-
tion. Jesus  has  everything  in  perfect  readiness  so  soon  as  the  heart  begins  to  feel  its
thirgt.— Y.

Ver.  24. — ThefaXlaxy  of  holy  plaoes.  I.  The  pallaot  imphatioaixy  stated.  Up
to  this  point  in  the  conversation  the  woman  has  not  the  slightest  idea  that  religious
matters  are  in  question ;  but  immediately  on  concluding  that  Jesus  is  a  Prophet,  she
proceeds  to  show  that  she  can  talk  about  religion  as  well  as  other  people.  Jesus  seeks
to  fasten  her  up  in  a  corner  where  she  may  be  dealt  with  according  to  her  individual
sin  and  individual  need,  and  so  she  tries  to  escape  away  into  a  general  discussion  on  an
old  point  of  difference  that  was  altogether  beside  the  question  that  should  have  had
most  interest  for  her.  The  fallacy  of  holy  places  is  emphatically  illustrated  in  the
experience  Jesus  had  of  them.  We  see  that  he  had  experience  of  two  places  reckoned
specially  holy,  Gerizim  and  Jerusalem.  Truly  the  holiness  of  Gerizim  had  done  little
for  this  Samaritan  woman;  and  the  holiness  of  Jerusalem  did  little  for  those  priests  and
Law-expounders  who,  in  their  fanaticism,  put  Jesus  to  death.  Here  is  the  paradox  of  a
woman  apparently  unconcerned  about  her  own  misdoing,  but  very  much  concerned
about  the  rightful  localization  of  Deity.

II.  It  is  a  fallacy  which  prevails  widely  and  deeply  still.  Jerusalem  and
Gerizim  are  still  reckoned  holy  places,  and  to  them,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  how  many
more  have  been  added !  Special  places,  special  forms,  special  symbols,  special  words,
have  been  slowly  exalted  unto  an  honour  and  an  influence  they  were  never  meant  to
obtain.  Many  who  on  no  account  wouLl  bow  before  an  image,  yet  act  as  if  Deity  had
a  special  dwelling  and  special  surroundings.  We  do  not  make  a  sufficient  distinction
between  what  is  necessary  to  us  and  what  is  acceptable  to  God.  Holy  buildings,  holy
forms,  may  have  in  them  much  value ;  but  the  value  is  for  us,  and  not  for  God.  If  one
can  think  of  God  esteeming  some  spots  of  earth  holier  than  others,  surely  they  are  those
where  most  has  been  done  for  the  renewal  and  sanctiftcation  of  men.  We  may  learn  »
lesson  from  the  obscurity  into  which  the  ark  of  the  covenant  fell.  How  it  vanishes
away  with  the  departure  of  Jehovah's  people  into  the  Babylonian  captivity  I

III.  A  FALLACY  which   IS  ONLY   TO   BE   REMOVED   BY  A  CONTINUAL   REMBMBKANOB  OF

THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  GoD  AND  MEN.  God  is  purc  Spirit.  A  thousand  things
which  in  themselves  serve  and  gratify  human  beings  because  of  their  correspondence
with  human  nature  cannot  serve  and  gratify  God.  The  whole  position  is  placed  before
us  in  the  question,  "Can  I  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  and  drink  the  blood  of  goats?"
Incense  from  Sheba,  and  sweet  cane  from  a  far  country,  became  abominable  to  Jehovah,
because  the  people  who  offered  them  did  not  hearken  to  his  words,  and  rejected  his  Law
(Jer.  vi.  20).  We  who  have  bodies  must  to  some  extent  be  served  even  as  the  beasts
are  served;  but  if  we  got  nothing  more  we  should  soon  be  miserable.  The  higher  and
peculiar  part  of  our  nature  has  also  to  be  amply  served.  That  which  is  invisible  in  us
is  the  most  important  thing;  and  that  which  we  value  most  from  others  comes  from
what  is  invisible  in  them.  How  much  more,  then,  when  we  are  dealing  with  that  Being
who  has  in  him  no  mixture  of  the  bodily  1  We  do  give  human  beings  something  when
we  give  to  their  bodies;  but  unless  we  give  God  the  spiritual  we  give  him  nothing
at  all.— Y,

Ver.  27. — The  astonishment  of  ignorance.  These  disciples  marvelled  that  Jesus
talked  with  a  woman  at  all.  Thus  we  have  proof  positive  that  this  conversation
occurred  at  an  early  stage  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  The  disciples  would  soon  cease  to
marvel  at  Jesus  talking  with  women.  What  a  difference  the  ministry  of  Jesus  has
made  in  the  position  of  women  1  What  an  illumination  and  example  are  given  by  his
treatment  of  them !

I.  The  degraded  condition  op  this  woman.  A  condition,  not  because  of
something  peculiar  to  her  as  an  imiiviJual,  but  simply  because  ehe  was  a  woman.
'JThink  of  lie  work   to  which  she  was  put,  travelling  away  out  of  the  city  at  the


202  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  it.  1-64.

noontide  hour  to  get  water  at  the  well.  Hard  a8  her  lot  was,  it  was  not  peculiarly
kard ;  she  would  not  be  worse  off  than  most  women  of  her  acquaintance.  Think,  too,  of
the  light  thrown  upon  the  life  of  woman  in  that  place  by  the  startling  announcement
of  Jesus,  "  Thou  hast  had  five  husbands."  Some  of  these,  perhaps,  had  died,  but  some,
possibly  all  even,  had  got  tired  of  the  wife,  and  made  an  excuse  to  send  her  away.
Considering  the  need  of  the  woman,  the  real  marvel  would  have  been  if  Jesus  had
remained  silent  with  such  a  golden  opportunity.

II.  The  help  Jesus  gave  heb.  Take  this  woman  as  representative  of  the
toiling,  burdened  woman  everywhere.  She  has  her  own  share  in  this  world's  work  and
weariness,  and  more  than  her  own  share  in  the  world's  monotony.  Many  women  there
must  be  who  want  refreshment  and  brightness,  something  to  make  life  Ipss  mechanical,
something  to  bring  at  least  a  bit  of  blue  into  the  sky,  a  bit  of  sunshine  iuto  the  room.
Jesus,  speaking  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  speaks  to  such.  It  was  irksome  work  for  her
coming  "hither"  daily  to  draw.  So  Jesus  hints  mysteriously  at  a  new  fountain  of
waters,  gushing  out  with  a  fulness  and  force  which  indicated  the  exhaustless  stores
within ;  and  so  the  poor  woman,  thinking  but  of  her  daily  toil,  begs  for  this  water  that
she  may  thirst  not,  neither  come  to  draw.  Yet  this  was  the  request  Jesus  did  not
comply  with.  She  still  would  have  to  take  her  daily  journey  to  Jacob's  well.  Jesus
helped  her  otherwise;  even  spiritually,  one  hopes  that,  after  getting  so  much  instruction
and  so  many  explanations,  this  wearied  woman  did  have  opened  up  in  her  heart  the
well  of  water  springing  up  to  everlasting  life.  If  so,  then  for  ever  she  would  have  to
bless  the  journey  to  the  well.  Her  load  of  daily  duties  was  not  diminished  in  itself,
but  practically  it  was  diminished,  because  her  strength  was  increased.  Thus  Jesus
would  help  all  women.  He  is  far  above  the  limitations  of  sex.  The  marvel  now  is  that
women  will  not  come  and  talk  with  Jesus,  seeing  he  is  a  Helper  still  wherever  the  faith
and  obedience  are  found  that  make  his  help  available. — Y.

Ver.  34. — The  purpose  of  Jesus  in  eating.  I.  The  besouboeb  of  Jesus.  The
disciples  had  left  their  Master  by  the  well,  wearied,  hungry,  and  thirsty,  while  they
went  to  the  city  near  by  to  get  some  food ;  certainly  they  would  stay  no  longer  than
they  could  help,  seeing  Jews  had  no  dealings  with  Samaritans.  Eeturning  to  Jesus,
they  are  astonished  to  find  a  change  in  his  appearance.  He  looks  fresh  and  satisfied.
Jesus  had  ways  for  recruiting  bodily  strength  and  receiving  bodily  nourishment,  such
as  lie  beyond  us.  He  was  not  hedged  in  by  our  limitations,  though,  as  a  general  rule,
he  kept  within  them.  Whatever  nourishment  there  be  in  the  customary  channel  of
bread,  God  can  send  through  some  secret  and  special  channel,  if  there  be  sufficient
leason.  And  such  a  reason  there  was  here.  A  weary,  exhausted  man  could  not  talk  to
the  woman  of  Samaria  as  she  needed  to  be  talked  to.  Jesus  would  always  put  himself
in  the  best  possible  state  physically  for  doing  the  Father's  will  and  finishing  his  work.

II.  The  pueposb  in  eating.  Every  human  being,  because  he  is  a  reflecting  and
responsible  being,  is  bound  to  consider  the  why  and  wherefore  of  every  voluntary  act.
Je.sus  eats  that  he  may  satisfy  hunger,  but,  when  the  hunger  is  satisfied,  he  seeks  in  the
strength  thus  gained  to  go  on  fulfilling  the  great  purpose  of  his  life.  Jesus  tells  us  the
purpose  underlying  every  meal  that  he  took.  He  was  no  ascetic,  no  imitator  of  John
as  to  his  food;  doubtless  he  sat  down  at  times  in  the  company  of  gluttons  and
wine-bibbers,  but  all  the  while  he  would  make  it  plain  that  he  did  not  eat  and  drink
just  to  gratify  appetite.  We  are  not  to  eat  as  the  brute  beasts,  conscious  of  a  recurrent
need  and  a  recurrent  pleasure,  but  with  no  purpose  beyond  serving  the  present  bodily
need,  receiviiij;  the  present  bodily  pleasure.  When  good  digestion  waits  on  appetite,  and
health  on  both,  be  sure  that  adds  to  the  responsibilities  of  life.  Having  the  health  that
comes  from  a  sound  and  vigQrous  stomach,  it  will  be  required  from  us  according  to  our
health.  It  is  a  shame  to  see  some  in  health  and  strength,  using  it  all  in  selfish
pleasure,  while  others,  whose  life  is  one  constant  struggle  against  disease  and  pain,  yet
manage  to  work  on  for  God  And  Christ,  their  hearts  unwenried,  however  wearied  their
bodies  may  be.

UI.  The  example  of  Jesus  in  this  matteb.  He  used  what  health  and
strength  he  had  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him.  One  feels  that  he  must  have
been  a  thoroughly  healthy  man  in  body.  We  read  of  him  being  wearied ;  we  never
tsad  of  him  being  ill.    That  there  should  bo  in  him  great  fulness  of  physical  life  ij


OH.  IV,  1—54:.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  203

just  what  we  might  expect.  He  who  requires  us  to  use  health  and  strength  in  doing
the  will  of  God,  first  of  all  so  used  health  and  strength  himself.  And  how  we  benefit  by
the  result  of  all  this  I  There  was  much  work  to  be  done ;  Jesus  was  capable  of  much
work,  and  so  he  did  it.  There  was  no  wasted  effort  and  energy  ;  all  his  conversations
and  dealings  with  men  were  directed  to  a  certain  aim.  Where  should  we  have  been,  if
he  had  not  bent  every  energy  and  thought  of  life  to  the  finishing  of  his  Father's  work  ?
All  things  had  to  be  made  subordinate  to  the  mission.  Jesus  was  speaking  fresh  from
the  gladness  and  encouragement  he  had  got,  because  of  his  talk  with  the  Samaritan
woman.  He  who  pointed  his  disciples  to  the  fields  white  to  harvest  had  done  some
reaping  by  that  very  talk ;  and  he  wants  his  disciples  to  aim  at  reaping  also.  We
must  have  the  bread  that  perisheth,  and  it  will  not  come  like  the  sunshine  and  the
rain — we  must  work  to  get  it.  But  always  beyond  the  bread  and  the  pleasure  of
mating,' and  the  strength  to  which  the  eating  ministers,  there  must  be  the  service
of  God.  Even  in  a  matter  of  routine  and  habit,  like  eating  and  drinking,  let  us  aim  to
do  the  will  of  him  who  made  us  and  saved  us,  and  get  strength  for  doing  such  work  as
may  be  useful  in  his  kingdom. — Y.

Vers.  35 — 38. — The  two  harvests.  I.  A  sbabchino  look  into  the  past.  There
can  be  little  doubt  that,  when  Jesus  said  the  fields  were  white  already  to  harvest,  he
meant  his  disciples  to  consider  the  company  of  Samaritans  eagerly  coming  out  of  the
city  towards  them.  Why  were  they  coming?  Jesus  knew  that  the  coming  was  not
sufficiently  explained  by  saying  that  the  woman's  report  had  stirred  up  the  curiosity
of  the  people  in  the  city.  Jesus  rejoiced  in  the  fresh  proof  he  had  got  of  how  people
everywhere  were  waiting  for  the  Messiah.  Even  the  Samaritan  was  waiting,  and,  if
the  Samaritan,  how  much  more  the  Jew  1  People  were  ready  to  run  in  any  direction
where  they  might  find  one  to  answer  their  expectations.  And  Jesus  looked  upon  this
expectant  state  of  mind  as  the  harvest  of  what  had  been  sown  long  ago.  He  did  not
forget  his  Father's  faithful  messengers  in  ages  past,  with  their  testimonies,  messages,
and  predictions.  And  so  we  may  be  sure  Jesus  would  ever  have  us  consider  how  ths
present  is  the  result  of  the  past.  The  valuable  and  gladdening  things  we  have  to-day
did  not  spring  up  all  in  a  night.  This  faith  in  a  coming  Messiah  had  been  growing  for
generations.  At  first  the  faith  of  only  a  few,  it  had  come  to  be  the  faith  of  more,  and
then  the  faith  of  all.

II.  The  peculiar  work  of  the  disciples.  They  had  to  be  in  readiness  for
a  people  who,  more  or  less,  were  ready  for  them.  When  harvest-time  comes,  how  the
reapers  are  on  the  look  out !  Eeaping  is  not  like  some  sorts  of  work,  it  cannot  be  spread
over  a  long  term.  And  these  disciples  were  to  be  just  as  reapers,  co-reapers  with  Jesus
himself.  If  the  farmer  has  a  large  extent  of  ground  under  corn,  he  cannot  reap  it  all
with  his  own  hands ;  he  must  have  helpers  proportioned  to  the  ground  that  has  to  be
covered.  While  Jesus  was  in  the  body  of  his  humiliation,  he  worked  with  bodily
restrictions  upon  him.  Hence  the  need  of  colleagues  who  could  do  what  he  was  not
able  to  do  himself,  going  forth  each  one  of  them,  specially  authorized  and  endowed  to
communicate  the  blessings  of  the  Christ  to  needy  and  eager  Israel.  We  must  ever  be
on  the  look  out  for  harvest-work.

III.  A    PATHETIC    element    IN    AGRICULTURE.      Of   all   who   gO   OUt   tO    SOW    in   the

sowing-time,  not  all  survive  to  the  harvest-time.  This  must  happen  every  year,  and
so  no  proverb  is  more  likely  to  start  into  utterance  than  that  which  speaks  of  the  sower
being  one,  and  the  reaper  another.  But  when  Jesus  comes  to  dilate  on  the  higher
harvest,  he  speaks  of  a  state  of  things  where  nearly  always  the  sower  is  one,  and  the
reaper  another.  The  necessity  of  the  case  makes  it  so.  Superstitions  and  traditions
have  to  be  overthrown.  But  when  the  sower  for  God  well  understands  that  he  cannot
also  reap,  then  all  is  right.  He  does  his  work  with  his  own  joy  in  the  doing  of  it;  he
does  the  work  into  which  God  has  put  him ;  he  is  sure  of  the  equity,  nay  more,  of
the  love,  of  his  Master ;  and  thus  he  is  sure  also  that  the  due  reward  will  duly  come.
The  sower  and  the  reaper  will  rejoice  together ;  and  what  a  new,  unimaginable  expe-
rience that  will  be !  Here  sowers  have  a  measure  of  rejoicing  together,  and  reapers  a
measure  of  rejoicing  together;  but  the  sowers  and  reapers  must  be  all  together,  looking
upon  the  work  before  they  can  see  it  in  all  its  wisdom  and  fulness.  The  earliest
prophet  of  the  old  covenant  must  clasp  hands  with  the  latest  servant  of  the  new. — ^Y.


204


THE   GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.   JOHN.       [ch.  v.  1— 47.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  V.


Here  commences  the  second  ».^ion  of
&e  Grospel  (oh.  v. — li.)

n.  The  Conflict  with  the  Chosen
People  in  Jerusalem,  Galilee,  and
Jerusalem,  to    the    Death-Sentence

BECOKDED   BY   THE    SANHEDRIS.

Vers.  1 — 4:7. — 1.  Christ  proved,  by  signs
a7id  wonders  and  testimonies,  to  he  Source
of  life.

Vers.  1 — 9. — (1)  A  sign  on  a  paralyzed
body  and  an  unsusceptible  soul.

Ver.  1. — The  journey  to  Jerusalem  is
said  to  have  taken  place  at  the  time  of  "  a
feast,"  or  "  the  feast  of  the  Jews."  •  After
these  things  (juera  Taura).  Suggesting  a
number  of  events,  not  necessarily  connected
with  each  other.  (For  tlie  latter  idea  of  a
period  expressed  by  /ierti  toCto,  see  ch.  il.
12  and  xi.  7, 11 ;  for  ,ueTeb  toEto,  see  ch.  vi.
1  and  xxi.  1,  etc.)  There  was  the  feast  of
the  Jews.  Now,  "  the  feast "  of  the  Jews
eould  hardly  be  any  other  than  the  second
Passover,  while  ch.  vi.  4  would  indicate  a
third.  "The  feast"  referred  to  in  ch.  iv.
45  undoubtedly  means  the  first  Passover.
"  A  feast "  would  leave  the  question  open,
though  by  no  means  excluding  positively
the  second  Passover,  as  the  anarthiousness
of  the  word  might  bo  chosen  with  a  view
to  call  special  attention  to  it.  However,
the  indefinite  eopr-li  has  been  identified
by  commeuttaors  with  every  feast  in  the
calendar,  so  there  can  be  no  final  settlement
of  the  problem.  If  the  feast  be  the  Pass-
over, then  our  Lord's  ministry  lasted  a  little
more  than  three  years.  If  not,  it  must  be
one  or  other  of  the  feasts  that  elapsed  be-
tween the  Passovers  of  ch.  ii.  and  oh.  vi.
Edersheim,  with  many  others,  refuses  to
accept  any  chronological  hint  in  ch.  iv.  35,
and  therefore  throws  the  journey  from  Je-
rusalem to  Galilee  a  few  weeks  after  the
first  Passover,  in  the  early  summer,  and
supposes  that  Jesus  returned  to  the  unnamed
feast  in  the  autumn.  Several  critics  say  of
cli.  iv.  35,  one  part  of  the  sentence  must  be

'  'H  topT^  stands  in  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.),  with  N,  0,  E,  F,  etc.,  and  fifty  cursives,
Coptic,  Sahidio.  But  E.T.,  Tregelles,  Alford,
place  the  ri  in  the  margin,  and  follow  in  text
A,  B,  D,  G,  K,  etc.,  and  Origen's  express
mention  of  the  anarthrous  form  and  the
difficulties  involved  in  it.  On  the  other
hand,  Irenseus  discusses  the  point,  and
regards  the  feaat  here  mentioned  as  the
Passover.


parabolical  and  the  other  literal,  and  that
the  disciples  might  be  anticipating  a  spiri-
tual harvest  after  four  months,  and  Jesus
drew  from  the  physically  ripening  corn-fields
his  comparison.  Tliis  stems  to  me  entirely
contrary  to  our  Lord's  ordinary  method ;
and  that  the  disciples  were  in  too  carnal  a
mood  to  be  credited  with  an  anticipation  of
spiritual  results  in  Samaria  at  all.  Those
who  think  that  ch.  iv.  35  does  give  a  liint
of  four  months  pieceding  harvest,  place  the
journey  between  the  middle  of  December  and
the  middle  of  January.  To  my  mind  there
is  consequently  no  difficulty  in  imagining
that  when  those  four  months  should  have
been  spent,  and  before  the  regular  calling
and  appointment  of  the  twelve  apostles,  our
Lord  should  have  gone  up  to  the  feast — one
of  the  feasts  which  did  summon  the  adult
men  to  the  metropolis.  This  is  the  view  of
IrensBus,  Luther,  Giotius,  Lampe,  Neander,
Hengstenberg,  Conder,  and  many  others.
Wieseler,  Hug,  'Meyer,  Lange,  Godet,
Weiss,  Farrar,  Watklns,  think  that  the
Feast  of  Purim,  celebrated  on  the  15th  of
Adar  (or  March)  (2  Maoo.  xv.  36),  in  com-
memoration of  the  deliverance  of  the  people
from  the  evil  intention  of  Haman  (Esth.  ix.
21,  etc.),  was  that  natiouiil  fast  and  feast
which  Jesus  thus  honoured.  Purim  was  not
one  of  the  divinely  appointed  festivals,  but
it  is  also  stated  that  the  Lord  undoubtedly
attended  one  of  the  national  and  recently
appointed  festivals,  that  of  Dedication
(ch.  X.  22).  The  more  serious  objection  is
that  it  could,  if  desired,  have  been  cele-
brated quite  as  well  in  Galilee  as  in  Jeru-
salem, and  that  the  method  of  celebration
seemed  contrary  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the
Master,  and  the  whole  tone  of  the  dis-
course which  followed.  It  is  said  that
part  of  the  ritual  of  the  feast  was  the  free
and  frequent  gifts  made  spontaneously
by  one  to  another.  Westcott  prefers  the
autumn  Feast  of  Trumpets  as  more  suit-
able on  several  grounds  than  the  Passover,
(1)  because  of  the  absence  of  the  article, —
this,  however,  is  very  problematical  (see
Tischendorf,  8th  edit.);  (2)  because  when
at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (ch.  vii.  2)  the
incident  described  in  ch.  v.  is  still  in  lively
recollection ;  (3)  because  the  great  events
of  the  Feast  of  Trumpets,  the  commemora-
tion of  the  Creation  and  the  Law-giving,
correspond  with  the  theme  of  the  Lord's
great  discourse.  The  fact  that  this  particular
miracle  on  the  sabbath  should  be  referred
to  a  few  months  later  in  Jerusalem,  on
Christ's  third  appearance  there,  is  not  im-
probable, if  we  bear  in  mind  that  Judtean
emissaries  in  Galilee  had  been  bitterly  as-


CH.T.1— 47.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


2<»


sailing  Jesns,  on  the  ground  of  his  persistent
determination  to  heal  sickness  and  hopeless
maladies  on  the  sabbath  day.  This  Jeru-
salem "  sign,"  and  the  claim  he  made  on  the
ground  of  it,  had  roused  the  cry,  and  was
still  the  matter  of  contention.  The  claims
of  the  Purim  feast  turn  principally  on  the  fact
that,  since  it  occurred,  about  a  month  before
the  Passover,  on  the  14th  or  15th  of  Adar,
this  visit  might  have  taken  place  in  the
course  of  the  four  months  referred  to  in  ch.
iv.  35,  and  therefore  between  the  sojourn  in
Samaria  and  the  Passover  of  oh.  vi.  4,  which
Jesus  did  not  attend.  Dr.  Moulton  (as-
suming the  anarthrous  form  of  the  4opT^)
thinks  that  the  feast  is  left  undetermined
because  there  was  nothing  in  it  typical  of
our  Lord's  work,  and  fulfilled  in  his  Person.
Such  a  position  renders  the  visit  itself
strange  and  apparently  uncalled  for.  These
long  gaps,  silences,  during  which  there  is  uo
record  of  event  or  discourse, constitute  a  lead-
ing feature  of  the  gospel  history,  and  indeed
of  most  of  the  history  of  both  Old  and  New
Testaments.  To  my  mind  there  is  advan-
tage rather  than  otherwise  in  supposing
more  time  than  a  few  months  to  have  been
consumed  in  theGalilsaau  ministry  described
in  Mark  ii.  and  iii.  Tregellea  and  the  Ee-
visers,  with  Westoott  and  Hort,  have  rele-
gated the  SsuTfpo-irp^Ttji  of  Luke  vi.  1  to  the
margin,  but  Tischeudorf  (8th  edit.)  and
Canon  Cooke,  etc.,  retain  the  remarkable
expression,  on  the  overwhelming  evidence
of  a  host  of  authorities.  If  it  stand,  which
we  believe  it  must,  then  during  the  Gali-
Itean  ministry,  and  in  the  interval  which  pre-
ceded the  Passover  mentioned  in  ch.  vi.  4,
there  is  a  reference  to  tlie  proximity  of  a
previous  Passover  and  a  previous  harvest ;
the  Galilsean  opposition  to  Christ  on  this
question  of  ritual  being  at  its  very  height.
If  so,  the  feast  must  have  been  the  Passover.
The  question  cannot  be  finally  settled,  and
commentators  are  in  hopeless  conflict  with
one  another.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the
majority  of  modem  critics  assume  the  Feast
of  Purim  to  be  that  intended,  and  thereby
reduce  the  length  of  our  Lord's  ministry
from  Cana  to  Calvary  to  two  short  years.
And  Jesus  went  up  to  Jerusalem.  This
was  before  the  formal  call  of  the  twelve
apostles,  and  there  is  no  proof  that  he  was
accompanied  by  his  disciples.  Many  of
the  commentators  (and  see  Weiss,  '  Life  of
Christ,'  vol.  ii.  321)  urge  that  not  even  John
himself  was  present  on  the  occasion,  from
the  absence  of  lifelike  touches  and  particu-
larity of  incident.  There  is,  however,  much
detail  in  the  first  fifteen  verses.  The  great
discourse  that  follows  is  not  broken  into
dramatic  dialogue,  and  does  certainly  pre-
sent more  of  the  biographer's  subjective
treatment  than  other  portions  of  the  nar-


rative. It  is  more  conceivable,  however,
that  John  did,  on  grounds  mentioned  hj
Caspari  (see  Introduction),  accompany  hu
Lord,  and  learned,  by  what  he  heard  of  these
great  words,  and  by  subsequent  converse
with  Jesus,  the  burden  of  the  mighty  reve-
lation. Thoma  sets  to  work  in  the  most
dogmatic  way,  and  Weiss  with  a  perfectly
different  spirit,  to  demonstrate  the  identity
of  the  narrative  which  follows,  with  the
famous  story  of  the  cure  of  the  paralytic
"  borne  of  four  "  which  occurs  in  the  synop-
tic narrative.  Thoma  goes  further,  and
imagines  that  the  supposed  healing  of  the
paralytics  by  both  Peter  and  Paul  are  also
hero  idealized.

Ver.  2. — ^Now  there  is  in  Jerusalem.  A
phrase  denoting  intimate  acquaintance  with
the  topography  of  the  city,  and  the  pre-
sent tense  suggests  either  a  hint  of  a  ruin
yet  existing  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,
or  it  may  betray  the  fact  that  the  evan-
gelist wrote  down  at  tbe  very  time  some
details  of  the  incident  which  formed  the
occasion  of  the  following  discourse,  and
never,  in  his  later  editing  of  the  document,
omitted  or  altered  the  form  of  his  sentence.
At  the  sheep  (market)  or  (gate)  a  pool,  sur-
named  in  Hebrew  Bethesda,  having  five
porticoes  or  porches.  The  adjective  wpoParticii
requires  some  substantive  to  be  introduced,
and  since  there  is  no  reference  to  any  sheep-
market  in  the  Old  Testament,  little  justifi-
cation can  be  found  for  the  gloss  contained
in  the  Authorized  Version.  There  was  a
"  sheep-gate  "  mentioned  in  Neb.  iii.  1,  32
and  xii.  39.  There  is  no  reason  against
this  method  of  supplying  the  sense,  except
this,  that  there  is  no  other  instance  of  the
word  -iriKri,  or  "  gate,"  being  omitted  after
this  fashion.  The  "  sheep-gate  "  stood  next,
in  Nehemiah's  recital,  to  the  "  fish-gate,"
and  it  was  built  by  tlie  priests.  The  old
"  sheep-gate  "  is  now  known  by  the  name
of  St.  Stephen's  Gate,  to  the  north  of  the
Haram  es-Sherif,  or  temple  area,  from  which
the  patli  leads  down  into  the  valley  of  the
Kedron,  and  if  "  gate "  be  the  proper  term
to  add  to  TpoPaTiK-ff,  and  we  have  its  site
fixed  by  the  modem  St.  Stephen's  Gate,
then  we  must  look  for  the  pool  surnamed
Bethesda  in  that  vicinity.  Eusebius  and
Jerome  speak  of  a  piscina  probatica  as
visible  in  their  day,  but  do  not  determine
its  site.  Kobinaon  ('  Bibl.  Kesearches,'  i.
p.  489)  did  not  accept  the  identification  of
the  sheep-gate  with  St.  Stephen's  Gate,  aud
places  the  former  more  to  the  south,  and
ni  arer  to  what  is  now  called  tlie  Pountiiin
of  the  Virgin.  This  fountain,  on  Hobinson's
visit,  displayed  some  curious  phenomena  of
periodical  and  intermittent  ebullition,  re-
ceiving a  supply  of  water  from  another
source.     It  was  found  by  Bobinson  to  b«


206


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  y.  1—47.


connected  by  a  tunnel  with  the  fonntain  of
Siloam,  and  the  relations  of  these  wells  have
been  quite  recently  submitted  to  fresh  ex-
amination ('Palestine  Expl.  Soo.  Bep.,'
Got.  1883).  Robinson  identified  this  pool
with  "Solomon's  Pool"  of  Josephus  and
"King's  Pool"  of  Nehemiah,  and  thought
it  might  be  the  original  pool  of  Bethesda.
Neander  and  Tholuok  incline  to  agree  with
him.  The  observations  of  Bobinson  have
been  confirmed  by  Tobler,  and  at  lenst  show
that  what  certainly  happens  now  in  some  of
these  fountains  may  have  been  phenomena
constantly  expected  at  some  other  fountain
bearing  the  name  now  before  us,  on  the
north-eastern  side  of  the  Haram  area.
Within  the  (sheep-gate)  St.  Stephen's  Gate
the  traditional  site  of  Bethesda  is  pointed
out.  The  modem  name  is  Birket  Israel,
and  this  tank,  from  the  accumulation  of  rub-
bish, does  not  now  show  its  original  extent ;
neither  does  it  now  hold  water,  but  re-
ceives the  drainage  of  neighbouring  houses
(Colonel  Wilson  in  '  Plot.  Palestine,'  vol.  i.
pp.  66,  106 — 109).  A  church,  near  that
of  St,  Anne,  was  built  by  the  Crusaders
over  a  well,  in  this  immediate  vicinity — a
spot  which  was  supposed  to  be  the  site  of
the  angelic  disturbance.  Colonel  Wilson
prefers  this  traditional  site  to  that  fixed
upon  by  Robinson.  So  also  Sir  G.  Grove,
in  Smith's  '  Bible  Diet.'  The  five  porches,
or  porticoes,  may  have  been  a  columnar
structure  of  pentagonal  form,  which  shel-
tered the  sick  and  the  impotent  folk.  At
present  no  indubitable  relic  of  this  build-
ing has  been  discovered.  Alford  (7th  edit.)
quotes  a  letter  which  makes  it  probable
that  Siloam  was  Bethesda,  and  the  remains
of  four  columns  in  the  east  wall  of  that
pool,  with  four  others  in  the  centre,  show
that  a  structure  with  five  openings  or
porches  might  easily  have  been  erected  there.
Bethesda,  which  is  said  to  be  the  Hebrew
(that  is,  Aramaic)  surname  of  the  pool,  is
very  doubtful.  Probably  this  is  the  correct
form  of  the  text,  though  there  are  many  va-
riants, sucli  as  Bethzatha,  in  N,  33,  Tischeu-
dorf  (8tb  edit.) ;  Bethsaida,  in  some  ver-
sions and  TeituUian.  It  seems  generally
allowed  tiiat  its  significance  (Njpn  rra)  is
"house  of  grace  or  mercy,"  and  that  it
derived  its  reference  from  the  dispensation
there  of  God's  providential  gifts.  The  heal-
ing virtue  of  waters  charged  with  iron  and
carbonic  acid  and  other  gas  is  too  well
known  to  need  reference,  and  the  remark-
able cures  derived  from  their  use  may
account  for  every  part  of  the  statement.
which  was  here  written  by  John.  Busebius
speaks  of  these  waters  as  "  reddened,"  so  he
thought,  with  the  blood  of  sacrifices,  but  far
more  probaMy  by  chalybeate  earth.
Yen.  3, 4, — ^In  these  (percbai)  lay  a  mul-


titude of  siok  folk,  blind,  lame,  withered, -
[waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water;  for
an  angel  went  down  season  by  season  into
the  pool,  and  troubled  the  waters :  he  then
that  first  stepped  in  after  the  troubling  of  the
water  became  whole  of  whatsoever  disease
he  had].*  The  interesting  gloss  discussed
below  conveys  the  idea  of  magical  cure^  with-
out moral  significance,  and  attributes  such
cure  to  angelic  ministry.  This  is  the  natural
and  popular  explanation  of  the  Buthesda
healings,  and  would  easily  occur  to  a  copyist
who  hns  not  taken  pains  to  use  New  Testa-
ment diction.  Wunsche  quotes  firom  '  Chul-
lin,'  fol.  105,  6,  a  testimony  that  "  deadly
qualities  of  water  were  attributed  to  demons,
and  healing  ones  to  the  angels."  The
crowds  which  gather  in  all  countries  round
medicinal  and  intermittent  springs  are  still
unable  to  explain  their  curative  quality  by
scientific  analogies;  and  tliere  is  nothing
more  likely  to  have  suggested  itself  to  the
mind  of  a  copyist  than  the  intervention  of
an  angel.  The  absence  from  Scripture  else-
where of  non-moral  miracles  is  powerful  in-
ternal reason  for  the  lack  of  authenticity  for
the  poetic  gloss.  The  text,  when  deprived
of  this  dubious  gloss,  loses  all  character  that
is  inconsistent  with  the  authenticity  of  the
narrative.  The  close  of  ver.  3,  "waiting
for  the  moving  of  the  waters,"  is  far  better
attested  than  ver.  4,  and,  moreover,  is  con-

'  The  passage  here  marked  in  brackets  is
almost  certainly  an  ancient  gloss  upon  the
text,  introduced  to  explain  ver.  7.  Lach-
mann  retained  it  on  strong  authority  of  A,
C,  B,  F,  G,  T,  A,  etc.,  several  versions  and
definite  references  to  it  by  TertuUian  ('  De
Baptismo,'  v.),  Didyraus,  and  Cyril;  but
there  are  great  fluctuations  in  the  elements
of  the  text,  some  manuscripts  giving  Kvpiou
after  &yyi\os,  others  omitting  it,  icoTe;8ou'6
interchanged  for  Kariipxcro  and  4\oiero.
The  words  themselves  contain  a  number  of
^7ra|  \ey6fievcu  Thus  kIvtictis,  xarSt  Kaiphv,
SiiiroTe,  v6(rrina,  Tapdrrm,  and  rapax'fl  in  the
sense  of  troubling  waters,  are  not  elsewhere
found  in  the  New  Testament.  The  manu-
scripts D,  1, 33,  retain  the  last  clause  of  ver.
3,  while  they  omit  ver.  4,  making  it  probable
that  this  clause  was  first  added,  in  order  to
explain  ver.  7,  and  then  by  some  subsequent
hand  enlarged  into  ver.  4.  The  great  au-
thorities, N,  B,  C,  D,  Thebaic,  Memphitic,
Syriac,  Vulgate  Versions,  all  omit  the  entire
passage;  so  tliat  Tischemiorf  (8th  edit),
Meyer,  Tregelles,  Alford,  Olshausen,  Luoke,
Godet,  as  well  as  Westcott  and  Hort,  reject
it.  Reuss  says  it  is  "  vainly"  repudiated,  as
though  critics  had  merely  acted  here  in  an
apologetic  spirit.  Thoma  does  not  allude  to
critical  diHiculty,  but  finds  mystical  mean-
I  iug  natural  to  "the  Johannist."


en.  T.  1—47.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOSDDTG  TO  ST.  JOHN,


207


sistent  with  John's  manoer,  and  with  well-
ascertained  matters  of  fact ;  and  the  clause
would  give  authentic  ground  for  the  glosa
that  follows.  Hoffmann  and  Hengstenberg
defend  the  passage,  and  believe  that  "  the
angel  of  the  waters"  in  the  Apocalypse
betrays  the  same  hand.  But  there  can  be
no  fair  comparison  between  an  historical  fact
and  a  symbnlical  figure.

Ver.  5. — And  a  certain  man  was  there,  who
had  been  thirty  and  eight  years  in  Ms  in-
firmity. He  had  not  lost  all  his  powers — he
crawled  probably  from  some  near  home  to
the  healing  well ;  but  for  thirty-eight  years
lie  had  been  dragging  out  his  impotent  ex-
istence. The  length  implies  the  inveteracy
of  the  disease.  Hengstenberg,  Wordsworth,
Westoott  (in  part),  imply  a  marked  corre-
spondence between  these  thirty-eight  years
and  the  similar  period  of  time  during  which
Israel  was  compelled  to  wander  in  the  wilder-
ness. It  is  not  said  how  long  the  man  had
lain  in  the  five  porches  waiting  listlessly  for
healing,  but  that  the  malady  was  of  old
standing,  and  to  all  human  appearance  in-
curable. Thoma  finds  allegorical  meaning
in  "Bethesda" — a  synonym  of  the  metro-
polis, and  keeps  up  a'  series  of  comparisons
with  Acts  iii.

Ver.  6. — When  Jesus  saw  him  lying  there,
and  perceived  (came  to  k^ow  by  his  search-
ing glance  and  intuitive  knowledge  of  the
liistoiy  of  others)  that  he  had  during  a  long
time  already  been  (in  that  condition,  or  in
tielmees,)  said  unto  him — spontaneously,  in
the  royalty  of  his  benefactions,  not  demanding
from  the  man  even  the  faith  to  be  healed,
and  dealLDg  with  him  almost  as  he  did  with
the  dead — ^Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  The
leper  came  beseeching  him,  "  Lord,  if  thou
wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean."  The  leper
was  quite  sure  of  his  own  intense  desire  for
cleansing,  and  all  he  questioned  was  the
teill,  not  the  power,  of  Jesus.  The  admis4on
of  the  power  was  a  tacit  cry  for  healing.  The
questioning-  of  Jesus  on  this  occasion  in-
volved an  offer  of  mercy.  "  Vast  thou  veri-
^tahly  wish  for  health  and  strength  ?  "  The
question  implies  a  dfiubt.  The  man  may  have
got  so  accustomed  to  his  life  of  indolence
and  mendicancy  as  to  regard  deliverance
from  liis  apparent  wretchedness,  with  all  con-
sequent responsibilities  of  work  and  energy
and  self-dependence,  as  a  doubtful  blessing.
He  whined  out,  with  professional  drawl,  his
oft-told  story,  reflecting  very  much  upon  his
lovelessness  and  quarrelsomeness,  and  ugly
temper.  There  are  many  who  are  not
anxious  for  salvation,  with  all  the  demands
it  makes  upon  the  life,  with  its  summons  to
self-sacrifice  and  the  repression  nf  self-indul-
goiioe.  There  are  many  religious  impos-
tors who  prefer  tearing  open  their  spiritual
Voundfi  to  the  first  passer-by,  and  hugging


their  grievance,  to  being  made  into  robust
men  upon  whom  the  burden  of  responsibility
will  immediately  fall.  In  this  case  the  sign
of  his  palsied  nature  was  written  upon  his
face,  and  was  probably  known  to  every
passer-by.

Ver.  7.— The  sick  (impotent)  man  answered  "
him.  Sir,'  I  have  no  man,  when  the  water
has  been  troubled,  to  put  me  '  into  the  pool :
but  while  I  am  coming,  another  steppeth  down
before  me.  This  implies  that  some  special
advantage  accompanied  the  troubling  of  the
water.  The  sudden  escape  of  the  medicinal
gas  may  have  soon  subsided,  and,  with  it,
the  special  virtue  of  the  well.  The  difS-
culty  which  the  sick  man  found  in  reaching
the  point  of  disturbance  may  be  accounted
for  in  many  ways.  The  steps  which  led
into  the  water ;  the  weakness  of  the  sufferer,
which  made  it  an  impossible  task  without
help ;  the  eagerness  of  many  other  impotent
folk  to  take  advantage  of  the  supposed  cure,
jostling  one  another  with  selfish  haste;  or
the  absence  of  any  personal  friend  to  fight
his  battle  for  him,  and  cast  him  (,$ii\ri)  with
the  required  plunge  into  water.  The  last
point  may  be  explained  on  the  supposition
that  he  was  a  comparative  stranger  in  Jeru-
salem, and  had  made  no  friends ;  or  by  an-
other, which  several  other  allusions  justify,
viz.  that  he  was  a  man  who,  from  some  rea-
son or  other,  could  neither  make  nor  retain
friendship.  The  melancholy  recital  of  his
frequent  disappointment  is  given  with  an
air  of  mendicant  resignation— a  kind  of  mor-
bid satisfaction  with  his  lot.  The  phrase,
"  while  I  am  coming,  another,"  etc.,  implies
that  he  could  move,  if  slowly,  without  help.
The  moroseness  of  self-dependence  charac-
terizes some  sufferers,  who  rather  glory  in
isolation  than  lament  it.  Still,  the  words
express  the  hopelessness  of  thousands  who,
for  lack  of  human  help,  are  jostled  out  of
life,  peace,  and  salvation.

Ver.  8. — Jesus  saith  to  him,  Eise,  take  up
thy  bed  (Kpd^0aT6v  aov) — thy  mattress  or
pallet ;  the  word  is  said  to  be  of  Macedonian
origin,  it  is  Latinized  in  tlie  Vulgate  into
grdbbatus,  and  is  not  unfrequently  found  in
the  New  Testament  (Mark  ii.  4,  9 ;  vi.  55 ;
Acts  V.  15 ;  ix.  33) ;  the  ordinary  Greek  word
axiimovs,  <rKifiir6Siov — and  walk.  These  are
in  part  the  identical  words  which  Jesus  ad-
dressed to  the  paralytic  (Mark  ii.  9).  He  did
not  touch  him  or  use  any  other  means  than
his  own  life-giving  word  to  confer  the  cu:|;e.
He  put  forth,  in  royal  might  and  spontaneous
unsolicited  exertion,  the  miraculous  forc&

'  Some  manuscripts  and  Fathers  (C,  E,
F,  G,  H,  33,  Syriac)  read  mt  before  Kipte.

'^BdXfi  is  adopted  by  recent  editors  in  pre-
ference to  Bdwri  by  the  almost  unanimoni
consent  of  the  uncial  manuscripts,


206


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  v.  1—47.


The  energy  of  the  Lord's  will  mastered  the
palsied  wU  of  the  sick  man,  and  infused  into
him  the  lacking  energy.  Archdeacon  Wat-
kins  supposes  that  the  man  did  possess
incipient  and  recipient  faith,  moved  by  the
generous  tenderness  and  sympathetic  interest
of  the  Stranger  in  his  case.  The  very  strik-
ing fact  mentioned  in  the  synoptic  cure  of
the  paralytic,  viz.  that  he  was  home  into
the  presence  of  Jesus  by  four  friends,  ought
to  liave  prevented  Thomu's  caricature  of
criticism,  which  makes  this  narrative  a  mere
ide«lization  of  that.

Ver.  90. — And  immediately '  the  man  be-
came whole  (well,  sound  in  health),  and  took
up  his  bed,  and  walked.  This  act  of  obedi
ence  was  an  act  of  faith,  as  in  every  other
miracle  upon  paralyzed  nerves  and  frames.
The  imagery  of  the  sign  explains  the  ration-
ale of  faith.  The  impotent  man,  the  para-
lytic, and  the  man  with  withered  liand,  were
severally  called  by  Christ  to  do  that  which
without  Divine  aid  seemed  and  was  impos-
sible. The  spiritual  quickening  of  the  mind
was  communicated  to  the  ordinary  physical
volition,  and  the  bare  act  was  a  method  by
which  the  palsied  sufferer  took  hold  of  God's
strength.  Faith  always  lays  hold  thus  of
power  to  do  the  impossible.  The  woids  and
the  result  are  similar  to  those  adopted  on
the  cure  of  the  paralytic.  This  is  another
instance  of  the  identity  of  the  Christ  of  John
and  of  the  synoptists.  The  various  efforts
of  Strauss,  Baur,  and  Weiss  to  identify  this
miracle  with  that  wrought  on  the  paralytic
is,  however,  in  defiance  of  every  condition
of  time,  place,  character,  and  consequences.
The  energy  of  faith  and  love  which  led  the
Galilsean  sufferer  to  secure  the  services  of
four  stalwart  friends,  oot  only  to  carry  him,
butto  make  strenuous  efforts  tobring  him  into
the  presence  of  Jesus,  contrasts  powerfully
with  the  loneliness  and  friendlessness  of  the
impotent  man  ;  and  the  method  adopted  by
the  Lord  to  convey  his  grace,  and  the  discus-
sion that  followed  on  that  occasion  touching
the  power  of  the  Son  of  man  to  forgive  sins,
all  suggest  profoundly  different  circum-
stances. Nothing  but  the  claim  of  the  critic
to  be  entirely  superior  to  the  dueument  he  is
interpreting  can  account  for  so  wild  a  con-
jecture.

Vers.  96 — 16. — (2)  The  outbreak  of  hostility
due  to  the  breach  of  the  eabbatio  law.

Ver.  96. — Now  it  was  the  sabbath  on  that
day.  The  form  of  the  expression  implies
that  it  was  one  of  the  festival  sabbaths
rather  than  the  weekly  sabbath.  These
days,  however,  received  the  same  reveience,
and  were  observed  with  nearly  the  same
lites  and  restrictions,  as  the  ordinary  sab-

>  Tischendorf  omits  the  (vSeas  with  K*
•ndD.


baths.  This  statement  is  the  key-note  of
the  ptreat  discourse  which  follows,  and  it  is
made  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  subsequent
incidents.  The  Jews;  i.e.  the  authorities,
either  the  rabbis  or  Sanhedrists  who  were
present  in  the  crowd  which  gathered  round
the  pool  of  Bethesila,  or  iiiled  the  neigh-
bouring courts,  are  to  be  distinguished  from
"the  multitude,"  or  from  the  people  gene-
rally. The  designation  evidently  means  the
leading  folk,  the  social  censors,  the  hier-
archy, who  very  soon  displayed  in  marked
fashion  their  jealousy  and  hatred  of  Jesus.
The  Jevfs  therefore  said  to  the  man  who  had
been  healed,  It  is  sabbath,  and  *  it  is  not  law-
ful for  thee  to  carry  thy  bed.  Judging  by  the
letter  of  the  Law  (Exod.  xx.  10  and  xxxv.  3),
and  by  the  precedents  of  Scripture  (Numb.
XV.  32 — 35),  and  by  the  special  injunctions  of
the  prophets  (Jer.  xvii.  21 — 23;  Neh.  xiii.
15,  etc.),  the  man  was  infringing  a  posi-
tive command.  Babbinism  had  indeed  de-
clared that,  in  cases  affecting  life  and  health,
the  law  of  the  sabbath  was  legitimately  held
in  abeyance;  but  this  relaxation  was  so
hedged  about  with  restrictions  that  the  poor
man  and  the  layman  were  unable  to  apply
the  rules.  The  rabbinic  interpretations  of  the
sabbatic  law  concerning  burden-bearing  were
BO  intricate  and  sophistical  that  the  entire
majesty  of  the  law,  and  the  merciful  intent
of  the  prohibition,  were  concealed  and  viti-
ated. Apart  from  the^e  complioations,  the
man  was  prima  facie  disobeying  the  letter
of  the  law.  '  Shabbath,'  lol.  6,  a,  declares
that  if  unwittingly  a  burden  was  carried  on
the  sabbath,  the  transgressor  was  bound  to
bring  a  sin  offering ;  if  with  knowledge,  he
must  be  stoned.

Ver.  11. — And  he  answered  them,  He'  that
made  me  whole,  that  very  same  man  (eKcTros,
"even  he;"  cf.  for  this  use  of  the  pronoun,
ch.  i.  18,  33;  xiv.  21,  26,  etc.)  said  unto  me,
Take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk.  This  h  as  justifi-
cation for  him.  TheProphet-likeHealermust
know  what  was  right,  and  upon  his  shoulders
the  responsibility  must  rest.  There  was  a
rabbinic  saying,  which  the  cured  man  may
or  may  not  have  heard,  that  conferred  a  dis-
pensing power  upon  a  prophet ;  but  the  man
could  not  have  known  «ith  any  certainty
that  such  was  Christ's  ofBcial  character.  It
is,  moreover,  clear  that  he  did  not  know  at
this  moment  either  the  face,  the  voice,  or  the

'  Kal,  though  omitted  by  T.K.,  finds  place
in  X,  A,  B,  C*,  D,  and  many  other  manu-
scripts, and  numerous  versions,and  is  adupted
by  Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  R.T.

'  "0$  Si  is  adiled  by  R.T.  and  Tregelles,
with  A,  B ;  but  N,  C,  G,  K,  L,  A,  read  6
Si  direicpieri,  and  N*,  S  Si  oB-6KpivoT<i ;  and
Tischendorf  (8tli  edit.),  Alford,  Bale  Re.
visers,  omit  it,  with  T.B


OH.  V.  1—47.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


209


name.  M^er  hears  a  ring  of  deflanoe  in
these  words.  The  other  huts  we  obtain
touching  the  man's  character  do  not  sustain
such  an  idea.

Ver.  12.— [Then] '  they  asked  him,  Who  is
the  man  (contemptuous  use  of  &vB(>mros,  as
diatlnct  from  God's  great  messengers,  or  the
legislators  and  pirophets  of  the  olden  time,
who  have  laid  down  the  eternal  Law  of  God)
that  said  nnto  thee,  Take  up  [thy  bed],*  and
waUcI  "The  Jews"  here  ignore  the  work
of  healing  and  mercy,  and  seek  to  fasten  a
charge  of  overt  criminality  against  some
person  unknown.  A  technical  offence  has
been  done  against  the  honour  of  tiieir  sacred
place.  The  work  of  healing  is  an  insignifi-
cant compensation  for  such  a  disgrace.  They
would  be  even  with  the  heretical  healer.
Saving  men  by  questionable  methods  is  not
to  be  endured.  "  Who  is  the  man  ?  "  "  Men
and  women  lying  in  moral  helplessness,  not
helped  by  God's  priests  and  rulers,  are  now
standing  and  moving  in  the  strength  their
new  Teacher  has  given.  They  cannot  deny
it ;  but  can  they  prevent  it  ?  The  rabbinic
precept  which  he  has  crossed  shall  be  applied
to  stamp  out  his  work  and  kill  him"
(Watkins).

Ver.  13. — Now  he  that  was  healed — in  this
place  6  iaSfU  takes  the  place  of  rfSepmrfv-
fifpos  of  ver.  10.'  The  fundamental  idea  in
the  verb  espaiveia  is  to  render  kindly  and
useful,  even  noble,  service  to  another — to  do
the  work  and  act  the  part  of  a  e^piiTriov.  The
ministry  rendered  may  be  that  of  a  Sov\os  or
vm]pirr\s,  a  eaKTtwv  or  laTpis.  The  "  service  "
successfully  rendered  by  a  physician  is  more
often  expressed  by  iiofiat,  which  has  no  other
meaning  than  restoration  to  health,  and  its
use  here  may  imply  this  positive  fact  (see
the  use  of  both  words  in  Matt.  viii.  7,  8) —
-  knew  not  who  it  was  (was  at  that  time  and
for  a  whUe  ignorant  of  the  person  of  his
Healer):  for  Jesus  withdrew — after  the  heal-
ing. 'EKveia  i  s  "  to  nod  or  bend  the  head  and
avoid  a  blow,"  but  comes  to  mean  "  with-
draw "  or  "  retire."  Some  have  supposed
that,  like  ixviai,  to  "  escape  by  swimming
from  a  danger,"  i^evtva-e  means  here  "steal-
thily escaped  " — a  sense  that  it  has  in  Eur.,

•  Otv  is  omitted  in  E.T.,  on  the  authority
of  K,  B,  D,  although  L,  which  generally
follows  X,  here  sustains  A,  0,  r,  A,  etc.,  in
its  retention.  Tregelles  brackets ;  Tischen-
dorf  (8th  edit.)  omits.

'  Instead  of  Sipov  xal  irepiiraTii  imper.,  i<
reads  here,  and  in  vers.  11  and  12,  apai  xai
vcpnrcEreiv.  The  X,  B,  0,  L,  omit  riv  xpiP-
fiariv  <rov,  and  Bevised  Version  and  Ti-
iichendorf  (8th  edit.),  etc'.,  follow ;  TregeUe*
braokets.

3  Tisohendorf  here  reads,  with  D,  b,  1,  6

itms.


*  Hipp.,'  470,  and  elsewhere ;  but  (as  Grimm
says)  Jesus  did  not  withdraw  to  avoid  a
danger  which  had  not  yet  proclaimed  itself,
but  to  evade  the  acclamation  of  the  multi-
tude (see  also  Lange) — a  crowd  being  in  the
place  where  the  miracle  had  been  wrought.
Ver.  14. — After  these  things  (see  ver.  1).
Westcott  thinks  that  a  looser  connection  be-
tween the  foregoing  and  subsequent  events
is  denoted  by  ix,tr^  ratra  than  by  the  ex-
pression fierii  TovTo.  Consequently,  the  per-
secution referred  to  in  the  remainder  of  the
chnpter  may  have  occurred  several  days  after
the  foregoing  conversation.  Jesus  found  him '
in  the  temple.  Some  have  inferred  from  this,
the  recognition  by  the  healed  man  of  the
hand  of  God  in  his  cure,  and  his  desire  to
express  his  gratitude  in  the  house  of  God  by
some  appropriate  conduct  or  service;  and,
granting  this  explanation,  much  charm  is
observable  in  the  fact  that  Jesus  found  him,
and  found  him  there.  The  Lord's  habit  of
visiting  the  temple,  and  the  penetrating
glance  which  he  casts  over  all  the  frequenters
of  his  Father's  house  might  then  fairly  be  de-
duced from  the  pa  Bsage ;  but  the  motive  of  the
man  is  quite  conjectural.  From  the  words  of
Jesus  one  might  as  reasonably  suppose  that
the  man  was  treading  at  the  time  on  dan-
gerous moral  ground,  making  some  kind  of
gain  from  his  notoriety.  The  healing  was,
at  least,  imperfect  until  the  man  had  learned
its  spiritual  significance.  Every  gift  of  God
is  doubled  in  value  when  its  source  is  recog-
nized. God's  signature  on  his  own  mercies
gives  them  their  true  meaning.  Christ  found
the  healed  man  in  the  precincts  of  the
temple,  whether  his  motive  was  pure  or
mixed  in  going  thither.  And  he  said  unto
him,  Behold,  thou  art  made  whole  (bast  be-
come sound  and  healthy  throughout  thy
physical  system ;  cf.  for  the  form  of  this
description  of  his  case,  the  query,  ver.  6) :
no  longer  continue  to  sin.  The  form  of  the
sentence  points  to  something  special  and
persistent  in  this  man's  habits,  rather  than
to  the  general  corruption  of  human  nature.
Christ's  penetrating  glance  discovered  all  the
hidden  misery  and  bleeding  wound  and
putrefying  sore  of  the  man's  soul.  Apart
from  the  obliteration  of  the  consequences  of
his  bad  life,  and  without  a  clean  and  free
condition  of  things,  the  future  would  have
proved  hopeless,  and  deliverance  from  the
yoke  of  fear  and  concupiscence  impossible ;
but  now  this  new  chance  is  given.  He  was
made  whole,  bom  again  physically.  As  Naa-
mau's  flesh  became  like  that  of  a  little  child,
so  this  man — once  bent,  crippled,  distorted
by  his  self-indulgence,  and  now  made  whole
— is  to  "sin  no  longer."    It  would  not  be

'  K,  Syriao  (Guretonian),  lead  bere,  Thi>
TeSepmrfv/jL^vov  iliBtead  of  aiiro;'.

r


210


THifl  GOSPEL  ACOOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [ch.  v.  1— 47.


leasonable  to  oonolnde  from  this  that  Christ's
doctrine,  like  that  of  Job's  friends,  involved
the  indissoluble  connection  of  sin  with  sick-
ness, or  made  the  amount  of  pain  in  any  case
the  criterion  of  individual  sin.  Our  Lord
repudiates  this  position  in  ch.  ix.  3  and  in
Luke  xili.  1 — 5 ;  but  special  calamities  have
unquestionably  followed  wrong-doing,  and
can,  in  many  instances,  be  referred  to  ob-
vious transgressions,  to  specific  acts,  or  in-
veterate habits.  The  man's  own  conscience
would  respond  to  the  charge.  Jesus  added :
Lest  a  worse  thing  befall  thee.  There
is,  then,  something  worse  than  thirty-eight
years  of  apparently  hopeless  wretchedness  !
Jesus  said,  even  as  reported  by  the  apostle
of  love,  thii  moit  terrible  things  that  ever
fell  from  human  lips.  The  "sin  no  longer"
makes  it  seem  as  though  man's  will  could
accomplish  much  (cf.  Isa.  i.  16, "  Cease,"  etc.),
and  as  though  all  the  future  of  our  life  were,
so  far  as  human  responsibility  goes,  depen-
dent upon  ourselves.  We  are  to  act  as  if  it
were.  Let  it  be  noticed  that  he  who  said,
"  Sin  no  more,"  said,  "  Rise  up,  take  thy  bed,
and  walk."  Thfee  things,  which  appeared
utterly  beyond  the  power  of  the  impotent
man,  were,  nevertheless,  done  by  him  tlurough
the  grace  of  Christ,  which  he  then  and  there
appropriated.

Vers.  15,  16. — The  man  departed,  and
told*  the  Jews  that  it  was  Jesus  who  had
made  him  whole.  Therefore  the  Jews  per-
secuted Jesus,  (and  eotight  to  slay  him  '),  be-
cause he  was  doing  these  things  on  the  sab-
bath. The  motive  of  the  man  may  have  been
one  of  gratitude,  or  may  have  arisen  from
a  sense  of  duty,  seeing  that  he  had  not  an-
swered the  question  of  the  Jews,  and  liad
been  himself  charged  with  doing  the  unlaw-
ful thing  (Weiss).  He  may  have  sought  to
win  from  his  interlocutors  some  reverence  for
his  Healer ;  but  everything  points  the  other
way.  He  was  a  loveless  being ;  he  seems  to
have  been  nettled  by  the  charge  and  warning
he  had  just  received,  and  went  with  the
name  of  his  Benefactor  on  his  lips  tn  those
who  in  his  hearing  had  already  condemned
the  Saviour's  conduct.  The  connection  is
close  between  the  two  facts,  viz.  the  man's
eager  implicatiou  of  his  Healer  in  the  re-
sponsibility of  his  own  act,  which  was  said

'  R.T.  and  T.E.  read  ovijyyfiAe ;  there  are
several  variants.  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hort,  vrith  (<,  C,  L,  Syriac,
Coptic,  read  elirev.

'  The  authorities  on  which  Westcott  and
Hort,  B.T.,  Meyer,  Tregelles,  and  Tischen-
dorf (8th  edit.)  omit  the  clause,  Kal  i(nTouy
ainhy  dwoKTeiyai,  are  X,  B,  0,  L,  with  1,  33,
69,  and  certain  otiier  cursives,  Yulgate,  Cure-
tonian  Syriac,  Coptic,  etc.  The  phrase  wa»
probably  drawn  from  ver.  18


by  "the  Jews"  to  he  unlawful;  and  the
course  of  cruel  persecui.on  and  deadly  hate
which  was  there  and  then  inaugurated
against  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  The  six-
teenth verse  represents  a  course  of  conduct  on
the  part  of  the  Jews  which  led  to  opeo  con-
flict with  the  dominant  party.  Christ's  view
of  the  sabbath  lay,  indeed,  in  the  heart  of
the  old  Law,  and  was  even  recognized  by
some  of  the  wisest  and  noblest  spirits  of
Judaism ;  but  it  ran  counter  to  the  current
traditionary  interpretation,  and  cut  as  with
a  sharp  sabre  through  tlie  knots  and  en-
tanglement of  the  schools.  It  was  the  un-
pardonable sin  that  ideas  and  rules  which
sustained  and  fed  the  authority  of  the
hierarchical  party  should  be  swept  away  as
valueless  and  perilous  accumulations,  and
as  fungoid  encrustations  upon  the  Law  of
Moses.  Weiss  justly  remarks  that  there  is
no  colour  for  the  charge  that  the  fourth
evangelist  antedated  the  sabbath  contro-
versy, for  Mark  (iii.  6)  shows  that  it  had
already  commenced  in  Galilee.  Li  oh.  iv.
1 — 3  we  see  that  the  Pharisaic  party  dis-
trusted Jesus ;  here  we  see  that  the  authori-
ties are  in  arms  against  him.

Vers.  17— 47.— (3)  The  reply  of  Jenu  to
the  hostile  Jews.  The  discourse  of  the  Loi'd
Jesus,  in  reply  to  the  persecuting  spirit  and
deadly  purpose  of  the  Jewish  authorities,  is
DOW  given  at  length.  There  is  a  fulness  and
order  and  progress  observable  throughout  of
immense  importance  as  establishing  the
sacred  origin  of  the  words.  The  simplicity
of  the  style,  quite  Hebraic  in  its  freedom
from  conjunctive  forms,  discriminates  it
from  the  Philonio  presentation  of  certain
analogous  but  different  ideas.  If,  as  Godet
has  remarked,  we  venture  on  the  hazardous
speculation  that  the  prologue  to  the  Gospel
merely  places  before  us  the  Philonio  concep-
tion of  0EO2  and  AOrOS,  making  God  to
be  the  inconceivable,  unapproachable,  im-
personal Essence,  coming  into  activity  in
the  AOrOS,  who  is  self-dependent,  but  who
exliausts  all  the  vitality  and  activity  of  the
supreme  @eos,  we  may,  with  Beuss,  find  here
wliat  is  contrary  to  both  the  prologue  and  to
the  views  of  the  Divine  Being,  which  repu-
diate the  correlative  subordination  of  the
Son  of  God.  But  the  prologue  is  based  on
the  identity  of  nature  between  0EO2  and
AOrOS,  and  the  subordinate  and  yet  eternal
relation  of  the  latter  to  the  former.  There  is
an  infinite  fulness  of  being  and  activity  in  the
Father^  who  yet  is  and  loyes  And  energizes  In


cH.v,l— 47.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


211


all  things  through  the  AOrOS,  the  MONO-
TENHS.  It  appears  to  us  that  precisely  the
same  truth  is  taught  here,  but  it  is  taught  in
terms  derived  from  the  eonseiouaness  of  the
Logos  incarnate,  and  with  reference  to  a  part
only  of  the  operations  of  the  Logos,  viz.  in
the  providential,  redeeming,  and  quickening
work  cf  the  Son.  This  narrative  shows  how
actual  levelations  of  the  Logos  were  made
through  the  human  consciousness  of  him  who
was  lifted  up  into  the  being  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  who  became  the  Interpreter  of  the
Son  to  men.  Tlie  prologue  is  built  upon  the
discourse — is  an  inspired  and  transcendental
generalization  of  the  truths  here  and  else-
where announced.  The  discourse  is  the
basis  of  the  prologue  in  the  thought  of  the
evangelist.  The  originality  of  the  discourse
is  conspicuous.  Its  theme  shows  it  to  be
closely  allied  with  the  discussions  which
shortly  after  this  created  such  fierce  ani-
mosities in  the  synagogues  of  Galilee,  whither
his  Jerusalem  enemies  pursued  him.  We
shall  find  that  there  Jesus  declared  that
"  the  Son  of  man  was  Lord  of  the  sabbath,"
and  wag  competent  in  that  capacity  to  assert
what  was  contained  and  involved  in  the
sabbath.  On  another  occasion  he  vindicated
for  his  disciples  the  right  to  food  on  the
sabbath  (Mark  iL  23  —28),  (1)  on  the  historic
ground  tliat  the  royal  hero  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment was  at  liberty,  in  dire  emergency,  to
eat  the  priest's  shewbread,  which  narrow
rituHlism  would  have  refused  to  starving
laymen ;  (2)  that  his  Person  was  a  temple,
and  his  service  a  temple-service,  which  would
be  a  further  justification  of  the  conduct  of
the  disciples,  as  priests  in  the  temple,  in  their
submission  to  the  higher  law  of  duties,  '*  pro-
fane the  sabbath  and  are  blameless."  The
cures  he  persistently  wrought  on  the  sabbatli
were  justified  by  the  principle  that  it  is  law-
ful to  do  acts  of  kindness,  to  save  life,  to
release  the  sin-  and  Satan-bound  daughter  of
Abraham  on  the  sabbath;  and  that  such
sabbath-keeping  was  part  of  the  original
significance  of  the  day.  Here  the  Lord
takes  the  higher  ground  that  he  and  the
Father,  in  works  of  providence,  healing,
and  life-giving,  are  one.

Vers.  17,  18. — (a)  The  claim  of  tpecial
relation  with  the  Father,

Ver.  17. — But  Jesus  answered  them  (_hrf-
KfivnTo ;  here  and  ver,  19  are  the  only  places


where  the  author  uses  this  aorist,  Ky  Father
worketh  hitherto;   i.e.  until  now;  hag  not,
has    never,  ceased    from  working.      Soma
critics,  eager  for  disparaging  comment,  have
said    "this    is  point-blank  denial  of   the
sabbath-rest  of  the  Creator  as  exhibited  in
Gen.  i.,  ii.,  and  Exod.  xx.     But,  on  the  con-
trary, it  is  the  true  exposition  of  those  grand
utterances.      God  through  his  Logos,  tlia
Father  through  his  Son,  did  bring  his  strictly
creative  works  to  an  end  with  the  six  days ;
but  then  he  entered  on  the  seventh  day,  the
rest  of  his  preserving,  protective,  reproduo-
tive  energy ;  then  he  began  to  pursue  his
redeeming  and  quickening  operations  in  all
regions  of  his  dominion.  My  Father  worketh,
energizes,   until  now.     Ifis  "  rest "   is  an
infinite  activity  of  wisdom  and  power,  of
righteousness  and  mercy.   The  true  sabbath
is  this  rest  of  God,    Man  has  to  enter  into
this  rest,  and  co-operate  with  and  utterly
abandon  himself  to  the  will  of  God.  Sabbath-
keeping  is  the  great  symbol  of  such  entire
satisfaction  with  God.    The  activities  from
which  man  has  to  cease  on  the  holy  day  are
man's  own,  man's  self-centred  labours ;  but
lie,  too,  may  combine  the  highest  activity
with  profound  repose.    "  My  Father  worheth
until    now,  and   I  loork — I,  who  am  his
Instrument,  his  Word,  his  Manifestation,  his
Messenger,  abstaining  from  all  mere  self-
originated,  self-poised,  self-centering  toil,  I
work  with  him,  for  him.    I  work  obviously
and  visibly  that  you  may  see  for  yourselves
what  he  hag  ever  been  doing  silently  and
unobserved."   Philo  had  said  ('  Leg.  AH.,'  i.
3)   "that  God  never  ceases  to  create,  nor
takes  a  holiday  from  his  works ; "  and  the
author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (iv.)
had  grasped,  as  an  echo  of  Christ's  own
teaching,  the    perpetuity    of   Divine    rest
through  all  the  ages  of  work ;  but  the  naked
thought  here  soars  far  above  them  both.
The  dawning  of  every  day,  the  opening  of
the  flowers,  the  flowing  of  the  rivers,  the
sustenance  of  vegetable,  animal,  and  human
life,  reveal  through  every  moment  of  the
agelong  sabbath-rest,  and  on  every  sabbath-
day,  his  intense  and  constant  activity.

Ver.  18. — On  this  account  (the  Si4  toCto
is  still  further  defined  by  the  ifri)  therefore
the  Jews  were  seeking  the  more  QmWov,
i.e.  more  than  they  had  sought  before  he
made  use  of  this  sublime  expression)  to  slay
him,  because  not  only  in  their  opinion,  though
very  falsely,  he  was  violating  (i.e.  dissolving
the  authority  of)  the  sabbath.  Jesus  was
actually  placing  the  sabbatic  law  where  it
has  remained  ever  since,  giving  it  sanctions,
beauty,  and  hold  on  conscience  it  hail  never
kudwn  before.  He  was  abrogating  the  petty
restrictions  and  abolishing  the  unspiritual
somnolence  by  which  it  htwi  been  character-
ized an4  misunderstood.     But  there  wmi


212


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHU.      [ch.  v.  1—47


another  and  more  Btaggering  charge  which
they  were  not  at  that  moment  able  to  condone.
They  sought  the  more  to  slay  him  because  he
was  oallmg  God  his  own  (fSiox)  Father,
making  himself  equal  to,  on  a  level  with,  Ood.
He  did  use  the  pliraae,  "  my  Father,"  with
a  marked  emphatiis.  He  did  not  say,  "  our
Father, or  your  Father;"  he  assumed  a  unique
relation  to  the  Father.  The  inmost  centre
of  the  Divine  consciousness  in  him  thrilled
through  the  human.  Though  he  did  not
wear  now  the  "  form  of  God,"  but  the  "  form
of  the  Servant,"  yet  the  Servant  knew  that
he  was  Son  and  Lord  of  all.  The  Divine
Personality  which  had  always  wrought  out
the  eternal  counsels  of  the  Father's  will  was
working  now  on  identical  and  parallel  lines
in  the  human  sphere.  There  were  senses
in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  own  and
only  begotten  Son  of  God.  This  was  a  hard
saying.  This  placing  of  himself  on  a  level
with  God  was  the  blasphemy  which  the
Jews  resented.  Jesus  knew  what  lie  said,
and  saw  the  impression  his  words  produced,
and  took  no  steps  to  correct  it.  Two  classes
of  result  naturally  followed.  Some  said,
"  He  blasphemeth,'  "  He  hath  a  devil,"  and
the  high  priest  subsequently,  in  reply  to  a
similar  utterance  of  the  Lord,  rent  his  clothes ;
but  other  some  felt  concerning  him  that  the
relation  between  him  and  the  Father  was,
se  far  as  they  linew,  absolutely  unique.  The
author  of  this  Gospel  exclaimed,  "He  who
'  was  with  God  and  was  God '  has  been
manifested  in  the  flesh,  and  we  saw  his
glory,  the  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the
Father."

Vers.  19 — 29.— (6)  Christ  vindicated  M»
equality  with  the  Father.

Ver.  19,  20a. — (a)  Se  declares  himself  to
be  "  the  Son."

Ver.  19. — Jesus  therefore  answered  and
said  to  them;  i.e.  replied  to  their  secret
thoughts,  and  to  the  sentiments  of  animosity
and  hostility  which  they  did  not  conceal.  He
spake  in  language  of  extraordinary  solemnity
and  august  claim.  The  Verily,  verily,  with
which  he  prefaced  the  opening  sentence,
and  which  he  repeated  (of.  vers.  24,  25,  as  in
ch.  iii.  3  and  elsewhere)  on  subsequent  occa-
sions, denoted  the  high  ground  of,  authorita-
tive revelation  on  which  he  took  his  stand.
He  proceeded,  without  a  break  or  interrup-
tion, to  assert,  on  the  authority  of  his  own
consciousness,  the  true  relation  subsisting
between  the  Son  and  the  Father — the  deep,
eternal,  sacred  link  between  them;  in  essence
and  in  affection,  in  work  and  function  ;  and
gave  several  illustrations  of  these  matters,
the  verifioation  of  which  was  not  beyond  the
capacity  of  his  hearers.  These  he  made
the  basis  of  the  argument  of  ver.  23,  "  that
all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as
tiiey  honour  the  Father,"     What  did  Do


wish  "the  Jews"  to  understand  by  "the
Sou  "  ?  Did  he  identify  himself  with  the
Son  of  whom  he  here  speaks  ?  Surely  this
is  unquestionably  the  case,  for  the  "  answer  "
here  given  is  one  addressed  to  those  who
were  seeking  to  slay  him  because  he  claimed
for  himself  that  God  was  "  his  own  Father."
He  had  said, "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,
and  I  work."  He  justified  the  true  reverence
he  felt  for  the  Father  when  using  this
language,  by  desciibing  in  various  ways
tho  functions,  jirivileges,  and  work  of  "  the
Sou."  Is  "the  Son,"  however,  here  the
Paternal  Son,  the  Logos,  before  and  indepen-
dently of  his  incaination ?  and  are  the
doctrines  here  announced  an  appeal  to  a
pre-existing  belief  in  such  a  sonship  on  the
part  of  his  enemies,  so  that  he  is  dealing,
at  least  from  vers.  19 — 23,  with  the  internal
relations  of  the  Godhead  t  The  references
to  the  recent  epyov,  and  the  moral  effects
which  are  to  be  produced  upon  his  hearers
by  further  activity,  make  this  view  doubtfuL
Does  he  here  speak  simply  of  "  the  Son  of
man "  in  his  purely  dependent,  servile
capacity,  and  earthly  manifestation?  (Wat-
kins).  We  think  not;  for  the  deeds  and
functions  of  "the  Son"  are  here  so  lofty
and  far-reaching  that  this  interpretation  is
inadmissible.  Therefore  we  conclude,  with
Meyer  and  others,  that  by  "  the  Son  "  he  did
mean  "  the  whole  subject,  the  God-Man,  the
incarnate  Logos,  in  whom  the  self-determi-
nation of  action  independently  of  the  Father
cannot  find  place."  This  view  of  "  the  Son  "
involves  the  continuity  of  the  Logos-con-
sciousness, and  not  its  obliteration ;  nor  is
this  (as  Eeuss  urges,  and  even  Godet  appears
in  part  to  ooncode)  incompatible  with  the
Logos-doctrine  of  the  prologue.  The  Son
is  not  able  to  do  anything  from  himself,
in  the  great  work  of  hraling,  life-giving,  and
redemption,  except  that  which  he  seeth
the  Father  doing.  The  Logos  made  flesh,
the  Son  who  has  taken  humanity  up  into
his  own  eternal  being,  is  ever  in  full  con-
templation of  the  Father's  activity.  He  is
in  intimate  and  continuous  and  affectionate
relations  with  the  Father,  who  in  this
capacity  has  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  world's
Saviour.  He  sees  the  Father's  healing
grnce  and  omnipresent  energy  and  ceaseless
activity  in  regions  where  "  the  Jews  "  fail
to  discern  them.  The  incarnate  Son  does
not  set  up  a  rival  throne  or  authority.  He
moves,  lives,  has  his  being,  from  the  Father
and  not  from  himself.

Ver.  20. — For— the  Lord  introduces  a
reason,  states  a  fact,  which  is  calculated  to
muke  this  vision  of  the  Father's  activity
apprehensible  to  his  hearers — the  Father
loveth  ((/>i\e7  expresses  strong  personal,
natural  affection,  amat  rather  than  the
I  ^yan-y  or  diligit  of   many  other  passages,


oa.T.1— 47.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


21S


See  notes,  oh.  xxi.  15  and  iii.  35) '  the  Son,
and  he  loveth  him  to  such  an  extent  that
he  showeth  him,  making  it  therefore  possible
for  him  "to  see" — all  things  that  himself
doeth.  The  Son  has  been  from  eternity  and
is  now,  notwithstanding  his  incarnate  lowli-
ness, the  continuous  Spectator  of  all  the
Father's  doing  in  all  hearts  and  lives,  in
all  places  of  his  dominion.  "  O  righteous
Father,  the  world  hath 'not  known  thee :  but
I  have  known  thee."  So  stupendous  a  claim
was  never  exceeded  or  transcended.  "All
tliingsthat  himself  doeth,"  shown  and  visible
to  One  walking  this  world.  The  mind  either
rebels  against  or  succumbs  before  such
sublime  and  all-embracing  knowledge.  No
neutrality  is  possible.  If  these  were  his
words,  then  there  is  justification  for  the
generalizations  of  the  prologue.

Vers.  206— 29.— (/3)  The  greater  work$.

Ver.  206, — And  greater  works  than  these
works  of  healing  will  he  show  him.  Here
the  term  ^pya  is  used  for  the  first  time
in  this  Gospel.  It  becomes  the  recognized
phrase  by  which  Christ  describes  what  the
world  regards  as  "signs  and  wonders,"
"  miracles "  of  power  or  grace ;  but  it
actually  connotes  the  simple  activity  of
God,  tlie  normal  operation  of  his  hand.
Greater  manifestations  than  physical  quick-
ening or  revival,  namely,  the  mighty  changes
of  thought  and  life,  the  gifts  of  grace  and
peace,  eternal  life  itself,  are  evermore  pro-
ceeding. The  Father  will  so  show  them
that  the  Son  will  see  and  do  them,  and  so
bring  them  by  revelation  to  your  conscious-
ness that  ye  may  marvel.  Christ  will  not
say  here  that  ye  may  believe,  but  that  ye
may  look  on  confounded  and  astonished.
This  was  the  first  effect  of  Christ's  work —
Christ's  revelation  of  the  Father's  heart,
Christ's  demonstration  of  the  Father's  near-
ness and  character.  Westcott  quotes  the
apocryphal  saying  of  our  Lord  preserved  by
Clement  of  Alexandria,  'Str.,'  ii.  9.  45,  "He
that  wonders  shall  reign,  and  he  that  reigns
shaU  rest."  The  wonders  of  grace  will  never

'  The  first  word,  (t>i\eTi>,  occurs  thirteen
times  in  this  Gospel — once  of  the  Father's
love  to  the  Son  (here),  and  of  his  love  to
those  that  love  the  Son  (ch.  xvi,  27) ;  three
times  of  the  love  of  Jesus  to  his  disciples
(eh.  xi.  3,  36;  xx,  2);  six  times  of  their
love  to  him  (oh,  xvi.  27;  xxi.  15,  16,  17,
twice) ;  and  twice  in  other  connections  (ch,
xii.  25 ;  xv.  19).  It  does  not  occm-  in  the
Epistles.  'Ayairav  occurs  thirty-seven  times
in  the  Gospels,  thirty  times  in  the  Epistles,
to  denote  all  these  relations,  but  the  love
indicated  by  this  word  is  that  which  is
generated  by  respect,  confidence,  and  admi-
ration (Tittmann,  'Syn.  in  N.T.-;'  Trsneh,
•S7n.ofGk.Teiit'>


be  exhausted.  New  combinationa,  new  trans-
formations, new  discoveries,  new  insight  into
the  eternal  love,  will  he  effected  by  him  whom
God  hath  sent,  whom  the  Father  hath  sancti-
fied and  sent  into  the  world  (but  see  ver.  28).

Vers.  21 — 26. — Greater  works:  (i,)  the
resurrection  of  the  dead.

Ver,  21. — For  (yap  introduces  an  illus-
tration, a  proof  of  the  previous  assertion,
viz.  that  the  eternal  love  of  the  Son  would
issue  in  such  new  marvels)  as  the  Father
raiseth  the  dead,  and  quickeneth  them ;  even
so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will.  This
is  the  most  exhaustive  expression  of  the
Father's  love  and  revelation  to  the  Son.
This  thing  the  Sou  sees,  and  this  same
thing  he  will  do,  whether  these  Jews
attempt  to  put  any  arrest  upon  his  will  or
not.  The  majority  of  commentators  regard
vers.  21 — 27  as  descriptive  of  the  moral  and
spiritual  resurrection  of  dead  souls,  and
hold  that  a  transition  is  made  in  vers.  28,
29  to  the  resurrection  of  dead  bodies  and
the  final  consummation.  Tliere  are  some,
however,  who  regard  the  whole  passage —
even  vers.  28,  29— as  referring,  with  the
previous  verses,  to  moral  resurrection,  al-
though the  words,  "in  their  tombs"  (ev
fLVTifieloia'),  are  there  added  to  give  distinct-
ness and  explicitness  to  that  future  resur-
rection;  and  though  "now  is"  of  ver.  25
is  not  there  predicated  or  repeated.  Others
(with  many  of  the  older  expositors)  refer
the  entire  passage  to  the  final  resurrection,
wliich,  however,  is  incompatible  with  ver.
20  and  with  the  "now  is"  of  ver.  25.
Others,  again,  see  in  ver.  21,  in  iyeipet  and
iao-rroiu,  the  whole  process  of  resurrection
and  renewal,  both  physical  and  moral,
bodily  and  spiritual.  They  suppose  that  in
ver.  25  Christ  refers  first  to  the  spiritual
renovation,  to  he  afiirmed  and  consummated
in  the  universal  resurrection  and  judgment
of  the  last  day.  The  generality  of  the
terms  eyeipn  and  ^aoiroiel,  attributed  to  the
Father,  makes  it  possible  that  the  Lord
was  referring  to  the  numerous  events  of
uplifting  from  the  pit,  from  the  lowest
theSl,  which  formed  the  staple  religious
nntrition  of  the  Jewish  race.  The  history
of  Divine  revelation  is  one  lengthened
series  of  interpositions  and  deliverances,  of
resurrections  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and
of  the  theocracy  from  bondage,  exile,  and
spiiitual  and  civil  death,  and  of  references
to  the  wonderful  transformations  of  saints
and  prophets  and  kings  from  the  depths  of
despair  to  the  light  of  life  and  Divine
favour.  Ezekiel  (xxxvii.)  had  likened
the  most  memorable  of  these  resurrections
to  the  uprising  of  a  huge  army  from  a
Talley  of  vision,  strown  with  the  dry  bones
of  both  houses  of  Israel.  "  So  alio,"  says
Jesua,  "the   Son   quickeneth,"   {Minding


214


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  v.  1—47.


under  this  term,  it  may  be,  the  physical
healing  which  is  often  the  precursor  and
condition  of  spiritual  awnkening  and  moral
health  and  vigour.  The  Son,  the  incarnate
Logos,  revealing  himself  on  earth,  both  as
Logos  and  Son  of  man,  it  now  quickening
after  the  tame  fashion  whom  he  will.  The
will  of  Christ  is  in  such  entire  harmony
with  the  Father's  will  that  there  is  no
rivalry  here.  The  will  of  the  Son  is  In
spontaneous  accord  with  the  Divine  purpose
of  resurrection  and  quickening.  He  is
already  doing  thus  here  on  earth,  as  the
great  organ  of  the  Father,  that  which
makes  his  will  the  revelation  of  the  Father.
There  is  no  arbitrary  decree,  such  as  Calvin
found  here,  nor  such  as  Keuss  insists  upon.
The  emphasis  is  simply  upon  the  subject  of
the  verb  fleXei;  and  we  have  in  the  ex-
pression a  vindication  of  the  nineteenth
verse,  "  The  Son  doeth  that  which  he  sees
the  Father  doing."  His  own  6e\r|^o  being
the  origin  and  revealed  centre  on  earth  of
Divine  manifestations.

Ver.  22. — That  ogs  $e\ei  is  the  point  of
connection  with  what  follows,  and  that  the
Son  quickeueth  whom  he  willeth,  is  more
clear,  seeing  that  (7ap)the  Father  even  judges
no  man ;  judges  no  man  apart  from  the  Son.
"  Pater  non  judioat  solus  neo  sine  filio,
jadicat  tamen  (ver.  45 ;  Acts  xvii.  31 ;  Bom.
jit.  6)"  (Bengel).  The  word  icpivei  does
not  mean  exclusively  either  "  condemn  "  or
**  acquit,"  but  the  exercise  of  judicial  func-
tions whch  will  either  acquit  or  condemn.
As  in  ch.iii.  17,  the  "condemnation"  is  rather
inferred  than  asserted.  Moreover,  we  are
there  told  that  the  Son  was  not  sent  into
the  world  for  the  purpose  of  judgment,  but
for  the  larger  purposes  of  salvation,  and  "  to
give  eternal  life."  Nevertheless,  "  life  "  to
some  is  judgment  to  others,  and  judgment
even  unto  death  is  the  obverse  of  the  gift  of
life  when  the  conditions  of  life  are  not
found.  In  ch.  i.  39  Christ  declares  that
one  solemn  consequence  of  his  coming  was
fis  Kplfia,  "  unto  judgment " — to  reveal  the
final  decisions  of  the  Judge.  How,  then,
shall  we  reconcile  these  apparently  incon-
gruous statements  ?  Judgment  unquestion-
ably results  from  the  rejection  of  the  proffer
of  mercy.  The  judgment  rests  on  those
who  say,  "  We  see."  Tlieir  sin  remaineth.
Those  who  are  not  willing  to  be  made
whole  remain  unhealed.  Those  who  love
darkness  rather  than  light  abide  in  the
darkness.  This  is  the  judgment,  but  this
judicial  process  was  (not  the  end,  but)  the
consequence  of  his  mission.  The  Father's
ordinary  providence,  which  is  always  passing
judgment  upon  the  lives  of  men,  is  now
placed  in  the  hands  of  "  the  Son."  Eowheit
he  hath  giTen  the  whole  judgment — t.e.  the
judgment  in  all  iU  pait»— to  the  Son.    He


has  made  the  entire  juridical  process  which
brings  to  light  tlie  essential  tendencies  of
human  hearts,  issue  from  the  reception  given
by  man  to  the  Son.  The  whole  question  of
right  against  wrong,  of  life  versus  death,
acquittal  against  condemnation,  is  deter*
mined  by  the  attitude  of  men  towards  the
Son.  In  many  passages  this  plenipoten-
tiary endowment  of  "the  Son"  with  func-
tions, powers,  authorities,  is  expressed  by
this  same  word  (Se'Sw/ce).  "  he  hath  given  "
(ver.  36 ;  ch.  iii.  35 ;  vi.  37,  39 ;  x.  29 ;
xvii.  2,  4).  Meyer  limits  the  meaning  of
Kpivei  to  "  condemnation,"  and  Stier  includes
in  it  the  separation  of  sin  from  the  life  of  be-
lievers ;  but  surely  the  judgment  of  the  world
is  effected  by  the  light  that  shines  upon  it,
and  the  essence  of  the  judgment  (itpfins)  is
thediscriminationwhiohinfallibly  follows  the
revelation  of  the  Father  through  the  Son.

Ver.  23. — The  purpose  of  the  entire  com-
mission of  judgment  to  the  Son,  a  bestow-
ment  which  illustrates  tlie  quickening  re-
sults that  he  (who  does  the  will  of  the
Father)  wills  to  effect,  is  now  gathered  to
a  lofty  climax,  abundantly  vindicating  the
right  he  had  claimed  to  call  God  his  own
Father.  It  is  as  follows,  in  order  that
all  may  honooi  the  Son.  Iiinaviv,  not  lepo-
iTKvvuffai  ("  honour,"  not  "  worship  "),  is  the
word  used;  but  seeing  that  the  identical
sentiment  of  reverence  due  to  the  Supreme
Being,  to  the  Father,  is  that  which  is  here
said  to  be  due  to  the  Son,  and  is  here  declared
to  be  the  reason  why  all  judgment  is  entrusted
to  the  issues  of  his  will, — we  are  at  a  los«
to  know  how  loftier  attributes  oould  be
ascribed  to  the  Son.  It  is  surprising  that
Weiss  should  declare  it  "  impossible  to  iind
■any  statements  here  as  to  the  metaphysical
unity  and  equality  of  the  Son  and  the
Father,  although'  current  apologetics  be-
lieve it  has  succeeded  in  doing  so  "  ('  Life
of  Christ,'  vol.  ii.  326,  note).  Luthardt  asks,
"  What  other  form  of  ti;u^  than  that  which
calls  him  '  Lord  and  God '  shall  belief  now
assume,  than  that  which  the  Christian
Church  cherishes  toward  Jesus?"  Thoma
points  to  Eph.  ii.  1^ ;  Col.  ii.  11 — 13,  and
other  great  parallels  in  the  New  Testament.
We  gladly  accept  them,  not  as  proof  that  the
Jobannist  framed  Christ's  discourse  from
them,  but  as  proof  that  the  ideas  of  St.  Paul
were  not  originated  by  him,  but  came  from
the  direct  assertions  of  Christ,  of  which  we
have  the  historic  trace.

Ver.  24. — In  this  verse  the  discourse
tnrns  from  the  relations  between  the  Father
and  the  Son,  to  deal  with  the  relations  of
the  living  Christ  (the  "  I,"  who  is  speaking
throughout)  with  men.  In  vers.  21 — 23,
indeed  vers.  19 — ^23,  the  Lord  had  been
■peaking  prominently  of  the  ideal  sonship,
of  "the  San"  on  the  Divine  nde  of  )^|


OH.T.  1—47.1       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


216


eonBcioasness.  The  use  of  the  first  person,
which  is  here  Teeumed,  calls  more  express
attention  to  the  cimsciousness  of  his  human
manifestation,  which  again  reaches  its
climax  in  ver.  27.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto
you — ^I,  whose  voice  you  now  hear,  whom
you  are  misunrlerBtanding,  rejecting,  and
seeking  to  slay.  I  say  with  most  solemn
emphasis— He  that  heareth  my  word — this
term,  aKoieiv,  suggests  moral  as  well  as
physical  hearing,  and  means  whosoever
allows  my  thougiit  to  penetrate  his  nature,
hears  and  understands,  hears  and  acts
accordingly  (of.  Matt.  xi.  15 ;  xlii.  9,  18 ;
Rev.  ii.  7, 17 ;  iii.  22)— a,ni further  believeth
him  that  sent  me ;  believeth  i.e.  that  he  has
home  and  is  continually  bearing  true  wit-
ness concerning  me.  Theie  is  a  different
meaning  conveyed  by  ma-Teieiv,  with  the
simple  dative,  and  Trurreieii'  ets  riva,  or  iitX
Tivtf  or  ^ttI  Tivot  and  again  ^i'  nvix  these
prepositions  convey  a  gradually  deepening
sense  of  intercommunion  and  dependence ;
the  simple  accusative  is  found  in  1  Cor.
ix.  17;  EUioott  on  1  Tim.  i.  16).  To
believe  on  a  person,  or  in  one,  conveys  a
different  idea  from  believing  that  person
with  regard  to  any  special  assertion  he  may
make.  Here  the  belief  of  God  has  em-
phatic reference  to  the  testimony  the  Father
is  bearing  to  the  claims  of  Jesus.  Such  a
hearer,  such  a  believer,  hath  eternal  life;
even  here  he  has  entered  into  the  "  eternal
now ; "  on  earth  he  is  in  possession  of  the
blessed  consummation.  Such  belief  in  words
authenticated  by  the  Father's  commission  is
eternal  life  (of.  oh.  xvii.  3).  It  lifts  a  man
out  of  the  reach  of  corruption  and  condem-
nation, it  ushers  him  into  eternity,  it  is  an
eternal  blessedness  in  itself;  and  he  oometh
not  to  judgment,  hut  has  passed  from  the
death  into  the  life.  He  is  already  trans-
lated from  the  death-state  to  the  renewed,
quickened  state.  The  decision  and  dis-
crimination between  him  and  the  world
have  taken  jilaoe.  The  judgment  is  over,
the  books  are  closed,  the  condemnation  is
no  longer  possible.  He  will  not  perish,  he
has  eternal  life.  "The  believer  is  free
from  the  judgment  which  executes  itself  in
the  exclusion  inflicted  on  the  unbeliever,  by
the  revelation  of  Jesus  as  the  Light,  because
he  is  already  in  possession  of  the  saving
blessing"  (Lnthardt).  "Judgment,  being
completed,  does  not  require  repetition"
(Godet).  "  When  that  confidence  in  Christ
has  illumined  the  heart  wherein  we  recog-
nize that  we  have  been  verily  accepted,
listened  to,  ruled,  and  defended  by  God,
peace  follows,  and  high  joyfnlness,  which  is
the  realization  of  eternal  life,  and  which
covers  the  sins  that  erewhile  had  clung  to
om  weakness  "  (Melancthon),  In  this  life
of  faith  "  we  taste  the  powen  of  th«  world


to  come,"  "onr  citizenship  is  in  heaven."
"  This  eternal  life  is  a  veritable  resurrection
of  the  dead  "  (Augustine).

Ver.  25. — Once  more  the  solemn  assevera-
tion, Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  is  re-
peated, when  onr  Lord  still  further  empha-
sized the  authority  of  his  own  word,  the
Father's  confirmation  of  its  accuracy,  and
the  Divine  signature  and  testimony  to  ita
power.  The  hour  is  ooming,  and  now  is.
Tliere  will  be  more  wonderful  attestations  to
the  truth  than  any  which  as  yet  have  broken
the  silence  of  the  grave.  Not  only  will  the
physically  dead  rise  from  their  bier  or  their
grave  in  the  fulness  and  strength  of  resumed
life,  but  the  spiritually  dead  in  vast  multi-
tudes will  pass  from  death  into  eternal  life,
will  know  that  the  bitterness  of  death  is
over,  and  that  there  shall  be  no  more  con-
demnation for  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  was,
when  Jesus  spake,  about  to  convict  the  world
of  sin,  and  to  unveil  the  glory  of  Christ  to
the  eye  of  faith.  Pentecost  would  confirm
the  word  of  Jesus,  for  the  Spirit  will  bear
witness  to  the  reality  of  the  risen  Lord.  But
whereas  that  hour  was  only  "  coming,"  that
marvellous  day  had  yet  to  dawn  upon  the
world,  Jesus  added  it  now  it — while  I  am
speaking  the  reality  of  this  vast  spiritual
change  is  taking  place.  There  are  proofs
enough  already.  "Now,"  already,  at  this
very  moment,  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voioe
of  the  Son  of  Ood.  The  spiritually  dead
shall  be  disturbed  in  their  slumber  and
roused  from  their  indifference,  be  made  to
know  that  the  summons  of  supreme  power
and  autliority  is  addressed  to  them.  Em-
phasis is  laid  upon  the  Divine  force  which
is  at  work  upon  heart  and  conscience.  "  The
Son  of  God,"  not "  a  son  of  man  "  merely,  is
uttering  his  voice.  And  they  that  have
heard — accepted  the  summons,  "heard  the
word,"  and  believed,  not  merely  him  that
sent  me  (the  teaching  of  ver.  24),  but  that
he  who  has  been  sent  is  none  other  than
the  "  Son  of  God  " — these,  said  Christ,  shall
live.  The  form  of  the  expression  dKoirtwres
can  only  designate  those  who  give  ear,  and
by  this  the  literal  resurrection  of  all  the
dead  is  excluded.'  The  teaching  of  this
verse  reasserts  the  teaching  of  ver.  24,  and
adds  to  it,  and  clothes  the  truth  in  the
imagery  of  the  general  resurrection.  The
awful  suggestion  is  involved  that  many  of
theee  dead  ones  will  hear  the  voice  of  the
Son  of  God,  and  not  give  heed  to  it  Heng-
stenberg  endeavours  to  overthrow  this  gene-

'  •'  For  this  double  meaning  of  dKoiew  In
one  sentence,  see  Plato, '  Legg.,'  p.  712  B,  Beiv
.  .  .  hriKdKii)}ieQa  d  Se  oucoiffeie  re  Kal  oKoitras
(cum  exaudiveriC)  .  ,  .  ^Adot;  cf.  also  the
proverbial  expression,  'tixoioma  fii)  iKoittr"
(Meyer).


216


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [ch.  ▼.  1— 47,


ral  interpretntion  of  the  verse,  making  it
equivalent  to  vers.  27,  28  rather  tlian  an
expausion  of  ver.  24.  The  "  now  is,"  accord-
ing to  him,  covers  the  whole  period  to  the
second  advent,  and  the  future  iKoiaovrai
points  to  a  future  epoch  in  the  Spa.  But
the  emphatic  omission  of  the  vvv  eo-n  in  the
later  and  more  explicit  statement  is  against
such  a  view,  and  the  aKovfrovrai  is  best  ex^
plained  by  its  adaptation  to  the  whole  clause.
"  The  hour  is  coming  "  as  well  as  "  now  is."
The  QI\aovTai,  "  sliall  live,"  rather  than  shall
be  "  made  alive,"  is  far  more  applicable  to
the  resurrection  of  dead  souls  than  of  de-
funct bodies.  It  is  equivalent  to  "have
eternal  life  "  of  the  previous  verses.

Ver.  26. — This  verse,  introduced  by  yap,
shows  that  the  statement  about  to  follow
will  sustain  some  portion  of  the  previous
one.  Which  portion?  As  it  seems  to  me,
the  coming  clause  justifies  the  alteration  of
the  term  '■  tlie  Son  "  into  "  the  Son  of  God ; "
and  declares,  more  fully  than  any  other  pas-
sage in  the  New  Testament,  the  lofty  and
unique  character  of  the  Sonship  which  he
claimed.  For  even  as  the  Father  hath  life
in  himself — the  sublime  assumption  of  the
self-existence  and  eternal  being  of  the
Father,  the  absolute  Possessor  nf  life  per
se,  the  Source  ultimate  and  eflScieut  of  all
that  is  connoted  by  life,  the  eternal  Fountain
of  life — in  like  manner  also  he  gave  to  the
Sou  to  have  life  in  himself.  "  He  generated,"
as  Augustine  has  it,  "  such  a  Son  who  should
have  life  in  himself,  not  as  a  participator  in
life,  but  one  who  should  he  as  he  himself  is
— Life  itself."  It  is  the  hand  fide  expression
of  community  of  nature,  attribute,  quality,
and  possession  of  Godhead.  In  virtue  of
this  utterance,  the  evangelist,  learning  from
the  consciousness  of  Christ  through  long
years  of  meditation,  under  the  power  of  the
Spirit,  eventually  formulated  the  doctrine
of  the  prologue,  "  In  him  was  life."  "  The
Son,"  or  the  Qod-Man,  is,  so  far  as  this
Sonship  is  concerned,  the  veritable  Son  of
God  with  such  a  fulness  of  life-power  and
such  a  fountain  of  life  flowing  from  him,
that  his  voice  is  the  voice  of  the  Eternal
Son.  This  is  the  primary  meaning,  though
since  the  Lord  returned  to  Lis  use  of  the
word  "the  Son,"  and  since  the  word  "  gave"
is  also  employed  to  denote  the  stupen-
dous conception,  there  is  also  involved  in
it  the  declaration  that  the  Goil.-Man,  see-
ing he  is  both  Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man,
is  endowed  with  all  the  functions  of  both.
In  his  incarnation  he  has  not  lost  the  in-
finite fulness  of  life-givina;  power.  "He
quickeneth  whom  he  will,"  having  life  in
liimself.  His  voice  is  the  voice  of  the  Son
of  God.  The  glory  of  the  Word  who  became
flesh  was  the  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten.
The  part  which  this  great  passage  took  in


the  Arian  controversy  is  well  known  (see
Athanasius, '  Discourses  against  Ariang,'  iiL
3,  translated  by  J.  H.  Newman).  Archdeti-
con  Watkins  emphasizes  the  position  tha«
the  Lord  here  speaks  of  "life  in  himself,"
which  was  given  to  the  Son  (God-Man)  in
virtue  of,  and  as  the  reward  of  his  sacrificial
work.  He  point's  to  Phil.  ii.  6,  etc.  But
Jesus  here  speaks  of  a  gift  already  made.

Vers.  27—29. — (ii.)  Second  "  greater  work  "
—judgment  of  the  world.

Ver.  27. — And  he  gave  him  (i.e.  the  Son,
the  God-JUo»)  authority  to  execute  judgment,'
hecanae  he  is  Son  of  man.  He  has  vindicated
his  power  to  confer  life  upon  the  dead  by
asserting  the  possession  by  "  the  Son  "  of  the
Divine  Sonship.  He  now  adds,  so  far  as  the
relation  to  man  is  concerned,  his  fitness  and
authority  to  administer  justice,  to  preside
over  the  entire  juridical  process,  to  lift  the
scales,  to  determine  the  destiny  of  the  human
race.  The  fitness  is  seen  in  this,  that  he,
"  the  Son,"  is  "  the  Son  of  man."  The  one
term,  "  the  Son,"  entirely  covers  the  twofold
Sonship.  The  proof  of  his  humanity  is  as-
sumed to  be  complete.  The  fact  of  it  is  the
ground  that  he  who  knows  what  is  in  man
should  be  the  Judge  of  men.  By  personal  ex-
perience of  man's  temptations  and  frailties;
by  knowing  every  palliation  of  our  sins,  every
extenuation  of  our  failures,  every  aggravation
of  our  weakness ;  by  gazing  through  human
eyes  with  human  consciousness  upon  our
mysterious  destiny,  he  is  competent  to  judge ;
whereas  by  being  Son  of  God  as  well  as
Son  of  man,  he  is  entrusted  with  power  to
execute  the  judgment  of  the  Eternal.  The
principle  involved  is  based  upon  perfect
justice.  The  honour  thus  conferred  on  the
God-Man  is  infinite,  the  consolation  thus
held  out  to  man  unspeakable.  We  are  being
judged  by  Christ,  not  by  impersonal  law.
The  entire  incidence  upon  every  individual
of  the  Law  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Redeemer.
The  Saviour,  the  Life-giver,  the  Voice  which
quickens  tlie  dead,  assigns  the  judgment.
We  must  be  careful,  in  any  fnferenoe  we
draw  from  this  grand  utterance,  to  avoid  all
suspicion  of  schism  or  rivalry  between  the
Father  and  the  Son,  The  Son  is  not  more
merciful  than  the  Father.    For  the  Father

•  The  Kol  before  Kpiffiv  is  omitted  by  E.T.
and  Westcott  and  Hort,  Tisohendorf  (8th
edit.),  Alford,  on  the  authority  of  N",  A,  B,  L,
Italic,  Curetonian  Syriao,  Coptic.  The  ab-
Bonce  of  the  article  before  vi6s  makes  this
phrase  more  indefinite  than  the  numerous
places  where  it  occurs  with  the  article.  'O
u'lAs  ivSpdirov  in  many  places  undoubtedly
means  the  ideal  man,  who  by  his  humilia-
tion is  clothed  with  spiritual  glory.  But
the  phrase,  vihs  avepditov,  emphasizes  the
humanity  in  antithesis  to  Divinity.


OH.  V.  1—47.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


217


of  the  Old  Testament  pitieth  his  children,
and  kaoweth  their  frame  (Fs.  oiii.  13,  14),
and  the  Father  of  Jesus  Christ  loves  the
world,  and  counts  the  very  hairs  of  our  heads.
The  Son  will  not  exercise  this  judgment
with  less  regard  to  the  claims  of  eternal
justice  than  the  Father ;  but  his  knowledge
of  humanity  is,  by  tlie  nature  of  the  case,  a
guarantee  of  such  application  of  tlie  justice
of  God  to  the  case  of  every  individual,  tliat
man's  knowledge  of  himself  will  be  able
personally  to  justify  and  verify  it.  The
Divine  judgment  will  go  forth  from  the  heart
of  man  himself.

Vers.  28,  29. — It  is  impossible  not  to  draw
a  distinction  between  the  theme  of  these
verses  and  that  of  vers.  24,  25.  The  Lord
announces  an  event  which  is  in  the  future
altogether.  The  "  and  now  is,"  which  charac-
terized the  first  resurrection  of  which  he
spoke,  is  here  omitted.  The  description  of
the  subjects  of  the  resurrection  as  those  "  in
their  graves,"  contradistinguishes  them  from
"  the  dead"  of  ver.  25 — a  plirase  which  will
suffer  several  interpretations.  The  univer-
sality of  the  summons,  and  tlie  impossibility
of  neglecting  it  or  ignnring  it,  form  another
marked  contrast  to  the  resurrection  already
referred  to.  Marvel  not  at  this  !  At  what  ?
Clearly  at  the  entire  statement  that  the
resurrection  of  dead  souls  will  be  the  un-
doubted issue  of  accepting  Christ's  word  and
identifying  it  with  the  word  of  God.  Marvel
not  that  the  judgment  of  the  world  is  en-
trusted to  "the  Son,"  because  he  is  both
Son  of  man  as  well  as  Son  of  God.  "  Marvel
not "  is  a  relative  word.  It  means  obviously
that  there  is  a  greater  marvel  still  in  store.
Because  the  hour  is  coming ;  always  coming,
though  it  seemeth  long — coming  swiftly,
measured  on  the  great  cloek-faoe  of  the  uni-
verse. Geological  time,  astronomical  aeons,
should  before  this  have  rebuked  our  imper-
tiiitnce  about  the  delays  of  God,  and  our
shallow  criticism  ot  the  fulness  of  the  times,
"  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand
years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."
As  compared  with  geological  annals,  still
less  with  God's  eternities,  it  is  only  the  day
before  yesterday  when  Adam  fell ;  it  is  only
yesterday  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,
and  to-morrow  that  he  will  come  in  his  glory.
The  hour  is  coming  when  all  who  are  in
the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice.  The  same
voice  that  wakes  the  spiritually  dead  shall
pierce  the  clods,  shall  iind  the  buried  dead,
shall  bring  once  more  into  the  world  of  the
visible  and  tangible  the  long-forgotten  live*.
Every  solitary  life  lives  with  him  and  be-
fore him.  The  organic  clothing  of  the  spirit,
which  goes  on,  as  St.  Paul  suggests  (2  Cor.
V.  1)  from  the  death  of  the  physical  body
till  the  coming  of  the  Sou  of  God  with
glory,  does  not  render  this  statement  more


difiScult,  but  more  comprehensible.  As  far
as  this  world  is  concerned,  those  who  are
clothed  upon  with  the  house  not  made  with
hands — those  who  are  with  Christ,  are  to  all
appearance  dead,  and  in  their  "  graves,"  in
their  memorial-places;  but  they  will  all
hear  the  voice  of  the  Son,  and  they  will
come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  '  good
things,  to  the  resurrection  of  life ;  they  that
have  practised  evil  things,  to  the  resurrection
of  judgment.  They  will  come  forth  from
these  hiding-places  of  fading  memories.
Even  tombs  of  prophets  and  kings  are  them-
selves burieil,  covered  by  the  graves  of  the
many  generations  that  have  followed.  The
grave-hidden  will  come  forth  into  what  we
call  the  reality,  visibility,  tangibility,  of
things.  The  hour  is  coming  on  apace  when
Death  himself  shall  be  dead,  and  the  mys-
tery of  time  be  finished.  They  that  rise  will
divide  themselves  into  two  classes.  The  ana-
stasis  will  have  two  forms.  There  is  a  "  re-
surrection of  life"  and  a  "resurrection  of
judgment."  Those  who  have  indeed  passed
from  spiritual  death  to  life  will  not  come  into
"judgment"  (not  Kpl/ia  or  KaTixpiim,  but
Kpiais)  when  their  anastasis  is  complete,
their  judgment  is  over,  their  life  is  secure.
When  those  who  have  not  heaid  the  voice
of  the  Son  of  God,  have  not  come  to  the
light,  who  are  not  of  God  nor  of  the  truth —
men  who  have  deliberately  practised  "evil
things"  without  compunction  or  amend-
ment,— when  these  are  called  from  their
tombs,  from  their  shadowy  hiding-places,
into  the  presence  of  him  who  executes  judg-
ment, it  will  be  to  undergo  the  (Kpiais)
judgment  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  We  must,  indeed,  all
be  made  manifest  before  the  judgment-throne
of  Christ,  to  receive  the  consequences  of  "the
doing  of  well "  and  "  the  practice  of  evil."
The  issue  of  the  one  is  life,  and  of  the  other
is  judgment.  The  suggestion  seems  to  be
that  such  judgment  may  issue  unfavourably,
but  the  thought  is  centred  upon  the  process
of  the  judgment.  The  effort  of  Eeuss  and
others  to  draw  a  marked  distinction  between
the  eschatology  of  the  synoptists  and  of
John  fails.  Christ  does  not  represent  the
spiritual  resurrection  as  "  greater  work  "
than  the  physical  resurrection.  On  the  con-
trary, while  he  speaks  of  the  marvelling  of
his  hearers  at  his  claim  to  quicken  the
spiritually  dead,  yet  the   ground  of  their

'  Tlotitv  and  irpaffiretv  are  compared  with
each  other  in  ch.  iii.  20,  21  (see  notes).  The
two  places  where  these  words  are  used,  are
mutually  explanatory.  Those  that  have
done  good  and  come  to  the  light,  will  at
the  last  pass  into  resurrection-lite — ^those
who  have  practised  evil  things  and  dreaded
and  turned  away  from  Divine  illumination,
will  rise  to  judgment  of  condemnation.


218


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  v.  1—47.


marrel  is  emphatically  arrested  (gee  ver.
28)  until  they  should  recognize  to  the
fuU  the  fact  tliat,  as  Son  of  God  and  Son  of
man,  he  would  call  all  the  dead  from  their
graves.  Thoma  finds  admirable  justification
foi  this  representation  by  the  Johannist  of
the  Messianic  Judge,  alike  in  the  Book  of
Daniel,  in  the  synoptic  Gospels,  in  the
Pauline  Epistles,  and  Apocalypse  I

Vers.  -30 — 40. — (c)  The  witness  home  to
these  daims.

Ver.  30. — The  Lord,  still  preserving  the
consciousness  of  his  own  ego,  continues  to
speak  through  human  lips  to  human  ears.
He  deprecates  the  criticism,  "  Who  and  what
canst  thou  be,  that  thou  ehouldst  execute
judgment,  or  bring  us  to  thy  bar,  or  compel
UB  to  come  from  our  hidden  places  to  thy
jndgment-seat  ? "  It  is  not  as  mere  man
that  he  will  judge  the  world;  God  will
judge  through  him.  Moreover,  the  equality
of  "  life  "  and  "  honour  "  and  "  authority  "
that  he  has  with  the  Father,  as  the  veri-
table Son  of  God,  is  nevertheless  a  life  de-
rived, a  being  generated,  an  honour  given.
He  here  opens  up  on  this  basis  a  new  class
of  instruction,  and  proceeds  to  explain  the
threefold  nature  of  the  testimony  borne  to
his  present  claim  to  be  the  Bepreeentative
and  CO- Agent  of  tlie  Father.  He  goes  back
in  these  words  to  the  great  text  of  the  dis-
course, viz.  "  My  Fatlier  work«*th  hitherto,
and  I  work  "  (ver.  19).  I  (the  4y^  is  very
emphatic,  the  individual  standing  before
them  associates  himself,  and  is  identified,
with  the  one  Being  who,  as  Son  of  God  and
Son  of  man,  has  done,  is  doing,  and  will  yet
do,  wonderful  things)— I  can  of  mine  own  self,
from  any  separate  or  self-originating  source
in  myself,  apart  from  the  Father,  do  nothing.
He  subsequently  said  to  his  disciples, "  With-
out me  ye  can  do  nothing."  He  claims  a
higher  soiirce  than  himself  for  all  his  own
power  {Siviiits).  When  referring  to  the
same  subject  (vers.  19,  20),  he  drew  his
illustration  from  the  sense  of  sight.  The
Father  "  shows  "  to  him,  and  he  "  sees  "  a'l
things  that  the  Father  doeth.  Here  he
adds,  with  special  reference  to  the  last  and
consummating  manifestation  of  relation  with
the  Father,  As  I  hear,  I  judge :  and  my  judg-
ment of  men  is  righteous ;  because  I  seek  not
my  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him '  who  sent  me.
Christ  refers  to  his  judgments  of  absolution
or  condemnatiou  upon  things  or  men,  posi-

'  The  irarpds  of  T.R.  rests  on  E,  G,  H,
M,  S,  U,  V,  and  numerous  cursives;  but
rejected  by  the  Eevised  Version,  Meyer,
M'Clellan,  Godet,  as  well  as  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort,  Alford,
Tregelles,  with  X,  A,  B,  D,  K,  L,  A,  twelve
cursives,  with  several  Italic  manuscripts,
Vulgate,  Syriao,  Coptic,  and  Fathers.


tively  declaring  them  to  be  either  right
or  wrong;  e.g.  he  claimed  the  power  to
say,  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven ; "  "  Thy  faith
hath  saved  thee ;  "  "It  is  better  for  this
man  that  he  had  never  been  bom ; "  "  Come
unto  me;"  "Depart  from  me;"  "I  never
knew  you."  These  and  all  his  other  judg-
ments on  scribes  and  Pharisees,  on  devils
and  hypocrites,  on  Pilate  and  Herod,  on
Jerusalem  and  the  world,  are  revelations  of
the  Fathei-'s  mind — are  in  themselves  just
judgments,  absolutely  free  from  any  self-
hood, from  any  reflex  influence  or  reaction
from  men  to  himself.  They  are  the  true
and  infallible  expression  of  the  Divine  wiU.
Because  of  the  entire  conformity  of  his  will
and  himself  to  the  Divine  will,  the  judg-
ment must  correspond  to  that  which  is,  in
its  very  nature,  right  and  true.  If  this  be
80,  we  can  scarcely  refrain  from  asking,
"Wherein,  then,  lies  the  consolation  and
encouragement  derivable  from  the  fact
that  the  execution  of  judgment  is  placed  for
man's  sake  in  the  hands  of  the  Son  of  man  ?  "
It  lies  here,  that  the  Incarnation  is  perfect ;
that  the  manhood  has  not  obliterated  the
Divinity,  nor  the  Godhead  absorbed  the
manhood,  of  the  Christ.  The  human  con-
sciousness of  the  Son  becomes  the  basis
for  the  Father's  judgment,  which  is  uttered
thus  absolutely  and  finally  through  human
Ups.  It  is  impossible  to  imagine  thoughts
like  these  arising  in  the  mind  of  soma
thinker  of  the  second  cenhery.  Great  sm
the  prologue  to  this  Gospal  unquestionably
is,  this  unveiling  of  the  heart  of  the  Son
of  God  incarnate  is  immeasurably  greater.
The  consciousness  of  Christ  is  unique.
Keither  legend  nor  imagination,  to  say
nothing  of  history,  has  ever  transcended  it.
Here,  too,  the  enormous  difference  between
the  Johannine  Christ  and  the  Philonio  Logos
comes  into  startling  prominence.

Ver.  81. — At  this  point  the  Lord  proceeds
to  meet  the  clamour  which  most  probably
arose,  the  doubt  and  questioning  which
brolte  the  silence  with  which  his  solemn
defence  had  been  received.  We  can  hear
between  the  lines  the  cries  of  an  excited
crowd,  declaring  that  these  words  are  simply
his  own.  Such  testimony  as  this  to  himseU
must  be  sustained  and  sanctioned.  Why
and  how  can  this  Teacher  take  such  ground
as  to  assert  about  himself  what  no  prophet,
no  rabbi,  no  chief  priest  of  the  people,  not
even  the  greatest  man  of  men,  Moses  him-
self, had  ever  dared  to  claim  ?  Christ  admits
that  such  assumptions  as  these  need  justifi-
cation and  approval  over  and  above  his
ipse  dixit.  The  words  that  follow  are
startling :  If  I  bear  "witness  concerning  my-
self, my  witness  is  not  true.  At  first  sight
this  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  ch.  viii.  14^
where,  in  reply  to   the  Pharisees'  "  Thou


OH.  T.  1—47.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   JOHN.


21f.


bearest  witness  concerning  thyself;  thy
witness  is  not  true,"  he  leplied,  "  Though  I
bear  witness  of  myself,  my  witness  is  true ;
because  I  know  whence  I  came,  and  whitlier
I  go."  The  absolute  unison  with  the
Father,  which  he  was  not  only  conscious  of,
but  had  also  revealed  to  the  Pharisees,
lifted  his  own  word  to  the  grandeur  of  a
word  of  God.  The  Divine  beamed  through
the  human,  the  infinite  through  the  finite.
Here  he  says,  "  If  I  bear — if  X  and  I  alone
were  bearing  vntness  to  myself,"  then — sup-
posing a  case  which,  ai  a  m&tter  of  fact,  is  im-
possible—"  f»j  witness  is  not  true."  If  he
were  acting  alone,  which  is  an  inconceivable
supposition,  seeing  that  in  the  depths  of  his
consciousness  he  knew  that  he  was  one  with
the  Father,  then  for  his  human  nature  to
break  away  thus  from  the  Father  and  dis-
dain his  .testimony  would  nullify  and
falsify  his  witness.  He  is  not  bearing  wit-
ness alone.

Vers.  32,  37,  38.— (a)  2^  witnem  of  {he
Father.

Yer.  32. — ^It  18  another  that  witnesseth
concerning  me ;  and '  I  know  that  the  witness
which  he  witnesseth  concerning  me  is  true.
It  is  a  mistake,  with  Bwal£  De  Wette,
and  many  others,  to  suppose  that  this
refers  to  the  testimony  of  John  the  Baptist.
By  Angnstine,  Hengstenberg,  Lutbardt,
Godet,  Meyer,  etc.,  it  has  been  perceived
that  the  "other"  (Swos)  refers  to  the
Father.  Jesus  expressly  declines  to  receive
John's  testimony  as  his  justification  or
sufScient  vindication,  and  he  contrasts  it
with  the  higher  confirmation  which  in  three
distinct  ways  is  already  and  continuously
vouchsafed  to  him.  The  present  tense,
liaprvpiT,  is  in  striking  contrast  to  the  testi-
mony of  John  already  silenced  by  im-
prisonment or  death.  The  methods  of  this
testimony  are  subsequently  analyzed  and
described.    The  Father's  witness  includes —

Vers.  33 — 35. — (;8)  The  temporary  witness
of  John.

Yer.  33. — ^Te  have  sent  to  John,  and  he
hath  borne  witness  to  the  truth.  The  send-
ing to  John  was  probably  a  reference  to  the
official  transaction  described  in  oh.  i.  19.
This  is  not  the  "other"  whom  he  referred
to,  for  in  the  next  clause  he  made  solemn
disclaimer  of  resting  his  claim  upon  John
or  npon  any  individual  man.  The  witness
of  the  forerunner  was  a  tme  one.  The
function  of  the  prophet  is  to  bear  witness  to
the  Lightj'to  strip  off  the  veils  which  hide  it,
to  call  attention  to  its  most  solemn  realities,
to  quicken  vision,  to  stimulate  conscience,  to

>  The  reading  oTSare  (or  otSa/ity  in  some
Fathers),  K*,  D,  has  induced  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.)  to  insert  in  the  text  Ha  it  not
followed  by  any  other  editor.


disturb  apathy,  to  discern  the  ooming  amd
prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  (see  eh.  L  4,  6,
notes).  He  was  not  the  Light ;  bnt  ha  did
call  attention  to  a  testimony  immeasurably
more  precious  than  any  word  proceeding
merely  from  human  lips.  The  testimonies
of  John,  both  before  and  after  he  came  into
contact  with  Christ,  were  very  wonderful
and  were  adapted  to  exert  and  did  produce
a  deep  impression  upon  the  people  for  a
time;  but  by  themselves  they  would  not
have  given  sufficient  ratification  to  the
Lord's  words.  We  may  welcome  still  all
Johannine,  ministerial  testimonies  to  the
Lord,  but  the  power  of  Qod  himself  must
assert  itself  to  the  inner  consciousness
before  any  man  receives  the  gospel.  No
mere  human  testimony  to  such  claims  as
these  rises  to  the  dignity  of  the  occasion.
Unless  the  Father's  witness' can  be  discerned,
supreme,  convincing,  and  final,  John's  wit-
ness would  be  insufficient.  It  may  arrest
attention,  it  may  impress  the  apathetic,  it
may  overawe  the  gainsayers ;  but  it  is  not
final,  nor  does  it  leave  the  hearers  without
excuse.  All  the  rhetoric,  all  the  threatening,
all  the  irony,  of  Elijah  would  have  failed  if
the  fire  of  the  Lord  had  not  fallen  to  con-
sume the  sacrifice.

Ver.  34. — But  I  for  my  part  receive  not
the  witness  which  affirms  my  Sonship  from
a  man ;  or,  yet  the  witness  which  I  receive  is
not  from  man.  Some  have  given  the  stronger
meaning  of  "take  hold,"  or  "snatch,"  or
"strive  after,"  to  \an0iya.  But  this  .is  un-
necessary, for  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  article,
"the_  witness,"  which  is  real,  infallible,  con-
vincing, commanding,  must  come  from  the
highest  source  of  all.  Yet,  though  Christ
cannot  depend  npon  John's  testimony,  it
ought  to  have  had  weight  with  his  bearers.
It  called  them  to  repentance,  to  holy  living,
to  faith  in  the  Coming  One.  It  discounted
their  pride  in  Abrahamio  birth,  and  their
false  notions  of  race-purity ;  it  made  personal
and  individual  that  which  had  been  looked
at  as  a  national  monopoly  of  privilege.  Nay,
more,  it  had  testified  that  he  was  the  "  Lamb
of  God  "  and  the  "  Son  of  God "  and  the
"  Bridegroom  of  the  Church."  Therefore  he
continued :  Howbeit,  these  things  I  say — I
call  attention  to  the  sum  total  of  his  mes-
sage, the  testimony  he  bore  to  truth — ^that  ye
may  be  saved;  for  all  that  John  said  was
true.  "  John  did  no  miracle :  but  all  things
that  he  said  concerning  Jesus  were  true"
(ch.  X.  41 ;  see  notes).  If  the  Jews  had
accepted  the  testimony  of  John,  they  would
not  now  be  cherishing  angry  and  rebellious
thought,  and  have  been  so  blinded  to  the
truth  and  reality  of  things.

Ver.  35. — He  was  the  lamp  (\ixvos,  not
ifms)  that  humeth  and  shineth.  He  was
not  the  Light,  but  came  to  bear  witness  to


220


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  v.  1—47.


the  light  (ch.  L  8).  The  glory  of  his
appearance  was  a  derived  or  kindled  illu-
mination  (cf.  Matt.  vi.  22;  2  Pet.  L  19).
(It  is  not  against  this  Inference  that  in
EeT.  xxi.  23  the  Lamb  is  the  Lamp  of  the
New  Jerusalem.)  The  household  lamp  or
torch,  when  kindled,  bums  with  more  or  less
brilliance,  but  bums  itself  out,  exhausts
itself.  One  may  walk  in  the  light  of  it,
see  the  way  one  should  take,  discharge
duties  that  would  otherwise  be  impossible,
avoid  perils  that  might  without  the  lamp
prove  disastrous  or  destructive;  but  the
capacity  of  the  torch  is  soon  reduced  to
a  minimum.  Bengel,  Stier,  Alford,  think
that  the  celebrated  passage  in  Ecclus.
xlviii.  1  may  be  referred  to :  "  Then  stood
up  Elijah  the  prophet  like  as  a  fire,  and  his
word  burned  as  «  lamp."  This  is  not  im-
possible, though  it  would  stand  alone  as
a  distinct  reference  in  the  Gospels  to  any
apocryphal  book.  Lange  has  given  a  long
series  of  the  lamp  and  fire  symbols  of  the
Old  Testament;  the  group  of  events  in
which  the  Lord  appealed  in  flames  of  fire
and  clouds  of  glory,  from  Exod.  iii.  to  Mai.
iii.  2,  affirming  John  to  be  "  tlie  flame-signal
of  Messiah,  the  last  Old  Testament  formol'  the
pillar  of  fire  and  candlestick  of  the  temple,
therefore  the  lamp  at  once  flaming  and
shining."  More  than  this,  and  more  to  the
point,  we  find  that,  under  the  figure  of  lamps
of  fire,  the  messengers  of  God,  the  activities
of  the  Church,  were  repeatedly  set  forth
(cf.  Matt.  V.  14—16;  xxv.  1—8 ;  Rev.  i.  20;
Phil,  ii  15).  John  was  the  hurning  lamp,
not  the  archetypal  Light.  Ye  desired  for
a  season  to  rejoice  in  his  light.  Many
interpretations  have  been  suggested,  such
as  the  exultation  of  a  wedding-party  in  the
brief  light  of  the  torch-bearer,  announc-
ing the  approach  of  the  bridegroom ;  or  the
dancing  of  ephemerides  in  the  glitter  of  a
lamp.  The  metaphor  is  lost  in  the  solemn
memory  of  the  high  gratification  for  a  season
whioh  the  populations  of  Judsea,  Galilee,  and
the  wilderness  had  manifested  on  the  appari-
tion of  the  great  prophet.  The  universal
acclaim  soon  subsided.  The  leaders  of  the
people  fell  back  when  they  heard  John's
call  to  repentance.  Publicans  and  harlots
pressed  into  the  kingdom  before  the  scribes
and  Ph  irisecs.  "  The  generation  of  vipers  "
did  to  John  "  whatsoever  they  listed."  The
secular  power  hushed  his  voice  and  crushed
the  man.  "For  a  season"  only  did  they
listen  to  his  word  or  respond  to  his  challenge.
His  great  testimony,  though  given  to  him
by  G«d,  knd  by  no  means  proceeding  from
his  meie  hunan  consoiousness,  had  been  in
the  main  unheeded.  WUnsohe  quotes  from
'  Seta,'  fol.  21,  o, "  Eabbi  Menahem  said  that
Solomon  (ProT.  vL  23)  compareB  'prayer'
with  'lamp,'  and  'teaching'  with  'light,'


because  the  one  flashes  for  the  twinkling  of
an  eye,  comforts  in  the  moment  during  which
it  shines ;  while  the  other,  like  the  shining
of  the  sun,  bums  evermore,  and  leads  to
eternal  rest."

Ver.  36. — (y)  The  vritneit  of  the  works.
But  the  witness  whioh  I  have  is  greater'
than  [that]  of  John.  The  testimony  of  John
was  memorable  and  noteworthy  in  many  re-
spects. If  the  people  had  accepted  it,  they
would  have  admitted  the  Divine  authority  of
One  who  was  "mightier"  than  John.  The
synoptic  Gospels  show  that  Jesus  made  a
similar  appeal  to  the  conscience  of  his  critics
on  a  later  occasion  (Matt.  xxi.  25,  and
parallels).  Though  John's  baptism  was
"  from  heaven,"  and  though  John's  testimony
was  "  great,"  yet  that  which  accompanied
the  ministry  of  Jesus  was  "  greater "  still.
The  words  of  John  were  not  merely  John's
words,  or  they  would  have  been  valueless.
Moreover,  "  the  testimony  that  I  have  "  is
in  itself  convincing ;  it  has  a  Divine,  self-
evidencing  force,  which;  added  to  my  word,
confirms  and  establishes  my  claim.  The
proof  or  illustration  of  this  is  as  follows :
for  the  works  which  the  Father  hath  given
me  that  I  should  bring  them  to  completion,
the  very  works,  whioh  I  am  doing,  bear
witness  concerning  me,  that  the  Father  hath
sent  me.  The  works  of  Christ  are  his
normal  activities — the  deeds  which  express
the  nature  and  compass  of  his  will,  and
indicate  the  qualities  of  his  Person.  They
would  be  Tepara  and  Bai'/iaTo,  should  any
other  perform  such  things  or  live  on  such
a  platform  of  exalted  activity.  They  are
his  "works."  This  term  is  often  used  for
the  special  manifestations  of  his  alliance
with  the  supernatural.  Divine  realm  (oh.
vU.  3 ;  ix.  3 ;  x.  25,  32,  etc. ;  xiv.  10 ;  xv.
24).  They  are  in  their  fulness  and  summa-
tion the  Ipyov  of  the  Lord  (ch.  iv.  34 ;  xvii.
4).  They  are,  moreover,  "  given  "  to  him  to
"  do  "  or  to  "  finish."  This  idea  is  frequently
expressed.  "  All  things  are  given  into  his
hand"  (oh.  iii.  35),  all  judgment  is  given
him  to  execute  (ch.  v.  22, 27).  Tlie  Father
hath  given  him  eelf-existenoe  (ver.  26;  cf.
ch.  xvii.  2,  6,  9,  12,  24;  xviii.  9).  It  is
Impossible  to  dissociate  these  "  works  "  from
those  great  miracles  which  ought  to  com-
mand assent  to  his  claims,  even  if,  alas  I  his
bare  words  are  not  sufQoieutly  oonvindng.
John's  Gospel  makes  numerous  references
to  these  proofs  of  the  Divine  commission,
these  illustratious  as  well  as  evidences  of
his  right  to  speak.    But  the  "works"  are

'  Alford,  Lachmann,  and  Tregelles  read
here  nel^av,  with  A,  B,  E,  G,  etc  MetCa
is  the  reading  of  K,  fl,  E,  L,  S,  U,  etc.,  and
is  ]ireferred  by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  B.T,
Westoott  and  Uort


OH.  T.  1—47.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


221


Dot  limited  to  the  miraculous  Iiealings,  to
multiplication  of  bread  and  wine,  and  resui>
rection  from  the  dead.  The  whole  of  his
work,  from  his  baptism  and  temptation  to
his  own  resurrection  from  the  deud,  was  liis
^pyov.  This  was  made  up  of  all  the  self-
revelation  of  his  life,  of  all  his  consecration
and  sympathy,  of  all  his  character,  of  all  I  he
resuscitation  of  dead  souls,  of  all  the  joy  he
was  pouring  into  broken  hearts,  and  all  the
life  he  was  evoking  in  moribund  humanity.
"  These  works  that  I  am  doing  bear  witness
concerning  me,  that  the  Father  hath  sent
me."  They  are  of  such  a  character  that  he
confidently  declares  about  them  that  they
proclaim  his  Divine  commission.  The  entire
work,  reaching  special  expression  in  certain
typical  acts  and  deeds,  was  greater  than  the
verbal  testimony  which  John  bare  to  his
mission.  All  that  John  said  was  true,  but
Christ's  "  works"  prove  it.

Vers.  37,  38. —  The  witness  of  the  Father
further  elucidated.    (See  ver.  32.)

Ver.  37. — And  the  Father  (himself')i  who
Bent  me,  (he)  hath  home  witness  oonoeming
me.  If  the  "  himself  "  be  the  genuine  reading
(and  it  is  defended  by  Godet,  M'Clellan,  and
Meyer),  there  would  seem  to  be  a  special  or
direct  and  additional  form  of  the  Father's
testimony.  And  several  ancient  and  modem
critics  (Chrysostom,  Bengel,  Paulus,  Godet)
have  seen  in  it  a  reference  to  the  special
"  voice  and  shape  "  which  were  heard  and
seen  by  John  and  Jesus  at  the  baptism,  when
heaven  was  opened,  when  a  voice  from
heaven  proclaimed  him  to  be  the  well-beloved
and  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  and  when
the  Spirit  of  God  descended  as  a  dove  and
abode  upon  him.  This  testimony  was  only
given  to  the  world  through  the  consciousness
and  word  of  John,  who,  after  receiving  it,
bore  record  that  this  was  the  Son  of  God.
Meyer  and  many  others,  rather  following  the
suggf-stion  of  De  Wette  that  the  inward
drawing  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  wus  that
to  which  the  Lord  referred,  would  thus
complete  the  testimony  of  the  "works."
This  testimony,  then,  which  is  cited  against
the  challenge,  "Thou  bearest  witness  con-
cerning thyself,"  would  be  a  purely  sub-
jective one.  'W'estcott  thinks  it  refers  to
the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  ministry
and  prophetic  and  typical  anticipation  of
the  Christ,  culminating  in  John  the  Baptist.
This  particular  series  of  testimonies  is  re-
fcri-ed  to  in  vers.  39  and  47,  etc.  Moulton,
who  rejects  the  ainhs,  sees  no  new,  no  direct,

'  The  e^rds  is  omitted,  and  tKt'yos  substi-
tuted for  it,  by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  E.T.,
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  T^egelles,  on  the
authority  of  K,  B,  L  (L  is  generally  a  satellite
of  K,  B),  while  all  other  uncials,  cursives,
and  numerous  Fathers  preserve  the  airit.


testimony  in  addition  to  that  of  the  works,
but  the  assertion  that  they  are  the  Toice  of
the  Father — ^In  a  sense  the  yery  form  of  the
Father,  for  the  conviction  of  those  who  might
if  they  would  come  to  him.  If  the  ain-bs
must  oe  retained,  I  think  that  we  must
suppose  our  Lord  referring  to  the  whole  of
those  objective  manifestations  of  the  Father's
will  imd  mind  concerning  Christ  which  were
outside  of  his  own  act  or  work ;  and  all  that
shining  through  his  face,  that  whispering
through  his  word  of  what  was  tlie  eternal
Father's  face  and  voice,  and  plainly  distin-
guished from  the  work  of  the  Son ;  e.g.  the
angels'  song,  the  miraculous  providence
which  protected  his  childhood,  the  opening
of  heaven  at  his  baptism,  the  Divinity  whicli
attended  him  and  which  made  his  ministry
so  strange  and  strong  an  inSuence.  Nor
could  he  who  had  the  whole  of  his  life
before  him  fall  to  be  conscious  of  further
testimonies  from  heaven  and  from  Provi-
dence which,  though  unrecorded,  would
continue  to  set  their  seal  upon  his  character
and  work.  We  must  never  forget  that  our
Lord  himself  was  a  revelation  of  the  Son.
But  the  revelation  of  the  Son  in  his  ^pyu
was  accompanied  throughout  with  another
manifestation — that  of  (fte  Father,  The  glory
of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  him.  Never-
theless, a  difficulty  is  conceded  as  arising
out  of  the  unsusceptibility  and  limited
opportunities  of  his  hearers.  ITever  have
ye  heard  a  voice  of  him,  or  seen  a  form  of
him.  These  voices  and  these  sounds  need
opened  ears  and  unsealed  eyes.  Tou  (says
Christ)  have  not  heard  that  which  you
might  have  heard.  You  have  not  seen
that  which  you  might  have  seen.  On  a
subsequent  occasion  he  said  to  one  of  his
disciples,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time
with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,
Philip?  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen
the  Father.  How  sayest  thou,  then,  Show
us  the  Father?"  So  that  there  was, indeed,
the  condition  of  adequate  rovelntiou  of  the
Father  provided  for  the  disciples  in  the  life
of  Christ,  in  the  ministry  of  the  Son  of  the
Father.  Moreover,  it  far  exceeded  the  vision
of  God  which  was  granted  to  patriarohs  and
prophets  under  the  Old  Testament  dispen-
sation. Doubtless  the  voice  of  Jehovah  had
been  heard  (Exod.  xx.  19;  Deut.  iv.  12),
the  face  of  Jehovah  had  been  seen  (Gen.
zxxii.  30 ;  Exod.  xziv.  10 ;  Numb.  xii.  8 ;
Dent.  v.  i,  21).  Isaiah  saw  the  glory  of  the
Angel  of  the  Lord  (Ti.;  cf.  oh.  xiL  41),
and  Ezekiel  likewise  by  the  river  of  Chebar
(iii.  23).  Nevertheless,  the  evangelist,  on  the
credit  of  the  great  utterance  before  us,  has
laid  down,  as  the  very  climax  of  the  pro-
logue, "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time
(Tr^irore) ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  who  ia  in
the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  deolared


222


THE  OOSPBL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  ▼.  1—47.


Mm."  Tbli  language  of  the  prologue  shews
that  the  trae  levelation  of  the  Father's
heart  was  not  even  granted  to  the  noblest  .
of  the  seers  and  patriarchs.  Suob  miinifes-
tations  as  the  visions  of  the  Old  Testament
saints  were  not  the  veritable  voice  or  form
of  the  Father.  Should  mankind  ever  obtain
vision  or  audition  of  the  Father,  it  must  be
through  the  presence  among  them  of  him
Kho  had  been  for  ever  in  the  bosom  of  the
Father.  Though  these  captious  critics  were
in  a  position  to  tiave  received  this  revelation
of  the  Higliest,  they  had  not  done  so.  "  Te
have  neither  heard  a  voice  of  him,  nor  Been
a  form  of  him.  You  miglit  have  seen  and
beard  and  handled  if  you  had  oliosen,  but
you  will  not  oome  to  me,  you  will  not  believe
me,  yon  will  not  yield  to  my  claims  as  One
sent  to  you  from  me  Father  I "

Ver.  38. — And  farther,  you  have  not  his
Word  (TON  AorON  ATTOT)  abiding  in
yon.  The  Word  of  the  FaihsT  (for  the  outcB
refers  to  the  Father),  i.e.  the  full  expression
of  the  Father's  heart,  was  sounding  tiirough
the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Ood,and  miglit  have
entered  into  and  become  an  abiding  power
in  their  inmost  conscience  and  their  spiritual
life ;  but  they  had  not  received  the  "  Word  "
of  the  Lord  through  the  "Voice"  of  the
Lord.  The  reason  given  is,  Because  hira
whom  he  (the  Father)  sent,  him  (this
One)  ye  believe  not.  In  other  words,  "  Your
lack  of  faith  in  me  accounts  for  your  perverse
misconception,  for  your  inability  to  see  and
hear  all  that  there  is  of  the  Father's  personal
testimony  to  me."  Some  suspect  a  petitio
prineipii  in  this  argument,  but  the  reasoning
seems  to  he  this;  there  is  abundant  evidence,
corroboration,  and  co-operative  glory,  affirm-
ing the  truth  of  all  that  Christ  has  said
about  himself  as  the  Source  of  life  and  Judge
of  man ;  but  the  moral  susceptibility  of  lus
hearers  is  paralyzed,  and  their  faith  in  the
most  fundamental  facts  of  their  own  ex-
perience is  at  fault.  They  seem  impervious,
Bot  only  to  Christ's  Word,  but  to  the  cor-
roborative testimonies  themselves.

Yen.  39,  40.— (5)  The  witnesa  of  the  Scrip-
tures.

Ver.  39. — Te  search  the  Soriptores.  A
large  number  of  commentators,  from  Chry-
eostom  and  Augustine  to  Luther,  Tholuck,
Hengstenberg,  M'Clellan,  Luthardt,  and
Ewald,  with  the  Authorized  Version,  regard
this  as  an  imperative  command.  This  is
grammatical,  and  corresponds  to  the  language
of  Isa.  xxxiv.  16 ;  but  with  Cyril,  Bengel,
De  Wette,  Meyer,  Godet,  Lange,  Westcott,
Pluinmer,  Watkins,  we  think  the  whole  coo-
text  demands  the  indicative.  The  tecond
clause,  "  because  in  them,"  etc.,  follows  far
more  obviously  upon  an  assertion  than  upon
a  precept.  The  "  ye  wUl  not  "  that  follows
is  far  more  iu  harmony  with  the  indicative


than  with  the  snpposed   eommand.     The
Lord  says, "  You  have  a  third  great  testi-
mony to  my  claim,  and  yet  you  are  not  pre-
pared to  accept  it."     ¥t  tearch  the  Baip-
turea.     The  verb  iptvvm  is  nsed  (oh.  vii.
52 ;  1  Pet.  i.  11 :  Bom.  viii.  27 ;  1  C!or.  ii.
10)  for  minute,  prolonged  search.    The  kind
of  investigation  which  the  rabbis  spent  upon
the  text  and  letter  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  is
a  proverb,  and  led  to  the  allegorical  mysti-
cal meanings  of  the  Gemaras   and   other
Hebrew  literature.    "  Ye  search  the  Scrip-
tures "  rather  than  the  living  Word,  rather
than  the  Divine  meaning  and  message  &om
the  living  God  which  they  do  contain.   This
is  one  term  out  of  many  which  the  Lord
employed  for  the  sacred  literature  which
was  the    great   heritage   of  the   Hebrew
people.    Elsewhere  he  called  it  "  the  Law,"
"  the  Law  and  prophets,"  "  Moses  and  the
prophets,"   "your   Law,"  "the  wisdom  of
God."     He  admits  their  study,  prolonged
and  eager,  of  the  sacred  writings,  and  he
justifies  tiie  ground  and  motive   of  such
search,  viz.:  because  ye  think  in  them  ye
have  eternal  life ;  or,  ye  ihdll  have,  at  ehall
find,  eternal  life.     8ome   powerful   critics,
like  Meyer,  urge  that  our  Lord  agrees  so
far  with  the  Jews,   that   he    sympathizes
with  their  search,  and  that  censure  or  ironi-
cal language  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
Saviou?s  reverence  for  the  Scriptures.    But
the  expression  is  very  unusual  on  that  hy-
pothesis, "  Ye  think  [or,  •  imagine ']  ye  have
in  them,"  rather  than  "ye  have  through
them."    Surely  our  Lord  is  here  condemn-
ing the  superstitious  idea  that,  in  the  mere
possession  of  the  letter,  they  were  possessors
of  the  eternal  life ;  that,  apart  from  the  in-
dwelling Word,  apart  from  the  heart  of  the
message  itself,  some  magical  advantage  was
springing.    Hillel,  whose  view  of  Scripture
may  be  expressed  in  a  saying  ('  Aboth,'  ii.
8),  "He  who  has  gotten  to  himself  words
of  the  Law  hath  gotten  to  himself  the  lite
of  the  world  to  come,"  here  differs  utterly
from  the  Lord,  who,  on    the  doctrine  of
Holy  Scripture,  takes  ground  similar   to
that  which  he  had  taken  with  reference  to
the   temple  and   the  sabbath.      It  is   not
the  bare  possession  of  the  Scriptures,  nor
the   prolniigod    examination    of   its    mere
letter,  that  is  the  condition  of  eternal  life.
"  Search  "  which  is  originated  and  stimu-
lated by  a  vague  idea   of  the  life-giving
force  of  the   letter,  is  illusive.     We   may
fhinlt  that  in  them  we  have  eternal  life,
but  our  Lord  would  undeceive  us.     More-
over, from  the  depths  of  his  own  conscious-
ness and  knowledge  of  his  own  mission,
he  adds :  And  they  are  they  which  testify
oonoerning  me.     This  is  one  of  the  key-
notes   of   New    Testament    teaching,  vix.
Christ's  idea  of  the  Old  Testament,  that  U


cii.  V  1-^1]      TUE  GOStEL  ACCQfeDIiJG  TO  St,  JOII».


22a


was  a  sketch  or  portraiture  drawn  in  suc-
cessive agi'S  and  nn  various  material  of  him-
self— that  it  was  an  outline  of  great  princi-
ples which  he  was  about,  not  to  rub  out,  but
to  fill  in,  not  "to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil."
The  histories,  the  experiences,  the  cere-
monial, the  dynasties,  the  offices,  tlie  songs
and  prayers,  the  predictive  and  typiral
sorrows  there  depicted,  were  all  prelibations
and  unconscious  prophecies  of  himself.
"  They  testify  concerning  me,"  and,  together
with  my  works  and  with  my  forerunner,
and,  more  than  all,  with  my  Father's  own
voice  speaking  and  my  Father's  own  face
shining  through  all,  they  complete  the
manifold  testimony  to  the  fact  that  I  have
come  to  do  his  will,  to  work  with  him,  to
deliver,  to  restore,  to  give  life,  and  to  execute
judgment  also,  when  my  hour  is  come.  If
this  be  80,  then  strange,  inconsistent,  and
tragic  is  the  ultimate  issue —

Yer.  40. — And  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that
ye  may  have  life.  This  fearful  conclusion
of  the  whole  matter  is  charged  upon  the  re-
sponsibility of  man.  Doubtless,  elsewhere,
the  will  is  described  as  itself  made  willing
by  the  Divine  attraction,  by  the  grace  of  the
Father.  "  He  that  hath  teen  and  heard  of
the  Father  [seen,  i.e.  his  shape  and  beard
his  voice — seen  his  shape  and  heard  his
voice  in  my  ministry  and  manifestation],
Cometh  unto  me."  Yet  the  grace  of  God
working  directly  on  character  or  indirectly
by  other  revelations,  never  obliterates  tlie
sense  of  responsibility.  The  appeal  of  God
is  made  to  the  will  of  man,  whether  we  con-
sciously or  unconsciously  are  made  "  willing
in  the  day  of  his  power  "  (cf.  ch.  vii.  17 ;
vi.  44,  67 ;  viii.  44).  The  sad  tone  of  this
solemn  charge  corresponds  with  and  does
much  to  explain  the  pathetic  cry,  "  O
Jerusalem  .  .  .  how  often  would  I  have
gathered  thy  children  .  .  .  and  ye  would
not  I "  while  the  entire  passage  suggests  that
this  appeal  was  only  one  specimen  out  of
many  such  discourses,  one  hint  of  the
numerous  sayings  and  self  manifestations,
one  of  many  accumulated  proofs  of  his
Divine  commission,  out  of  which  the  belief
of  the  evangelists  and  the  invincible  assent
of  the  Church  arose,  that  he  was  indeed
"  the  Word  made  flesh,"  "  the  Only  Begotten
of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  '

Vers.  41— 47.— ((*)  The  effect  of  the  reve-
lation of  the  Son  upon  the  Jews.

Vers.  41,  42.— This  appeal  to  the  will  of
man  was  apparently  entirely  misunderstood,
and  ended  for  the  time  in  failure.  "  They
would  not  come."  Everything  was  pre-
pared, but  none  were  ready  or  willing  to
accept  even  so  rich  a  blessing  as  life  itself
This  is  the  refrain  of  the  whole  Bible :  "  Ye
will  not;"  "Ye  would  not; "  "What  could
bave  been  done  more  to  myTineyard,  thai  T


have  not  done  in  it?"  "  I  called,  and  ye  re-
fused;" "I  wrote  the  great  things  of  my
Law ;  ye  have  counted  them  as  strange
things.  Our  Lord  proceeds  in  the  closing
words  to  account  in  some  respects  for  this
unwillingness.  I  receive  not  glory  from  men,
but  I  know  yon  (eyvuKo,  I  have  come  by  ex-
perience or  intuition  to  such  knowledge  of
you),  that  yon  have  not  the  love  of  God  in
you.  The  love  of  God  is  the  principle  of
all  obedience  ;  and  Christ  elsewhere  declares
it  to  be  the  first  and  great  commandment  of
the  Law.  But  love  is  the  principle  of  all
knowli  dge.  "He  that  loveth  not  knoweth
not."  This  principle  reaches  its  fullest  ex-
pression when  we  learn  the  greater  truth
that  "  God  is  love."  It  is  true  of  all  objects
of  love,  the  liigliest  kind  of  knowledge  is
not  possible  without  love.  This  is  pre-emi-
nently the  case  when  we  think  of  knowing
Grod.  Since  God  is  essential  Love,  without  ex-
periencing love  we  cannot  realize  that  Divine
essence.  Again,  there  is  an  elementary  faitli
that  precedes  elementary  love,  but  when  love
is  once  awakened,  faith  again  deepens,  and
love  grows  by  what  it  feeds  upon,  until  the
faith  becomes  vision  and  the  love  rapture.
But  why  the  opening  words,  I  receive  not
glory  from  men  f  Probably  they  intimate
opposition  and  questioning  to  some  such
effect  as  this :  "  Thou  hast  declared  thyself
the  Giver  of  life  and  resurrection,  and
charged  our  lack  of  spiritual  life  upon  our
unwillingness  to  believe  these  claims  and
to  submit  ourselves  to  these  exalted  assump-
tions or  to  go  to  thee  for  life.  Thou  art
eager,  after  all,  for  our  approval  and  glory."
To  this  Christ  replied,  "  Olory  from  men  1
receive  not.  It  is  not  for  my  sake,  but  for
yours,  I  say, '  Come  unto  me  and  live ; '  but,
alas!  having  searched  you  through  and
through,  I  discern  no  love,  none  of  the
spirit  out  of  which  the  forces  of  faith  can
be  evolved.  The  reason  why  you  are  un-
willing to  come  to  me  for  life  is  that  you
are  measuring  me  by  yourselves,  and  have
not  that  self-emptying  and  abnegation  and
distrust  out  of  which  faith  and  love,  love  and
faith,  must  ever  spring."

Ver.  43. — I  have  come  in  the  name  {i.e.  in
the  power,  with  the  credentials,  with  the
encompassing  revelation)  of  my  Father,  and
ye  receive  me  not  Your  idea  of  the
Father's  glory  is  so  profoundly  different
from  the  reality,  that  you  do  not  recognize
it  when  it  is  offered  you  and  Ehining  over
you,  Christ  did  not  profess  to  have  come
in  his  own  name.  He  was  not  a  mere  evo-
lution of  humanity,  or  of  Israel,  or  of  the
house  of  David.  He  was  the  Only  Begotti'u
of  the  Father,  bom  from  above,  sent  down
from  heaven.  The  language  of  the  world
was,  "This  is  not  Divine;"  "It  Is  too
gentle,  too  giaoious,  too  ■ympatketie  foi


224


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDlNa  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [cii.  v.  1—47.


God  I "  The  leliglona  world  Ustened  eagerlr
fSor  tome  echo  of  the  trumpet-peals  of  SinaL
It  deiiied  a  king  neater  than  Solomon,  •
prophet  more  terrible  than  Elijah.  When
he  came  with  the  real  glory-robee  of  the
love  of  God,  and  with  the  majesty  of  the
Xame  of  the  Lord,  there  was  widegpread
disappointment  and  cruel  rejection  of  hie
oommission.  Should  another  oome  in  his
own  (proper,  peculiar)  name,  that  is,  with  no
testimony  from  heaven,  seeking  "honour
(S<(Jo,  glory)  from  men,"  creating  a  sove-
reignty by  enlisting  the  voices  of  men,
compromising  with  evil,  making  no  warfare
against  the  power  of  the  world,  allowing
the  legitimacy  of  the  throne  of  the  prince
of  this  world ; — should  he  come  in  his  own
name,  alas  I  him  (that  one)  ye  will  receive.
The  eagerness  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  to
find  the  Messiah  has  led  them  to  accept  in
some  sort  no  fewer  than  sixty-four  false
Christs  (Sohudt,  'Jiidische  HerkwQidig-
keit,'  vi.  27 — 30  ;  Bengel  and  Meyer).  Nor
must  the  Christian  Church  take  the  flattering
unction  that  it  is  free  from  this  charge.  The
teacher  that  can  utilize  to  the  widest  extent
the  fashionable  worldliness,  and  can  mingle
the  pungent  human  condiment  with  the
princely  food  of  the  King's  banqueting-
house,  is  he  who  at  the  present  hour  meets
with  the  loudest  response  and  the  readiest
reception.  There  is  solemn  warning  here  for
statesman  and  author,  artist  and  preacher.

Ver.  44.— How  can  ye  believe,  seeing  that
ye  receive  glory  one  from  another,  and  ye
seek  not  the  glory  that  oometh  from  the  only
God?  The  difficulties  of  faith  in  himself
multiply  as  he  proceeds.  First,  he  insisted
that  he  had  seaiclied  their  hearts,  and  found
•ihero  none  of  that  elementary  "  love  of  God  "
which  is  the  prime  condition  of  knowledge
or  faith.  Then  he  sliowed  that  an  apprecia-
tion on  their  part  of  the  type  of  character
antithetic  to  his  own,  fe.  of  the  man  who  comes
in  his  own  name  and  seeks  his  glory  from
men,  must  blind  them  to  that  which  is  most
characteriBtio  of  himself.  They  will  receive
the  prophet,  the  pseudo-Christ,  for  the  very
reason  that  makes  his  own  mission  so  unpa-
latable. He  strikes  right  across  their  taste,
their  passion,  thek  prejudice.  He  now  lays
down  a  new  or  modified  statement  of  one  of
the  primeconditionsiif  spiritualfaith.  Tliere
V3  a  universal  desire  for  5<(Ja,  glory,  of  some
sort.  The  original  meaning  of  5(f{o  here
almost  forces  itself  into  thu  text.  Aiifa  is
"  opinion,"  thought,  and  the  good  opinion
which  one  person  may  entertain  with  refer-
ence to  another.  The  glory  of  a  Greek
citizen  was  the  good  opinion  of  his  fellow-eiti-
zens  or  fellow-countrymen.  God's  "  glory  "
is  the  universal  judgment  of  all  intelligences,
including  his  own  concerning  himself.  The
highest "  glory  "  of  man  ie  the  approval  of


Almighty  God ;  the  "  opinion "  which  ii
absolutely  true  and  is  not  mingled  or  con-
taminated with  any  flattering  fictions.  The
minds  which  deliberately  ignore  this  highest
and  only  true  source  of  glory,  and  substitute
for  it  the  glory  of  the  ignorant  plaudits  and
unreal  approval,  and  unhesitating  homage
of  the  clique  to  which  they  belong,  are  in  a
moral  condition  incapacitating  tliem  to  be-
lieve in  the  Christ.  How  should  they  ?  How
can  they  ?  It  is  not  possible  for  that  man  to
believe  Christ  at  all  whose  mind  is  so  be-
fogged, whose  moral  judgments  are  so  dis-
located. "The  only  God  {irapk  toS  iiivou
0foC)"  (see  ch.  xvii.  3;  Bom.  xvi.  26;  1
Tim.  vi.  15).  The  use  of  .this  epithet  in  the
Fourth  Gospel  is  of  singular  value.  More-
over, in  this  very  connection  the  Son  is  so
exalted  above  the  world,  and  the  Father
comes  so  close  to  man  in  Christ,  that  we  can-
not wonder  that  Gnosticism  and  Arianism
rapidly  evolved  a  Ditheism  of  great  peril  to
the  conscience.  The  Lord,  notwithstanding
the  lifting  of  his  humanity  to  the  throne  of
universal  judgment,  and  the  lifting  of  hia
Sonship  into  the  bosom  of  God,  on  more  than
one  occasion  reminds  his  hearers  of  the  unity,
the  solity,  of  Almighty  God.

Ver.  45. — Think  not,  he  added,  with  one
concluding  and  sweeping  exposition  of
their  relation  to  the  old  covenant  and  to
himself — Think  not,  as  ye  might  be  disposed
to  do,  that  I  will  accuse  you  to  (before;  see
Syriac  k'dom)  the  Pather  (not  referring
to  the  judgment-day,  where  he  will  appear
as  Judge,  but  now),  as  One  in  intimate  and
awful  relation  with  the  Father,  or  as  One
whose  words  have  set  up  a  standard  which
is  much  loftier  or  severer  than  that  which
you  are  prepared  to  allow.  He  has  charged
them  already  with  having  missed  the  deepest
teaching  of  their  own  Scriptures,  with  fas-
tening on  the  letter  rather  than  on  the  spirit
of  the  Divine  Word ;  that,  though  the  prime
article  of  their  creed  was  the  doctrine  of"  the
only  God,"  they  had  no  love  of  God,  no  appr^
elation  of  God  as  the  only  Source  of  worthy
glory,  and  therefore  neither  faith  nor  know-
ledge. They  were  snapping  up  worthless
pretenders,  and  drinking  the  flattery  of  men
rather  than  the  approval  of  God.  They  were
blind  to  the  gloi^  and  deaf  to  the  voice  of
the  Father,  and  so  would  not  come  to  him
for  life.  These  sad  facts  need  not  be,  will
not  be,  pressed  against  them,  seeing  that
there  is  a  primary  accusation  already  laid.
He  that  (or,  there  i$  one  tliat)  aoouseQi  yon,
Moses,  on  whom  ye  have  set  your  hope  (of.  2
Cor.  i.  10) ;  Moses  himself,  in  that  very  Law
which  you  are  now  making  the  ground  ol
the  rejection  of  my  claims — Moses  is  youi
accuser ;  Moses  appears  against  you.  "  This,"
says  Lange,  "is  the  last  and  mightiest
stroke  "    "  Elenchus  maxima  aptus  ad  con-


-JH.  V.  l-4t.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


^25


clusionem"  (Bengel);  i.e.  "The  spirit  of
MoseB  IB  my  Tindication,  the  teaching  of
Moses  is  typical  of  mine,  the  institutions
of  Moses  were  symbolic  of  my  coming  and
work.  The  predictions  of  Moses  pointed  out
my  coming.  The  mighty  words  of  Moses
will  not  save  you,  unless  you  penetrate  to
their  inner  meaning."

Vers.  46,  47. — For  if  ye  believed  Moses,
ye  would  believe  me.  The  reason  for  the
previous  saying  is  introduced  by  yap.  The
form  of  the  conditional  sentence  shows  that
the  protasis  is  a  supposition  of  an  event
contrary  to  the  fact.  They  were  not  helieving
Moses,  though  they  were  putting  a  vain  and
illusive  confidence  in  him ;  and  hence  they
were  not  believing  in  Christ.  Here  is  the
secret  of  the  antagonism  to  the  Lord.  A
deeper  understanding  of  their  own  Scripture
would  involve  an  acceptance  of  tlie  claims  of
Christ.  For  he  wrote  of  me.  The  old  saying
contains  Christ's  utterance :  Novum  Teata-
menlum  in  Vetere  latet.  Veins  Testamentum
in  Novo  patet.  Beferenoe  is  made  to  the
great  place  which  Moses  gave  to  the  first
promise,  to  the  typical  deliverances  of  a
fallen  world,  to  the  hopes  of  a  redeeming
Seed.  Christ  referred  to  the  Mosaic  type
involved  in  the  spirit  willing  to  sacrifice
the  Only  Begotten,  to  the  creation  of  the


birthright-blessing,  the  Tisiona  of  the  dying
Israel,  to  the  blessings  on  Judah;  to  the
significance  of  the  Law,  of  the  tabernacle,
of  the  Passover,  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,
of  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  and  the  very
special  prophecy  concerning  a  Prophet  like
unto  himself.  More  than  this,  Moses  had  set
forth  in  the  Decalogue  the  portrait-sketch  of
the  perfect  Man,  of  the  Divine  life  which  the
Lord  Jesus  proceeded  to  fill  out,  to  fulfil.
He  awakened  by  the  Law  that  sense  of  sin
and  sinfulness  which  the  Lord  Christ  had
come  to  soothe  and  obliterate.  But  if  ye  be-
lieve not  his  writings,  how  shall  ye  believe
my  words!  "They  are  easier  for  you  to
understand;  you  have  them  ever  on  yout
tongue.  If  their  meaning  is  missed,  the
deeper  truths  of  my  words  will  be  more  in-
accessible to  you."  The  antithesis  is  rather
between  the  "  his  "  and  "  my  "  than  between
the  "  writings  "  and  "  words."  "  This  charge
of  not  believing  Moses,  addressed  to  people
who  were  put  in  a  fury  by  the  pretended
violation  of  one  of  the  Mosaic  command-
ments, recalls  other  words  of  Jesus  (Matt
xxiii.  29 — 32),  '  Ye  build  the  tmnbs  of  th6
prophets,  where/ore  ye  be  uiitnesses  unto  your-
selves that  ye  are  children  of  them  that  killed
the  prophets'"  CGtodet).


HOMmETICS.

Vers.  1 — ^9. — 7%«  cure  of  {he  impotent  man.  The  icene  elianges  once  more  to
Jerusalem.  There  unbelief  develops  very  rapidly,  and  there  is  a  foreshadowing  of  the
dread  reality  :  "  It  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  Jerusalem."  Jesus  finds
himself  once  more  in  the  very  focus  of  controversy.

I.  The  time  of  this  miracle.  "After  these  things  there  was  s  feast  of  the
Jews."  It  is  generally  believed  that  this  was  the  Feast  of  Purim.  1.  It  was  not  one
of  the  three  great  feasts.  2.  It  was  a  feast  in  which  the  Jews  gave  presents  to  one
another.    Jesus  would  signalize  it  by  a  deed  of  miraculous  beneficence.

II.  The  scene  op  the  miracle.  "  Now  there  is  at  Jerusalem  by  the  sheep-
gate  a  pool,  which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Bethesda,  having  fire  porches."
This  was  a  thermal,  intermittent  spring,  such  as  are  still  to  be  found  at  Jerusalem,
possessing  rare  curative  properties  in  cases  of  disease.  "The  blind,  the  halt,  the
withered,"  gathered  round  it,  seeking  shelter  in  the  porches  while  they  were  awaiting
"  the  moving  of  the  waters."

III.  The  case  of  the  impotbnt  man.  1.  He  had  heen  for  eight  and  thirty
yea/rs  afflicted  with  impotence  in  his  limbs.  2.  Perhaps  his  impotence  had  some
connection  with  youthful  sins  and  follies.  (Ver.  14.)  3.  He  had  no  strength  to  enable
him  to  plwnge  into  the  bubbling  springs  as  they  arose  with  healing  power.  4.  Se  had
no  money  to  hire  a  carrier.  5.  The  bystanders,  whether  sick  or  hah,  had  no  mercy  or
sympathy  for  him.    6.   Tet  he  came  from  day  to  day  in  the  hope  of  a  cure.

IV.  Odb  Lord's  compassion  for  him.  "Wilt  thou  be  made  whole?"  1.  The
question  tms  designed  to  shake  off  the  long  apathy  of  years,  and  revive  the  hopes  of  the
afflicted  man.  2.  It  was  designed  to  withdraw  his  mind  from  the  Bethesda  waters,  and
bring  him  into  contact  with  the  Saviour  himself.

V.  The  actual  cure.  "  Kise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk."  1.  The  command  was
accompanied  by  the  exercise  of  Divine  power  on  Christ's  part,  and  of  faith  on  the  part  of
the  impotent  man.  2.  The  impntent  man  walked  in  the  joy  of  his  recovered  power.
3.  The  miracle  was  done  on  the  sabbath  day.    It  was  a  deed  of  mercy,  and  therefore

JOHH.  «


226  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [ch.  v.  1— 47.

suitAble  to  the  day.    4.  The  miracle  was  one  not  to  he  gainsaid,  as  this  man  had  been
bog  known  to  resort  to  the  Bethesda  springs  in  search  of  cure.

Vers.  10 — 16. — Oufbreak  of  Jewish  hostility.  It  is  not  against  the  miracle,  but
Against  an  imagined  infringement  of  Mosaic  law.

I.  The  chabge  aoainst  the  impotent  man.  "  It  is  the  sabbath  day :  it  is  not
lawful  for  thee  to  carry  thy  bed."  1.  It  seemed  Justified  in  the  letter  hy  the  Divine
comTnandment.  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  and  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  day  "
(Jer.  xvii.  21).  2.  But  the  command  related  to  matters  of  trade,  not  of  mercy  or
comfort.  (Neh.  xiii.  15.)  3.  The  Jews,  however,  must  have  their  cavil  where  they  cannot
deny  the  working  of  miracle.  4.  Formalists  affect  an  extreme  reverence  for  the  letter  of
a  law  which  they  neglect  and  despise  in  its  inmost  spirit.

II.  The  akswbr  to  the  chabgb.  "  He  that  made  me  whole  said  to  me,  Take  up
thy  bed,  and  walk."  1.  It  was  a  serious  charge,  for  it  involved  the  punishment  of
death  by  stoning.  2.  The  cmed  man  shelters  himself  under  the  authority  of  the
Miracle-worker,  implying  that  he  who  was  able  to  do  such  a  work  must  have
authority  to  give  him  such  a  command.  3.  He  was  still  ignorant  of  the  name  of  the
Divine  Person  who  had  cured  him.  "  And  he  that  was  healed  wist  not  who  it  was."
He  had  hardly  time  to  make  inquiry  before  Jesus  "  had  conveyed  himself  away,"
making  an  easy  escape  through  the  thronging  multitude.

III.  The  discoveet  of  his  Bbnefactob.  1.  The  cured  man  is  found  hy  Jesus  in
the  temple.  His  first  act  is  to  thank  God  for  his  cure.  It  marks  the  reality  of  his  faith.
2.  Our  Lords  admonition  to  him.  "  Sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  upon  thee."  '
(1)  It  is  implied  that  his  lifelong  affliction  had  its  origin  in  his  sins,  (o)  There  is  an
invariable  connection  between  sin  and  suffering  established  by  the  moral  government  of
God.  (6)  Yet  it  is  not  possible  for  man  to  trace  this  connection  at  all  times  in  the
midst  of  the  complicated  and  mysterious  dispensations  of  his  providence.  (2)  It  is
implied  that  the  Lord  proportions  his  chastisements  or  his  punishments  to  the  degree
of  sinful  provocation  attained  by  transgressors.  "Lest  a  worse  thing  come  upon  thee."
(a)  The  lighter  chastisement  is  often  sent  in  mercy  to  warn  against  sin  and  folly.
(6)  The  Lord  does  not  afflict  willingly,  but  for  our  profit  (Heb.  xii.  10).

IV.  The  Mibaole-workeb  made  known  to  his  enemies.  "The  man  departed,
and  told  the  Jews  that  it  was  Jesus  that  made  him  whole."  What  was  his  motive
in  giving  this  information  to  the  Jews?  1.  It  was  not  a  malicious  denunciation,
which  would  only  argue  the  deepest  ingratitude  on  his  part.  2.  It  was  not  prompted
by  the  mere  instinct  of  obedience  to  the  authorities.  3.  It  was  not  designed  to  shift
the  responsibility  of  sabbath-breaking  from  himself  to  Jesus.  He  here  emphasizes
the  miracle  rather  than  the  sabbath-breaking.  "  It  was  Jesus  that  made  him  whole."
4.  It  was  prompted  rather  (1)  by  gratitude  to  our  Lord,  (2)  by  the  desire  to  make  him
known  to  others  in  a  similar  distress,  (3)  and  to  bring  the  Jews  to  recognize  him  in  his
true  character.    His  faith  seems  to  imply  a  motive  of  this  kind.

V.  The  effect  of  the  disclosube  upon  the  Jews.  "  Therefore  did  the  Jews
persecute  Jesus  .  .  .  because  he  had  done  these  things  on  the  sabbath  day."  1.  Their
action  had  a  double  root.  "  These  things  " — the  healing  and  the  burden-bearing  on  the
sabbath.  2.  They  had  no  true  sympathy  with  suffering,  nor  had  they  any  true
conception  of  the  nature  of  their  ovm  sabbath.  3.  T%e  spirit  of  perseeution  often
springs  from  ignorance.

Vers.  17 — 23. — Our  LorcPs  vindication  of  his  conduct.  It  is  summarized  in  a  single
significant  sentence  :  "My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."

I.  The  true  meanino  of  cub  Lobd's  declaration.  1.  His  Father's  life  is
characterized  by  unceasing  activity.  He  may  have  ceased  to  put  forth  power  in  the
way  of  creative  energy,  but  he  is  still  active  in  the  spheres  of  providence  and
redemption.  2.  Chrisfs  work  is  co-ordinate  with  that  of  the  Father,  and  not  merely
dependent  upon  it.  The  assenion  implies  equality  of  operation.  3.  The  sabbath
miracle  Just  performed  was  part  of  his  Divine  activity,  but  not  on  that  account
inconsistent  with  the  sabbath  law.  (1)  As  One  "  born  undei-  the  Law  "  (Gal.  iv.  4) ;
(2)  as  a  "Minister  of  the  circumcision  "  (Rom.  xv.  8),  he  could  not  repudiate  the  Law,
which  was  only  to  cease  with  his  death ;  but  (3)  the  work  of  mercy  done  on  the  sabbath
was  really  included  in  the  spirit  of  the  Law.


oa.T.  1—4:7.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOfiDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  22?


II.  The  Jewish  intebpbbtatioh  put  upon  oub  Loed's  declabation.  "There-
fore sought  they  the  more  to  kill  him,  because  he  not  only  had  broken  the  sabbath,  but
laid  also  that  God  was  his  Father,  making  himself  equal  with  God."  The  interpreta-
tion was  perfectly  just,  and,  accordingly,  Jesus,  instead  of  repudiating  it,  uses  four
arguments  to  confirm  its  truth.  1.  First  argument.  His  perfect  Sonship  involves
identity  of  tvUl  and  operation  with  the  Father.  "  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,
but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do :  for  what  things  soever  he  doeth,  these  also  doeth
the  Son  likewise."  (1)  The  Arian  infers  from  the  words,  "  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of
himself,"  that  Christ  is  not  equal  to  the  Father.  (2)  But  the  Lord  asserts  that
separate  action  is  impossible  on  account  of  the  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Bon ;  and
(3)  that  the  action  of  Father  and  Son  is  coextensive  in  virtue  of  the  sameness  of
nature.  2.  Second  argwnent.  The  love  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  leads  to  his
communicating  to  the  Son  "all  things  that  himself  doeth:  and  he  will  show  him
greater  works  than  these,  that  ye  may  marvel."  (I)  The  Father's  love  to  the  Son  is
based  on  their  essential  nature.  (2)  Love  is  the  perfect  revelation  of  the  Father,  and  is
therefore  communicative  in  its  very  nature.  (3)  It  is  through  the  Son  this  love  of  the
Father  streams  downward  to  believers  (ch.  xvi.  27).  (4)  The  greater  works  yet  to  be
done  might  excite  the  wonder  of  the  Jews,  and  leave  them  without  excuse  in  their
unbelief.  Wonder  ought  to  excite  to  faith.  3.  Third  argument.  The  Son  it
joined  with  the  Father  in  quickening  the  dead.  "For  as  the  Father  raiselh  up  the
dead, and  quickeneth  them;  even  so  the  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will."  (1)  This  work
is  an  act  of  omnipotence  possible  to  God  only.  If  Christ  can  do  it,  be  must  be  God.
(2)  The  work  is  impossible  to  man,  whether  it  be  regarded  as  referring  to  the
resurrection  of  the  dead  at  the  judgment-day,  or  to  the  spiritual  resurrection  of  sinners
in  the  present  life.  (3)  Christ's  power  Was  manifest  (a)  in  raising  Lazarus,  the  son  of
the  widow  of  Nain,  and  the  daughter  of  Jairus ;  (6)  in  the  conversion  of  many  souls  during
his  ministry ;  (c)  and  will  be  still  more  gloriously  manifest  in  the  final  resurrection  of
the  dead,  (d)  He  is  sovereign  in  the  exercise  of  his  power :  "  The  Son  quickeneth  whom
he  will."  (o)  Yet  his  will  is  not  independent  of  the  Father's  wUl,  for  he  quickeneth
all  whom  the  Father  hath  given  to  him.  (i3)  But  the  salvation  that  springs  out  of  this
quickening  is  not  of  works,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  him  that  showeth  mercy.
4.  Fourth  argument.  Judgment  bdongs  to  the  Son.  "  For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,
but  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son."  (1)  The  Father  is,  in  a  true  sense,
Judge  of  all  the  earth,  but  he  does  not  judge  without  the  Son ;  for  he  will  yet  judge  the
world  in  righteousness  by  his  Son  (Acts  xvii.  31).  (2)  Yet  he  has  committed  the
judgment  to  the  Son  of  man.  This  prerogative  of  judgment  implies  equality  of  Father
and  Son.  (3)  The  desigu  of  this  arrangement.  "  That  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,
even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  This  text  condemns  those  Sooinians  who  refuse  to
worship  Christ  as  they  worship  the  Father.  (4)  The  Jews  of  our  Lord's  d?ty,  like  the
Sooinians  of  our  day,  dishonour  the  Father  in  the  very  act  of  refusing  due  homage  to
the  Son.  "  He  that  honoureth  not  the  Son  honoureth  not  the  Father  who  hath  sent
him."  Divine  honour  can  only  be  given  to  a  Divine  person.  "My  glory  will  I  not
give  to  another,"  saith  God,

Vers.  24 — 30. — The  two  resurrections  and  the  two  judgments  by  the  Son.  The  views
hitherto  expressed  in  a  summary  form  are  now  exhibited  at  length  in  their  concrete
aspects.

I.  The  natubb  and  bebttlt  of  the  spibitual  besubbection.  "He  that
heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  eternal  life,  and  cometh  not
into  condemnation;  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life."  1.  The  two  conditions  of
eternal  life.  (1)  Knowledge  of  Christ's  will.  "  He  that  heareth  my  word."  (o)  Christ
is  the  Author  of  revelatiou  ;  as  the  Word,  he  makes  known  the  Father's  mind  and  will
for  our  salvation.  (6)  It  is  a  word  for  hearing,  because  "  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and
hearing  by  the  Word  of  God  "  (Eom.  x.  17).  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."
"  The  Word  first  began  to  be  siwken  by  him,  and  afterwards  by  them  that  heard  him  "
(Heb.  ii.  3).  (2)  Faith  in  God.  (a)  This  implies  more  than  belief  in  God's  existence.
(J)  It  implies  a  heartfelt. trust  in  him  as  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (c)  Faith
in  Cbd  ituplies  faith  in  Christ  (John  xi>.  1);  (a)  because  the  Father  speaks  through
the  Son ;  (ft)  because  the  Father's  love  reaches  man  through  the  Son ;  (7)  because  "  our


228  THE  &OSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  t.  1—47.

life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God"  (Col  iii.  3).  2.  The  result  of  thin  knowledge  and  faith.
(1)  Positively:  eternal  life,  (a)  It  is  a  present  possession.  lie  "hath  eternal  life."
(6)  He  has  a  right  and  claim  to  it  by  virtue  of  Christ's  work,  as  involving  a  justification
to  life,  (c)  He  has  meetness  for  it  and  the  earnest  of  it  in  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Cor.  i.  2t).
(2\  Negatively  :  "  He  cometh  not  into  condemnation,  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life."
(a)  He  is  not  condemned  for  original  sin,  though  judgment  did  pass  upon  all  men  to
condemnation  for  it.  (&)  Nor  for  actual  transgression ;  for  "  there  is  no  condemnation
to  him  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Bom.  viii.  1).  (c)  But  is  "  passed  from  death  unto
life."  (a)  He  has  escaped  from  spiritual  death  ;  (i8)  from  the  second  death ;  (y)  for  he
has  become  alive  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ  onr  Lord.

IL  The  efooh  or  this  spiRiTnAi.  besurbbction.  "The  hour  is  coming,  and
now  is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God :  and  they  that  hear  shall
live."  1.  His  words,  which  were  spirit  and  life,  were  already  preparing  the  way  for
Pentecost.  2.  The  coming  howr  of  abounding  blessing  was  to  date  from  Pentecost.
3.  The  blessing  of  the  epoch.  (1)  The  persons  included  in  the  blessing.  "  The  dead."
(a)  The  spiritually  dead,  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,  dead  to  all  spiritual  good ;
(&)  who  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God ;  to  whom  the  Word  comes  in  power,  and  works
effectually  in  them,  receiving,  believing,  obeying  it.  (2)  The  saving  voice.  "  The  voice
of  the  Son  of  God."  (a)  It  is  a  voice  of  love,  grace,  mercy,  righteousness,  peace,  and
salvation ;  (6)  it  is  a  voice  of  power,  because  it  is  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God.  (3)  The
blessing.  "  They  shall  live."  (a)  It  will  be  a  life  of  faith ;  (5)  a  life  of  communion  with
God ;  (e)  it  will  be  eternal  in  its  duration.

III.  The  oround  ov  this  spiritual  bescbbeotion.  "For  as  the  Father  hath
life  in  himself,  so  hath  he  given  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself."  1.  The  Son  has  a
self-sufficient  life,  essentially  and  originally  like  the  Father.  2.  But  he  has  a  life  given
of  the  Father,  in  virtue  of  which  it  is  divinely  secured  for  those  whom  the  Father  has
given  him  (1  John  v.  11).  Eternal  life  is  what  the  one  gives  and  the  other  receives
in  the  economy  of  Divine  salvation.  3.  There  is  thus  a  doiMe  security  for  eternal
life.

lY.  Tee  junaMENT  a  the  hands  or  the  Son  of  han.  "And  hath  given  him
authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man."  1.  The  Judgment
implies  omniscience,  perfect  holiness,  perfect  Justice,  and  all  other  Divine  perfections.
2.  It  is  committed  to  the  Son  of  man  as  a  sharer  of  the  nature  that  is  to  be  Judged  for
the  deeds  done  in  the  body.

V.  The  final  eesurreotioh  and  the  final  judouent.  "As  by  man  came
death,  so  by  man  shall  come  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  It  was  a  marvellous  truth
to  proclaim  to  the  Jews,  that  he  who  addressed  them  would  raise  up  the  dead  and  judge
them  at  the  final  assize.  1.  Mark  the  certainty  and  the  v/niversality  of  the  resurrection.
"  The  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  bis  voice."  2.  The
means  hy  which  the  resurrection  shall  be  accomplished.  "  The  voice  of  the  Son  of  man."'
(1)  Sinners  may  shut  their  ears  to  that  voice  on  earth,  but  it  will  be  heard  in  the
judgment-day.  (2)  It  is  a  voice  which,  re-echoed  by  the  voice  of  the  archangel  and
the  last  trump,  will  have  power  to  awake  all  the  dead  without  exception.  3.  The  two-
fold end  of  the  resurrection.  "  They  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  good,  to  the
resurrection  of  life;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  to  the  resurrec'ion  of  judgment."
(1)  There  will  be  a  judgment  of  all  as  surely  as  a  resurrection  of  all.  Believers  must
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  as  well  as  unbelievers,  to  receive  according
to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  But  they  will  receive  the  judgment  of
acquittal  in  virtue  of  their  union  with  Christ  in  righteousness  and  life,  while  their
rewards  will  be  proportioned  to  "  the  deeds  done  in  the  body."  (2)  The  judgment  will
proceed  upon  a  test  practically  applicable  to  the  whole  human  race — "  the  deeds  done
in  the  body,"  whether  they  shall  be  the  deeds  of  the  righteous,  issuing  out  of  faith  in
Christ;  or  the  deeds  of  the  unrighteous,  issuing  out  of  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief.
(3)  There  will  be  a  final  division  of  the  human  race  into  two  classes.  There  will  be  the
sheep  and  the  goats,  the  saved  and  the  lost,  saints  and  sinners.

VI.  The  conclusion  or  the  whole  matter.  "I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing:
as  I  hear,  I  judge :  and  my  judgment  is  just ;  because  I  seek  not  mine  own  will,  but  the
will  of  him  that  sent  me."  Our  Lord  carries  the  Jews  back  to  the  starting-point  of  his
discourse:  "My  Father  workoth  hitherto,  and  I  work."     He  has  now  justified  his


OH.  T.  1—470      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOHDING  TO  BT.  JOHN,  t2»

original  statement.  1.  Jesui  repeats  his  declaration  of  a  Divitie  Sonship.  2.  He
announces  the  prineiple  of  his  Judgment — "  as  I  hear,  I  judge  " — which  is  the  principle
of  all  true  judgment.  3.  Ee  declares  his  judgment  to  be  true,  because  it  is  based  on  hia
perfect  knowledge  of  the  Father's  will,  to  which  his  own  will  is  Infallibly  conformed.

Vers.  31 — 40. — The  witness  to  the  Son.  The  Jews  might  retort  that  all  Jesus
affirmed  respecting  himself  had  no  other  support  than  his  own  words.  His  answer  is
that  there  is  a  threefold  witness  in  hia  favour.

I.  OuB  Lord  admits  the  need  of  a  Divine  sanction.  "  If  I  bear  witness  of  myself,
my  witness  is  not  true.  There  is  another  that  beareth  witness  of  me ;  and  I  know  that
the  witness  which  he  witnesseth  of  me  is  true."  1.  This  Witnest  (a  Qod  himself,  though
his  name  is  not  yet  mentioned.  2.  It  is  not  John  the  Baptist.  "  Ye  sent  unto  John,
and  he  bare  witness  unto  the  truth.  But  I  receive  not  testimony  from  man."  (1)  Our
Lord,  by  this  reference  to  the  Baptist,  implied  that  the  Jews  ought  to  have  regarded
his  testimony  as  decisive  upon  the  mission  of  Jesus.  (2)  His  object  in  quoting  the
Baptist's  testimony  at  all  was  the  salvation  of  the  Jews ;  for  John  proclaimed  Jesus  to
be  "  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  "  But  these  things  I  say,
that  ye  may  be  saved."  (3)  He  treats  John's  testimony  as  merely  provisionaL  "  I
receive  not  testimony  from  man" — even  thougit  he  be  a  prophet;  for  I  have  higher
testimony.  (4)  The  Jews  are  without  excuse  for  rejecting  Christ,  for  they  delighted
themselves  for  a  time  in' John's  ministry,  which  was  essentially  preparatory  to  that  of
Christ.  "  He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  lamp :  and  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to
rejoice  in  his  light."  (a)  John  was  a  lamp  that  was  joyous  for  a  time,  for  the  light
and  hope  he  diffused  through  Israel ;  (b)  but  a  dying  lamp,  necessarily  decreasing  (ch.
iii.  30).  The  Jews  regarded  him  with  a  strange  curiosity,  but  rejected  his  solemn
warningB  of  repentance.

IL  The  fihst  op  the  thkeb  witnesses  to  the  Son.  "  But  I  have  greater  witness
than  John :  for  the  works  which  my  Father  gave  me  to  finish,  the  same  works  that  I  do
bear  witness  of  me,  that  the  Father  hath  sent  me."  His  miracles  were  his  first  witness.
1.  The  Jews  could  not  deny  the  fact  of  the  miracles.  2.  The  miracles  were  gifts  of  tht
Father  to  Jesus,  and  yet  works  of  Jesus  himself.  3.  They  were  signs  to  authenticate  the
Divine  Messenger.

III.  The  second  of  the  thbee  witnesses.  "  And  the  Father  himself,  which  hath
sent  me,  hath  borne  witness  of  me.  Ye  have  neither  heard  his  voice  at  any  time,  nor
seen  his  shape."  Jesus  here  refers  to  the  Father's  testimony  at  his  baptism, "  This  is
my  well-beloved  Son."

IV.  The  third  of  thx  three  witnesses.  "  And  ye  have  not  his  Word  abiding  in
you :  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  believe  not."  This  is  the  revelation  contained
in  Old  Testament  Scripture.  Jesus  implies  that  he  is  mirrored  in  that  Scripture,
1.  Consider  the  importance  of  searching  the  Scriptures.  "  Search  the  Scriptures ;  for  in
them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life:  and  they  are  they  which  testify  of  me."  (1)  The
Scriptures  are  to  be  made  the  object  of  deep  search,  not  mere  casual  reading.  They
contain  many  deep  mysteries  to  task  the  intellect  of  man.  (2)  They  contain  the
knowledge  of  salvation,  (a)  The  way  of  salvation  was  the  same  under  both  dispensa-
tions. ( J)  It  was  attained  through  knowledge ;  for  "  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing
by  the  Word  of  Gori."  2.  There  is  a  possibility  ofm^n  studying  the  Scriptures  and  yet
rejecting  the  salvation  offered  in  it.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  might  have
life."    Man  possesses  the  dread  power  of  rejecting  life.

Vers.  41 — 47. — The  cause  and  the  end  of  Jewish  unbelief.  Jesus  has  Just  declared
that  the  Jews  will  not  come  to  him,  and  now  he  reveals  its  cause.

I.  The  cause  of  their  trNBELiEF.  "  I  know  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in
you."  1.  This  love  would  oblige  them  to  seek  honour  only  from  Ood,  and  thus  appreciate
the  glory  the  Father  has  given  to  the  Son.  2.  Jissus  has  no  concern  for  man's  praise
or  report,  for  the  Father's  testimony  is  all-sufficient.  "I  receive  not  honour  from
men."  3.  TTie  Jews  could  not  receive  this  testimony,  because  human  considerations  had
blinded  their  eyes.  "  How  can  ye  believe,  who  receive  honour  one  of  another,  and
seek  not  the  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only  ? "  4.  Mark  the  readiness  of  tht
Jews  to  receive  false  Messiahs.    "  If  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name,  him  ye  will


830  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  tO  St.  JOfiN.       [<«•  *•  l-^^

receive."    Sixty-four  false  Messiahs  have  appeared  at  varioua  period*  to  reoelT*  the
temiwrary  homage  of  the  Jews.

II.  Thb  end  of  Jewish  nNBELiEF — cokdemkation  thbouoh  Mobk8  bouklf.
1.  The  true  accuser  of  the  Jews.  (1)  Not  Jesus,  for  he  is  Judge,  not  accuser.  "  Do  not
suppose  that  I  will  accuse  you."  (2)  But  Moses,  their  liberator  and  advocate.  "  There
is  one  that  aocusethyou,  even  Moses,  on  whom  ye  have  set  your  hope."  2.  HVie  connec-
tion between  faith  in  Jesus  and  faith  in  Moses.  "  For  had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would
have  believed  me :  for  he  wrote  of  me."  (1)  Our  Lord  implies  that  Moses  was  the
writer  of  the  Pentateuch.  (2)  He  implies  that  the  whole  system — promises,  types,
symbolic  institutions  of  the  Law,  as  presented  in  the  Mosaic  writings — found  their  true
fulfilment  in  himself.  Moses  truly  wrote  of  Jesus  in  the  memorable  prophecy,  "  I  will
raise  them  up  a  Prophet  like  unto  thee  "  (Deut.  xviii.  18).  (3)  Disbelief  in  Moses
carried  with  it  a  necessary  disbelief  in  Christ.  "  If  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how  shall
ye  believe  my  words  ?  "  (o)  The  writings  of  Moses  might  be  regarded  as  possessing
greater  weight,  because  they  were  contained  in  a  book,  than  mere  words  of  moutb.
(b)  lliey  had  all  the  prestige  of  age  and  usage.  If,  therefore,  they  were  rejected  in
their  true  import,  how  could  the  Jews  be  expected  to  lecaira  Uie  oral  teaching  of  him
to  wliom  the  writings  bore  witness?


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  6.— 27i«  will  to  be  healed.  This  miracle  is  indeed  a  parable.  The  pitiable
condition  of  the  sufferer,  the  prolonged  duration  of  his  calamity,  his  utter  helplessness
and  despondency,  all  have  their  analogues  in  the  spiritual  state  of  the  sinful.  And,  on
the  other  hand,  the  exercise  of  Christ's  Divine  authority,  the  condition  of  blessing
imposed  upon  the  infirm  man,  and  the  immediateness  and  completeness  of  the  cure,
are  all  suggestive  of  the  terms,  the  process,  and  the  results  of  salvation.  The  language
in  which  Christ  addressed  the  sufTerer,  with  a  view  to  elicit  his  iaith,  is  especially
instructive:  "  Wouidest  thou  be  made  whole?"

I.  It  does  not  follow  that  wbebeteb  thebi  u  a  ipibitdal  iiai.adt  there

IS   also  a   CONSCIOnSNESB  OF  IT    AND  A   DESIRE    TO    BE    DELIVERED    FROM   IT.       JesUS

did  not  take  it  for  granted  that,  because  the  man  bad  an  infirmity  of  long  standing,  he
was  therefore  anxious  to  be  relieved  from  it.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  was  so  anxious  ;
and  the  presumption  is  that  men  do  wish  to  be  delivered  from  bodily  and  temporal
ills.  It  is  not  so  in  all  cases  with  spiritual  disorders.  It  was  a  reproach  against  the
self-righteous  that  they  knew  not  that  they  were  poor,  naked,  blind,  and  miserable.
Sin  is  not  always  accompanied  by  consciousness  of  sin.  Long  familiarity  with  vice  and
crime,  and  still  more  with  that  alienation  of  lieart  from  God  which  is  the  essence  of
sin,  is  often  found  to  render  the  nature  insensible  to  its  own  wretched  condition  and
prospects.

II.  Even  Divine  merot  does  not  act  independentlt  of  human  confession,  faith,
AND  DDSIRE.  The  truth  is  that  it  cannot ;  for  God  cannot  override  the  nature  with
which  he  has  himself  endowed  his  creatures.  He  may  annihilate  that  nature;  but,
whilst  it  remains,  be  cannot  contradict  himself  by  acting  independently  of  it.  And,
further,  he  wiU  not  dispense  with  the  appointed  human  conditions,  for  the  sake  of  his
own  moral  government,  whose  sacredness  he  will  surely  maintain,  and  for  the  sake  of
the  spiritual  welfare  of  those  whom  he  governs.  It  may  appear,  on  a  superficial
glance,  that  in  taking  this  view  we  magnify  the  free-will  of  man  above  the  sovereignty
of  God ;  but  reflection  convinces  us  that  this  is  not  the  case.  There  is  nothing  arbitrary
ia  the  Divine  government ;  and  infinite  Wisdom  has  decided  that  without  the  voluntary
co-o[ieration  of  man  the  highest  blessings  must  be  unattainable.

III.  Where  thebb  is  a  disfositiom  and  desibe  on  the  pabt  of  man,  Dtvink

KBBOT   WILL  NOT    WITHHOLD  THE  OBAOK   OF   SFIBITDAI.   HEALING.      There    Is  nO   place

for  human  power ;  we  can  do  nothing  to  heal  our  spiritual  diseases.  There  is  no  place
for  human  merit ;  we  can  do  nothing  to  deserve  a  Divine  interposition.  Yet  he  who
will  be  made  whole,  who  accepts  the  Deliv»er  and  welcomes  the  praised  deliverance,
shall  experience  the  healing  power  of  Immanuel.  Let  there  he  wuUngness,  let  there
be  faith  in  Christ,  let  there  be  submission  to  Divine  plans  and  order,  and  there  is  no


OH.  V.  1—47.]        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  X81

8in  for  wTiicb  pardon  cannot  be  obtained,  no  character  for  which  it  shall  ha  found  that
there  is  not  provided  .renewal  and  gpiiitual  health.— T.

Ver.  11. — Christ  viho  tavet  is  Ohritt  who  rt^.  This  poor  sufferer  excited  the
Saviour's  sympathy  and  pity,  and  Christ  healed  him  without  delay.  And  it  is  notice-
able that  the  word  of  healing  was  also  a  word  of  comtnand :  "  Take  up  thy  bed,  and
walk."  The  authority  of  the  Divine  Physician  was  acknowledged  by  the  patient  woo
had  received  the  benefit.  That  authority  was  felt  to  be  capable  of  overriding  the  letter
of  the  c<  remonial  law.  And  the  man  who  had  been  made  whule,  when  censured  by  the
formalists  for  carrying  his  couch  on  the  sabbath  day,  naturally  enough  fell  back  for
his  vindication  upon  the  command  of  the  great  Healer.  He  was  bound  to  do  the
bidding  of  him  who  had  set  him  free  from  a  protracted  infirmity,  and  had  thus  estab-
lished a  claim  upon  his  grateful  obedience.

I.  Observe  the  twofold  natube  and  need  of  man.  1.  Human  nature  is  dis-
tinguished by  a  capacity  for  feeling  and  by  a  faculty  of  energy.  2.  Consequently  a
Divine  Saviour  must  both  relieve  him  of  his  pains  and  infirmities,  and  at  the  same
time  give  a  new  direction  to  his  practical  powers.  The  double  need  requires  a  double
grace.

II.  Bemauk  in  Christ  the  disposition  to  pity  the  suffebeb,  to  pardon  the
■inneb,  to  restore  the  disordebed  to  moral  health  and  harmonious  activity.
The  miracles  of  healing  which  Christ  wrought  (in  number  more  than  two-thirds  of  the
whole,  as  recorded  by  the  evangelists)  are  an  abundant  proof  both  of  his  compassion
and  of  his  power  to  save.  The  variety  of  human  ills  with  which  he  dealt  may  be
taken  as  symbolizing  the  sympathy  of  Jesus  with  all  the  sorrows  and  errors  of
humanity,  and  his  power  to  heal,  to  harmonize,  and  to  bless.

III.  Bemabk  no  less  in  Christ  the  habit  of  BiOHTEons  and  authoritative
COMMAND.  Christ's  was  the  authority  of  holiness,  of  helpfulness,  of  love.  This
authority  was  acknowledged  by  nature,  by  demons,  and  especially  "by  men.  He  was
felt  to  speak  as  One  "  having  authority ; "  he  drew  forth  the  exclamation,  "  What
manner  of  man  is  this  I "  When  he  spoke  the  word  of  command,  rigid  Jews  broke
without  compunction  the  tradition  of  the  elders,  and  helpfess  cripples  willed  to  use
their  hitherto  powerless  limbs.  All  this  denoted  the  right  of  the  Son  of  God  to  rule
over  human  hearts  and  consciences,  over  individual  conduct,  and  over  social  life.

IV.  Consider  the  personal  experience  op  the  saved  as  witnessing  to  the
Lordship  op  the  Saviour  over  those  whom  he  has  redeemed.  1.  So  far  as  the
Lord  himself  is  concerned,  his  healing  grace  witnesses  to  his  Divinity,  and  his  Divinity
involves  his  control  over  bis  own  subjects.  2.  So  far  as  they  are  concerned  who  are
healed  by  the  Bedeemer,  it  may  be  said  that  gratitude  and  love  give  efficacy  to  those
purposes  of  obedience  which  are  formed  in  the  presence  of  his  rightrul  authority  and
power.  The  heart  responds  gratefully  and  affectionately  to  the  interest  exhibited  and
the  healing  mercy  exercised  by  Jesus,  and  looks  up  to  its  best  Friend  for  guidance
and  for  help.  There  is  no  law  so  powerful  as  the  law  of  love,  and  no  obedience  so
thorough  and  cheerful  as  that  of  gratitude. — ^T.

Ver.  17. — 2%«  incessaney  of  Divine  mimttry.  Healing  is  work.  The  sabbath  is  for
rest.  Thus  the  Jews,  in  their  rigid  formality,  objected  against  Jesus  that,  in  restoring
the  infirm  and  sick  man  to  health  and  vigour,  he  had  transgressed  the  Law,  because  he
had  wrought  the  cure  ujwn  the  sabbath  day.  The  calumnies  and  persecutions  of  his
enemies  were  met  on  the  part  cif  Christ  by  these  simple  and  significant  words:  "My
Father  woiketh  even  until  now,  and  I  work."  There  is  no  pause  in  the  Creator's
beneficence,  none  in  the  Saviour's  ministrations.

I.  Here  is  tbachino  upon  the  relation  op  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The
Jews  were  quick  to  discern  the  claim  implicitly  conta'ned  in  the  language  of  Jesus.
He  was  "  making,  himself  equal  with  God.  This  he  did,  both  by  speaking  thus  of  his
"  Father,"  and  by  assertiu';  of  himself  what  was  true  of  no  mere  mnn,  but  of  God  only.

II.  Here  is  teaghino  upon  the  unintebmitting  continuity  op  the  Divine
operations.  Christ  gives  no  countenance  to  the  very  common  notion  that  God  created
the  universe,  as  a  mechanic  may  a  machine,  leaving  it  when  wound  up  to  do  its  work,
with  no  energy  exercised,  no  interest  shown,  no  interference  taking  place  on  the  part


281  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [olt.I— 47.

of  the  Creator.  God  U  ever  working.  In  all  the  laws  of  nature,  in  all  the  move-
nipnts  of  society,  we  are  justified  in  tracing  his  ever-present  and  most  beneficent
hand.

III.  Here  is  teaching  upon  the  pabamount  authobitt  op  the  Lobd  Cbbibt.
What  dignity  is  there  la  the  assertion  of  our  Master,  "I  work"!  He  came  to  this
earth  in  order  to  work ;  his  life  among  men  was  a  life  of  toil.  "  I  must,"  said  he,
"  work  the  woiks  of  him  that  sent  me,  while  it  is  day."  Especially  did  he  work  in  the
vanquishing  of  human  ills,  and  in  the  promotion  of  human  purity  and  well-hcing.  His
work  was  not  only  wise;  it  was  effective.  Satan  worked;  Chiist  counter-worked.
Christ  worked  with  Divine  efficiency.

IV.  Hebe  is  teaching  upon  the  belation  between  Chbist  and  men's  views
AND  PRACTICES  WITH  REFERENCE  TO  RELIGION.  The  Jews  cavilled  and  quibbled,  marie
much  of  trifles,  were  strict  in  ceremonial  observances.  How  did  the  Lord  and  Saviour
act  in  view  of  Jewish  formalities  ?  "I  work  I " — such  was  his  reply,  his  rebuke.  They
might  talk  and  find  fault,  they  might  forget  the  sufferer  and  the  sinner  in  their  exalta-
tion of  the  Law.  The  Lord  showed  them  a  more  excellent  way,  when  he  quietly
but  assiduously  did  the  work  for  which  he  came  into  the  world.

V.  Hebe  is  teaching  upon  the  nature  of  the  Church's  mikistrt.  If  the
Father  and  the  Son  concur  in  working,  and  if  their  work  is  incessant,  what  must  he
the  vocation  of  the  representatives  of  Christ,  the  servants  of  God?  Surely  their
ministry  must  needs  he  one  of  toil.  And  if  even  the  sabbaih  was  a  suitable  occasion
tor  the  performance  of  a  miracle  of  healing  and  of  mercy,  can  Christians  put  the  Lord's
day  to  a  better  use  than  they  do  when  they  spend  its  hours  in  seeking  the  salvation  of
mankind?—!.

Ver.  18. — Offence  with  Christ.  It  might  have  been  expected  that  a  Saviotur  so  com-
passionate and  so  beneficent  as,  even  from  an  ordinary  human  point  of  view,  Jesus
undoubtedly  was,  would  have  met  with  a  warm  and  grateful  reception.  Especially,  it
might  have  been  expected,  would  his  own  countrymen,  the  neighbours  and  acquaint-
ances of  those  who  were  benefited  by  his  kindness,  have  encompassed  him  with  honour,
confidence,  and  affection.  But  it  was  not  so;  and  Jesus  was  not  surprised,  for  he  well
knew  what  human  nature  is.  Again  and  again  in  the  Gospel  narrative  do  we  meet
with  statements  regarding  the  offence  taken  at  Jesus  by  the  Jews,  and  the  hostility
they  cherished  towards  him.

I.  The  offence  was  usuallt  taken  with  some  word  spoken  by  Jesus  which

had   a  peculiar  PRECIOUSNESS,  OB  with  some  deed  that  DESERyED  ESPECIAL  HONOUB.

1'hose  who  in  their  life  and  work  moved  upon  familiar  lines,  who  fell  in  with  the
prejudices  of  their  country  and  their  times,  escaped  censure  and  commanded  confidence.
But  the  discourses  of  Jesus  were  paradoxical,  and  the  deeds  of  Jesus  were  novel  and
surprising.  It  was  when  he  said  something  altogether  above  the  spiritual  level  of  his
contemporaries,  when  he  wrought  some  work  worthy  of  God  himself,  that  the  hostility
and  malice  of  the  Jews  was  aroused.  And  if  any  one  will  observe  upon  what  grounds
the  unbelievers  of  our  own  time  take  offence  at  Christ,  he  will  find  that  the  "  scandal,''
the  stone  of  stumbling,  is  something  deserving  of  admiration  and  of  reverence.

II.  Offence  was  taken  with  Jesus  because  he  would  not  condescend  to  their
PETTY  AND  FOBMAL  NOTIONS  OF  BELIGION.  The  Sabbath  was  a  divinely  instituted
ordinance,  and  one  obviously  beneficial  and  beautiful.  But  the  Jews  confounded  the
means  with  the  end,  and  attached  a  superstitious  sanctity  to  the  seventh  day.  Jesus
was  the  Lord  of  the  sabbath,  and  held  that  the  day  was  hallowed  by  the  perform-
ance of  a  deed  of  mercy  and  helpfulness.  This  was  a  view  alien  from  the  formal
and  ceremonial  habits  of  the  Jewish  leaders.  The  ways  of  Jesus  were  too  high,  too
spiritual,  for, these  narrow-minded  hypocrites,  and  accordingly  they  were  offended  with
him.

III.  Offence  was  taken  with  Jesus  because  his  opponents  could  not  bise  to
ms  OLOBI0U8  but  just  bepbbbentation  of  hib  own  nature  and  mission.  The
claim  which  Jesus  made  to  identity  of  purpose  and  to  closest  intimacy  of  nature  with
the  Divine  Father  should  have  awakened  in  the  minds  of  the  Jews,  at  least,  a  spirit  of
inquiry,  and  have  suggested,  at  least,  the  hope  that  in  this  gracious  Being  God  might
be  visiting  and  redeeming  his  people.    This,  however,  was  far  from  being  the  case.


OH.  T.  1—47.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  2«3

The  higher  Christ's  claim,  the  ruder  the  resentment  of  his  adversaries.  It  may  be
questioned  whether  they  really  believed  in  God  at  all ;  had  they  done  so,  how  could
they  have  avoided  the  conclusion  that  God  was  "in  Christ"?

IV.  Thb  offbnok  with  Jbbdb  led  to  those  pubposes  and  plots  which  issued
IN  HIS  DEATH.  The  impression  produced  upon  the  Jewish  leaders  by  our  Lord's
ministry  in  Jerusalem  was  one  of  hostility;  and  this  hostility  was  deepened  by  every
great  act  of  Divine  authority  he  accomplished,  and  by  every  bold  and  sublime  utter-
ance which  either  explicitly  or  implicitly  rebuked  their  formality  and  unspirituality.
Thus  their  "  offence  "  deepened  into  malice  and  rage.  They  "  stumbled  '  at  the  miracles
by  which  the  Lord  asserted  and  explained  his  claims.  Repeated  "olTence"  issued  in
resolute  plots  against  his  life.  And  Jesus  thus  came  to  the  cross  not  because  of  his
faults,  for  he  had  none ;  but  because  of  his  righteous  claims  and  his  peerless  beneficence.
His  death  was  a  witness  against  his  foes  as  fiiUy  as  it  was  •  witness  in  his  own
favour. — T.

Vers.  19,  20. — Tfie  Father  and  the  Son.  Most  of  our  Lord's  discourses  concern  man
and  his  spiritual  life,  are  moral  and  practical.  But  this  passaije  is,  in  the  true  and
proper  sense  of  the  term,  theological,  informing  us  of  the  relations  between  the  persons
of  the  Godhead,  and  revealing,  so  to  speal;,  the  inner  springs  of  our  Saviour's  ministry,
by  giving  us  a  glimpse  into  the  Divine  nature  and  purposes.

I.  The  Fathkb  is  ever  cabbyino  on  beneficent  opebations  in  htjmah  bocibtt.
The  whole  discussion  originated  in  the  cure  of  the  infirm  man  at  Bethesda;  this  being
wrought  on  the  sabbath  occasioned  the  murmurings  of  the  Jews,  and  elicited  the
defence  of  Jesus.  Now,  an  ordinary  physician,  had  he  effected  such  a  cure,  would  have
been  rightly  satisfied  to  fall  back  upon  the  fact  that  the  man's  sufferings  were  relieved,
and  that  human  strength  and  comfort  are  an  abundant  justification  for  any  measures
not  morally  wrong.  But  the  Divine  Physician  fell  back  upon  the  working  of  God  in
the  world  and  among  men.  What  he  says  does  not  remove  all  mystery,  for  he  tells  us
nothing  to  explain  the  existence  of  sin  and  of  suffering.  But  he  does  give  us  to  under-
stand that  Gud  is  ever  working  among  men  in  the  very  way  in  which  he — Jesus  him-
self— had  been  working,  when  he  had  healed  the  infirmities  of  the  sick.

II.  The  Fatheb,  loving  the  Son,  shows  him  what  things  he  is  evbe  DODra.
This  language  is,  of  course,  accommodated  to  our  powers  of  comprehension.  However
the  world,  or  the  Jews  in  particular,  might  hate  Christ,  he  was  the  beloved  of  the
Divine  Father,  and  as  such  was  admitted  to  the  Father's  intimate  and  affectionate
confidence.  What  a  qualification  for  him  who  came  to  this  earth  as  Prophet,  Priest,
and  King  of  humanity  1  How  wise  a  provision  was  thus  made  for  our  salvation  I  A
perfect  sympathy  exists  between  the  Personal  Power  of  beneficence  in  the  universe  and
the  Teacher,  Saviour,  Lord  of  man.

III.  The  Son,  seeing  the  Fathee's  woekb,  does  the  same  in  hib  earthly
ministry  and  in  the  exeboise  of  his  mediatobial  sovebeionty.  Here  was  the
all-sufficient  vindication  of  our  Lord's  miracles  themselves,  and  also  of  their  manner
and  circumstances.  The  Father  is  ever  working  for  man's  welfare,  on  the  sabbath  as
on  other  days.  Every  day  of  the  week  his  sun  shines,  his  air  passes  gently  over  the
earth,  his  streams  flow,  his  flowers  bloom,  his  birds  sing,  his  creatures  rejoice  in  his
bounty  and  kindness.  He  is  all  day  long  and  every  day  promoting  not  only  the  bodily,
but  the  intellectual  and  spiritual  welfare  of  his  dependent  children.  And  what  the
Father  does,  that  the  Son  does,  moving  amongst  men,  seen  or  unseen,  a  Presence  of
grace  and  comfort,  of  inspiration  and  of  peace.  Thus  he  ever  works  his  Father's  works,
and  forwards  the  cause  which  is  dear  to  the  Father's  lieart.  Where  we  see  the  triumphs
of  the  Gospel  in  individual  hearts,  in  human  society,  let  us  recognize  the  tokens  of  the
Saviour's  holy  and  benevolent  ministry,  and  be  assured  that  this  is  the  work  of  God
himself.

rV.  Thb  fabt  opkbations  of  Divine  meboy  abe  a  pledge  of  gbeateb  and  uobe
MABTELLOUS  WOBKB  IN  THE  FUTUBE.  Our  Lord,  unlike  a  human  teacher  or  leader,
always  represented 'what  he  did  as  only  the  promise  of  greater  and  better  things  to
come.  This  assmance  of  his  foreknowledge  was  verified  in  the  marvels  of  Pentecost,
and  in  the  fruits  which  have  been  yielded  throughout  the  long  centuries  of  the  spiritual
^jspjisaHon, — T.


284  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  v.  1—47.

Vers.  22 — 27. — 2%e  human  Judge  upon  the  Divine  throne.  Many  are  the  offices
which  it  is  appointed  for  the  Son  of  man  to  hold.  Yet  they  are  all  consistent  one  with
another,  and  only  a  complete  view  of  them  can  present  Christ  as  he  really  is,  and  can
elicit  towards  him  all  those  sentiments  which  are  justly  due  to  him.  If  he  is  the
Saviour  of  sinners  and  the  Friend  of  his  people,  he  is  also  the  Lord  of  the  earth  and
the  Jud2;e  of  all  mankind.

I.  The  qualifications  of  Christ  as  Judge.  As  represented  by  himself,  these  are
two.  1.  His  Divine  ability  of  knowledge,  of  authority,  of  justice,  in  virtue  of  his  nature
as  Son  of  God.  This  is  asserted  in  the  claim  he  makes  in  ver.  22  of  equality  with  the
Father,  and  of  a  consequent  right  to  the  same  honour  which  is  accorded  to  the  Father.
2.  His  participation  in  our  human  nature  implied  in  the  designation  "  Son  of  man  "  in
ver.  27.  This  true  humanity  of  our  Loid  ensures  that  all  judgment  shall  be  conducted
not  only  with  Divine  knowledge  and  equity,  but  with  human  sympathy  and  con-
sideration.

n.  The  pebsonb  oveb  whom  Cheist  exercises  his  judicial  functions.  All  man-
kind must  stand  at  his  bar ;  God  bath  committed  aU  judgment  unto  him,  and  a  day  is
appointed  in  which  God  will  judge  all  men  by  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  Friends  and
subjects,  enemies  and  rebels,  alike  must  receive  sentence  from  his  lips.

in.  Thb  principles  which  direct  Christ's  judgment.  Of  these  two  may  be
mentioned.  1.  The  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart  are  considered  as  well  as  out-
ward actions.  2.  With  respect  to  those  who  have  been  privileged  to  hear  the  gospel,
the  all-important  question  is — Did  they  receive  or  reject  the  Divine  Mediator,  the  offer
of  Divine  mercy  ?

IV,  The  distinct  periods  of  Christ's  judgment.  1.  There  is  judgment  here  and
now,  as  seems  implied  in  ver.  22.  Christ  is  ever  passing  judgment  upon  men,  criticizing
their  character  and  their  action,  discriminating  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  making
allowance  for  human  infirmities  on  the  one  hand,  and  for  human  endeavours  on  the
other.  It  is  well  for  us  that  Christ  judges  his  people  now ;  that  when  necessary  he  has
a  controversy  with  them;  that  he  has  words  of  reproach  for  the  unfaithful,  and  words
of  encouragement  for  the  depressed;  that  he  chastens  his  people  in  kindness  and  with
purposes  of  love.  It  is  for  them  to  submit  themselves  to  their  Lord,  to  bow  before  his
chastising  hand,  to  profit  by  his  correction.  2.  There  is  judgment  hereafter.  Life  has
to  be  considered,  not  only  in  detail,  but  as  a  whole.  When  it  is  finished,  then  is  the
time  for  it  to  be  duly  estimated  and  justly  recompensed.  Now,  our  Lord  himself
assures  us  that  retribution  in  the  life  to  come  is  his  peculiar  work.  The  anticipation
of  this  process  should  quicken  our  spiritual  diligence  and  solicitude. .  The  sinner  may
well  repent  and  seek  acceptance,  so  that  he  may  recognize  his  Saviour  upon  the
judgment-seat;  and  the  Christian  may  well  prepare  to  render  in  his  account  i'  with  joy
and  not  with  grief," — T.

Ver.  25. — The  voice  that  reaches  the  dead.  The  dispute  between  Jesus  and  the
unwilling  and  unbelieving  Jews  was  a  dispute  as  to  our  Lord's  authority,  dignity,  and
power.  The  attitude  of  his  enemies  constrained  the  Lord  to  adopt  language  the  boldest
and  most  uncompromising  with  regard  to  himself  and  his  offices.  Thus  it  was  that  he
was  led  in  the  course  of  this  discussion  to  advance  his  claim  of  authority  over  such
even  as  were  spiritually  dead.

I.  The  state  of  spiritual  death.  I.  Its  cause  is  sin,  wicked  departure  from  the
God  of  life.  2.  Its  tokens  are — insensibility  to  spiritual  realities,  incapacity  for
spiritual  exertion,  and  unfitness  for  spiritual  society.  3.  Its  effects  are  apparent  both
here  in  this  world,  and  hereafter  in  the  future  state  of  retribution.

II.  The  summons  op  the  Son  of  God.  1.  It  is  the  summons  of  One  who  has  life
in  himself;  as  is  apparent  from  his  power,  several  times  exercised  in  the  course  of  liia
ministry,  to  raise  the  dead,  and  even  more  strikingly  fiom  his  own  glorious  resurrecti(  n.
2.  It  is  conveyed  in  a  voice  in  itself  authoritative  and  Divine;  and  yet  a  voice  of
invitation  and  of  promise.

in.   ThBEEBPONSB    of    HEARINO    and    reverent    attention  "AND    OBEDIENCE.      1.

This  is  by  no  means  universal,  being  rendered  only  by  those  who  are  awakened  by  the
Influenfcs  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  some  susceptibility  to  the  spiritually  authoritative
tones  and  language  of  the  Son  of  God.    2.  It  is  the  hearing  of  the  soul  which  our


CH.  V.  1—47.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  285

Lord  reqidreB  as  the  condition  of  life.  The  Old  Testament  admonition  and  promise
are  appropriate  in  this  connection :  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  The  frequent
invitation,  or  rather  summons,  addressed  to  the  people  by  the  Saviour  should  be  borne
in  mind:  "He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  Many  listened  to  his  discourses
who  never  really  heard  him  ;  and  it  is  so  now  with  His  gospel.

IV.  The  gift  or  lite.  1.  This  life  which  is  conferred  by  the  Son  of  God  is
spirittMl,  In  a  subsequent  part  of  the  discourse,  Jesus  claims  to  be  endowed  with
authority  to  raise  the  dead  to  the  life  of  the  future  state;  but  hero  the  life  which  is
promised  is  of  the  spirit.  "That  which  is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  The  spiritua'
character  of  this  life  appears  from  the  references  to  that  with  which  it  is  in  contrast :
"You  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  through  trespasses  and  sins."  2.  It  is
dependent  life,  derived  from  the  source  of  spiritual  vitality.  Of  himself  the  Lord  Jesus
says,  in  the  following  verse,  that  he  possessed  life,  as  his  own,  "in  himself,"  by  the
appointment  of  the  Father.  But  Christians  derive  their  new  life  from  him,  who  came
"  that  they  might  have  life,  and  might  have  it  more  abundantly."  3.  It  is  immortal
life,  in  this  being  distinguished  from  that  of  the  body.  In  the  preceding  vertse  Christ
describes  it  as  "  eternal,"  by  which  we  may  understand  that  it  consists  in  participation
in  the  Divine  nature  and  in  the  Divine  immortality.  Thus  the  new  life  in  Christ  is
independent  of  that  of  the  body,  whose  dissolution  indeed  ia  the  occasion  of  its  higher
development  and  true  perfection. — ^T.

Ver.  39. — The  Scriptwrea  and  the  Christ.  Jesus  is  expostulating  with  the  Jews,
vho  refuse  to  admit  his  claims,  to  accept  his  salvation.  The  course  of  his  argument
and  censure  is  somewhat  thus :  "  Tou  revere  and  examine  the  canonical  Scriptures.
You  profess  to  think  of  them  so  highly  that  you  regard  them  as  the  source  of  eternal
life  fur  men.  Yet  you  will  not  yield  faith  and  allegiance  to  m«.  What  inconsistency
is  here  1  The  true  value  of  the  Scriptures  lies  just  in  this,  that  they  bear  witness  to
me,  that  they  are  intended  to  lead  you  and  all  who  read  them  to  me.  The  fact  is,
that  you  rest  in  the  Scriptures,  instead  of  being  led  hy  the  Scriptures  to  me,  who  am
Life  Eternal.     Thus  the  Word  fails  to  fulfil  in  your  case  its  intended  purpose."

I.  Thk  SoBiPTnEBS  WITNESS  TO  Jesub  AS  THE  Chbist.  1,  TUs  is  SO  with  the  Old
Testament,  which  was  in  our  Lord's  mind  when  he  used  this  language.  In  the  Old
Testament  there  are  recorded  some  explicit  and  direct  predictions  which  are  fulfilled
in  Jesus;  whilst  the  symbols,  sacrifices,  and  services  of  the  old  economy  in  many
instances  point  to  him  who  should  come.  No  Christian  can  read  certain  of  the
psalms,  or  certain  passages  from  the  writings  of  Isaiah  and  of  Daniel,  without  tracing
prophetic  outlines  of  the  sufferings  and  of  the  reign  of  the  Messiah.  2.  It  is  obvious
that  this  is  still  more  strikingly  the  case  with  the  New  Testament,  to  which,  of  course,
our  Lord  could  not  be  referring  here,  but  which  we  are  bound  to  search,  and  in  which
we  are  sure  to  find  abundant  witness  to  Jesus  as  the  Christ  of  God  and  the  Saviour
of  men.  The  Gospels  and  Epistles  are  full  of  Christ;  they  relate  facts,  they  offer
doctrinal  explanations,  they  draw  practical  inferences,  all  of  which  have  a  bearing  upon
human  salvation.

IL  The  Sobiptuees  abb  thus  the  means  op  etebnai.  life  to  mankind.  By
"eternal  life,"  the  most  comprehensive  of  all  phrases  employed  to  denote  spiritual
enrichment  and  blessing,  we  are  to  understand  the  life  of  the  soul,  the  life  which  is
Divine.  Now,  this  is  a  boon  which  the  knowledge  of  the  mere  letter  of  Scripture  can
never  impart.  It  must  be  communicated  by  the  quickening  Spirit  of  God,  and  is  con-
veyed through  that  Mediator,  who  is  in  himself  the  life  of  God,  and  who  becomes,  by
his  humiliation,  obedience,  and  sacrifice,  the  life  of  man.  He  himself  professed  and
promised  to  bestow  this  boon :  "  Come  unto  me,  that  ye  may  have  life; '  "  This  is  life
eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  bast  sent."  If
we  know  Christ  in  and  throngh  the  Scriptures,  we  may  be  justly  said  to  owe  to  them
the  incomparable  gift  of  life  eternaL

III.  The  Scbiptubes  should  thebefobb  be  studied  and  beabched  bt  kteby
ONE  DB8IB0U8  OF  spiBiTUAi.  BLESBiNa.  1.  In  what  Spirit?  With  a  reverent  sense  of
their  Divine  origin  and  authority,  and  with  a  high  conviction  of  their  priceless  value.
2.  With  what  intent  and  view  ?  Not  for  curiosity's  sake,  nor  for  secular  ends,  but  for
iipiritual  improvemect.    3.  In  what  manner?    Systematically,  and  not  in  a  desultory


23«  VHB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.        [ch.  v.  1— 47.

fashion;  with  all  accessible  human  aids,  and  with  prayer  for  Divine  enlightenment
and  assistance. — T.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Help  of  the  helpless.    Here  we  have—

L  Jesus  attracted  bt  misery.  Why  was  Jesus  found  at  Bethesda?  Because
there  were  such  misery  and  need.  He  was  ever  found  where  he  was  most  wanted,  and
where  be  might  do  most  good.  He  was  not  found  in  places  of  luxury,  but  in  the
haunts  of  misery.  1.  The  misery  was  great.  There  was  presented  to  the  eye  of  Jesus
there  such  pain,  degradation,  poverty,  and  misery,  physical,  mental,  and  moral,  as  could
scarcely  be  described,  and  all  presented  to  him  together  in  one  scene.  2.  Th»  misery
was  various.  It  was  not  confined  to  one  disease,  but  embraced  many  classes — "  the
impotent,  the  halt,"  etc.  The  diseases  were  various  in  their  kind  and  history,  but  all
baneful  branches  from  the  common  stem  of  physical  and  moral  disorder.  3.  The  misery
was  distributed  among  a  great  number.  There  was  a  multitude.  The  porches  were  full,
and  doubtless  many  could  not  be  admitted  for  want  of  room.  Physical  suffering  is  the
heritage  of  the  human  family,  and  the  special  heritage  of  some.  It  is  a  mercy  that
suffering  is  distributed.  We  only  know  of  One  who  could  and  did  bear  all  in  himself —
"  the  Man  of  sorrows,"  etc.  4.  All  were  waiting  and  struggling  for  the  same  bhssing,
viz.  restoration  to  health.  With  what  anxiety  they  would  watch  the  moving  of  the
waters,  and  what  efforts  they  made  to  have  the  first  bath !  To  this  place  Jesus  was
attracted.  Being  the  incarnation  of  mercy,  he  was  attracted  by  misery.  The  whole
scene  was  such  as  would  naturally  excite  his  compassion,  and  stood  forth  as  a  picture
to  him  of  a  more  terrible  and  imiversal  malady,  that  of  sin,  which  be  came  to  take  away.

II.  Jesus  spechallt  attbaoted  by  the  most  misbrablb.  They  were  all  miser-
able enough,  but  there  was  a  certain  man  standing  alone  in  misery  and  helplessness.
1.  He  was  impotent,  perhaps  paralytic,  thoroughly  helpless,  and  unable  to  plunge  into
the  healing  pool,  and  had  no  one  to  help  him  in.  2.  He  had  been  a  long  time  in  this
condition.  Thirty-eight  years.  The  best  part  of  his  life  was  spent  in  pain  and  misery.
He  had  only  just  sufficientlife  left  tofeel  his  pain  and  woe.  3.  He  was  almost  in  the  grip
of  utter  despair.  Impotent  in  mind  and  will  as  well  as  in  body.  He  had  been  there
for  years,  and  doubtless  was  the  sport  of  the  more  fortunate,  and  the  prey  of  despair.
Still  he  mechanically  crawled  there  day  after  day,  with  an  occasional  glimmer  of  hope
that  some  good  chance  would  turn  up.  And  it  turned  up  at  last.  Jesus,  the  Son  of
God,  was  there,  and  this  poor  man  became  the  chief  object  of  his  pity.  He  doubtless
pitied  the  multitude,  but  the  most  miserable  riveted  his  compassion.  The  most
helpless  and  miserable  became  the  most  fortunate.

III.  Jesus  HELPnro  the  most  miserable.  We  have  here  :  1.  A  wonderftd  question.
"  Wilt  thou,"  etc.  ?  We  see :  (1)  The  importance  of  the  consent  of  the  will  in  physical
as  well  as  spiritual  recovery.  Christ  did  not  choose  to  help  people  against  their  will.
The  consent  of  the  will  is  essential  to  the  efficacy  of  even  Divine  influences,  especially
in  spiritual  restoration.  It  is  the  first  step  towards  it.  (2)  Christ  was  anxiously  willing
to  help  every  one  who  had  the  wish  for  it,  and  even  more,  he  was  anxious  to  create  and
encourage  the  will  so  as  to  be  able  to  lay  hold  on  the  help.  In  consequence  of  long
and  repeated  failures  to  get  relief,  even  the  will  for  it  now  in  this  poor  cripple  seemed
to  be  weak ;  but  Jesus  fans  the  smouldering  embers  with  the  question,  "  Wilt  thou,"
etc.  ?  This  is  a  vivid  picture  in  the  physical  domain  of  the  indifference  and  apathy  of
men  with  regard  to  spiritual  recovery.  But  this  is  an  exceptional  picture,  for  as  a  rule
men  are  intensely  anxious  for  health  of  body.  Look  at  the  multitude  at  Bethesda ;  what
itruggle  they  make  to  be  the  first  in  the  moved  water  1  But  in  a  lamentable  contrast
to  this  is  the  conduct  of  men  with  regard  to  the  water  of  life ;  they  seem  to  struggle  to
be  the  last  there.  The  appeal  is  made  by  the  physician  to  the  sick,  and  not  as  usual  by
the  sick  to  the  physician.  God  in  grace  first  prayed  to  man,  and  thus  teaches  man  to
pray  to  him,  and  create  in  him  an  interest  in  his  own  welfare.  "  Wilt  thou,"  etc.  ?
(3)  2%«  question  brings  from  the  man  a  sad  tale,  A  tale  of  human  helplessness  on  the
one  hand,  and  of  human  selfishness  on  the  other.  The  "  will "  was  not  entirely  gone,
but  it  was  very  weak  through  his  own  helplessness  and  the  stolid  selfishness  of  others.
"  8ir,  I  have  no  man,"  etc.  "Every  one  for  himself"  was  the  rule  then.  A  picture  of  life.
"The  survival  of  the  fittest"  seems  to  be  the  law  of  nature  under  sin  ;  but  there  is
»  bw  ei  grace  by  which  the  seemingly  uiifittest  may  survive,  and  its  question  is,  "  Wilt


OH.  V.  1—47,]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST,  JOHN.  237

thou,"  etc.  ?  There  is  a  gracious  power  on  which  the  weakest  may  lay  hold.  2.  A
wonder/ul  command.  "  Else,"  etc.  la  this  command  we  distinctly  hear:  (1)  The  voice
of  Divine  power.  "  Else."  This  he  was  utterly  unable  to  do.  "  Take  up  thy  bed,"  As
well  tell  the  bed  to  take  him  up.  Every  human  power  had  failed  even  at  earlier  stages
of  the  disease.  And  human  power  never  speaks  thus  under  such  circumstances  but
in  madoess.  But  is  natural  in  the  Divine.  (2)  The  voice  of  Divine  authority.  Divine
power  and  authority  go  together.  There  is  here  a  Divine  will,  and  a  Divine  right  and
power  for  its  immediate  execution.  There  is  no  hesitancy,  no  timidity,  but  full  and
serene  Divine  consciousness  of  power  to  carry  out  his  will,  and  make  the  man  whole.
(3)  The  voice  of  Divine  mercy.  Power  alone,  or  swayed  by  justice,  could  kill  and
perform  any  miraculous  feat  of  destruction,  as  in  the  case  of  Lot's  wife;  but  infinite
power,  under  the  guidance  of  mercy,  heals  and  saves,  and  that  most  completely.
"  Whole."  Amidst  the  thunders  of  power  and  the  majestic  lightnings  of  authority  we
hear  the  genial  voice  of  mercy  answering  its  own  question,  "  Wilt  thou?  "  etc.,  by  the
command,  "  Rise,"  etc.  3.  A  wonderful  effect.  "  Immediately  the  man  was  made
whole."  Consequent  upon  the  command  an  effort  was  made;  strength  came  with  the
effort.  The  effect  was  instantaneous ;  the  miracle  was  complete,  and  thorough.  The
man  rose  and  walked  away ;  a  wonder  to  others,  not  less  to  himself,  and  an  unmis-
takable monument  of  Divine  power  as  well  as  Divine  mercy.

OoNCliUSiONS.  1.  Jesus  selected  his  own  object.  The  most  helpless  and  miserable.  This
was  a  most  gracious  act  to  the  man  himself.  And  this  moat  helpless  and  furthest  from
the  reach  of  human  aid,  answered  well  the  purposes  of  Jesus  in  revealing  himself  as  the
Son  of  God.  Among  the  suffering  throng  there  was  not  one  who  answered  this  purpose  so
well.  The  greatest  misery  attracts  most  of  the  relieving  compassion  of  Jesus,  and  when
relieved  will  redound  most  to  his  glory.  2.  Jesus  often  helps  in  a  manner  and  degree
which  we  should  not  expect.  This  poor  cripple  never  expected  more  than  to  he  helped
to  the  pool ;  but  Christ  made  him  whole  by  his  mere  word  and  will.  "  He  is  able  to  do
exceeding  abundantly,"  etc.  3.  What  Christ  did  physically  to  this  man,  he  is  ready  and
willing  to  do  spiritually  to  the  human  race.  The  human  family  by  sin  are  spiritually
impotent  and  helpless.  Christ,  in  the  gospel  of  his  love  and  power,  asks  the  question
to  each,  "  Wilt  thou,"  etc.  ?  If  they  are  willing,  he  is  willing  and  able.  4.  There
is  much  suffering  in  the  world,  but  there  is  mercy  here  as  well.  The  world  is  a  Bethesda,
the  house  of  mercy ;  Jesus  has  made  it  so.  Every  healing  spring  in  nature,  as  well  as
the  river  of  life,  is  from  him. — B.  T.

Ver.  14. — Suffering  alleviated  by  the  removed  of  sin.  Notice —
I.  That  it  was  the  great  aim  of  Jesus  to  alleviate  the  supferinos  of  the
HUMAN  FAMILY,  AND  MAKE  THEM  WHOLE.  We  SCO :  1,  That  the  human  family  are
subject  to  great  sufferings.  This  is  too  patent  to  require  proof.  It  is  the  universal
experience  of  all.  These  are  various  and  great.  (1)  Physical  sufferings — those  arising
from  the  infirmities,  diseases,  and  ultimate  mortality  of  physical  life.  (2)  Mental
sufferings — those  arising  from  personal  and  social  afSictions,  bfreavements,  disappoint-
ments, slander,  failures  of  every  description,  and  the  mysterious  problems  of  being.
(3)  Moral  suffer  ings—SLUsing  from  a  sense  of  guilt ;  the  unreconciliation  of  the  soul  with
Grod,  and  its  consequent  unsettled  and  painful  spiritual  state.  2.  It  was  thegreat  object  of
Christ  to  alleviate  and  remove  these.  To  this  he  devoted  his  life  and  energy.  He  did
this  by  sympathizing  and  guiding  words,  by  merciful  deeds,  and  by  his  vicarious  death.
In  all  his  life  and  death,  "surely  he  bore  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows."

IL   To  ATTAIN  THIS   AIM  IT   IS   ABSOLUTELY  NECESSARY  THAT  SIN   SHOULD  BE   DONE

AWAY  WITH.  "  Sin  no  more."  1.  Sin  is  the  direct  or  indirect  cause  of  all  sufferings.
All  the  sufferings  of  the  human  family,  whether  physical,  mental,  or  moral,  are  traceable
to  sin,  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  in  all  the  departments  of  human  being.  The  suffer-
ings of  this  poor  cripple  were  the  direct  consequence  of  his  sin.  Physical  and  spiritual
nature  invariably  punishes  the  violation  of  its  laws  with  suffering.  2.  The  cause  must  be
removed  t»  order  to  remove  the  effects.  You  must  dry  the  fountain  before  you  can  dry
the  stream.  As  long  as  there  is  a  fountain  there  must  be  a  stream.  As  long  as  there
is  sin  there  must  be  suffering.  Effects  must  follow  causes.  3.  The  removal  of  the  cause
must  be  followed  with  the  removal  of  the  effect.  Dry  the  fountain,  there  will  be  no
stream.    "Sin  no  more,"  th^re  wjll  be  no  suffering.    We  have  a  practical  illustration


238  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [rai.  t.  1—47.

of  this  in  this  world.  In  the  degree  sin  is  lessened  suSering  is  lessened,  and  even  with
regard  to  the  extent  of  suffering  for  which  we  are  not  directly  responsible  the  paia  is
not  unnatural.  We  have  a  revealed  illustration  of  this  from  the  other  world.  In
heaven  there  is  no  dn,  and  there  is  no  suffering.  In  hell  there  is  unmixed  sia,  and
there  is  unmixed  suffering.    Suffering  must  end  with  sin,  not  before ;  hut  then  it  will.

III.   To  DO  AWAY  WITH   SIN  BBQTJIBES  DrVTUB  AND   HUMAN  OO-OPBEATION.      "  Sin  DO

more."  This  is  the  Divine  voice  appealing  to  man  for  his  consent  and  co-operation
against  sin.  1.  This  appeal  presupposes  two  things  at  least.  (1)  That  to  resist  sin
effectually  is  a  possibility.  In  connection  with  what  Christ  has  done  and  is  doing,  and
what  man  can  do,  this  is  possible.  We  are  not  asked  to  perform  impossibilities.  A
similar  help  which  accompanied  the  effort  to  rise  and  walk,  will  accompany  the  effort
to  resist  sin.  (2)  That  to  resist  sin  is  a  most  binding  duty.  It  is  each  man's  duty  to
Bod,  to  himself,  and  to  others,    2,  This  Divine  appeal  is  made  to  matins  moroZ  Tiature.

(1)  To  his  individual  consciousness.  "  Sin  no  more."  Men  are  to  be  restored,  not  in  the
nbstract,  but  in  the  concrete.  Not  as  multitudes,  but  as  individuals.  Each  man  is
directly  appealed  to.  (2)  To  his  individual  sinful  amseiousjiess.  "  Sin  no  more."
Thou  hast  sinned,  thou  art  a  sinner.  The  Divine  voice  appeals  to  man  as  a  sinner ;
thus  his  sin  is  brought  home  to  him.  This  is  an  essential  step  to  its  removal,  and
unless  an  assenting  echo  comes  from  within,  the  Divine  power  has  nothing  to  work
upon.  (3)  To  the  powers  in  man  which  can  distinguish  and  resist  sin.  His  conscience
and  will.  The  one  can  distinguish  between  good  and  evil,  and  the  other  can  say  yes  or
ao  to  its  dictates,  as  well  as  to  the  dictates  of  Heaven.  Conscience  is  ever  on  the  side  of
good,  and  against  evil  and  such.  The  will  is  not;  hence  to  educate  the  conscience,  and  stir
ijp  and  gain  the  human  will  to  the  right  side,  is  the  chief  aim  of  Christ  and  his  gospel.
3.  This  Divine  appeal  is  made  through,  the  most  powerful  motives.  (1)  Those  arising
from  considerations  of  sin  itself,  (a)  Experience  of  its  evii  consequences  in  the  past,
"  Lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto  thee" — implying  that  its  consequences  in  the  past  were
bad.  The  sin  of  this  man  had  cost  him  thirty-eight  years  of  untold  suffering  and  misery ;
only  a  faint  shadow  of  its  spiritual  consequences.  Every  hell  is  against  sin,  and  sin
really  is  against  itself.  Man  should  learn  from  his  failures,  and  grow  wiser  by  experience.
(S)  Its  certain  worse  consequences  in  the  future.  "Lest  a  worse  thing,"  etc.  (o)  How-
ever bad  has  been  the  experience  of  sin,  its  worst  has  not  been  yet  felt ;  there  is  some-
thing worse  in  store.  (/3)  A  repetition  of  sin  tends  to  its  final  issue.  Every  repetitioc
fixes  it  deeper  in  the  character,  and  makes  it  more  difficult  of  cure.  It  is  in  the  very
nature  of  sin  to  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  the  next  step  in  it  may  lead  to  the  worst  of
all — to  utter  inability  to  resist,  and  the  consequent  impossibility  of  relief.  This  should
be  a  strong  motive  against  sin,  and  a  mighty  influence  to  incline  the  will  against  it.

(2)  Those  motives  arising  from  considerations  of  the  Divine  goodness.  "  Behold,  thou  art
made  whole."  (a)  Deliverance  from  the  painful  consequences  of  sin  is  not  a  sufficient
guarantee  against  falling  into  it  again.  The  danger  may  be  greater.  It  will  be  a  point
at  which  the  man  will  be  specially  attacked ;  and  if  it  becomes  strong,  it  must  become
so  by  special  watchfulness  and  prayer,  (b)  Deliverance  from  the  painful  consequences
of  nn  should  be  a  strong  motive  not  to  commit  it  again.  "  Behold,  thou,"  etc.  This
should  awake  (o)  a  sense  of  special  duty— not  to  sin.  (;3)  A  sense  of  special  obligations
to  the  Deliverer.  (7)  A  sense  of  special  gratitude  to  him  for  the  deliverance-  And  this
can  never  be  manifested  while  sin  is  wilfully  committed,  for  it  is  as  detestable  to  God
as  it  is  ruinous  to  man.  (c)  All  the  special  and  general  goodness  of  God  in  providence
and  grace  is  in  order  to  keep  us  from  sin.  With  Divine  eloquence  it  tells  each  man,
"  Kn  no  more."  This  is  the  case  especially  with  regard  to  our  personal  deUverances,
And  if  these  will  not  keep  us  from  sin,  what  will?

Ledsonb.  1.  Christ  cured  bodies  in  order  to  cure  souls.  His  physical  cures  were
introductory  to  the  spiritual.  He  performed  the  miracle  of  Bethesda  in  order  to  teach
the  lesson  of  the  temple :  "  Sin  no  more."  2.  No  cure  is  complete  unless  the  soul  is
awed  of  the  disease  of  sin.  Jesus  sought  the  man  in  order  to  finish  his  work.  At
Bethesda  it  was  incomplete.  How  many  are  satisfied  with  the  introduction!  But
Divine  goodness  is  wasted  unless  it  is  carried  out  to  its  natural  issues,  the  restoration
of  the  soul.  3.  To  keep  away  from  sin  is  better  than  to  be  delivered  from  it.  ]?reven-
tion  is  easier  and  safer  than  cure.  Prevention  is  ever  possible,  cure  is  not.  It  is
possible  to  bei  in  the  palsy  of  sin  where  there  is  no  Divine  Ph^rsioian.    4-  /(Wif  hdps


aa.  V,  l-4tj        tHt!  fiOSML  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JGa».  259

man  in  order  that  man  sTiould  help  himself.  He  helped  this  man  and  did  for  him
what  he  himself  could  not  do.  He  made  him  whole.  He  was  then  in  a  position  and
under  an  obligation  to  do  something  for  himself.  "  Sin  no  more."  5.  In  order  to  keep
away  from  iin,  we  should  ever  remember  its  terrible  consequences  and  our  gracious
deliverances.  We  should  he  reminded  of  these,  for  we  are  very  forgetful.  There  was
a  danger  that  this  man  should  forget  this  between  Bethesda  and  the  temple;  therefon
the  first  thing  Christ  did  was  to  remind  him,  "  Thou  hast  been  made,"  etc. — ^B.  T.

Ver.  24. — Eternal  life.    Notice —

I.  Its  nature  and  import.  1.  It  is  the  spiritual  life  of  the  soul.  It  is  called
"  eternal  life,"  not  merely  as  distinguished  from  temporal  and  fading,  but  also  from
material  and  carnal.  The  soul  by  sin  has  lost  its  spiritual  life,  its  primitive  purity,
harmony  and  happiness  arising  from  the  peace  and  fiiendship  of  God.  The  soul  left
God  like  an  erratic  star  from  its  central  sun,  and  is  truly  described  as  being  dead — dead
to  God  and  its  highest  interest.  This  life  is  the  life  of  God  within.  Hjs  Law  written
in  the  heart,  and  his  image  restored  in  the  soul.  A  life  having  its  roots  in  God,  its
vitality  from  him,  germinating  and  budding  in  the  genial  soil  of  his  peace  and  friendship, .
growing  and  blooming  in  the  sunshine  of  his  love,  and  under  the  reviving  dew  of  his
presence  and  influence.  This  is  the  highest  life  of  which  the  soul  is  capable.  It  is
its  true  life — ^real,  and  not  a  mere  form.  2.  This  life  is  in  and  through  Christ.  Having
lost  our  spiritual  life  by  sin,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  have  it  from  a  Divine  source,
and  through  a  Divine  medium,  and  under  a  new  and  Divine  arrangement.  Christ  is
this  Source  and  Medium.  He  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life.  "  I  am  come  that
they  might  have  life,"  etc.  As  we  derive  our  natural  life  from  Adam,  we  derive  our
s[>iritual  life  from  Christ,  the  second  Adam.  3.  7%is  life  is  a  blessing  to  he  attained.
It  comes  not  with  us  into  the  world.  We  have  many  things  in  consequence  of  birth.
We  are  born  with  all  the  privileges  of  manhood ;  but  not  with  eternal  life.  This  we
must  attain,  and  to  attain  it  is  the  chief  end  of  life.  If  we  had  eternal  life  simply  as
men,  we  would  not  be  urged  to  get  it,  seek  it,  and  make  every  effort  to  lay  hold  of  it.
4.  It  is  to  be  had  on  certain  conditions.  These  conditions  are  as  set  forth  here — know-
ledge of  and  faith  in  the  Divine  Father  and  the  Son :  "  He  that  heareth  my  word,"  etc.
Every  life  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  has  its  conditions,  and  these  must  be  com-
plied with  ere  that  life  can  be  enjoyed.  Eternal  life  has  its  conditions.  To  know  and
believe  the  Author,  the  Source,  and  the  Giver  of  this  life  is  essential  to  its  enjoyment.
This  natural,  reasonable,  and  gracious  as  the  conditions  are  suitable,  easy,  and  within
the  reach  of  all.  5.  It  is  to  be  had  on  these  conditions  now.  As  soon  as  its  conditions
are  complied  with,  eternal  life  is  begun  in  the  soul.  "  Hath  eternal  life."  Some  speak
of  it  as  if  it  were  entirely  future,  whereas  it  must  be  had  in  the  present  or  never.  This
world  is  the  only  birthplace,  and  the  season  of  salvation  is  the  only  birthday  of  eternal
life.  All  those  who  enjoy  it  in  heaven  found  it  on  earth.  6.  It  can  only  befxdly  enjoyed
in  the  future.  Being  eternal,  it  must  have  eternity  to  develop  itself  fully.  What  is
eternal  in  duration  cannot  reach  maturity  in  time ;  what  is  spiritual  in  nature  Cannot
be  fully  enjoyed  under  material  conditions.  All  terrsstrial  life  reaches  a  climax  under
terrebtrial  laws  and  circumstances ;  but  spiritual  life  requires  spiritual  conditions,  and
naturally  demands  eternity  in  its  full  length  to  expand  and  develop  its  beauty,  fruition,
and  happiness.  7.  It  is  a  life  without  end.  "  Eternal  life."  Every  life  here  has  an  end,
but  one — spiritual  life — Christ-life  in  the  sonl.  This  is  eternal,  and  worthy  of  being
'so.  The  life  of  the  body  has  an  end;  and  when  we  consider  its  vanity,  emptiness,  priva-
tions, and  sufferings,  we  are  glad  that  it  has.  There  is  nothing  in  it,  as  a  whole,  to
make  endlessness  desirable.  There  is  no  life,  but  that  of  God  in  the  soul,  worthy
of  being  qualified  by  the  word  "  eternal ; "  this  has  all  the  elements  to  make  it  worthy
of  eternal  continuance.  Eternity  in  the  possession  of  this  life  will  make  up  the  sum  of
all  the  happiness  man  is  capable  of.

IL  Its  blessed  results.  1.  There  is  a  wonderful  immunity.  "Shall  not  come
into  judgment."  Much  of  the  blessings  of  redemption  consist,  not  in  what  we  shall
enjoy,  but  in  what  we  shall  evade;  and  this  will  be  a  great  evasion.  "  Shall  not  come,"
etc.  And  why  ?  Because  it  is  passed.  Eternal  life  and  judgment  are  opposed  to  each
other,  and  are  respectively  the  results  of  faith  and  no  faith  in  Christ,  Judgment  is  in
the  region  of  death,  but  the  believer  has  come  out  of  that.     There  can  be  no  retl


S4d  OJfifi  GOSPEL  AC!COllDlN&  TO  St.  JoM.       fen.  v.  i— 4?.

judgment  for  the  possessor  of  life.  "  Who  can  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  "
In  this  case  the  final  examination  is  in  the  preliminary.    Pass  this,  and  you  pass  all.
2.  Then  it  a  wonderful  transition.    "  From  death  unto  life."    (1)  This  transition  i*
wonderfully  great.    Death  and  life  are  diametrically  opposed.     The  moral  distance
between  them  is  immeasurable ;  the  change  involved  is,  therefore,  great.    There  is  a
change  of  nature,  of  condition,  of  sphere,  of  character,  of  prospects,  of  world.    The
passage  from  death  unto  life  is  morally  long,  and  the  transition  wonderful.     (2)  The
transition  is  Divine.    Every  one  who  undergoes  this  transition  must  undergo  a  Divine
process.     The  voice  of  God  alone  can  make  the  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  hear.     His
power  alone  can  bring  them  back  to  life.     His  infinite  love  can  warm  and  quicken  the
soul  into  spiritual  vitality ;  cause  the  heart  to  beat,  and  the  blood  to  course  so  as  to
result  in  a  new  and  Divine  life.    What  is  human  in  the  process  is  lost  when  compared
with  the  Divine,  and  God  is  all  in  all.    (3)  The  transition  is  real.    It  is  not  a  passing
dream,  but  a  glorious  reality ;  a  genuine  passage  of  the  soul  from  a  state  of  spiritual
death  to  that  of  spiritual  Ufe.     That  it  is  real  is  evidenced :   (a)  By  the  believer's
experience  and  consciousness.    He  does  not  feel  the  same  man.    And  he  is  light ;  for  he
is  a  new  man.     "  I  live,  but  not  I,"  etc.     His  experience  is  quite  different.    "  Who  was
before  a  blasph  emer,"  etc.   (6)  There  are  the  ordinary  proofs  of  life.    1 1  is  not  very  difficult
to  distinguish  between  a  dead  and  a  living  body,  and  not  much  more  difficult  is  it  to
distinguish  between  a  dead  and  a  living  soul.    Mark  the  difference  in  the  man — ^in  his
habits,  his  temper,  his  character,  his  language ;  they  are  unmistakable  evidence  of  the
transition,     (c)  The  emphatic  testimony  of  Christ.     "  VerUy,  verily,"  etc.     (4)  The
transition  ia  free.     It  cost  infinitely  to  God.     Before  a  single  soul  could  be  transmitted
from  death  unto  life,  God's  only  begotten  Son  had  to  suffer  the  most  ignominious  death.
But  what  we  have  to  do  in  the  transition  is  only  to  believe  and  submit ;  only  to  jump
on  board  the  ship  of  life,  and  the  passage  is  free.    (5)  The  transition,  though  great,  is
quickly  made.    We  hear  of  quick  passages  made  across  the  oceans,  but  they  are  all  phy-
sical (Ustance.  To  the  moral  distance  between  death  and  life,  they  are  the  moral  poles  of
the  universe ;  but  the  passage  is  quickly  made.    Only  believe  in  Christ.    The  quickest
passage,  perhaps,  on  record  is  that  of  the  thief  on  the  cross.     In  the  morning  and  even
at  midday  he  was  in  the  empire  of  death  and  one  of  its  extreme  regions ;  but  by  an
act  of  faith  in  Christ  he  was,  before  the  close  of  that  day,  with  Christ  in  one  of  the  regions
of  life — ^in  Paraiiise.     (6)  The  transition  is  a  most  happy  one.    "  Prom  death,"  etc.
(a)  The  happiness  of  the  greatest  deliverance.    (5)  The  happiness  of  the  highest
promotion,  (c)  The  happiness  of  perfect  safety,  (d)  The  happiness  of  an  ever-increasing
enjoyment— the  enjoyment  of  a  holy,  spiritual,  and  ever-young  and  growing  life,  (e)  The
happiness  of  a  never-ending  gratitude. — ^B.  T.

Vers.  28,  29. —  The  two  resurrections.  1.  The  effect  of  Christ t  preceding  dis-
course on  his  hearers  was  wonder.  "They  marvelled."  2.  The  teachings  and  deeds
of  Christ  were  well  calculated  to  produce  this  emotion  in  aU.  3.  Each  manifestation  of
his  power  and  glory  was  only  introductory  to  something  greater  still.  "  Marvel  not
at  this,"  etc.  The  two  resurrections — the  resurrection  of  life  and  that  of  judgment.
Notice —

I.  Theib  siuilabitt.  1.  In  the  phy steal  condition  supposed.  The  subjects  of  both
are  dead,  and  described  as  being  in  their  graves.  The  good  die  as  well  as  the  bad.
They  lie  down  and  sleep  together ;  their  graves  are  often  in  close  proximity  to  each
other,  and  their  dust  is  mingled  together.  They  are  under  the  same  physical  condition,
that  of  mortality  and  complete  dissolution.  2.  Both  are  similar  in  their  wondeiful
effects.  Both  are  resurrections.  There  will  be  a  quickening  into  life,  into  full  conscious
existence.  There  will  be  a  reunion  of  body  and  soul  after  a  long  separation;  the
physical  effects  will  be  similar  in  both.  The  good  and  the  bad  shall  hear,  and  come
forth.  8.  Both  are  the  remit  of  the  same  Divine  power.  (1)  The  Agent  is  the  same  in
both.  "  The  Son  of  God."  To  raise  the  dead  is  the  prerogative  of  Divinity,  and  by  the
power  of  the  Son  of  God  shall  the  good  and  the  bad  be  raised.  As  the  resurrection
forms  a  most  important  part  of  the  great  scheme  of  redemption,  it  most  befittingly  falls
to  tke  Bedeemers  lot  to  do  it.  He  has  the  right  and  the  power  ;  and  it  will  be  exercised
on  this  occasion  on  all,  irrespective  of  character.  (2)  Tlie  process  in  both  is  the  same.
"  Shall  \mt  the  voice  of  the  Son,"  etc.    There  will  be  an  outward  manifestation — a


^  *.  1— 4t.]       1?HB  GOSF^L  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  241

7oio»— ftnd  there  will  be  a  reiponse.  The  same  voice  can  awake  the  good  and  the  bad.
They  would  sleep  on  for  ever  unless  called  by  him.  The  .voice  of  angels  would  be
ineffective.  But  all  will  hear  and  know  his  voice,  and  come  forth.  Even  the  Son  of  God
never  addressed  such  a  vast  congregation  before  at  once,  and  never  with  such  unexcep<
tional  success.  How  many  of  his  sermons  missed  the  mark  I  But  this  grand  resurrection
sermon  will  not  fail  in  a  single  instance.  All  shall  hear  and  come  forth.  4.  The  guhfecta
of  loth  resurrections  shall  come  forth  in  their  own  and  true  character.  As  good  or  evil.
Neither  the  sleep  of  death  nor  the  Divine  process  of  the  resurrection  can  produce  any
change  in  character.  Whatever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  reap.  The  resurrection
will  not  change  this  law,  but  help  to  carry  it  out.  Character  will  cling  to  us  for  ever.
5.  The  subjects  of  both  shall  cmne forth  in  their  true  character — aeeording  to  the  character
of  their  deeds.  "  They  that  have  done  good,  and  they  that  have  done  eviL"  Character
in  both  cases  it  formed  by  actions ;  so  that  the  resurrection  will  be  the  same  in  its
process  to  both  classes.  It  will  be  fair  to  both — a  faithful  reproduction,  not  merely  of
the  physical  and  mental,  but  also  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  self.  Identity  wiU  be
preserved  intact.  No  one  will  have  any  reason  to  complain.  6.  JBoth  are  similar  in
their  certainty.  The  resurrection  of  the  good  and  bad  is  equally  certain.  "  All  that
are  in  the  graves  shall  hear,"  etc.  There  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  both,  and  there
is  an  adequate  power.  Divine  physical  power  is  irresistible ;  Divine  moral  power  is  not
so.  What  is  absolutely  necessary  must  come  to  pass.  The  good  must  be  raised  for
the  purposes  of  grace,  the  bad  for  the  purposes  of  justice.

II.  In  theib  dissiuilabitt.  1.  Dissimilar  in  the  character  of  their  subjects.  The
subjects  of  one  are  those  who  have  done  good,  the  subjects  of  the  other  are  those  who
have  done  evil.  And  between  good  and  evil  there  is  an  essential  and  an  eternal
difference — a  difference  which  neither  eternity  nor  omnipotence  can  efface.  Good  will
be  good  and  evil  will  be  evil  at  the  last  day,  and  the  difference  will  be  more  strikingly
seen.  2.  Dissimilar  in  their  results.  (1)  One  is  the  resurrection  of  life,  the  other  is
that  of  judgment.  Those  who  have  done  good  will  not  be  raised  to  judgment,  for  they
have  passed  from  death  unto  life.  Therefore  they  must  rise  unto  life;  the  highest,
the  truest  life  of  the  soul — a  life  like  that  of  Christ  himself.  The  other  is  the  resurrec-
tion of  judgment,  of  condemnation — the  opposite  of  life.  (2)  The  one  is  a  reward,  the
other  is  pwnishment.  Life  is  the  natural  consequence  of  goodness  and  faith  in  Christ ;
still  it  is  a  reward  and  a  Divine  favour.  The  resurrection  and  its  com^equences  will  be
a  reward  to  the  good,  but  punishment  to  the  wicked.  It  would  be  mercy  to  them  to
let  them  sleep  on ;  but  justice  demands  their  resurrection  to  receive  the  wages  of  sin,
which  is  death.  (3)  The  one  will  be  followed  by  a  glorious  ascension,  the  other  by  a
horrible  descent.  Those  who  have  done  good  will  come  forth  to  rise  for  ever  in  the
ever-increasing  enjoyment  of  a  pure,  happy,  and  endless  life;  while  those  who  have  done
evil  will  rise  to  sink  deeper  in  spiritual  death.  The  reunion  of  body  and  soul  to  the
good  must  intensify  their  happiness.  To  the  wicked  it  must  intensify  their  misery.
What  a  difference  there  is  between  the  good  man  being  awaked  to  join  his  family  at
the  breakfast-table  and  at  the  mercy-seat,  and  the  culprit  being  awaked  in  the  morn-
ing to  undergo  the  terrible  sentence  of  the  law  I  This  is  but  a  faint  illustration  of  the
difference  between  the  resurrection  of  life  and  that  of  judgment.

Lebsoitb.  t.  We  have  passed  through  many  important  crises,  but  the  most  important
and  marvellous  one  is  yet  in  store.  "  The  hour  is  coming,"  etc.  A  most  important  and
wonderful  hour  I  Time  and  eternity  in  an  hour !  We  should  live  continually  in  that
hour.  2.  The  inseparable  connection  between  the  present  and  tJte  future.  Our  fiiture
is  in  our  present,  and  our  present  will  be  reproduced  in  the  future.  3.  The  importance
of  well-doing  in  the  present.  Let  us  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  man,  now  that  we  may
welcome  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  in  that  hour.  The  physical  process  of  the  resur-
rection is  entirely  future,  with  which  we  shall  have  nothing  to  da  The  spiritual  process
-  is  going  on  now,  and  by  Divine  help  we  can  shape  our  own  resurrection  and  determine
whether  it  is  to  be  one  of  life  or  of  judgment. — ^B.  T.

Yen.  89, 40. — A  eommendable  search  and  a  sad  failure.    We  have  here —

I.  A  COMMENDABLB  8EABCH.    Commendable  because;  1.  It  is  a  search  for  the  pnper

object,    "  Eternal  life."    (1)  This  is  man's  greatest  spiritiud  need.    This  he  lost  by  sin.

When  he  Binaed,  he  died  sviritually.  .  He  became  dead  to  God  and  virtue.    But  when  he


24«  TBB!  GOSPEL  ACCOEDlNG  tO  ST.  JOSIJ.       {pa.  y.  1—4?.

lost  his  spiritual  Ufe,  the  craving  for  it  remained.  Eternal  life  is  felt  by  man  to  be
his  greatest  spiritual  need.  (2)  This  is  man's  highest  good.  It  is  his  greatest  spiritual
need,  and  is  calculated  to  develop  all  his  spiritual  capacities  and  satisfy  all  his  spiritual
wants.  This  is  the  climax  of  being.  Nothing  higher  can  be  given,  nothing  higher  can
be  desired.  (3)  This  is  the  most  imjiortant  object  that  can  engage  the  attention  of  man.
His  greatest  need,  his  highest  good,  and  any  attention  bestowed  upon  it  and  any  effort
put  forth  to  secure  it  is  praiseworthy.  2.  It  is  a  search  for  the  proper  object  in  the
proper  field.  "  The  Scriptures."  (1)  Eternal  l^e  is  a  subject  of  revelation.  This  is
natural  and  essential ;  it  must  be  so.  It  is  evidently  beyond  human  discovery.  "  Eye
hath  not  seen,"  etc.  Eternal  life  and  the  way  to  obtain  it  must  come  from  the  source
of  life.  (2)  Men  in  all  ages  have  looked  for  it  in  connection  with  some  kind  of  revela-
tion, either  oral  or  written.  The  human  race  have  instinctively  looked  for  it  in  the
direction  of  the  Divine ;  they  searched  for  it  in  every  voice  and  book  purporting  to
be  Divine  communications,  as  instanced  in  the  oracles  of  the  Greeks  and  Komans,  the
Shasters  of  the  Hindoos,  etc.  (3)  This  search  for  it  is  made  in  ffie  true  revelation.
"  Ye  search  the  Scriptures."  All  other  revelations  are  false  and  imaginary,  but  the
Scriptures  are  the  true  revelation  of  God's  will  and  gracious  purposes — a  revelation  of
eternal  life.  They  ue  "  they  which  testify  of  me."  3.  The  chief  object  is  sought  in  a
praiseworthy  manner.  "  Te  search,"  etc.  The  Scriptures,  as  the  revelation  of  God's
will,  are  worthy  of  the  most  diligent  search.  No  search  can  be  too  minute  and  no
effort  can  be  too  thorough.  Eternal  life  is  a  pearl  to  be  found  by  search.  These
people  searched  the  Scriptures,  and  in  the  time  and  efforts  they  bestowed  on  this,  they
were  patterns  to  the  present  age.

II.  A  BAD  rAlLnBG,  1.  They  failed  to  recogn&e  Christ  as  the  great  Theme  of  the
Scriptures.  2.  They  failed  to  learn  the  testimony  of  Scriptwre  to  Christ  as  the  Life
of  the  world.  (1)  As  the  Source  of  life.  (2)  As  the  Author  and  Oiver  of  life.  (3)  As
the  Support  of  life.  (4)  As  the  perfect  Pattern  of  life,  in  its  development,  progress,
•truggles,  and  final  triumph.  The  very  Scriptures  which  they  searched  emphatically
and  uniteiily  bear  witness  to  Christ  as  the  Life  of  the  world,  and  as  the  Author  and  Giver
of  spiritual  life  in  the  soul.  This  witness  they  failed  to  recognize,  this  testimony  they
failed  to  understand.  3.  They  failed  to  come  to  Christ  to  have  life.  Our  Lord  suggests
the  reasons  for  this.  (1)  Want  of  inward  religious  integrity.  "  I  know  you,  that  ye
have  not  the  love  of  God  in  yon."  "  You  have  not  the  Word  of  God  abiding  in  you ; "
and,  having  neither  his  love  nor  his  Word  in  them,  they  failed  to  accept  his  most
precious  gift  (2)  Want  of  spiritual  discernment.  They  could  not  see  through  the
letter  to  the  Spirit ;  could  not  see  the  Son  of  God  in  the  Son  of  man,  nor  the  Divine
Saviour  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  (3)  Want  of  self-surrender,  "Ye  will  not,"  etc.
Surrender  of  their  prejudices,  of  their  carnal  notions,  and  of  their  wicked  conduct.
This  was  the  chief  reason  of  their  terrible  failure  in  relation  to  Christ  and  eternal  life.
4.  This  failure  is  very  sad.  Because :  (I)  Their  best  energies  were  wasted.  There  was
much  search,  but  all  in  vain.  Their  labour  was  spent  for  that  which  satisfieth  not,
and  their  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread.  This  is  life  wasted,  energies  misapplied.
(2)  The  chief  good  was  lost.  "  Eternal  life."  How  sad,  after  so  much  search  I  (3)  Lost
while  no  near  to  them.  In  the  very  Scriptures  they  so  diligently  searched.  The  Author
and  Giver  of  eternal  life  was  in  their  nature,  in  their  midst,  preaching  in  their  streets,
teaching  in  their  synagogues,  performing  mighty  deeds  before  their  very  eyes,  and  utter-
ing the  words  of  eternal  life  in  their  ears.  Still  they  lost  the  highest  good.  They
were  in  the  field,  but  missed  the  pearl ;  they  had  the  casket,  but  missed  the  jewel.
(4)  Lost  while  they  ought  to  find  it.  They  had  the  best  advantages — the  testimony  of
Scriptures,  of  John,  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  mighty  works  of  Christ  himself.  To  lose
an  important  thing  through  misfortune,  or  through  something  which  could  not  btf
helped,  is  sad  enough,  but  to  lose  eternal  life  while  it  could  be  easily  attained  is  sadder
stilL    This  was  the  case  with  the  Jews,  as  well  as  with  all  who  have  the  gospel.

Lessons.  1.  The  chief  good  may  be  very  near  and  yet  missed.  This  was  the  case
with  regard  to  the  majority  of  Christ's  hearers,  and  this  is  the  case  still.  It  is  so  near,
but  how  often  missed!  2.  Much  commendable  search  of  Scripture  may  be  made  in
vain.  Many  students  of  the  Bible  are  scripturally  rich  but  spiritually  poor.  "Ever
learning,"  etc.  3.  It  is  not  enough  to  search  the  Scriptures,  hit  we  must  search  them
with  the  proper  end  in  view — with  open  eyes  and  open  hearts.    We  should  not  stop


oa.  T.  1-47.]       tflB  GOSPEL  AdCOftCma  TO  ST.  JOflN.  248

with  the  letter,  but  dive  down  to  the  spirit  and  drink  of  the  living  water,  accept  the
Life— the  Christ  of  the  Bible.  ^  4.  How  little  is  enough  to  keep  us  from  the  chief  good  I
A  want  of  will  is  sufficient.  Look  at  the  rich  young  man ;  only  Qne  thing  was  lacking.
And  look  at  these  Jews ;  it  was  only  the  "  will  not "  that  stood  between  them  and
eternal  Ufe.  5.  In  Christ  alone  eternal  life  is  to  he  foimd.  6.  We  must  eom^  to  him
for  it,  or  le  uiithout  it.  7.  The  importance  of  the  subject  and  the  Divine  aids  should
ever  decide  the  will  in  favour  tf  Qhrist.  To  know  the  Scriptures  and  not  know  the
Christ  of  the  Scriptures  is  very  sad. — B.  T.

Ver.  6.—^  remarkable  question  of  Jotun.  A  remarkable  question,  truly !  and  if  we
did  not  know  who  asked  it,  it  would  be  reckoned  a  thoughtless  and  somewhat  silly
question.  But  Jesus,  we  know,  must  oave  had" weighty  reasons  for  asking  it.  It  looks
plausible  to  assume  that  a  man  who  '^ad  been  thirty  and  eight  years  ill  must  assuredly
have  wanted  to  be  cured ;  but,  after  all,  the  assumption  is  badly  founded.  It  was
certainly  better  to  make  the  man  whole  than  to  leave  him  impotent,  but  it  does  not  at
all  follow  that  the  man  would  feel  it  to  be  better  amid  the  experiences  of  his  new  state.
Thirty  and  eight  years  would  fasten  a  man  down  to  the  habits  of  a  dependent  invalid,
and  the  perfect  recovery  of  physical  strength  by  no  means  guaranteed  that  he  would
be  fit  in  all  other  respects  to  use  the  strength  he  had  gained.  Those  who  had  willingly
helped  him  in  the  days  of  his  incapacity  would  now  say,  "  Get  you  gone  and  seek
work ;  earn  your  bread  as  others  do,  by  the  labour  of  your  hands."  Who  can  doubt
that  the  man  soon  had  cause  to  reflect  over  the  question  of  Jesus,  and  admit  that  it
was  a  question  full  of  meaning  ?  The  question,  then,  we  see,  was  just  the  question  tc
put  to  this  man  ;  and  more  than  that,  it  is  a  question  which  all  need  to  answer.

I.  It  kbminds  us  of  the  universal  spikitual  malady.  Jesus  is  the  great
Physician,  and  comes  to  benefit  the  sick.  When  he  talks  so  much  of  himself  as  the
Giver  of  new  life,  what  does  this  mean  but  that  the  old  life  ia  not  sufficient  ?  When
men  are  ill  In  body  they  know  that  they  are  ill,  and  are  quick  to  seek  for  remedies.
But  men  take  a  deal  of  persuading  and  humbling  and  emptying  of  self  before  they  can
see  the  need  of  healing  from  Christ.

II.  It  reminds  us  how  wb  must  take  the  true  wat  to  bpieitual  HEALixra.
Notice  the  answer  the  impotent  man  gives  to  Jesus.  He  proceeds  to  explain  that  he
is  doing  his  best  according  to  his  light  and  opportunity.  The  only  thing  he  knows  of
is  to  wait  at  Bethesda  till  his  chance  comes,  and  it  is  plain  it  never  will  come.  And  so
to  us,  taking  all  sorts  of  traditional  ways  to  ease  the  troubles  of  the  breast,  Jesus  comes,
and  in  the  midst  of  all  our  failures  says  there  is  real  healing  if  only  we  take  the  right
way.

III.  It  reminds  us  of  the  requirements  of  the  new  and  better  state.
From  this  poor  man  in  his  helplessness  little  was  expected.  When  he  was  healed  he
would  have  to  enter  on  a  life  of  struggle,  duty,  and  self-reliance.  When  Christ  lays
down  before  us  of  the  riches  of  his  grace,  a  great  deal  more  is  thereby  expectei^  from
us. — Y.

Ver.  14. — The  BeaJei's  warning.  I.  He  who  warns  has  the  right  to  speak.  It
is  not  a  mere  stranger  who  comes  up.  He  who  speaks  has  rendered  the  greatest  services
to  the  man  he  addresses,  and  his  warning  for  the  future  is  based  on  his  service  in  the
past.  So  to  speak,  the  healing  would  have  been  incomplete  but  for  the  giving  of  the
warning.  There  are  diseases  the  origin  of  which  is  not  traceable;  there  are  other
diseases  distinctly  traceable  to  the  evil-doing  of  those  who  suflfer  from  them.  This  man
might  surely  have  said,  even  as  did  the  Samaritan  woman,  "  Here  is  One  who  told
me  all  that  ever  I  did."  Many  would  speak  to  the  healed  man,  and  their  utterances
would  only  move  him  to  say  that  they  knew  not  what  they  were  talking  about.  "  Sin
no  more,"  says  Jesus.  That  seemed  to  point  back  to  some  act  or  course  of  evil-doing
far  away  in  the  past,  forgotten  by  most  who  had  ever  known  it,  and  to  many  not  known
at  all.  But  he  who  had  the  power  to  heal  had  also  the  power  to  know.  If  in  after
years  this  man  neglected  the  warning  and  fell  into  suffering,  all  the  bitterer  would  that
suffering  be  in  recollecting  that  he  was  so  clearly  forewarned  against  it.

II.  Jesus  would  have  health  bestobeq,  whateveb  the  cause  of  rrs  loss  might
be.    Jesus  did  not  come  first  of  all  to  the  impotent  man,  reminding  him  that  all  theM


u*  tat  GOSPBti  ACdoftbliJo  to  s*r.  Jonlf.     foH.  v.  l-4t.

long  years  of  infirmity  were  tbe  consequence  of  his  own  evil-doing.  Tlie  man  knew
that  well  enough,  and  in  all  likelihood  lamented  bitterly  over  his  folly.  AU  sufferers
demand  sympathy;  sufferers  through  their  sin  most  of  all.  Jesus  did  not  be^n
lecturing  the  impotent  man  as  he  lay  by  the  pooL  He  healed  him  first,  and  then  spoke
plainly,  even  severely,  to  him  after.

ni.  What  Jbsus  oiveb  man  must  ouabd.  While  this  poor  man  lay  helpless,  many
temptations  passed  him  by.  Now  that  he  was  well  again,  temptations  would  crowd  in
upon  him.  The  tempter  says,  "  You  are  getting  old ;  the  years  are  few :  make  up  for
what  you  lost  all  the  time  you  were  so  helpless."  Jesus  could  easily  make  fresh
physical  energy  pour  into  every  organ  and  member  of  this  disabled  man.  But  when  it
was  a  question  of  making  him  spiritually  strong,  then  he  had  to  be  appealed  to  in  a
very  warning  way.  What  a  dreadful  possibility  Jesus  presents  to  the  man !  "  A  worse
thing  may  happen  to  thee."  What  can  be  worse  than  a  life  of  physical  suffering  ?
And  yet  there  are  degrees  even  in  that.  More  sin  might  mean  even  worse  bodily
sufferincr,  though  it  is  almost  certain  Jesus  meant  the  ruin  of  the  whole  natnre.

IV.  The  EEBP0NSIBILITIE8  OF  HEALTH.  Those  in  full  vigour  of  body  and  mind
must  not  be  astonished  when  they  are  spoken  to  plainly.  If  they  are  not  careful,  their
very  strength  and  capability  work  out  all  the  more  evil.  When  we  mourn  over  pro-
mising lives  made  useless  by  bodily  infirmity,  we  must  remember  another  aspect  of
bodily  infirmity,  namely,  that  people  who  might  have  done  great  mischief  have  uiereby
been  made  harmless. — Y.

Ver.  36. — Tfit  witness-bearing  tnorhs  of  Jesus.  L  Those  to*  whom  the  tebtuont
WAS  OFFERED.  Jesus  had  done  two  things  which  exceedingly  shocked  and  horrified  the
Jews  of  Jerusalem.  On  the  sabbath  day  he  had  healed  an  impotent  man,  and  told  him
to  take  up  his  bed  and  walk.  He  had  also  said  that  God  was  his  Father,  making  him-
self equal  with  God.  The  words,  the  deeds,  and  the  appearance  of  Jesus  seemed  con-
tradictory to  those  who  would  not  wait  to  look  under  the  surface,  but  judged  everything
by  their  own  traditions  and  prejudices.  And  when  Jesus  was  confronted  by  all  this
prejudice  and  narrow-mindedness,  all  he  could  do  was  to  go  on  with  his  work  and  his
witness-bearing.  Not  for  himself  he  needed  to  fear  anything,  but  he  did  fear  for  those
who  were  blind  to  his  claims.  The  hearts  of  men  had  got  so  hardened  and  their  minds
so  twisted,  that  the  true  was  reckoned  to  be  the  false,  and  the  right  to  be  the  wrong.
It  did  no  harm  to  Jesus  that  he  should  be  called  sabbath-breaker  and  blasphemer,  but
it  did  great  harm  to  those  falsely  calling  him  so.  Hence  he  tries,  quietly  and  patiently,
to  get  them  to  examine  into  the  evidence  for  his  claims.  Jesus  never  wanted  people
to  take  his  bare  word.  He  knew  that  false  Ghrists  would  go  out  into  the  world,  and
therefore  he  would  furnish  ample  and  comforting  evidence  that  he  was  the  true  Christ.
Somehow  or  other,  there  were  immense  difficulties  in  the  way  of  people  receiving  Jesus
as  the  Christ  of  God.  But  they  were  not  difSculties  that  Jesus  made.  Jesus  is  on  our
side  against  the  difficulties.  The  works  of  Jesus,  going  on  from  day  to  day,  gradually
mounted  up  to  a  body  of  testimony,  on  which  the  taith  of  a  sincere  heart  could  build
as  on  a  foundation  of  rock.

II.  The  witness-beabino  wobkb.  John  was  a  witness,  but  Jesus  had  greater
witness  than  that  of  John.  Jesus  did  not  speak  in  any  way  depreciatory  of  John.  The
best  of  men  may  not  be  the  best  of  witnesses.  John  told  people  whore  to  look.  He
fixed  their  attenticm  on  Jesus,  and  they  were  then  to  watch  what  Jesus  would  do.
Prom  our  own  observation  of  Jesus  we  know  far  more  than  ever  John  could  have  told
us.  The  deeds  of  Jesus  speak  with  unsurpassed  power  and  tenderness  to  those  who
are  disposed  to  listen.  There  they  lie  in  their  simple  beauty  and  depth  of  suggestion,
waiting  till  we  look  at  them  and  search  into  them  and  put  them  together,  investigating
to  their  very  depths,  so  that  whatever  witness-bearing  power  is  in  them  may  be  brought
out  to  the  full.  What  men  say  about  Jesus  is  all  very  well  in  its  way,  but  what  we
can  see  Jesus  himself  doing  is  far  better.  He  means  that  we  should,  as  it  were,  see  him
with  our  own  eyes.

UL  Cub  besfonsibility  befobb  this  wrrNEBS-BEABiBa.  We  may  neglect  to
•zaraine  into  these  witnesses,  but  that  does  not  prove  them  unworthy  of  our  closest
stady.  Jesus  knows  his  own.  What  you  are  disinclined  to  look  at  just  now,  you  wmf
be  Mger  to  search  into  by-and-by.    Thousands  pooh-pooh  the  reality  and  possibUitjr


ca.  vt.  1—71.]     tM;  GostiiL  AcdOEbtNG  TO  s'r.  ion^.  244

of  the  works  of  Jesus,  measuring  the  possible  and  the  impossible  by  their  little  experi-
ence. Supposing  what  happened  to  Martha  and  Mary  happened  to  them,  and  one  of
their  dearest  was  raised  from  the  dead,  where  would  their  incredulity  be  then?  Those
Jews  who  so  savagely  charged  Jesus  with  breaking  the  sabbath  must  surely  have  been
men  whose  own  persons  and  dearest  friends  had  been  untouched  by  suffering.  We  are
responsible,  too,  for  examining  into  all  the  works  of  Jesus — ^works  in  the  spiritual
sphere  as  much  as  in  the  natural;  works  like  the  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  as  much
as  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus.  It  is  indeed  a  great  responsibility  to  be  face  to  face
with  the  testimonies  from  more  than  eighteen  centuries  of  Pentecostal  power.— Y.

Ver.  44. — A  tpeeial  hindrance  to  faith.  Jesus  deals  with  the  numerous  obstacles  to
faith  one  by  one,  as  they  rise  up.  And  observe,  too,  that  Jesus  is  here  dealing,  not
only  with  unbelievers,  but  with  mortal  enemies.  Some  looked  on  Jesus  and  lisfened
to  him,  and  then  went  away,  as  little  touched  by  hate  as  by  love ;  others  were  so  filled
with  falsehood  and  pride,  and  zeal  of  God  not  according  to  knowledge,  that  almost  every
word  of  Jesus  caused  a  fresh  and  violent  irritation.  Such  could  do  nothing  but  oppose
Jesus,  and  make  their  unbelief  hideously  manifest  in  their  works.  And  Jesus  knows  the
reason  for  all  this  violence  in  unbelief.  These  opponents  of  bis  have  wrong  views  as  to
the  true  glory  of  human  nature.  Jesus  could  never  have  a  glory  that  would  please
them.

I.  Man's  touching  consciousness  that  hk  combs  short  of  his  glory.  For  it
is  glory  rather  than  honour  that  Jesus  is  here  speaking  about.  The  word  is  Srffa,  not
Tiyn<.  Glory  is  the  manifestation,  the  full  bringing  out  of  what  is  inside.  Honour  is
the  value,  the  price,  so  to  speak,  which  others  put  upon  us.  These  enemies  of  Jesus,
according  to  the  judgment  he  expresses  upon  them,  were  men  seeking  a  glory  which
would  not  come  by  any  natural  development.  If  it  came,  it  had  to  come  by  their
wishing  and  seeking.  The  glory  of  the  lily  in  its  clothing  comes  by  the  mystery  of  its
creation ;  the  glory  of  Solomon  comes  by  what  he  gathers  to  himself.  Jesus  looked
upon  men,  every  one  of  whom  was  conscious  he  had  done  something,  had  achieved  for
himself  a  position  of  sanctity  and  success  which  made  it  right  for  others  to  honour
him.

IL  Man  letting  hib  glort  be  determined  by  frail  human  judgment.  When
ambition  gets  into  our  hearts,  we  crave  for  those  eminences  and  splendours  which  the
world,  in  its  fondness  for  the  outward  and  visible,  will  readily  recognize.  Jesus  could
not  be  recognized  for  what  he  was,  because  he  could  not  be  measured  by  the  standard  to
which  his  enemies  habitually  appealed.  It  was  not  that  he  came  short  of  the  standard ;
he  could  not  be  measured  by  it  at  all.  It  was  as  if  a  man  who  had  nothing  but  liquid
measures  should  be  asked  to  determine  the  length  of  a  piece  of  cloth.  These  enemies
of  Jesus  could  not  even  undei  stand  him.  He  set  at  nought  the  glories,  the  aims,  and
the  sanctities  they  held  dearest.  They  let  glory  be  determined  by  human  traditions
and  the  self-seeking  notions  ef  the  natural  heart.

III.  How  seekers  of  glory  can  comb  to  a  real  faith  in  Jesus.  They  must
see  how  in  Jesus  there  is  the  real,  abiding,  everlasting  glory  of  humanity.  In  Jesus
there  was  the  glory  that  cometh  from  God — the  glory  of  a  pure  heart,  a  gentle  spirit,  a
perfect  integrity;  the  glory  of  a  life  that  best  shows  forth  the  glory  of  God.  This  was
the  glory  of  Jesus,  that  he  glorified  the  Father.  In  the  Son,  those  who  had  eyes  to
discern  could  see  all  of  the  eternal  glory  that  was  within  the  reach  of  human  percep-
tions. As  long  as  these  enemies  of  Jesus  remained  in  the  same  mind  and  clung  to  their
cherished  standards,  so  long  Jesus  would  be  impossible  to  their  faith.  Our  attitude  to
Jesus  infallibly  determines  our  real  worth.  We  are  unconsciously  judging  ourselves  in
judging  him. — Y.

EXPOSITION.
OHAPTEB  VI.


Yen.  1 — 71. — 2.  Christ  declares  himtelf
lobeth*  Snflainer  and  Protector  of  the  life  of
vikieh  he  i*  the  Souree.


Vers.  1— 15.— <1)  The  ropply  of  \mnan
want!  iUuitrated  by  a  tcell-hiunon  "  eign  "  of
power.

Chronological  diffloulties  besot  oar  treaW


24«


THfi  (JOS?EL  ACCORblNa  to  ST.  JoflH.     foa.  Vl  1— ?1.


ment  of  thii  mlraonlons  naTrative  with
iU  varied  ooniequenoei  and  leanlti.  Many
enrioiu  and  CTen  violent  measnres  have
been  letorted  to  with  a  Tiew  to  solve
them.  Some  have  enpposed  that  eh.  T.
and  tL  have  been  inyeited  in  order,  and
that  thus  the  presence  of  our  Lord  in
Galilee,  mentioned  in  oh.  It.,  wonid  aooonnt
for  the  statement  of  eh.  tL  1  and  the
journey  to  Jerusalem  of  ch.  t.  1,  be  brought
into  closer  relation  with  ch.  tU,  We  can-
not see  the  faintest  indication  or  evidence
whatever  of  any  such  treatment  of  the
Oospel  by  the  authors  of  the  manuscripts  or
the  quotations  or  versions.  The  evangelist
has  just  completed  his  record  of  the  conflict
between  Jesus  and  the  recognized  leaders
of  the  people  in  Jerusalem.  He  bad  intro-
duced our  Lord's  own  vindication  (based  on
the  highest  grounds)  of  hii  own  right  to
deal  with  the  rabbinical  restrictions  upon
sabbath  duty.  These  grounds  were  the
eternal  relations  of  his  own  Inner  nature
and  consciousness  with  the  Father's.  On
no  occasion  bad  Ctirist  made  the  unique-
ness of  his  personal  claims  and  powers  more
explicit.  He  called  for  entire  obedience  to
his  word  as  the  condition  of  eternal  life,
and  as  the  key  to  the  Scriptures  of  God.  If
we  had  no  synoptic  tradition  to  ^ve  a  closer
historical  setting  of  the  narrative  which
here  follows,  we  might  take  Meyer's  view,
and  say  that  the  "  after  these  things  "  (jxfri
ravTo}  of  ver.  1  referred  to  the  discourse
of  the  previous  chapter,  and  that  the  "  de-
parted" (sTT^ASe)  referred  to  Jerusalem  as
its  starting-point ;  and,  notwithstanding  the
extreme  awkwardness  of  the  expression,  we
might  have  supposed  that  "  the  other  side  "
of  the  sea  was  the  other  side  of  it  from
Jerusalem  (cf  oh.  x.  40 ;  xviiL  1).  Some
commentators  appear  to  have  a  morbid  fear
of  reducing  a  difficulty,  or  seeing  a  harmony,
between  these  four  narratives.  One  thing
is  clear,  that  they  are  independent  of  one
another,  are  not  derived  from  each  other,  do
each  involve  side  views  of  the  event  distinct
from  the  rest,  and  yet  concur  in  the  same
general  representation.  The  synoptists,
however,  place  the  "  feeding  of  the  multi-
tudes"  in  the  midst  of  a  group  of  most
remarkable  and  varied  events.  It  is  for
them  one  page  ont  of  many  descriptive  of
the  Galiliean  ministiy,  and  which  ultimately


led  to  grievous  departure  from  and  diminu-
tion of  the  temporary  popularity   of  the
great  Prophet.    It  would  seem  that  bitter
hostility,  as  well  as  excited  enthusiasm,  was
eheckering  his  early  ministry.    The  synop-
tics take  pains  to  show  the  combined  effect
of  his  lelf-revelations  (1)  on  his  own  fellow-
townsmen  (Luke  iv.  16—30 ;  Mark  vi.  1— ti);
(2)  upon  his  own  family  (Mark  iii.  19—21,
31 — 35) ;  (3)  upon  the  populace  (Matt.  xv.
31);  (4)  upon   Herod  Antipas  (Mark   vL
14 — 16) ;  (5)  upon  the  twelve  disciples  (Matt.
xvi.  13—28);  (6)  upon  John  the  Baptist  (Matt.
xi.  3) ;  and  (7)  upon  the  Father  in  heaven
(Matt  xrii.  1 — 13  and  parallel  passages).
The  canvas  is   orowded  with  scenes,  the
signs  and  wonders  of  healing  and  teaching
are  abundant      The   blind   see,  the   deaf
,  hear,  the  dead  are  raised,  the  daemons  are
exorcised.    The  twelve  apostles  are  chosen,
the   sermon   on   the   mount   is  delivered,
the  twelve  are  sent  forth  in  every  direction
with  the  proclamation  of  the  coming  of
the  kingdom  and  with  the  call  to  repent-
ance,   and   an    excitement    produced    by
the  mission  of  the  twelve  had  proved   to
be  extensive.      The  crowds  throng  him;
they  have  no  time  even  to  eat  bread.  And  we
judge  finm  Luke  ix.  10  that  this  very  ex-
oitement,  amounting  to  feverish  self-glori-
fication on  their  part  appears  to  have  been
one  at  least  of  our  Lord's  motives  for  the
temporary  withdrawal  of  his  disciples  from
the  multitudes.    Another  event  of  singular
significance  contributed  to  the  same  result.
Matthew  (xiv.  12)  takes  the  opportunity  of
describing  the  tragic  close  of  John's  im-
prisonment, and  relates  how  John's  "dis-
ciples came  to  tell  Jesns"  of  the  bloody
deed.     A  sudden  panic  was  felt  by  the
multitude.     A  crisis  had   arrived.     Tbe
great  Prophet  must  avenge  his  forerunner's
death  or  lose  his  hold  upon  the  affections
of  the  fickle  mass.    The  people  appeared
to  the  eyes  of  Jesus  (Mark  vi.   31)   "  as
sheep  without  a  shepherd."    He  had  com-
passion on  them,  but  he  must  make  them
understand  the  nature  of  the  royalty  as  well
as  of  the  realm  of  the  Messianic  King.

The  true  grounds  for  Christ's  retirement
are  not  incompatible,  but  mutually  explana-
tory. The  death  of  the  renowned  forerunner,
of  the  idol  of  the  multitude  brought  vividly
to  the  mind  of  the  Xx>rd  his  own  death — the


CH.  tlI— 71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


247


foreseen  eaciifioe  of  himself.  The  ooiiTie-
tion  that  he  must  give  himself  to  a  violent
death— ^ve  his  flesh  to  the  hungry  and
starring  multitude,  made  the  decadence  of
his  popularity  in  Galilee  a  certain  conse-
quence of  any  right  apprehension  of  his
mission  or  claims.  Tliis  mastery  over  the
powers  of  nature  which  his  compassion  for
others  prevailed  on  him  to  manifest  would
be  misunderstood.  The  moral  and  mystic
meaning  of  it  was  far  more  important  than
the  superficial  inferences  drawn  by  the
Galilieans.  The  real  lesson  of  the  miracle
would  grievously  offend  them.  But  it  sank
deeply  into  the  apostolic  mind,  and  hence
the  various  aspects  which  it  presents  in  the
fourfold  narrative.  John  selects  this  one
specimen  of  the  Galiliean  ministry  on
account  of  its  typical  character,  and  records
the  high  and  wonderful  results  which  the
Lord  educed  from  this  high  and  striking
manifestation  of  his  power.  There  is,  more-
over, remarkable  con-espondenoe  between
the  fifth  and  sixth  chapters  in  this  respect,
that  Galilee,  like  Jerusalem,  recoils  from
the  highest  claims  of  Jesus,  and  developed
an  antagonism  or  an  indifference  as  deadly
if  not  as  malignant  as  that  which  has  dis-
played itself  in  the  metropolis.  "  He  came
to  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."

Ver.  1. — After  these  things  (see  note  on
ch.  T.  1 ;  not  /terct  toSto,  which  would  mean
after  this  particular  scene  in  Jerusalem) —
i.e.  after  a  group  of  events,  one  of  which
may  have  been  this  visit  to  the  metropolis,
but  which  included  also  the  early  Galilsean
ministry  as  presented  in  the  synoptic  narra-
tive, and  with  which  John  and  his  readers
were  familiar — Jesus  departed  from  the  side
of  the  sea  on  which  he  was,  and  as  we  may
judge  (ver.  21)  from  Capernaum,  now  known
to  be  his  chief  resting-place,  most  probably
the  home  of  bis  mother,  brothers,  and  nearest
filends,  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea  of
Galilee,  of  Tiberias ;  or,  of  tJte  Galilsean  lea
of  Tiberias.  It  does  not  follow  that  the
evangelist  had  the  southernmost  portion  of
the  lake  in  his  mind  (as  Meyer  suggests).
Tiberias  was  the  showy  city  built  by  Herod
Antipas  on  the  western  shore  of  the  l^e.
Herod  called  the  place  after  the  name  of
Tiberius  Csesar,  aud  conferred  upon  it  many
Gentile  characteristics.  From  the  time  of
Antipas  to  that  of  Agrippa  it  was  the  chief
town  of  the  tetrarchy.  After  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem  it  became  for  centuries  the  site
of*  oe)ebmte4  school  of  Hebrew  }eaming,and


one  of  the  sacred  cities  of  the  Jews.  Jewish
tradition  makes  it  the  scene  of  the  last
judgment  and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.
It  was  a  modem  city,  which  may  acoonnt  for
the  omission  of  its  name  in  the  synoptio  nar-
rative. Christ  never  visited  it  that  we  know
of.  He  preferred  the  fishing  village  of  Beth-
saida,  or  the  more  thoroughly  Hebrew  aspect
of  Capernaum.  Nevertheless,  "Tiberias"
gave  to  Gentile  ears  the  best  and  least  du-
bious designation  of  the  lake.  So  Pausanias
(v.  7.  3)  calls  it  the  Kl/wri  TijSepfs  ("  the  lake
Tiber").  Luke  (v.  1)  calls  it  the  "Lake
Gennesaret,"  and  Matthew  and  Mark  "  the
Sea  of  Galilee  "  without  any  other  epithet.
John  (zxi.  1)  calls  it  "  the  Sea  of  Tiberias."
This  multiplicity  of  lake-names,  due  in  the
first  instance  to  some  peculiarity  of  the  includ  -
ing  shores,  finds  easy  parallels  in  Derwent-
water  and  Keswick  Lake,  and  in  the  "  Lake
of  the  Four  Cantons,"  called  also  "  Lake  of  Lu
zern,"  etc.  Christ  sought  retirement  from
the  surging  crowd,  and  for  himself  and  his
excited  disciples  a  time  of  rest  and  com-
munion with  the  Father,  who  had  accepted,
as  part  of  his  Divine  plan,  the  awful  sacrifice
of  the  life  of  John  the  Baptist.  He  went
"  by  ship,"  says  Matthew  (xi  v.  13)  to  a  desert
place.  In  Luke's  account  this  solitary  place
was  towards  or  near  («s)  a  city  called
"  Bethsaida."  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that
this  is  the  familiar  Bethsaida  or  "fishing
town,"  situated  a  little  south  of  Capernaum,
because  we  are  met  in  the  account  of  Hark
(vi.  45)  with  the  statement  that,  aftor  the
miracle,  the  disciples  were  urged  to  go  to
the  other  side  of  the  kke  (irphs  BijSiraiSai/)
towards  Bethsaida.  This,  compared  witli
ver.  17,  is  obviously  in  the  same  direction  us
Capernaum.  Indeed,  the  term,  "  Bethsaid  i
of  Galilee,"  referred  to  in  ch.  xii.  21  (is
the  Apostle  Philip's  residence),  seems  usi  d
with  the  view  of  distinguishing  it  &om  some
other  place  of  the  same  name.  Now,
Josephus  ('Ant.,'  xviii.  2.  1)  mentions  a
Bethsaida  Julias  situated  on  the  north-
eastern extremity  of  the  lake.  The  mins
of  this  city  may  be  still  seen  on  the  rising
hilly  ground  which  here  retires  somewhat
from  the  river  and  the  lake.  It  was  situated
in  Oaulonitis,  in  the  tetrarchy  of  Philip,  anil
therefore  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  Herod,
yet  not  far  from  the  road  into  Perna  by
which  the  Galilcean  pilgrims  to  the  metru-
polis  might  be  expected  to  travel.  The
silence  of  these  hills  provided  the  oppor-
tunity of  retirement.  But  it  was  frustrated
by  the  eager  excitement  of  the  maltitnde.

Ver.  2.— There  was  following  him  a  vast
crowd,  because  they  were  speotatoia  of  the

•  Tischendorf  (6th  and  8th  editX  Meyer
T.B.,  read  e^w,  with  N,  r.  A,  A,  IL  ate.  '•
Lachmann,  Tregelles,  B.T.,  with  B,  p,  L,


248


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—71


ligna  he  was  working  on  those  that  were
siok.  The  imperfect  tenses  here  reveal  a
period  of  time  that  had  elapsed;  a  group
and  series  of  healings  which  had  touched
the  heart  of  the  people.  Their  "  following  "
had  not  heen  by  ship,  but  round  tlie  bead
of  the  lake,  and  across  the  ford  of  the  Jordan,
which  is  still  situated  about  two  miles  from
the  point  where  the  river  flows  into  the  Sea
of  Galilee.  The  multitudes  would  easily
learn  the  direction  of  the  well-known  boat
with  its  solitary  sail,  and  would  be,  some  of
them,  ready  at  tlie  landing-place,  to  greet
the  Lord  on  his  arrival.  Many  hours  might
elapse  before  the  crowd  had  reached  such
vast  proportions  as  we  subsequently  find.
It  may  easily  have  been  swollen  by  curious
and  inquisitive  pilgrims,  or  by  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  neighbouring  villages,  intent
nn  a  sight  of  the  Prophet  who  had  preached
the  sermon,  who  had  spoken  in  wondrous
parables,  who  had  given  snoh  striking  proof
that  "  God  was  with  him."

Yer.  3. — ^And  Jesng  went  np  into  the
mountain ;  {.e.  the  high  ground  which  every-
where surrounded  the  lake.  The  same  ex-
pression, «j  ri  ipos,  occurs  very  frequently
in  the  synoptist  Gospels  (Mark  iii.  13 ;
Matt  T.  1 ;  xiv.  23).  This  last  passage  is
an  interesting  confirmation  of  onr  text.
The  usage  implies  on  the  part  of  the  four
evangelists  familiar  acquaintance  with  the
scenery.  And  there  he  sat  down'  with  his
disciples.  From  this  elevation  they  would
see  the  gathering  multitudes  streaming  from
different  points  and  meeting  on  the  pebbly
beach,  asking  each  other  where  was  the
Master?  and  whither  had  the  Prophet,  the
Healer,  fled?  Women  and  little  children
are  in  the  crowd  (Matt  xiv.  21).  Weiss,
who  argues  that  the  main  feattnes  of  the
narrative  are  deeply  imbedded  in  all  the
traditions,  summarily  disposes  of  the  later
accounts  of  the  similar  event  recited  by
Mark  (viii  1—11)  and  Matthew  (XV.  32— 38).

Yer.  4. — ITow  the  Fassover,  the  feast  of
the  Jews,  was  at  hand.  The  ordinary  mean-
ing of  iyyis  need  not  be  departed  from  (cf
eh.  ii.  13;  vii.  2;  zi.  55).  This  valuable
note  of  time  is  confirmed  by  another  hint
incidentally  dropped.  A  month  later  than
the  Passover  it  could  not  be  said  that
"much  grass"  WM  in  the  place.    In  the


read  iOedpow;  A,  iSeipav.  The  airov  Is
omitted  by  modern  editors,  Meyer,  Westcott
and  Hort,  Godet,  on  very  strong  authority —
N,  A,  B,  D,  K,  L,  etc.,  Italic,  Syriao,  Yul-
gate,  and  Coptic.

'  Tischendorf  (8th  edit),  Westcott  and
Hort,  with  K,  D,  13,  69, 124,  read  iKoSiQiro,
•*  was  sitting;"  iKiBTjre  of  T.B.  is  preferred
by  B.T.,  AlR>rd,sndTregeIle8,  on  the  autho-
rity of  A.  B,  I^  r,  4,  ^to.


late  spring  such  a  phrase  would  most  in-
adequately represent  tlie   scene  that  was
indelibly  impressed  on  the  fourfold  tradition.
Whatever  the  unnamed  feast  was  (oh.  v.  1),
whether  Trumpets,  Purim,  or  Passover,  we
have  reached  the  month  Abib,  when  the
crowds  of  pilgrims  were  gathering  for  their
southern  journey.    If  the  Purim  were  the
unnamed  feast,  then  the  suggestion  arises
that    Christ's  reception   at   Jerusalem   had
prevented  his  remaining  until  the  Passover
of  that  year.     If  the  Passover  be   meant
(eh.  V.  1),  then  a  year  has  passed  between
ch.  V.  and  vi.    Nor  is  this  a  day  too  long
for  the  crowd  of  events  and  teachings  re-
corded by  the  synoptists  as   having  taken
place  before  the  death  of  John.     The  note
of  time  may  be  recorded  &a  implying  the
dominant  sentiment  in  the  minds  of  the
people.  The  great  deliverance  from  Egyptian
bondage    was    burned    into    the    national
conscience,  and    the   fanatic   defiire   for  a
second  Moses  to  lead  them  out  of  Soman
servitude  was  at  such  seasons  fanned  into
a  flame.   The  Lord  had  his  own  thought
about  the  Paschal  lamb,  and  knew  that  God
was  preparing  a   Lamb    for  sacrifice.    In
mystic,  parabolic  sense  he  foreknew  that
men  would  and  must  consume  the  flesh  of
this  sacrifice.     He  was  ready,  moreover,  to
show  them  that  he  could  supply  all  their
need.    The  great  Prophet  who  had  said  of
himself,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  I "  had
just  fallen  beneath  the  executioner's  axe.
The  people  were  bereft  of  a  great  prophet
and  leader,  and  to  Christ's  eye  they  were
"  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd."    Yerily  he
was  preparing  to  lay  down  his  life  as  a  good
Shepherd  for  these  sheep — to  previde  for
them  in  the  future  a  feast  of  living  bread.
All  this  may  rationally  be  admitted,  without
for  a  moment  conceding  that  second-century
ideas  like  these  were  the  formative  causes
of  the  narrative.    The  miracle  that  follows
stands  on  an  entirely  distinct  basis,  and  is
more  powerfully  attested  than  any  other
miracle,  except  the  resurrection  of  Christ
If  it  stood  in  John's  record  alone,  there
might  be  some  colour  for  the  supposition
that  we  have  merely  a  parable  of  great
beauty.  But  the  threefold  tradition  long  an-
terior to  John's  Gospel  deprives  even  the
pseudo-John  of  the  possibility  of  inventing  it
On  the  other  hand,  the  appearance  of  the
narrative  in  John's  Gkwpel  deprives  it  of  the
mythical  character  which  some  have  attri-
buted to  the  authors  of  the  synoptic  Gospels.
Thoma,  in  the  spirit  of  Strauss,  here  ima-
gines that    the    synoptists  were   busy  in
fashioning  a  miracle  of  sustenance  and  a
portent  upon  the  waters — a  sign  on  land  and
sea — to  correspond  with  the  manna  and  Bed
Sea  QiarveU  of  the  Book  of  Exodus.    "  T^9


AH.  Ti.  1—71.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDma  TO  ST.  JOHN.


219


mountain  "(rb  Spot)  is,  as  he  thinks,  a  aimi-
litnde  of  the  Mount  Sinai,  and,  as  the  latter
represented  the  giving  of  the  Law,  this  was
asBociated  with  the  mountain  of  Beatitudes.
He  goes  further,  and  sees  in  the  Johannine
narrative  the  Christian  {agapse)  feasts,  and
tbedeliverance  of  the  Apostle  Paul  from  ship-
wreck I  He  is  eyen  more  ingenious  still,
and  suggests  that  the  "five  thousand"  fed
at  the  flrst  miraculons  meal,  with  twelve
baskets  of  fragments,  correspond  with  the
results  of  the  first  preaching  of  the  twelve
apostles,  and  that  the  seven  loaves  among
the  four  thousand  reflect  "  the  many  hun-
dreds" who  were  benefited  by  the  seven
evangelists.  He  endeavours  by  a  most  elabo-
rate process  to  make  it  appear  that  John
has  here  combined  into  one  tableau  minute
traces  derived  from  the  five  several  accounts
of  the  two  miracles.  The  old  rationalistic
theory  was  that  the  miracle  was  only  an
exaggerated  poetical  statement  of  the  fact ;
that  a  good  example  of  .charity  on  the  part
of  the  apostles  was  followed  by  others,  and
so  food  was  found  for  the  entire  multitude.
This  hypothesis  breaks  on  the  rock  that  the
authors  of  these  Gospels  intended  to  convey
a  perfectly  different  idea.  The  effect  of
sn^  cheap  philanthropy  and  pragmatic
travesty  of  a  royal  act  would  not  have  been
that  the  multitudes  would  have  rushed  to
tlie  conclusion  that  he  had  done  a  kingly
deed,  or  one  in  the  least  way  calculated  to
suggest  the  notion  that  he  could  feed  armies
at  his  will.  All  efforts  to  extirpate  by  such
theories  the  supernatural  character  of  the
occurrence  fail,  and  force  the  reader  back
upon  the  plain  statements  of  the  fourfold
narrative.

Ver.  5. — Jesas  therefore,  seated  with  his
disciples  on  the  rising  ground  in  full  view
of  the  lake  with  its  shipping  and  its  fringe
of  villages,  and  of  the  gathering  crowds  of
)>ilgrim8  to  the  Passover,  having  lifted  up
his  eyes,  and  having  beheld  that  a  great  mul-
titude oometh  (was  coming)  unto  him,  saith.
Matthew  (xiv.  14),  Mark  (vi.  34),  and  Luke
(ix.  II)  show  that  the  miracle  which  they
all,  with  John,  prepare  to  describe  was  pre-
ceded by  a  day  in  which  the  Lord  instructed
the  multitudes,  "  had  compassion  upon
them,"  "  taught  them  many  th  ings,"  "  spake
to  them  oonoeming  the  kingdom  of  God,"
"  healed  their  sick."  The  first  approach  of
the  multitude  was  the  occasion  of  a  sugges-
tion which  Jesus  made  to  Philip.  The  other
evangelists  record  the  reopening  of  the
conversation  on  the  same  theme,  stimulated
by  the  question  already  put  to  Philip  in  the
forenoon,  and  on  this  occasion  originated  by
the  disciples.  The  company  arrived  by  the
head  of  die  lake  (cf  .  Mark  vi.  33, "  They  ran
afoot  out  of  all  the  cities");  and  the  first
eom|)asBionate    thought    ia   attributed    by


John  to  the  Lord  himself:  Whence  are  wo
to  buy '  (bread)  loaves,  that  these  multitudes
may  eatt  This  very  question  shows  the
intimate  relations  between  our  Lord  and  his
disciples — the  touch  of  nature.  The  identi-
fication of  his  interests  with  theirs  is  in  the
"  we."  Why  should  Philip  bo  selected  for
the  questioning  or  suggestion?  Luthardt
argues  that  it  was  a  part  of  the  needed
education  of  that  apostle  that  he  should
have  been  submitted  to  the  searching  anxiety.
It  is  indeed  added —

Ver.  6. — This  he  said  to  test  him ;  but  it
is  doubtful  whether  more  is  involved  than
an  endeavour  to  entice  from  Pliilip  the
answer  of  faith,  such  e.g.  as  "  Lord,  all  things
are  possible  to  thee."  Philip  of  Bethsaida
was,  moreover,  in  all  probability,  present  at;
the  wedding-feast  at  Oana,  and  might  have
anticipated  some  such  sign  of  the  resources
of  his  Lord.  The  other  hints  of  Philip's
character  are  severally  consistent  with  this.
Philip  had  said  in  the  first  instance  to
Nathanael,  "  Come  and  see."  "  Seeing  is
believing ; "  and  Philip,  on  the  night  of  the
Passion,  after  much  hearing  and  seeing  of
Jesus,  said,  "  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and
it  sufficeth  us ; "  for  he  had  even  then  not
risen  to  the  loftiness  of  the  perception  that
the  Father  had  been  and  was  being  revealed  .
in  Christ's  own  life  (ch.  xiv.).  Philip's
personal  acquaintance  with  the  immediate
vicinity  is  more  liltely  to  be  the  reason
of  his  being  put  to  this  proof;  while  the
tact  of  the  inquiry  as  addressed  to  him  is
an  undesigned  note  of  the  identity  of  the
Johannine  Christ  with  that  portrayed  by
the  synoptists.  Bengel's  suggestion,  that
Pliilip  was  entrusted  with  the  commissariat
of  the  twelve,  is  hardly  consistent  with  the
fact  that  Judas  kept  the  common  purse
We  are  expressly  told  that  Jesus  did  not
put  the  question  in  consequence  of  any
deficiency  of  knowledge  or  resources  on  his
own  part,  but  to  test  the  character  and  tone
of  Philip's  mind.  He  himself  knew  what
he  was  about  to  do.  Thus,  by  a  slight  touch,
we  see  the  blending  of  the  distinctly  human
with  the  consciously  Divine  elements  of  that
unique  personality  of  his.  There  were  to
his  Divine  consciousness  no  gaps  of  reality,
but  he  BO  threw  himself  into  human  con-
ditions that  he  could  ask  the  question  and
pass  through  the  experience  of  a  man.  The
whole  kenotic  controversy  is,  of  course,  in-
volved in  the  solution  of  the  problem  offered

•  'Ayopiffoi/iev  is  preferred  by  Tregelles,
Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),  E.T.  and  on  very
abundant  authority,  in  place  of  ayapiaoimt
of  T.B.,  which  has  only  three  later  uncials,
E,  XT,  V,  and  some  manuscripts  of  the
Italio  Yenions  and  a  few  Fathen  to
tiou  i^.


250


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.      fcH.  vi.  1—71.


by  this  verse.  Perhaps  no  greater  difficulty
ia  iuTolTed  in  imagining  the  union  of  the
DiTine  and  human  in  one  personality,  in
which  at  times  the  Ego  is  the  Son  of  God
and  at  other  times  purely  the  Son  of  man,
than  there  is  in  the  blending  of  the  flesh
and  spirit  in  the  Divine  life  of  our  own
experience.  John  saw  this,  felt  this,  when
the  qneation  was  addressed  to  Philip.  He
saw  by  intuitive  glance,  as  on  so  many  other
occasions,  what  Christ  "  loiew "  absolutely
(^S«)  or  came  to  know  by  experience  and
observation  (ch.  iv.  1 ;  xvi.  19).  The  "  trial,"
not  the  "  temptation,"  of  Philip  was  obvious
in  the  form  and  tone  of  the  question.  The
use  of  the  word  wtipciiav  shows  that  it
frequently  means  "  test,"  "  prove,"  as  well
as  "  tempt."_  If  God  tempts,  it  is  with  the
beneficent  intention  of  encouraging  the
tempted  one  to  succeed,  to  resist  the  allure-
ment, to  show  and  prove  his  power  to  bear
a  more  serious  assault.  If  the  devil  tempts
(Treipd(ei),  it  is  with  the  hope  of  inducing  the
sufferer  to  yield  and  fail.

Ver.  7. — Philip  took  a  calculating  method
of  meeting  the  difficulty,  and  looked  at  the
question  as  one  which  their  entire  resources
were  unable  to  solve.  He  did  not  so  much  as
thiuk  of  the  "  whence,"  or  from  what  quarter
the  loaves  could  be  procured,  as  how  much
money  would  be  required  to  meet  the  case.
Philip  answered  him,  Two  hundred  penny-
worth of  loaves  are  not  sufficient  for  them,
that  each  one'  may  take  a  little.  The
denariui  was  equal  to  about  eightpence  half-
penny of  our  money;  so  that  the  sum
spoken  of,  probably  representing  the  entire
contents  of  their  common  purse,  was  only  six
pounds  fifteen  shillings,  and  was  utterly
insufficient  for  the  purpose.  The  conversa-
tion preserved  by  Mark  (vi,  35—37)  cannot
well  be  made  part  of  this  language  of
Philip,  but  rather  follows  when  the  short
afternoon  was  coming  on,  and  the  long
shadows  indicated  the  near  approach  of
darkness,  Philip  had  told  the  other  dis-
ciples of  the  Lord's  question,  and  they  had
discussed  the  possible  perils  of  the  case
and  the  intentions  of  the  Lord.  It  is  in-
teresting to  see,  in  Mark,  that  the  same  sum
was  mentioned  as  being  insufficient  for  the
needs  of  the  great  multitudes.  John  has
not  only  abridged  ttie  narrative  of  the
synoptists,  but  added  a  feature  which  is  of
interest,  and  shows  how  for  some  hours
the  disciples  had  meditated  on  what  they
fancied  would  be  necessary,  and  had  come
to  the  somewhat  unwelcome  conclusion  that
they  must  sacrifice  their  entire  stock  of
fundo.     The  Lord  had  first  of  all  made  the

'  T.B.  here  adds  axirav;  it  is  omitted  by
K,  A,  B,  L,  n,  etc.,  by  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort.  etc.


raggestion.  They  now  go  to  him,  to  beseech
his  influence  to  send  the  multitudes  away,
that  they  may  go  into  the  villages  and  huy
themselvet  something  to  eat.  When  the
enigmatic  words  burst  from  his  lips,  "  Give
ye  them  to  eat,"  the  two  hundred  penny,
worth  of  bread  is  once  more  referred  to  by
the  disciples  as  insufficient  (Luke  ix.  12, 13;
Matt.  xiv.  15—17).

Vers.  8, 9.— Then  aaith  one  of  his  disciples
to  him,  viz.  Andrew,  Simon  Peter's  brother.
The  spokesman  is  here  specially  indicated.
On  other  occasions  Andrew  is  singled  out  as
the  brother  of  Simon  and  friend  of  Philip
(oh.  i.  44 ;  xii  22).  This  repeated  reference
to  the  illustrious  brother  of  Simon  is  a  refu-
tation of  the  ill-natured  charge  against  the
author  of  the  Gospel,  that  he  aimed  at  the
depreciation  of  the  character  of  the  great
apostle.  Moreover,  it  is  interesting  to  re-
member that  in  the  Muratorian  fragment  on
the  Canon, "  Andrew  "  is  specially  mentioned
as  being  one  of  those  present  with  John  in
Epheaus,  who  urged  him  to  write  his  Gospel
(see  Introduction,  IV.  2  (3)).  There  is  a  '  lad
here  (possibly  a  lad  who  was  brought  with
themselves,  or  who  had  attached  himself  to
the  twelve)  who  has  five  barley  loaves,  the
bread  of  the  poorest  classes.  Of  tliis  there
is  ample  proof  ('Sotah,'  ii.  1,  quoted  by
Bdersheim,  voL  i.  681):  "Wliile  all  other
meat  offerings  were  of  wheat,  that  brought  by
the  woman  accused  of  adultery  was  to  be  of
barley,  because,  as  her  deed  is  that  of  the
animals,  so  her  offering  is  of  the  food  of
animals."  If  this  lad  was  conveying  the
food-stock  of  the  Lord  and  his  apostles,  it
is  an  impressive  but  accidental  hint  that
"  for  our  sakes  he  became  poor,"  and  classed
himself  socially  with  the  humblest.  And
two  fishes.  The  use  of  this  word  is  peculiar
to  our  Gospel  (Luke,  ixSies ;  Mark,  txerfoi,
the  ordinary  word  for  "  fish  ;  "  but  John  uses
the  word  o^dpia,  the  diminutive  of  the  Greek
word  6\fioy,  which  means  "  savoury,"  eaten
with  bread).  This  opsarion  mostly  consisted
of  small  fishes  caught  in  the  lake,  which
were  dried,  salted  as  "  sardines  "  or  "  ancho-
vies" are  with  ourselves  for  a  similar  pur-
pose. This  habit  belonged  locally  to  the
neighbourhood  of  the  lake,  and  reveals
the  Galilsean  origin  or  associations  of  the
writer.  The  Aramaic  word,  opiisonim,  is
derived  from  the  Greek  opson,  and  that  of
aphjain,  or  apMi,  is  the  name  for  a  small
fisli  caught  in  the  lake,  the  drying  of  which
was  a  lucrative  soiurce  of  industry,    Eder-

'  T.K.  reads  here  ev,  "  one,"  with  the  au-
thority of  A,  r,  A,  and  many  other  uncials ;
but  K,  B,  D,  1,  69,  fifteen  manuscripts,  and
many  others,  omit  it  (so  Tischendorf,  8th
edit.,  Westcott  and  Hort,  B,T,,  and  Tre-
gelles).


CH.  VI.  1—71.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


261


sheim  reminds  us  that  the  fish  laid  on  the
charcoal  fiie  (ch.  xxi.  9,  10,  13)  was  "op-
sarion,"  and  that  of  this  the  risen  Lord,  on
the  shore  of  this  very  lake,  gave  to  his  dis-
ciples to  eat,  though  he  guided  them  at  that
time  to  a  shoal  of  great  fishes,  ixBiav  /icfd-
\uv,  and  bade  them  add  some  of  these  to  the
otfidpta,  which  he  was  content  to  use  still.
The  use  of  this  word  on  these  two  occasions
shows  that,  at  the  last,  our  Lord  reminds  his
disciples  of  the  miraculous  feeding  by  the
shore  of  the  lake;  and  both  narratives
breathe  the  air  of  the  northern  parts  of
Galilee.  But  what  are  these  among  so
many!  The  same  lesson  of  the  iusufBciency
of  human  resources  to  meet  great  human
needs  is  suggested  by  Numb.  xi.  21 — 23.
Our  resources  at  the  very  best  are  quite  ex-
hausted. Our  best,  our  all,  avails  little —
an  expression  which  would  apply  to  the
nomberless  offers  of  our  poor  humanity  and
of  our  limited  faculties  to  meet  the  moral
starvation  of  the  world.  Take  the  Old
Testament :  how  can  the  dispensation  of  all
its  provision  satisfy  per  se  the  need  of  man-
kind as  a  whole  ?  Gieek  philosophy,  even
if  it  satisfy  the  few,  the  leisurely,  the  cyni-
cal, the  learned,  the  wise  men  of  the  West,
what  wiU  it  do  for  the  poor,  the  broken-
hearted, the  consciously  guilty  ?  The  good
things  of  this  life  are  equally  powerless,  and
the  proposals  of  even  truth  itself,  apart  from
the  gracious  operations  of  the  Spirit,  would'
fail  to  meet  the  wants  or  necessities  of  the
unbelieving.

Ver.  10. — *  Jesus  said  (the  omission  of  S^
rather  augments  the  vivid  force  of  the  sttite-
ment).  Make  the  people  (^apSptiirous  here,
contrasted  with  the  ovSpes  of  the  next  clause)
recline.  Now  there  was  much  grass  in  the
place.  As  already  said,  this  is  in  harmony
with  the  note  of  time  conveyed  in  ver.  4.
The  other  evangelist  (Mark  vi.  39)  speaks
of  the  people  sitting  down  "upon  the  green
grass  " —  a  vivid  toueh  this  of  an  eye-witness ;
Matthew  (xiv.  19)  also  speaks  of  the  grass ;
and  Mark  and  Luke  add  another  remember-
able  feature  which  John  omits.  The  man
(^&i/tp€s  were  distinguished  &om  HvSpaitot,
which  last  term  may  have  included  the
"  women  and  children  "  (Matt.  xiv.  21),  who
in  no  great  numbers  probably  formed,  ac-
cording to  Eastern  custom,  a  company  by
themselves).  The  men  sat  down  (reclined),
in  number — the  matter  of  the  "  number  "  is
here  put  into  the  "accusative  of  closer
definition"  (Meyer) — about  five  thousand.^

'  Ae  is  omitted  by  N,  B,L,  Syriac,  and  by
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort,
and  R.T.

'  The  Sinaitic  manuscript  (S)  here  reads,
r6nos  TToAus,  instead  of  x^P"^"^  iro\iJs,  and
Tpio'x^^iot  instead  of  Trevrc^Kifrx'^^ot'


Luke  says,  "  in  groups  of  fifty."  Mark  first
declares  that  Jesus  ordered  them  to  sit  down
((Tu/iirrfiria  avprniata)  in  parties,  and  describes
the  result  as  having  the  appearance  of
garden-  beds  (vpaffial,  Tpairial),  of  fifty  or  of
a  hundred  each.  The  irpafftd  is  area,  forus
(Gartenbett ;  Homer,  '  Od.,'  vii.  127  ;  xxiv.
247).  "UpaiTiai,"  says  Tlieophylact,  "are
the  different  divisions  in  gardens,  in  which
different  herbs  are  often  planted.''  The
image  of  the  garden-plots,  with  different
divisions  between  them,  forced  itself  on  the
eye-witness  (see  Trench, '  Miracles,'  p.  205).

Yer.  11. — Jesus  then  took  the  loaves ;  and
having  given  thanks  (eixapurriiffas  is  nsed
by  John,  whereas  Mark  speaks  of  his  look-
ing up  to  lieaven  and  blessing  the  loaves,
uttering  words  of  praise.  The  Eucharistial
expression  corresponds  with  the  function  of
the  head  of  a  household  at  the  Paschal
feast,  and  is  another  hint  of  relation  between
the  Passover  and  the  discourse  which  here
follows)  he  distributed"  to  them  who  were
set  down.  This  is  not  incompatible  with  the
language  of  the  synoptists,  that  he  gave  to
the  disciples,  they  to  the  multitude,  an  un-
doubted allegory  of  the  method  in  which
all  his  greatest  gifts  have  been  diffused  over
the  world;  but  John  calls  special  iittention
to  the  part,  the  supreme  part,  taken  in  this
proceeding  by  the  Lord  himself.  Advantage
has  been  taken  of  this  to  show  that  the
narrative  is  a  glorificatioii  of  the  Eucha-
ristial meal,  at  which  Jesus  gave  to  his
disciples  the  bread  which  he  brake.  Like-
wise also  of  the  fishes  ^oifiapiuv)  as  much
as  they  wished.  This  is,  doubtless,  the
place  or  moment  when  the  mighty  miracle
occurred.

"'Twas  seed-time  when  he  blessed  the
bread,
'Twas  harvest  when  he  brake.'"

This  pretty  couplet,  with  Augustine's  and
Olshausen's  remarks  that  the  processes  of
nature  were  hastened  by  the  great  organ  of
the  Divine  Creator,  does  not  throw  any  light
upon  the  phenomenon."    It  makes  it  more

'  The  T.R.  here  introduces,  on  the  au-
thority of  N",  D,  r,  A,  with  others,  toTs
lia9riTcus,  oi  Z\  jua9ijTal — a  probable  introduc-
tion from  the  account  of  Matthew  (N*,  A,
B,  L,  H,  1,  33,  118*,  254,  numerous  manu-
scripts of  Italic  Version,  and  Vulgate  and
other  versions;  Origen,  Basil,  etc.).  The
clause  is  omitted  by  R.T.,  Tregelles,  and
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.).

«  Augustine  ('Serm.,'  130,  131)  con-
trasted the  daily  augmentation  of  seed  in
the  furrows  with  this  multiplication  in  the
hands  of  Jesus ;  and  '  In  Evang.  Joh.  Tract.,'
xxiv.,  he  repeated  the  idea  in  felicitous
form  (see  Trench,  U.,  g08).


252


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDII^G   TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vi.  1-71


inexplicable,  for  ground  com  and  baked
barley  loaves  afford  no  parallel  with  living
seeds,  and  dead  and  salted  fish  create
even  greater  difficulties.  "Frugality  exag-
gerated into  a  miracle  "  (Renan)  is  far  more
thinkable,  though  it  leaves  the  sequel  unex-
plained. We  must  either  reject  the  narra-
tive, notwithstanding  its  wonderful  confirma-
tion by  two  or  three  separate  eye-witnesses,
or  wu  must  accept  it.  If  we  do  the  latter,  we
see  in  tliis  (and  the  following)  miracle  an  as-
Kertion  that  the  creative  will  of  Christ  ia
the  sole  cause  of  the  additional  food  that  was
provided  for  the  sustenance  of  this  multi-
tude. The  Son  of  God  added  to  the  sum  of
things,  to  the  quantity  of  matter,  or  called
tcigether  from  surrounding  air  the  elements
needed  for  the  purpose,  just  as  in  hushing
the  storm  he  met  force  by  that  will  of  his
wliich  is  the  ultimate  source  and  ground  of
all  force.  He  spake  in  the  power  of  Heaven,
and  it  was  done.  He  gam  thanks,  and  he
dietributed,

Ver.  12.— Then  when  they  were  filled,  he
said  to  his  disciples.  Gather  together  the
broken  pieces — not  the  crumbs  left  on  the
ground  by  the  satisfied  thousands,  but  the
jiieces  broken  from  the  original  loaves  (see
each  of  the  synoptists,  who  refer  to  the
lireaMng,  by  Jesus,  of  the  loaves) — that  re-
main over — not  eaten  by  the  multitudes ;  the
superabundance  of  the  provision  is  a  witness
t"  the  affluence  of  the  Giver  and  the  reality
of  the  gift — that  nothing  be  lost.  This  sacred
LCimomy  of  Jesus  is  in  harmony  with  and
illustrative  of  the  ways  of  the  Creator  with
i.is  universe,  and  of  the  wisdom  recom-
mended to  his  disciples.  The  other  evan-
gelists describe  the  facts,  but  do  not
attribute  the  order  to  the  wise  words  of  the
Lord  himself  Paulus,  in  the  endeavour  to
make  this  statement  confirm  his  rationalistic
interpretation,  makes  sad  havoo  of  the
grammar,  and,  instead  of  translating —

Ver.  13. — Therefore  they  gathered  to-
gether, and  filled  twelve  baskets  with  the
broken  pieces  of  the  five  barley  loaves  which
remained  over  to  them  that  had  eaten,  says,
"  Forioiii)  they  gathered  together,  and  had
filled  [iyfjuaav,  first  aorist,  not  pluperfect]
twelve  baskets  with  the  fragments  [the
more  than  enough  food  that  had  been
gathered  and  prepared  for  eating]  of  the
five  loaves;"  and  he  mtikes  John  here
speak,  not  of  remnants  left  after  the  meal,
but  of  bread  broken  before  the  meal.  Such
a  treatment  of  the  text  cannot  be  justified
on  any  pretext.  The  twelve  baskets  full
(StSSt/to  KiKplmus)  are  interesting  in  two
ways.  The  number  "twelve"  naturally
suggests  that  each  one  of  the  twelve
•postles  had  been  employed  in  the  collection
of  the  fragments.  There  is  no  need,  with
Luttaardt,  to   imagine  an  unconscious  re-


ference to  the  twelve  trlbesof  Israel,  further
than  that  the  twelve  apostles  themselves
were  at  first  chosen  with  that  reference.
The  number  twelve  points  to  the  fuct  that
the  apostles  had  already  been  selected,
though  this  Gospel  is  silent  about  that  fact.
Again,  the  word  used  for  "  basket "  is  that
which  is  used  in  the  three  synoptic  narra-
tives, and  contrasts  with  the  <rir6piBes,  the
word  used  in  the  later  account  of  the  feed-
ing of  the  four  thousand.  It  means  the
ordinary  wallet,  or  corhis,  in  which  Jews,
on  the  march,  were  accustomed  to  carry
their  food.  In  Matt.  xvi.  8 — 12,  where  the
two  miracles  are  compared  with  each  other,
the  two  words  are  again  used.  The  "  frag-
ments," tlie  superabundance  of  provision  of
love  for  all  mankind,  was  an  idea  specially
conveyed  by  our  Lord  as  antithetic  to  the
monopolizing  doctrine  of  the  scribes  and
Pharisees.  It  is  unsatisfactory  to  suppose
that  the  author  of  this  Gospel  manipulated
the  story  as  given  in  Mark,  adapting  it  to
his  own  purpose.  John's  narrative  is  full
of  fresh  life,  though  not  so  pictorial  as  that
of  the  Second  Gospel.  The  incident  of
Philip  and  Andrew  is  calculated  to  throw
much  light  upon  the  event  without  con-
flicting witli  the  synoptists.  The  mythical
hypothesis  suggests  that  we  have  here  a
Messianic  reproduction  of  the  story  of
Elijah  and  the  cruie  of  oil  (1  Kings  xvii.
16),  or  the  augmentation  of  the  oil  by
Elisha  (2  Kings  iv.  1 — 7),  and  still  more
the  feeding  by  Elisha  of  a  hundred  men
■n  ith  twenty  loaves  of  bread  and  fresh  ears
of  corn  (2  Kings  iv.  42 — 44).  The  sugges-
tion simply  shows  that  there  were  anticipa-
tions in  the  prophetic  career  of  the  great
prophets  of  the  northern  kingdom  of  that
which  the  greater  than  Elijah  accomplished
in  vindication  of  his  own  mission,

Ver.  14. — ^The  people  (Sxflpwiroi)  therefore,
when  they  saw  the  sign  which  he  '  wrought
— when  they  witnessed  the  marvel,  admitted
that  it  was  a  testimony  to  what  was  special
and  authoritative  in  the  great  Healer  and
Life-giver,  a  "sign"  of  his  higher  nature
— said,  This  is  Terily  the  Prophet  that  is
Doming  into  the  world.  This  was  probably
in  reference  to  the  great  prediction  (Deut.
xviii.  18)  to  which  such  frequent  and  solemn
reference  was  made.    From  oh.  i.  21,  25,

•  S,  B,  D,  Italic  Versions,  Syriao  (Cure-
Ionian),  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),'Godet,  Tre-
gelles,  and  E.T.,  omit  6  'IrjtroCs ;  while  T.E.,
Lachmann,  with  A,  L,r,  A,  and  many  uncials
and  versions,  retain  it.  Westcott  and  Hort
prefer  to  read,  &  iiro'niaev  (ttjiueio,  placing  the
singular  in  the  margin.  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.)  gives  the  singular  in  the  text,  with
K,  A,  D,  L,  all  the  Syriao  Venions,  and
other  authorities


OH.  fj.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


253


we  learn  that  the  Sanhedrists  distinguiahed
between  "the  Christ,"  "the  Elijah,"  and
"  that  Prophet ;  "  but  these  verses  show  how
the  two  ideas  were  blended  in  the  minds  of
the  people.  As  Jesus  fulfilled  one  or  more
of  the  predictions  of  the  Old  Testament,  and
embodied  the  foreehadowlngs  of  his  entire
career  which  were  given  in  the  temple  and
the  sabbath,  in  the  ritual  and  the  priest,  in
the  prophet  and  the  king,  it  was  gradually
revealed  to  the  world  that  in  him  all  fulness
dwelt.  At  all  events,  just  as  in  the  case
of  Nathanael,  the  prophetic  gifts  of  Jesus
suggested  to  the  guileless  man  tiiat  he  was
King  of  Israel,  so  here  we  find  a  similar
connection  of  ideas.

Ver.  15.— Jesus  therefore  knowing  (having
found,  perceived  {yvois),  by  ominous  move-
ments in  the  crowd,  or  in  any  other  way
still  more  explicit)  that  they  were  about
to  come  and  by  violence,  or  force,  seize  him
in  order  that  they  might  make  him  King.
This  movement  was  not  an  unnatural  one.
They  were  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem,  and
they  were  thirsting  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of
Borne  and  of  Herod,  and  probably  indignant
to  the  extreme  with  the  "deep  damnation  "  of
John  the  Baptist's  death.  In  such  a  frame,
the  display  of  power  and  resources  which
they  had  just  witnessed  pointed  Jesus  out
as  their  popular  idol,  and  encouraged  the
belief,  which  did  not  die  out  till  it  was
quenched  in  blood.  The  bald  snggestion
would  clash  absolutely  with  the  Lord's  own
plan,  with  the  Father's  design  concerning
him.  It  would  seem  that  the  disciples
manifested  gr^at  reluctance  to  leave  Christ
or  the  crowd ;  tor  both  Matthew  (xiv.  22)
and  Mark  (vi.  45)  imply  that  Jesus  had  to
use  special  moans  to  induce  them  to  depart
{rivdyKaffev).  He  compelled  them  to  do  so.
If  we  had  nothing  but  the  synoptic  narrative
to  guide  us,  we  might  suppose  that  .Tesus  had
difficulty  in  resisting  the  desire  of  the  dis-
eiples  to  remain  always  at  his  side  ;  or  that
the  intensity  of  their  aifection  was  inter-
fering too  much  with  the  need  in  which
he  felt  of  retirement  and  solitude.  John's
statement  here  illumines  the  language  of
the  other  Gospels.  The  disciples  them-
selves were  strongly  moved  by  the  passions
of  the  thousands ;  they  were  sharing  in  the
general  enthusiasm.  To  quench  such  an
unholy  or  unspiritual  view  of  the  true
Prophet  and  King,  the  disciples  must  be
separated  from  the  crowd,  and  Christ  had  to
overcome  by  some  special  utterance  of  his
authority  the  reluctance  of  the  twelve  to
embark  in  their  thip.  Having  done  this,
and  without  their  help,  ho  sent  the  multi-
tudes away.    He  withdrew,'  for  the  seooud

'  'XvfX'>'P'fl<''f''  is  the  reading  of  T.R.,
Lachmann,  B.T.,  VVesteott  and  Hort,  on  the


time,  to  the  monntain  (of.  ver.  3),  and  this
time  himself  alone.  These  occasional  sepa-
rations from  the  apostles  were  undoubtedly
part  of  the  discipline  to  which  they  were
subjected.  They  were  taught  that,  when
he  was  no  longer  visible  to  them,  he  might
still  be  spiritually  present  and  able  to  succour
them.

Vers.  16— 21.— (2)  The  mastery  of  tlit
forees  of  nature— a  "  sign  "  of  love.

Vers.  16, 17. — Now  when  it  became  even-
ing. This  must  have  been  the  "  second
evening ;  "  for  the  miracle  itself  was  said  to
be  wrought  when  the  day  began  to  decline
(Matt.  xiv.  15;  Luke  ix.  12).  The  first
evening  {i^la)  lasted  from  three  to  six  p.m.,
the  "  second  evening"  stretched  from  sun-
down to  darkness  (o-KOT^a).  The  night  was
drawing  on.  His  disciples  went  down  from
the  higher  ground  or  grassy  slopes  to  the  sea
(iirl  tV  e<iKa<r(rav),  and  having  embarked
in  a  ship,  they  were  making  for  the  other
side  of  the. sea  to  Capernaum;  or  as  Mark
(vi.  45)  says,  "towards  Bethsaida."  This
occasions  no  difficulty  to  those  who  re-
member that  there  were  two  Bethsaidas —
one,  "  Bethsaida  Julias"  on  the  north-
eastern end  of  the  lake;  and  the  other  near
to  Capernaum,  called  "  Bethsaida  of  Oali-
lee."  The  two  towns  were  so  near  that  the
latter  Bethsaida  might  reasonably  be  re-
garded as  the  port  of  Capernaum.

Vers.  17,  18. — And  darkness  had  already
come  on,'  and  Jesus  had  not  yet  come  to
them,  'rhis  thrilling  touch  in  John's  nar-
rative makes  it  more  than  evident  that  the
beloved  disciple  was  on  board.  He  had
been  expecting  the  Master  to  make  his  ap-
pearance in  some  form.  He  had  looked
long  and  eagerly  to  that  point  on  the  moun-
tain-side whither  he  knew  that  Jesus  had
retired.  The  dreary  and  disappointed  ex-
pectation, the  long  and  weary  waiting,  left
an  indelible  iiapression.  "Their  natural
course  towards  Capernaum  would  have
been  almost  parallel  with  the. shore  of  the
lake ;  but  it  was  dark  and  tempestuous,
they  could  not  steer.  And  the  sea  was
being  roused  from  its  slumber  by  reason  of
a  high  wind  which  was  blowing.  If  the
wind  came  from  the  north,  it  would  drift

authority  of  X",  A,  B,  D,  L,  and  many  other
uncials ;  but  ijievyft  is  the  unusual  word
adopted  by  Tischondorf  (6th  and  8th  edit.),
on  the  authoiity  of  X*  ulone,  and  some
doubtful  quotations,  etc.

'  The  E.T.,  Lachmann,  and  Westcott  and
Hort  here  agree  with  T.R.,  ^Sjj  eyey6vei,  on
the  authority  of  A,  B,  L,  r,  A,  and  many
others ;  but  Ti.-:cheiidorf  (8th  edit.),  ou  the
authority  of  X,  D,  and  one  njanuscript,  and
no  other,  reads,  KareKa^ev  5i  avrobs  ^  axarta,
"and  darkueas  overtook  them."


254


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh,  n.  1— 7L


them  out  into  the  darkness  and  the  middle
of  the  lake,  which  is  there,  at  its  widest,
about  five  miles  broad,  i.e.  forty  stadia,  or
furlongs.  The  statement  of  the  next  verse
comes  then  into  undesigned  coincidenoe
with  Mark  vi.  47,  which  shows  that  they
were  "  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,"  i.e.  half-
way from  shore  to  shore.  This  would
exactly  correspond  with  the  following  state-
ment.

Ver.  19. — ^When  they  had  rowed '  about
twenty-five  or  thirty  stadia  ;  or,  furlongs.
When  they  had  rowed  with  a  north-west
wind,  one  "  contrary  to  them,"  about  three
miles  and  a  half,  they  would  be  in  the
midst  of  the  broadest  portion  of  the  lake,
and  exposed  to  the  force  of  those  gales
which  often  sweep  down  with  astonishing
fury  upon  lakes  similarly  guarded  on  all
sides  by  high  hills.  While  the  wind  was
tossing  tho  little  lake  into  angry  waves,  it
was  not  silent  on  the  mountain  side  or
summit,  and  Jesus  (says  Mark)  "  saw  them
toiling  in  rowing."  He  loved  them  to  the
uttermost.  Now,  Jesus  never  went  out  of
his  way  to  work  a  miracle,  but  he  never
went  out  of  his  way  to  avoid  one.  It  seems
ks  natural  to  him  to  make  his  will  the
cause  of  events  as  to  submit  to  the  arbitra-
ment of  circumstances.  The  miracle,  how-
ever, was  always  for  the  benefit  of  others,
not  for  his  own  advantage  and  comfort.
They  beheld  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and
drawing  near  to  the  ship.  Faulus,  Gfrorer,
and  Baumgarten-Crusius  suppose  that
Jesus  was  walking  "  along  the  shore  "  (iropn
T^iv  BaXairaav  is  the  phrase  used  for  this
movement  in  Mark  i  16 ;  not  M  ttjs  BaXda-
<n]s,  as  here),  and  that  they  had  mis-
calculated their  distance,  and  that  there
was  no  manifestation  of  special  power  on
the  occasion,  nothing  less  than  one  of  the
moot  ordinary  of  all  coincidences.  The
three  narrators,  each  in  his  own  manner,
convey  a  profoundly  different  impression.
The  discovery  of  their  Lord  tlius  in  near
proximity  would  not  have  made  them  "  cry
out  for  fear,"  and  say  (Matthew  and  Mark),
"  It  is  a  phantasm,"  an  apparition,  a  herald
of  immediate  destruction.  The  loud  cry
(aviKpa^av)  is  the  especial  note  of  Mark.
John  simply  says.  They  were  affrighted  {i(po-
P-flOriffay).  They  might  have  eagerly  longed
for  his  presence,  remembering  his  recent
display  of  power  when  "  the  winds  and  sea
obeyed  him."  But  when  the  deliverance
came,  the  manner  of  it  was  unexpected,  and

'  'Ehaiveiy,  used  in  Mark  vi.  48  and
here,  commonly  means  "  to  drive,"  and  is
used  of  ships  or  clouds  driven  by  the  wind
(Jas.  iii.  4  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  17);  but  from  Homer
downwards  it  is,  with  vrja  or  yaiv,  uoed  for
"rowing."


the  symbolism  inelfably  Bublime.  They
could  not  have  been  ignorant  of  the  Psalms
which  spoke  of  Jehovah  walking  on  the
sea,  and  mightier  than  its  waves  (see
also  Job  ix.  8,  "  He  alone  spreadeth  out  the
heavens,  and  treadeth  on  the  heights  of  the
sea").  This' visible  nearness  to  them  of
the  mighty  power  of  God  is  enough  to  have
startled  them  into  cries  of  fear;  but  it  is
quite  incompatible  with  the  rationalistic
interpretation  of  the  event.  Matthew  and
Mark  both  relate  that  the  Lord  came  to
them  at  or  about  the  fourth  watch  (i.e.
between  three  and  six  a.m.),  when  the  first
gleams  of  light  were  breaking  over  the
eastern  hills.  Consequently,  their  peril  had
been  prolonged  and  perplexing.  The  whole
of  the  narrative  lends  itself  to  symbol,  and
suggests  the  impressive  analogy  of  the
calamities  to  which  the  ship  of  God's
Church  has  been  exposed  in  its  long  his-
tory. Often  has  the  Church  been  chastised
for  its  secular  tastes  and  worldly  passions,
buffeted  with  the  storms  of  the  world  and
tormented  by  the  waves ;  but  in  the  direst
extremity  it  has  seen  the  deliverer  approacli,
and  at  first  cried  out  for  fear,  trembling
at  his  nearness.  Individual  believers  have
often  seen,  in  this  picture  of  the  storm  and
the  Saviour,  an  image  of  the  sore  travail  and
victory  of  their  faith.  The  disposition  on
the  part  of  numerous  expositors  to  press  ■
these  analogies  has  strengthened  the  hands
of  the  critical  and  rationalistic  expositors.
We  can  grant  that  the  idea  which  is  so
fertile  is  more  important  than  the  narrative
per  se,  but  apart  from  the  historic  fact  itself,
who  can  say  that  the  idea  would  ever  have
dawned  on  human  minds?  We  make  no
farther  attempt  to  think  out  the  modus
operandi  of  the  miracle,  nor  can  we  with
that  view  accept  the  docetic  conception  ot
the  body  of  Christ,  which  some  have  attri-
buted most  unfairly  to  John's  Gospel.  It  is
enough  that  the  will  of  Christ  thus  faced
the  forces  of  nature,  and  prophesied  the
ultimate  victory  which  the  will  of  glorified
humanity  will  likewise  win.  Tlie  great
ep7a  of  Christ  include  his  power  over
nature,  in  its  physical  elements  and  forces,
in  the  regions  of  both  animal  and  vegetable
life,  over  human  nature,  diseased,  crippled,
devil-ridden,  and  dead.  The  highest  realm
over  which  he  reigned  was  his  own  Divine-
human  Person,  as  recorded  (l)tn  this  event,
(2)  in  his  transfiguration,  (3)  in  his  resur-
rection and  ascension.

Ver.  20. — But  he  saith  to  them,  It  is  I  (lite-
rally, I  am) ;  be  not  afraid.  These  Divine
words,  in  a  voice  whicli  reminded  them  of  his
entire  personality,  of  all  his  previous  benefi
cence,  of  all  his  knewledge  of  their  weaknesi
and  fear,  are  sacredly  symbolic.  The  Church
has  ever  since  regarded  them  as  veritably


OH.  Ti.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


255


Bacramental,  In  the  darkest  hour  of  men
and  Chuiches,  in  the  throes  of  persecution,
in  the  furnace  of  temptation,  on  a  million
death-beds,  the  same  voice  has  been  heard.
His  Divine  Personality,  his  infinite  power
and  perfect  sympathy,  the  conviction  of  his
specialized  regard  and  veritable  nearness  (as
we  count  nearness),  have  scattered  doubt  and
fear.

"Ver.  21. — Then  they  were  willing  to  receive
him  into  the  ship :  and  straightway  the  ship
was  at  the  land  whither  they  were  going.
Some  expositors,  who  find  discrepancy
between  this  statement  and  that  of  the
aynoptists,  say,  "  they  were  willing,  but  did
not  do  it,"  because  the  vessel  is  said  by  some
remarkable  process  to  have  been  miraculously
propelled  to  the  shore  (so  Liioke,  Meyer).
There  are  many  passages,  however,  where  a
■imilar  expression  is  used,  and  where  no
doubt  arises  that  that  which  the  actors  were
williug  to  do  they  actually  did  (see  Mark  xii.
38 ;  ccitainly  scribes  were  not  only  willing
to,  but  actually  did,  wear  long  robes).
Chrysostom  felt  this  difSeulty,  and  actually
proposed  to  read  ^Afloc  instead  of  ^BeKov,
which  would  remove  the  difficulty ;  and  N
veritably  contains  this  reading,  but  it  has
every  appearance  of  an  unauthorized  correc-
tion. The  imperfect  tense  implies  a  length-
ened willingness  supervening  on  fear  and
outcry — a  willingness  or  wish  increased  by
the  sound  of  his  voice,  following  his  first
action,  his  apparent  resolve  to  pass  by  them ;
and,  still  more,  by  the  incident  described  in
Matthew's  Gospel,  of  Peter's  desire  to  display
the  strength  of  his  faith  and  the  eminence  of
hisposition  amongthe  twelve.  This  occupied
time,  during  which  the  wind  may  have  been
bearing  them  briskly  in  their  true  direction.
They  willed,  wished,  to  take  him  into  the
<hip,  and  did  so,  and  the  calm  supervened  as
described  in  Matthew  and  Mark.  Their
wish  is  not  frustrated  by  the  fact  now  men-
tioned, but  accompanied  by  it.  "  Straight-
way," etc.  Most  expositors  confess  this  to
be  an  additional  miracle,  that  the  twenty
furlongs  or  thereabouts  (two  miles  and  a
half)  were  suddenly  traversed  and  miracu-
lously abolished.  There  would  be  a  greater
miracle  in  this  than  in  the  two  events  which
preceded.  The  annihilation  of  space  and
time  is  the  obliteration  of  the  very  categories
of  thought,  and  would,  if  conveyed  by  the
statement,  suggest  a  stupendous  and,  so  far
as  we  can  see,  a  useless  portent.  It  would
strongly  tempt  us  to  accept  the  rationalistic
interpretation.  EufleWdoes  not  always  mean
"instantaneously,"  but  simply  that  the  next
thing  to  notice  or  observe  was  the  faot  de-
■cribed.  Take  Mark  i.  21,  29.  It  does  not
mean  that  any  miraculous  rapidity  charac-
terized the  movement  of  Christ  to  the  house
of  Simon  and  Andrew  (Mark  iv.  17 ;  Gal.  L


16 ;  3  John  14  ;  ch.  xiii.  32 ;  and  many  other
passages).  The  author  of  the  '  Christian
Year'  lias  consecrated  in  sweet  lines  the
supposed  addition  to  the  miracle —

"  Thou  Framer  of  the  light  and  dark.
Steer  through  the  t,empest  thine  own  ark ;
Amid  the  howling  wintry  sea.
We  are  in  port,  if  we  have  thee."

But  there  are  so  many  ways  in  which  this
"  straightway "  may  be  reconciled  with  an
ordinary  disembarkation,  that  there  is  no
necessity  to  regard  it  as  implied  in  John's
narrative.  John  so  often  leaves  gaps  unfilled
in  his  chronology  and  horology  that  no  great
emphasis  need  be  laid  upon  the  annihilation
(save  in  his  adoring  thought)  of  the  hour
before  the  dawn.

Vera.  22 — 59. — (3)  The  sequel  of  the  signs.

The  discussion  which  follows  is  closely
linked  with  these  two  great  miracles  of
power  and  love.  It  naturally  arises  out  of
them,  and  refers  with  great  explicitness  to
the  former  of  them  and  to  its  true  meaning.
The  discussion  does  unquestionably  alter  its
scope  as  it  proceeds,  and  at  vers.  41  and  52
"  the  Jews "  take  up  a  controversy  which
had  previously  been  conducted  by  a  portion
of  the  crowd  who  witnessed  hia  mighty
works.  Jesus  declared  (1)  that  he  is  him-
self the  Bread  of  God— the  Bread  of  life  for
a  starving  world;  then  (2)  that  his  "  flesh,"
i.e.  his  wondrous  humanity — the  veritable
abode  of  the  Word  of  God — will  constitute
the  food  of  man ;  (3)  that  the  death  of  the
Divine  humanity,  the  separation  of  his  blood
and  flesh,  must  be  appropriated  by  men  ;  (4)
that  only  by  this  acceptance  and  entire  as-
similation— not  only  of  his  mission,  but  of  his
incarnation  j  not  only  of  his  incarnation,  but
of  his  sacrificial  death — will  men  receive
him,  or  live  because  he  lives.

Before  the  evangelist  proceeda  to  relate
this  great  discourse,  he  portrays  the  histo-
rical platform,  the  audience  to  which  it  is
addressed,  and  this  in  a  sentence  which  is
unusually  involved  and  perplexed  in  its
construction.  The  first  clause  with  its  verb,
cTSov,  is  not  completed  until  two  or  three
parenthetical  ideas  are  introduced ;  and  then
in  ver.  24  the  sentence  is  taken  up  or  recom-
menced, after  which  the  main  affirmation
follows,  viz.  iiiefitiaav,  etc.  The  whole  sen-
tence is  intended  to  explain  the  regathering
of  the  crowd  on  the  sea-shore  at  Capernaum,


266


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  ti.  1—7)


and  that  excited  state  of  baulked  curiosity
with  which  they  encountered  the  Lord.

Vers.  22 — 24. — The  next  day,  the  crowd
which  stood  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  near
the  site  of  the  great  miracle,  amazed  at  the
departure  of  the  disciples  and  the  separation
between  them  and  Jesus,  and  saw  that  there
was  only  one  little  boat  there  ' — or  "  none
other  little  boat  there  save  one,"  and  this  was
too  small  for  it  to  be  the  boat  which  brought
Jesus  and  his  disciples  thither  or  took  the
latter  away — and  saw  that  Jesus  did  not  enter
with  his  disciples  into  the  boat  in  which  they
were  accustomed  to  move  about  the  lake,  hut
that  his  disciples  departed  alone  (Howbeit  *
there  came  boats  from  Tiberias,  the  principal
station  on  the  lake,  the  boatmen  hoping  to
secure  numerous  ferry-freights,  near  to  the
place  where  they  did  eat  bread  after  that  the
Lord  had  given  thanks,  associating  the  mar-
vellous gift  with  the  holy  thanksgiving  of
the  wondrous  Host).  He  dues  not  say  that
Tiberias  was  near  to  the  place  where,  etc.,
but  that  the  boats  from  Tiberias  came  near
to  the  place,  etc.  This  parenthesis  makes  it
clear  tljat  this  one  little  boat  was  the  only  one
belong;ing  to  the  desert  place,  and  could  not
have  conveyed  Jesus  away.  When  then  the
crowd  saw  that  Jesus  was  not  there,  nor  his
disciples — the  latter  had  gone  and  not  re-
turned, and  Jesus  could  not  be  found  on  the
mountain-side  or  summitor  hollowB(not  until
we  reach  this  statement  does  the  writer  give
the  principal  verb  of  the  sentence)  -  they
themselves  embarked  in  the  little  boats,  and
came  to  Capernaum  seeking  for  Jesus.  This
does  not  mean  that  the  entire  multitude  took
shipping.  Such  an  exaggeration,  contrary
to  the  nature  of  even  the  most  extravagant
legend,  some  (Strauss)  have  tried  to  foist
into  the  story  for  the  sake  of  discrediting  it.
The  geographical  relation  of  the  two  places
showa  that  there  wejo  otlier  ways  of  passing
from  one  spot  to  the  other  than  by  ship.
That  some  should  return  by  the  head  of  the
lake,  and  others  should  cross  its  northern  arc
by  boat  to  Caperuaiim,  reveals  a  simple  and

'  The  text  is  also  difficult  to  decide.  The
T.R.,  with  r,  A,  A,  and  other  later  uncials,
and  cursives,  and  Curetoniaii  Syriao,  read
ISdv  in  instead  of  elSoy,  with  A,  B,  L,  the
Italic  manuscripts,  and  other  versions.  Ti-
Bclieudorf  (8th  edit.),  Westoott  and  Hort,  and
B.T.  agree  to  read  the  latter.  The  same
authorities  omit  sKuyo  ets  '6  ive^rnraif  oi  fiadri-
Tol  ouToS,  which  N  and  D  and  other  manu-
gcripts  admit  with  numerous  modifications.
In  ver.  23  irKoiipta  is  replaced  by  preponde-
rating authority  by  irAolo.

'  'A\\a  is  the  reading  of  E.T.,  Westcott
and  Hort ;  &\\a  Se  of  T.K.,  of  Tischendorf
(8th  edit,  omit*  Si),  Tregelles,  Laohmann.


interesting  fact,  which  is  incidentally  con-
veyed by  tlie  synoptists,  viz,  that  Capernaum
was  the  customary  dwelling-place  of  our
Lord  during  his  Galilsean  ministry  (of.  cli.
ii.  12  ;  Matt.  iv.  13;  viii.  5;  and  see  also
Matt.  ix.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  24).

Ver.  25. — When  they  had  found  him  on
the  other  side  of  the  sea  (other  side  than  that
on  which  the  miracle  took  place,  and  yet
near  Capernaum.  This  contradicts  the  ex-
position which  would  make  the  site  of  the
feeding  to  be  on  the  western  side),  they  said
unto  him,  Babbi,  when  earnest  thouf  and
how  happens  it  that  thou  art  here?  The
Trdre  JJSe  ^e'yocas;  is  difBcult  to  translate.  The
tnhen  f  practically  includes  the  how  f  also.
The  difficulty  lay  in  the  time.  They  were
sure  that  Jesus  had  not  started  before  the
disciples,  and  they  knew  that  there  was  no
method  by  which  the  lake  itself  would  have
been  available,  and  they  want  explanation.
The  news  of  his  crossing  the  water  after
some  fashion  that  would  ally  him  to  Moses,
Joshua,  Elijah,  may  easily  have  got  dissemi-
nated, one  report  or  another  being  rapidly
circulated.

Vers.  26 — 36. — (a)  An  offer  of  himtdf  aa
veritable  bread.

Ver.  26. — Jesus  answered  them;  i.e  he
met  by  response  their  question,  but  not  after
the  fashion  their  curiosity  might  dictate,
omitting  any  reply  to  their  unnecessary
inquiry,  and  even  refusing  to  answer  it.
The  method  and  time  were  of  no  real
moment  to  his  questioners.  Verily,  verily,
I  say  unto  you.  Ye  seek  me,  not  because
ye  saw  signs — in  the  sense  I  am  desirous
you  should  see  those  miracles  of  healing
(ver.  2)  or  other  wonders  of  yesterday,  viz.
as  "  signs,"  "  symbols,"  of  my  higher  nature
or  of  my  Divine  commission.  The  first
group  of  healings  drew  some  of  you  to  my
Bide,  not  for  my  word,  but  for  more  healing ;
and  though  some  others  of  you  who  ate  of
the  bread  said  (ver.  14), "  This  is  the  pro-
mised Prophet  that  is  coming  into  the
world,"  you  did  not  get  beyond  the  out-
ward seeming,  the  superficial  phenomenon ;
you  revealed  by  thus  rushing  to  the  conclu-
sion that  1  was  your  Prophet  and  King,  that
you  did  not  really  discern  the  sign  I  gave,
and  ye  are  seeking  me  now,  not  because
you  have  really  seen  "  signs  " — ^but  because
ye  ate  of  the  (those)  loaves,  and  were  filled
up  by  this  temporary  supply  of  your  daily
want,  expecting  to-day  some  new,  some
more  impressive,  characteristic  of  the  Mes-
sianic kingdom  than  yesterday.  You  are
fastening  on  the  outward,  acting  on  the
mere  physical  resources  which  you  suppose
me  to  possess.  These  are  not  the  claims  1
make  on  your  loyalty  or  obedience.

Ver.  27. — Labour  (work,  toil,  rush,  as  you
are  doing,  from  Betlisaida  Julias  to  Caper-


ou.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO   ST.  JOHN.


257


naum,  oi  from  either  tu  Jerusalem)  not  for
the  food  that  is  perishahle,  which  soon  loses
its  effect  and  must  be  renewed,  which  is
corruptible  and  worthless  if  not  partaken
of  at  once,  which,  like  manna,  may  breed
worms,  or  vanish  in  the  sun;  labour  not
for  the  merely  outward  and  vanishing  and
perishable  elements  in  my  work.  Christ
did  not  mean  that  these  multitudes  were
not  to  toil  for  their  daily  bread,  which  could
only  be  secured  for  them  by  labour  and  the
sweat  of  the  brow;  bnt  to  labour  for  the
food  which  endureth  (or,  ahideth)  nnto  eter-
nal life  (this  last  clause  Moulton  would
separate  from  the  ii^vovirav,  and  considers  to
relate  to  the  principal  verb  of  the  sentence ;
t.e.  "labour  for  the  abiding  food,"  with  a
view  to,  or  unto,  eternal  life).  The  bread
that  abideth  unto  eternal  life,  however,  cor-
responds very  closely  with  the  water  of  life
(eh.  iv.  14),  which,  when  once  appropriated,
flows  and  springs  up  with  perennial  energy
within  the  soul,  conferring  the  consciousness
and  the  beginning  of  eternal  life.  There  is
a  food  which  is  imperishable  and  incoiTup-
tible,  feeding  the  heavenly  life  within  the
soul,  and  which,  if  once  assimilated,  becomes
Divine  life  itself.  Labour  for  that  life  which
the  Sou  of  man  will  give  to  you.  This  grand
idea,  viz.  the  gift  of  eternal  life  in  and  by
Christ  himself,  was  one  of  the  main  themes  of
the  Gospel  of  John.  Christ  knew  himself  to
be  the  Giver  of  eternal  life — a  life  of  perfect
blessedness,  irrespective  of  time,  and  sense,
and  flesh,  and  the  world,  and  death.  The
Lord  here  calls  himself  "  Sou  of  man,"  rather
than  •'  Son  of  God."  The  whole  of  the  sub-
sequent  discourse  expands  and  rests  upon
this  gift  of  the  perfect  and  blessed  life  in
and  by  his  humanity.  In  the  previous  chap-
ter attention  was  called  to  the  Divine  Son-
ship  and  the  Divine  activity.  Hero  equal
emphasis  was  laid  upon  the  human  sonship
and  on  the  acceptance  and  assimilation  by
man  of  this  supreme  gift.  The  power  or  func-
tion of  the  Son  of  man  to  bestow  this  life  is
sustained  by  the  assertion,  For  him  (this
very  one)  the  Tather,  even  God,  hath  sealed.
'ZippayiCfiv  '  (see  oh.  iii.  33)  means  here  to
ratify  and  accredit  as  worthy  and  competent
to  discharge  such  duties,  to  render  iudubi-

'  Delitzsch  approves  of  the  suggestion  of
a  Jewish  correspondent  (flld  Test,  Student,
September,  1883)  to  the  effect  that  one  of
the  methods  of  sealing  was  the  stamp
which  tha  baker  impressed  upon  bread.
In  the  '  Mishua '  the  baker  is  called  OFtipi,
and  Delitzsch  translates  tovtov  ia(ppiyiaev,
in  his  Hebrew  translation  of  the  New
Testament,  by  innin  (see  "Brevia,"  by
editor  of  Expositor,  January,  1885).  Thus
the  Father  stamps  his  image  on  the  Son
(Heb.  i.  3).
JOHN.


table,  to  confirm  by  cmtward  visible  sign  or
seal,  as  one  empowered  to  do  so  Divine  a
thing.  The  Father  has  made  "  the  Son  of
man  "  the  steward  of  his  bounty.  The  Son
of  man  has  the  key  to  this  boundless  trea-
sure, this  eternal  blessing.  Men,  however,
must  labour  to  receive  so  great  a  gift.  It
will  prove  to  be  a  gift,  even  if  they  put  forth
the  most  strenuous  energy  to  receive  it.
This  first  dialogue  contrasts  the  carnal  and
spiritual  reasons  for  seeking  Jesus,  and
brings  into  sharp  relief  the  GaUlaean  concep-
tion of  the  Christ,  as  Miracle- worker,  tem  -
poral  Potentate,  prophetic  Leader  of  some
vast  host  of  triumphant  enthusiasts,  and
contrasts  with  it  the  Lord's  own  conception
of  himself  as  the  Giver,  the  Medium,  the
divinely  appointed  Almoner  of  a  spiritual
blessing,  for  which,  while  the  Father-God
freely  and  lavishly  gives  it,  the  sons  of  men
must  eagerly  toil.  The  next  question  and
answer  bring  out  the  moral  condition  on
which  alone  the  gift  can  be  dispensed.

Ver.  28. — They  say  unto  him,  What  must '
we  do,  that  we  may  work  the  works  of  God  1
The  works  of  God  might  be,  either  works
like  those  which  are  wrought  by  God  the
Father,  but  this  would  be  a  very  improbable
demand;  or  "the  works  of  God"  may  be
those  which  God  has  assigned  to  man  as
the  conditions  of  his  favour.  There  is  a
breadth  about  the  question  that  may  cover
the  ground  involved  in  Christ's  declaration,
but  it  reveals,  at  the  same  time,  the  self-com-
placency, the  carnal  conception  on  the  part
of  these  Galilaeans  of  their  being  able,  com-
petent, to  fulfil  along  certain  lines  to  be
specified,  all  the  required  conditions.  But
we  must  not  be  too  hard  on  these  Galilseans,
brought  up  as  they  were  to  believe  in  the
efiicacy  of  certain  rounds  of  specific  and
arbitrary  duties,  methods  of  purification,
forms  of  service  and  of  abstinence,  pilgrim-
ages and  fastings  and  feastings,  as  well  as
obedience  to  a  specific  moral  code.  They
ask  quite  rationally,  "What  must  we  do?"
and  in  various  forms  the  same  question
bursts  from  the  heart  of  all  who  have,  start-
ing from  utter  indifference,  made  any  pro-
gress towards,  or  in  the  direction  of,  holy
living  or  of  Divine  pleasing.

Ver.  29.— Christ's  reply  really  solves  the
great  problem  which  had  long  perplexed  the
schools  of  Palestine,  and  often,  and  even  to
the  present  hour,  is  dividing  into  two  hostile
camps  the  Christian  Church.  Jesus  an-
swered and  said  to  them,  This  is  the  work

'  T\otmiiev  (R.T.)  is  the  reading  of  the  prin-
cipal uncials,  and  ■noiovii.iv  that  of  G,  with
numerous  cursives,  and  was  adopted  by
Stephens.  Italic  and  Vulgate  read  "facie-
mus"  with  Totiitreiitif  (of.  Authorized  Ver-
sion),


258


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [ch.  vi.  1—71.


of  God.  Observe,  not  "  works,"  but  "  work  "
— ^the  one  work  which  is  the  geim  and  the
consummation  of  all  the  partial  workings
which  are  often  made  substitutes  for  it.
There  is  "one  work  "which  God  would  have
man  do.  Jesus  admits  that  there  is  Bome-
thing  to  do  {nouTv) — there  is  a  labour,  an
effort  of  the  will  needed  to  do  what  God
requires  ;  and  this  is  evident  enough  as  soon
as  this  great  work  is  described,  viz.  That  ye
believe  on  him  •whom  he  (the  Father)  sent ;
oi,hath  tent,  "Iko «irT6ii?)Te,'  here  preferred
by  the  E.T  to  wLo-Teia-riTe  (see  ch.  xiii.
19),  marks  the  simple  fact  and  continuous
act  of  believing  with  the  effort  tending  to
such  result;  while  the  aorist  would  have
pointed  to  one  definite  act  of  faith  (see
Westcott).  To  "  believe  on  him,"  to  habitu-
ally entrust  one's  self  to  the  power  and  grace
of  Christ,  to  make  a  full  moral  surrender  of
the  soul  to  the  Lord,  includes  in  itself  all
other  work,  and  is  in  itself  the  great  work
of  God.  "  It  is  the  Christian  answer  to  the
Jewish  question  "  (Thoma).  "  Faith  is  the
life  of  works,  works  the  necessity  of  faith  "
(Westcott).  "Faith  is  the  highest  kind  of
work,  for  by  it  man  gives  himself  to  God,
and  a  free  being  can  do  nothing  greater
than  give  himself.  St.  James  opposes  work
to  a  faith  which  would  be  nothing  but  in-
tellectual belief.  St.  Paul  opposes  faith,
active  faith,  to  works  of  mere  observance.
The  '  faith '  of  St.  Paul  is  really  the  '  work '
of  St.  James,  according  to  this  sovereign  for-
mvda  of  Jesus,  '  This  is  the  work  of  God,
that  ye  believe ' "  (Godet).  Luther  says,
"To  depend  on  God's  Word,  so  that  the
heart  is  not  terrified  by  sin  and  death,  but
trusts  and  believes  in  God,  is  a  much  severer
and  more  difficult  thing  than  the  Carthu-
sians or  all  orders  of  monks  demand."
Sohleiermacher  says,  "  This  is  the  most
significant  declaration,  that  all  eternal  life
proceeds  from  nothing  else  than  faith  in
Christ."

Ver.  30. — They  said  therefore  to  Mm,
What  then  doest  thou  as  a  sign  that  we  may
see  and  believe  thee  "  There  is  a  kind  of
irony  in  the  inquiry,  "What  doest  thoui"
There  is  at  least  some  ironical  mystification
of  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  If  we  have  not
seen,  as  thou  sayest,  the  sign,  which  we
thought  snflScient  to  induce  us  to  hail  thee
as  our  Prophet-King,  what  sign  wilt  thou
give  us  now  ?  If  we  are  to  believe  on  thee,
what  sign  art  tliou  ready  to  show  now  that
we  may  see  it,  and  believe  thee,  i.e.  take
thy  word  as  trustworthy,  and  so  begin  to

•  IIio-icuijTe  rests  on  the  authority  of  N,  A,
B,  L,  T,  1, 33,  and  other  cursives,  and  is  pre-
ferred by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)  and  B.T. ;
mffTe^trriT*  (aorist)  rests  on  many  uncials
and  several  quotations  from  Fathers.


consider  whether  it  will  be  safe  to  believe
in,  to  entrust  ourselves  to,  thee?"    It  has
been  the  peculiarity  of  the  Jewish  mind  in
all  ageS  to  seek  after  a  aign,  to  desire  some
irresistible  reason  for  invincible  faith.    In
certain  stages  of  immaturity  and  states  of
unrest  we  passionately  ask  for  signs  even
now — for  something  more  than  silent  words,
for  more  than  past  memories,  for  some  voice
out  of  heaven,  some  gleams  of  glory,  that  "we
may  see  and  believe."     These  frames  of
mind  are  no  whit  more  reprehensible  than
the  Greek  demand  for  unanswerable  argu-
ment, for  logical  harmony,  or  for  sure  demon-
stration.   They  said  to  him.  What  dost  thou
work?     How  wilt  thou  vindicate  thy  de-
mand for  such  implicit  trust?    This  very
question  has  been  made  Into  a  reason  for
breaking  all  historic  connection  between  the
miracle  of  tlie  feeding  and  the  dialogue  and
discourse  before  us  (Giotius,  Kuinoel,  B.
Bauer,  Weisse,  and  Schenkel).    It  is,  how-
ever, clear  that  they  were  still  revolving  the
work  of  the  past  day,  which  Jesus  had  de-
preciated per  se,  and  which,  apart  from  the
higher  lesson  it  might  have  conveyed  to
them,  and  apart  from  the  wrong  conclusion
they  bad  been  drawing  from  it,  grievously
perplexed  them,  and  seemed  insufficient  to
establisli  the  new  claim  of  Jesus.     They,
too,  begin  to  depreciate  it  in  comparison
with  a  corresponding  sign  which  Moses  had
wrought  for  their  fathers.    Verily  if  Moses
had  been  the  mediator  of  the  portentous
sign  of  the  manna,  if  Moses  had  been  its
real  author,  it  was  a  much  greater  sign  than
what   they  witnessed  at  Bethsaida.     For
forty  years  the  miraculous  bread  had  been
lavished  upon  them.    Daily  and  weekly  it
proved  its  supernatural  character.     In  quan-
tity, quality,  prolongation,  and  renewal  day
by  day,  and  in  its  c-essotion  when  they  ate
the   fresh  corn  of  Cannan,  Ihey   not    un-
natui'ally    saw    sometliinig    immeasurably
more  vnst  and  imposing  than  tlie  offer  of  a
single  meal  to  a  little  company  of  five  thou-
sand men.    Christ  had  wrought  a  repoj,  an
Ipyof,  but  they  had  not  seen  the  real  ainiuov
involved  in  it.    He  himself  suggested  tiiat
something  entirely  different  from  that  meal,
and  different  from  their  conclusions  concern-
ing it  was  the  true  "  sign."    Let  him  work
the  same  adequate  sign.    They  are  not  re-
pudiating all  knowletlge  of  the  feeding  of
the  five  thouSRUd,  nor  revealing  their  ignor-
ance of  it.    They  are  thrown  back  on  their
ingrained   passion   for  supernatural  proof,
not  as  yet  satisfied  by  what  Christ  had  done.
Ver.  31. — Our   fathers,  they   continued,
ate  the  manna  in  the  wilderness ;  even  as  it
has  been  written,  He  gave  them  bread  out  of
heaven    to    eat.     If   Moses  did  this,  the
Christ  should  do   more,  seeing  he  makes
this  exhaustive  claim  upon  our  faith.    The


OH  n.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


259


manna  (see  Exod.  xyi. ;  Numb,  xi.)  ap-
peared like  the  hoar-frost  ouf  of  heaven.
It  was  gifted  with  numerous  qualities —
perishable  if  not  immediately  used,  re-
specting in  mysterious  way  the  sabbath
sanctity,  attending  the  Israelites  through
their  forty  years'  wanOering,  terminating
wLen  no  longer  wanted,  utterly  unlike,  in
quart .ity  and  quality,  to  what  is  the  Oriental
manna  of  commerce  (Smith's  'Dictionary
of  the  Bible,'  art. "  Manna  ").  The  psalmists
epoke  of.it  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  24 ;  OT.  40)  as  virtually
coming  down  out  of  heaven,  as  "  corn  of
heaven,"  as  "  angels'  food."  The  Targum  of
Jonathan,  Deut.  xxxiv.  6,  says, "  God  caused
bread  to  descend  from  heaven  upon  the  sons
of  Israel,"  and  a  rabbinical  commentary  on
Eoolesiastes,  quoted  by  Liglitfoot  and  Wett-
stein :  "  Redemptor  prior  descendere  fecit
pro  lis  manna;  sic  et  Redemptor  posterior
descendere  faciet  manna."  Consequently,
they  make  the  challenge,  not  as  though
Jesus  had  done  no  sign,  but  as  though  he
had  not  done  enough  to  put  himself  on  an
equality  with  Moses.

Ver.  32. — Jesus  therefore  said  to  them,
with  the  tones  of  special  emphasis,  Verily,
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  It  was  not  Moses,  of
whom  you  are  reasonably  thinking  with
due  reverence,  who  gave  '  you  the  bread  out
of  heaven.  There  are  two  assertions  here.
There  is  also  an  implication,  which  the
hearers  of  Jesus  were  called  on  to  make.  (1)
It  was  not  Moses  who  gave  to  your  fathers  the
bread  out  of  heaven,  such  as  the  historians,
psalmists,  and  expositors  speak  of;  for  such
as  it  was, — a  needed  food  for  the  body  rained
on  you  out  of  heaven,— it  was  the  gift  of  Ood,
not  of  Moses.  (2)  Moreover,  the  manna
was  not  the  veritable  "bread  of  heaven."
There  is  a  richer  and  more  nourishing  food
than  that,  which  alone  deserves  to  be  called
Bread  from  heaven.  The  "  com  of  heaven,"
though  God's  gift,  was  not  that  of  which  I
speak,  nay,  it  was  only  the  shadow  and  type
of  that.  But  my  Tather  is  giving  you,  even
now,  the  veritable  bread  out  of  heaven
(aKnBtvJv);  that  which  fully  answers  the
deseription  of  the  term — food  for  your
spiritual  sustenance,  bread  which  will  save
your  souls  alive,  which,  if  assimilated  by
you,  will  convey  the  consciousness  and
reality  of  eternal  blessedness.  The  kind
of  strength  which  will  arise  within  you
when  once  appropriated,  is  an  eternal
possession,  an  abiding  advantage;  the
satisfaction  is  not   exhausted   by  a  short

•  The  reading  eSuKcy,  with  B,  D,  L,  is
adopted  by  Westcott  and  Hort,  Alford,  and
Tregelles,  though  Godet  rejects  it  on  in-
ternal grounds ;  Westcott  and  Hort  place
SeSaiKsv  in  margin;  Tischendorf  adopts  it
with  K,  A,  A,  A.


interval,  it  remains  for  ever.  The  Son  of
man  is  entrusted  with  power  to  be  f  tew  it.
He  is  sealed  and  sanctified  and  sent  into  the
world  for  this  purpose.  This  bread  is
veritably  from  heaven.  Moses  did  not  even
give,  nor  was  he  the  almoner  even  of,  the
manna.  All  the  giving  then  was  God's
work,  but  he  whom  God  has  sent,  on  whom
you  have  to  believe,  is  a  veritable  Giver  of
this  true  bread  from  heaven.

Ver.  33. — Por  the  bread  of  God  is  that
which  oometh  down  out  of  heaven,  and
giveth  life  to  the  world.  It  ia  debated
whether  the  i  KaTaffalvav  is  "he  who
cemeth  dovm,"  or  "that  (bread)  which
Cometh," etc.—  whether  in  this  verse  the  Lord
passes  at  once  to  the  identification  of
himself  with  the  bread,  or  for  a  moment
longer  is  delaying  the  announcement,  and
broadly  asserting  the  qualities  of  that
"bread  of  God,"  viz.  that  n hoover  and
whatever  it  is,  it  comes  from  heaven,  anr)
gives  life,  not  merely  to  the  theocratic
people,  but  to  the  whole  world.  (The  latter
is  the  view  of  Hengstenberg,  Lange,  Meyer,
Westcott,  Moulton;  the  former  translation
is  partially  urged  by  Godet,  who  thinks  our
Lord  here  spoke  amphibologieally,  meaning
both  ideas,  but  by  the  form  of  the  expres-
sion reserving  the  solution  of  the  problem.)
It  certainly  does  not  follow  that,  if  he  was
speaking  of  himself,  the  expression  6  koto-
pds  would  have  been  used,  because,  in  ver.
50,  after  he  has  removed  all  ambiguity,  he
still  uses  the  present  tense,  6  Hara^alvav.
The  present  tense  is  that  of  quality  rather
than  of  time.  These  characteristics  of  the
veritable  bread  of  God  must  hold  good.  It
must  have  a  heavenly  origin,  life-giving
power,  and  universality  of  application  to
human  need.  Oh.  iii  16  is  here  repeated.
The  whole  world  is  the  object  of  the  Divine
grace  and  love.  The  bread  of  God  must  bo
a  Divine  gift,  mysterious  and  heavenly  in
its  origin,  and-  must  at  once  demonstrate
its  vitality,  its  Source,  and  its  Giver.

Ver.  34. — They  said  therefore  to  him,
lord !  His  hearers  have  clearly  been  more
impressed  than  ever  with  the  extraordinary
claims  of  the  speaker.  They  have  risen
from  the  "Eabbi"  of  ver.  26  to  "Kyrie,"
which  implies,  as  the  "  Kyrie,"  or  "  Sir,"  or
"  Lord  "  of  ch.  iv.  15,  some  advance  in  their
tone  of  deference.  The  request  that  follows
is  neither  ironical  nor  sarcastic,  nor  need
it  be  as  carnal  in  its  spirit  as  the  similar
language  of  the  woman  of  Samaria  (oh.  iv.
15).  They  have  some  dim  notion  of  "  doing
the  works  of  God,"  and  of  some  heavenlv
satisfaction  given  to  their  earthly  wants.
It  may  be  that  they  imagine  some  material
thing  coming  down  out  of  heaven,  more
potent  and  lasting  than  the  historic  manna.
I  Lord,     evermore — "at    all    times,"    "con-


260


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOROrNG  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vi.  1—71.


tinuously "— give  us  this  bread,  of  which
you  speak,  and  which  as  Sou  of  man  you
are  able  to  bostow,  which  will  not  be
limited  in  quautity,  which  will  prove  to  be
the  elixir  of  life,  the  food  of  the  eternal  life,
and  which  will  satisfy  all  our  hunger,
abolish  our  poverty,  make  us  indifferent  to
death.  A  great  prayer  this,  which  Christ
showed  himself  not  unwilling  to  answer  in
his  own  way.

Ver.  35.—{_But,  or  ften']  Jesus  said  to
them,    now    dropping    all    disguise,    and
gatlieringup  into  one  buruing  word  all  the
previous  teaching,  which  they  might  have
fathomed,  but  did  not.     I  am  the  Bread  of
life ;  or  "  that  which  cometh  down  out  of
heaven,    the    veritable    lite-eternal-giving
Bread,  which    I,  as  the    steward    of   the
Divine  bounty,  aa  giving,  ia  my  very  self,
my  Divine  humanity."    On  other  occasions
the    Lord  said,  "I  am  the  Liglit  of  the
world"    (ch.  viii.   12),    "I  am    the    good
Shepherd"  (ch.  x.  14),  "I  am  the  Eesurrec-
tion  and  the  Life  "  (ch.  xi.  25), "  I  am  1 1 1  e  veri-
table Vine  "  (ch.  xv.  1).    He  claims  here  to
be   giving   lumself  to  the  world,  as  the
Source  of  its  true  life.    The  mode  in  wliicli
any  human  being   can  so  assimilate  this
Bread  that  it  should  accomplish  its  purposes
and  transform  itself  into  life,  is  by  "  com-
ing" or  "believing."    The  two  terms  are
parallel,  though  in  "  coming  "  there  is  more
emphasis  laid  on  the  distinct  act  of  the  will
than  in  "believing."    The  process  is  very
impressively  conveyed.    He  who  has  started
to  come,  he  that  is  coming  to  me,  shall  by
no  means  hunger;  he  that  is  believing  on
me  —  endeavouring  to  effect  such  inward
approval  and  surrender — shall  never  thirst
(the  TTt^TroTe  responds  here  to  the  iracTore).
There  is  no  special  significance  in  the  two-
foldness  of  the  parallel.      "  Coming "  does
not    stand  in    any   more  immediate  rela-
tion to  "eating"  than  to  "drinking,"  to
the  satisfaction  of  hunger  than  to  that  of
thirst,  nor  does  "believing"  connote  ex-
clusively either  the  one  or  the  other.    The
parallelism  is  a  strengthening  of  the  same
idea.    Approach  to  himself,  believing  sur-
render to  the  reality  of  his  word,  will  satisfy
the  most  pressing  spiritual  need,  and  do  it
in  such  a  way  that  the  hunger  and  thirst
shall  not,  shall  never,  return.    There  is  an
invincible  and  unalttrable  assent  produced

'  The  aly  is  found  in  X,  D,  r,  13,  33,
and  other  cursives,  and  is  preserved  by
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.);  SI  is  read  by  A,

A,  A,  and  nine  other  uncials,  Syriac,  Gothic,
iEthiopic,  and  Is  preferred  by  Godet  and  T.R
Tregelles,  B.T.,  Tischendorf  (6th  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hurt,  omit  tlie  copula,  with

B,  L,  T,  113,  and  some  versions,  Syriao
(Curetonian).


hu  a  real  apprehension  of  Christ,  wfiich
cannot  be  shaken  out  of  the  soul.  Satisfac-
tion of  liunger  may  possibly  (as  Godet
suggests)  point  to  the  supply  of  strength,
and  the  appeasing  of  thirst  to  the  supply  of
peace.  The  deeper  idea  is  that  the  desire
of  the  soul  is  satisfied,  and  it  is  not  a  le-
current  desire.  There  are  certain  realities
which,  if  once  perceived,  can  never  be
unknown  afterwards.  There  are  consola-
tions which,  if  once  supplied,  absolutely
stanch  and  heal  the  wounds  of  the  soul.
Christ,  in  "coming  down  from  heaven,"  by
revealing  the  Divine  Sojiship  in  a  Son  of
man,  brings  all  heaven  with  him,  opens  all
the  Fathei-'s  heart.  To  come  to  him  and  to
believe  on  him  is  to  feed  on  the  com  of
heaven  and  drink  of  that  river  of  life,  clear
as  crystal,  which  is  ever  issuing  from  the
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb."

Ver.  36. — But  (hWa  is  here  decidedly  ad-
versative.    It  introduces    the   melancholy
statement,  that  the  one  thing  which  is  req  ui-
site  to  the  full  realization  of  the  gift  is  that
of  which  these  questioners  are  ignorant)  I
told  you — I  said  unto  you — that  yon  have
both  seen  me,  and  believe  me  not ;  or  "  that
yon  have  seen  me,  and  yet  believe  not."
Some  difficulty  has  arisen   from   our  not
being  able  to  find,  in  the  previous  dialogue,
the  exact  words  here  quoted.     Some  have
supposed  it  to  refer  to  an  unrecorded  con-
versation (Alford,  Westcott),  or  even  to  some
written  sentence  which  is  now  a  lost  frag-
ment of  the  discourse.    Meyer  says  (without
answering  the  suggestions   of    Olshausen,
Hengstenberg,  Godet,  and  others),  that  there
is  no  such  statement  in  the  context,  and
proposes  to  translate  elTroi/  (as  he  says  it  is
not  unfrequently  found  in   Greek    trage-
dians, as  if  it  were  equivalent  to  dietujn
velim)  "  I  would  have  you  told  ; "  but  there
is  no  such  usage  in  the  New  Testament,
and  ch.  xi.  42  does  not  seem  a  parallel  case.
It  is  not  at  all  probable   that  Jesus  was
referring  to  the  language  of  ch.  v.  37,  words
which  were  addressed  to  a  different  audience
— to  "  Jews  "  at  Jerusalem,  and  uttered  many
months  before  (Liicke  and  De  Wette).    But
ver.  26  shows  tliat  Galilseans  had  come  to
see  him,  and  had  come  without  belief  in  the
great  sign  of  his  spiritual  nature  and  claims
which  he  had  already  granted.    They  had
seen  him  and  his  great  miracles,  it  is  true;
but  they  simply  longed  in  consequence  for
"  more  bread  "  and  "  more  healing,"  not  for
himself.    In  ver.  30  he  draws  from  them  a
confession  that  they  had  not  seen  enough  to
.believe  him.     This  thought  recurs  not  infre-
quently.   "  Have  I  been  so  long  witli  you,
and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip  1"
"  Because  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou  hast
believed  "  (ch.  xx.  29).    The  setting  forth  of
himself  ought  to  have  induced  belief  apart


OH.  VI.  1;-71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,


261


even  from  ■works.  He  is  so  intensely  con-
BcioiiB  of  the  Divine  reality  himself,  that
he  marvels  at  the  unbelief  of  his  hearers.
Let  them  think  as  he  does,  and  immediately
the  lifelong  hunger  and  thirst  of  their  souls
would  be  satisfied.  Seeing,  however,  is
not  believing  in  their  ease  ;  and  he  has
already  urged  them  to  consider  this  lament-
able spiritual  blindness  of  theirs.  The  ex-
clamation of  this  verse  recites  the  obvious
inference  of  the  verses  we  have  referred  to,
condenses  into  a  sentence  the  spirit  of  what
he  had  said,  elirc  (cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  8).

Vers.  37—  40. — (b)  Episode  on  the  bUssed-
ness  of  those  who  "  come  "  to  Christ.

Ver.  37. — ^Many  suppose  a  time  of  stillness,
n  break  in  the  conversation,  "  a  significant
asyndeton,"  from  the  absence  of  all  connection
between  this  and  the  previous  verse.  Vers.
39,  40  would  seem  to  have  been  aildressed
more  directly  to  the  disciples,  the  less  suscep-
tible hearers  retiring  from  him  or  engaging  in
eager  conversation  (cf.  ver.  41).  Neverthe-
less, the  Lord  takes  up  the  continuous  line  of
his  self-revelation,  and  ver.  37  clearly  refers
the  " non-coming "  and  "non-believing"  in
their  case  to  their  moral  obliquity,  and  to  the
apparent  inadequacy  of  sufficient  proof  to
induce  the  faith  which  will  satisfy  spiritual
hunger.  This  spiritual  dulness  on  the  part
of  all  suggests  some  internal  and  necessary
condition,  which  is,  though  yet  absent,
not  said  to  be  inaccessible.  Seeing  ought
to  issue  in  believing,  but  it  does  not ;  there-
fore there  is  sometl  ling  more  than  the  mani-
festation of  the  Christ  absolutely  necessary.
To  that  Jesus  now  reverts.  All  (wav,  the
neuter  is  also  used  of  persons  in  ch.  iii.  6
and  xvii.  2,  used  concerning  the  whole  body
of  real  believers,  the  whole  mass  of  those
who,  when  they  see,  Ao  come — the  entire
company  of  believers  regarded  as  a  grand
unity,  and  stretching  out  into  the  future)
all  that  which  the  Father  giveth  me.  The
subsequent  descriptions  of  the  Father's  grace
(vers.  44,  45)  throw  light  on  this.  The
"  drawing  of  the  Father,"  the  "  hearing  and
leiirning  from  the  Father,"  aie  there  declared
to  be  conditions  of  "  eomiug  to  Christ."  All
those  influences  on  the  eoul,  all  the  new-
creating  and  spirit-quiokening  energies  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  new  heart  and  tender
conscience,  the  honest,  serious  desire  for
holy  things,  are  broadly  described  in  this
passage  as  God's  method  and  act  of  giving
to  the  Son  of  his  love.  There  is  no  neces-
sity (with  Augustine)  to  suppose  tliat  our
Lord  refers  to  an  absolute  predestinating
decree.  For  if  God  has  not  yet  given  these
particular  men  to  him,  it  does  not  say  that  he
will  not  and  may  not  do  so  yet.  The  Father's
giving  to  the  Son  may  indeed  assume  many
forms.  It  may  take  the  character  of  original
Boustilution,  of  predisposition  and  tempera-


ment, or  of  special  providential  education
and  trainins,  or  of  tenderness  of  conscience,
or  of  a  truthful  and  sincere  and  unquenched
desire.  The  Father  is  the  Divine  Cause,
"  The  giving  "  implies  a  present  activity  of
grace,  not  a  foregone  conclusion.  All  that
which  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  reach  me —
all  souls  touched  by  the  Father  in  a  thousand
ways  to  the  point  of  making  a  moral  sur-
render to  my  claims,  will  reach  me  • — and
him  that  is  coming  to  me — i.e.  is  on  the  way
to  me,  is  drawing  near  to  me — I  for  my  part
will  not  oast  out.  Thus  authority  to  refuse
is  claimed  by  Christ,  and  power  to  exclude
from  his  fellowship  and  friendship,  from  his
kingdom  and  glory  (Matt.  viii.  12 ;  xxii.  13).
Admission  is  not  the  working  of  some  im-
personal law,  but  the  individual  response  of
him  who  has  come  down  to  give  life.  As
far  as  man  is  concerned,  it  turns  on  his
voluntary  coming,  on  his  bare  willingness
to  be  fed  with  heavenly  food.  It  is  impos-
sible, so  far  as  responsibility  is  concerned,
to  get  back  of  personal  wish  and  individual
will.  The  process  of  genuine  coming  to
Christ  does  show  that  the  Father  is  therein
giving  such  soul  to  his  Son.  Archdeacon
Watkins  says,  "Men  have  now  seized  one  and
now  the  other  of  these  truths,  and  have  built
upon  them  in  separation  logiciil  systems  of
doctrine  which  are  but  half-truths.  He
(Jesus)  states  them  in  union.  Their  recon-
ciliation transcends  human  reason,  but  is
within  the  experience  of  human  lite."  The
greatness  of  the  self-consciousness  of  Christ
appears  in  the  further  proof  that  he  pro-
ceeds to  supply  of  this  relation  to  the  Fatiier.
Ver.  38. — Because  I  came  down  from
heaven  (cf.  ch.  iii.  13),  not  that  X  might
do  my  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him  that
sent  me  (see  ch.  v.  19,  30,  notes).  The
practical,  ethical  force  of  this  statement  is
to  shape  and  defend  the  previous  assurance.
Christ's  gracious  reception  and  benediction
is  in  wilflng  harmony  with,  and  not  in  oppo-
sition to,  the  Father's  heart.  There  is  no
schism  between  the  Father  and  Son  A
separate  will  in  and  of  itself  assigned  tn  the
Son  Is  not  inconceivable,  nay,  it  is  impera-
tively necessary  to  posit,  or  we  should
lose  all  distinctions  whatever  between  the
Father  and  Son,  between  God  and  Christ.
But  the  very  separateness  of  the  wills  gives
the  greater  significance  to  their  moral  one-
ness. "Not  my  win,  but  thine  be  done,"
"  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt,"  involve
submission,  voluntary  surrender,  to  the
Father's  will;  but  here  the  Lord  insists
on  absolute  harmony  and  free  co-operation.
The  bare  idea  of  the  Incarnation  suggests

'  The  f){f  1  does  mean  more  than  iKeiatrar
{JKOj,  equivalent  to  admm,advenio;  therefore
more  than  vaiio  (ch.  viii.  42 ;  I  John  v.  20)


2fi2


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [ch.  vj.  1—71.


the  conditiong  of  freedom  which  might  oon-
ceivably  issue  in  divarication  of  interest  and
aim.  Christ  declares  that  the  Divine  com-
mission of  his  humanity  is  the  spontaneous
•and  free,  but  perfect,  coincidence  of  his  will
with  tjie  Father's.  Christ's  embodiment  of
the  Father's  wUI,  and  co-ordination  with  it,
make  all  his  attractiveness  to  the  human
soul.  His  healing,  feeding,  and  satisfying
powers  become  a  revelation  of  the  Father's
lieart.  If  he  will  not  cast  out  the  coming  ones,
it  is  because  he  came  down  out  of  heaven  to
fulfil  the  Father's  will  (see  further,  vers.  44,
45),  to  explain  the  world-wide  hunger,  to
meet  and  execute  the  will  of  the  Father.
The  frequent  assertions  by  our  Lord  in  this
discourse  (and  in  ch.  iii.  13)  of  his  descent
from  heaven  as  One  charged  with  a  full
knowledge  of  the  Divine  will,  implies  that
the  Lord  was  conscious  of  pre-existeuce  in
the  very  bosom  of  God.  This  was  language
which,  with  more  of  the  same  import,  led
St.  John  to  the  overwhelming  conclusion
that  the  Jesus  whom  he  knew  in  the  flesh
was  the  Only  Begotten  of  tfce  Father — was
the  Logos  made  flesh.

Yer.  39. — And  this  is  the  vill  of  him*  (the
Father)  that  sent  me,  that  (witli  reference
to)  aU  that  he  hath  given  me*  I  should  not
lose  (so.  tI)  anything,  any  fragment  of  it;
t.e.  from  the  entire  mass  of  humanity  thus
given  to  me  as  the  guerdon  of  my  sacrificial
work,  given  by  the  inward  working  of
Divine  grace  which  issues  in  their  coming
a  ad  reaching  me,  no  solitaiy  soul  should  be
plucked  out  of  my  hand — should  be  let  slip
away  into  perdition  or  destruction.  The
claim  of  a  Divine  authority  and  absolute
power  could  not  be  put  more  strongly.  The
care  with  which  the  Divine  hand  can  pro-
tect every  fragment  of  his  universe,  and
hold  it  by  its  everlasting  laws  and  keep  it
in  the  career  assigned  to  it  from  the  begin-
ning, illumines  this  passage.  Should  the
speaker  not  sustain  this  stupendous  assump-
tion, it  is  only  too  certain  that  he  was  giving
utterance  to  the  most  reckless  raving.  These
words  cannot  be  honestly  watered  down  to
the  language  of  the  influence  of  an  ethical

'  'Air6  is  here  read  by  Tregelles,  R.T.,  and
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),A,B,L,T,  13, 38,  etc. ;
wliile  the  more  common  Ik  is  read  by  S,  D,
r.  A,  and  many  other  nianuscripts  and  our-
tives.  The  former  preposition  denotes  his
sacrificial  descent  from  out  of  heaven,  the
latter  his  Divinity  (Westcott).

•  The  norpdj  of  T.R.  is  omitted  by  Tre-
gelles, Westcott  and  Hort,  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.),  and  B.T.,  with  N°,  A,  B,  D,  L,  T,  and
numerous  cursives.

^  Aidaxd  fioi,  the  gift  contemplated  as  a
completed  act.  The  construction  is  br.iken  ;
the  irS;'  J(,eto.,  is  in  the  nominative  absolute.


leformer  or  prophetic  messenger.  Jesus  pro-
ceeds to  clinch  his  argument  and  reassert
his  claims  as  follows.  But  in  proof  of  the
very  opposite  of  the  supposition  that  I  can
drop  one  atom  of  this  great  charge,  I  will
raise  it  up  at  the  last  day.  Beuss  applies
this  to  the  resurrection  of  each  believer  on
the  "  last  day "  of  each  life,  for  he  seems
unwilling  to  find  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  any
such  idea  as  that  of  the  general  resurrection.
But  cf  ch.  V.  29,  and  observe  the  repetition
as  in  a  wondrous  lefrain,  vers.  40,  44,  54,
in  which  he  again  speaks  of  the  "  last  day  "
— the  final  consummation  of  his  redemptive
work.  The  next  verse  shows  that  the  Lord
did  discriminate  between  eternal  life  already
bestowed  here  and  now,  and  the  great  con-
sequence of  such  possession  in  the  complete
restoration  of  body  as  well  as  life.  It  is  in
the  continuity  and  perpetuity  of  the  eternal
life  that  we  find  the  condition  of  the  resur-
rection-life. The  "  when  "  of  this  "  last  day  "
is  not  positively  asserted  here.

Ver.  40. — For'  this  is  the  will  of  my
rather'  (or,  of  him  that  lent  me),  that  every
one  (ttSs,  instead  of  the  Trav  of  vers.  37,  39),
treated  separately  and  individually,  who
beholdeth — i.e.  steadily  and  continuously  con-
templates— the  Son(herehe  identifies  himself
with  the  revelation  of  the  sonship  in  his  own
Person)  and  believeth  on  him — i.e.  entrusts
himself  in  a  full  moral  surrender  to  the  Son
(the  61S  aiT6p  must  be  here  especially  noticed)
as  thiu  revealed — should  have  eternal  life.
This  is  the  sublime  law  of  Divine  arrange-
ment, and  the  fullest  expression  of  the  will  of
the  Father  (comp.l  John  v.  12,  "He  that  hath
the  Son  hath  life ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the
Son  of  God  hath  not  life  ").  "  Behold  and
trust."  These  are  the-conditions.  The  steady
gaze,  the  full  perception  of  the  Divine  Son-
ship  that  is  adequately  expressed  in  the  Son
of  man,  issues  by  a  Divine  arrangement  in
life  eternal.  The  blessedness  of  the  life  of
faith,  its  elevation  above  the  conditions  of
corruption  and  decay,  are  not  all  which  he
promises,  for  he  added.  And  (perhaps  the  ha
is  carried  on  to  the  acairT^ira),  and  so  the
word  is  in  subj.  aor.  rather  than  fut.  indie,
and,  if  so,  the  sentence  may  express  the  fact)
that  I  should  raise  him  (not  "  it ; "  cf.  ver.
89)  at  the  last  day.

It  is  not  improbable,  as  we  have  seen,  that

'  r&p  instead  of  Se  stands  on  the  high
authority  of  N,  A,  B,  C,  D,  etc.,  thirty  cur-
sives, and  Italic,  Syriac,  and  Coptic  Versions,
and  is  preferred  by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)
and  E.T.

'  N,  B,  C,  D,  L,  T,  U,  Italic,  Syriao,  and
Coptic  rcail  rod  itfiv\ioa>T6s  lie  in  place  of
Tov  narods  fiov.  So  Tischendoif  (8th  edit.)
tad  K.T.


OH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


263


our  Lord  uttered  these  verses  (37 — 40)  to
the  innermost  circle  of  his  followers.  The
lirBt  discourse  closes  with  ver.  36.  The  dis-
ciples looked  with  eager  and  inquisitive
glances  at  each  other  and  at  their  Lord,
and  received  these  teachings  of  the  Lord
concerning  the  relation  he  was  sustaining
to  the  Father,  and  the  claim  he  made  to  be
the  Almoner  of  the  mercy  and  minister  of
the  judgment  of  him  that  sent  him.  This
great  utterance  corresponds  with  the  cele-
brated synoptic  recital  (Matt.  xi.  26,  27).

Vers.  41 — 51. — (c)  The  murmur  of  the
Jews  met  by  additional  claim  that  his  "flesh  "
is  the  "livirig  bread."  The  passage  here
following  resumes  the  narrative  of  the  im-
pression pruduced  by  the  extraordinary  dis-
course that  had  preceded.  The  question  of
"  the  Jews  "  does  not  turn  at  all  upon  the
explanation  he  had  just  given  to  his  dis-
ciples ill  vers.  36 — 40,  but  goes  back  to  the
theme  of  vers.  29 — 36.  "  The  Jews  "  need
not  be  restricted  to  the  Jewish  or  the  aristo-
cratic or  bigoted  portion  of  the  Galilsean
oxAoy,  but  rather  to  the  Jewish  authorities
of  the  towns  of  Bethsaida  and  Capernaum,
who  had  been  stirred  up  into  active  opposi-
sition  by  the  report  of  the  miracles  and
of  the  explanation  which  the  Lord  had  put
upon  them.

Ver.  41. — ^The  Jews  therefore  murmured
concerning  him.  Perhaps  in  ch.  vii.  32
■yoyyiCetv  means  simply  "  whisper ; "  but
throughout  the  New  Testament  (1  Cor.  x.
10 :  Luke  v.  30,  with  TTp6s ;  Matt.  xx.  IX,
with  Hartk;  cf.  Acts  vl.  1;  Phil.  ii.  14;  1
Pet.  iv.  9 ;  "Wisd.  i.  10)  it  has  the  malevolent
meaning  conveyed  in  the  LXX.  It  is  used  to
denote  very  rebellious  feelings  against  God
(Rxod.  xvi.  7—9 ;  Numb.  xi.  1 ;  xiv.  27).
The  Attic  writers  used  TopSopiC".  Because
he  said,  I  am  the  Bread  which  cometh  down
from  heaven.  This  was  a  reasonable  putting
together  of  the  thre?  assertions  :  "  I  am  the
■  Bread  of  life  "  (ver.  3.5) ;  "  I  have  come  down
from  heaven  "  (ver.  38) ;  and  "  The  bread
of  God  is  that  which  cometh  down  from
heaven"  (ver.  33).  "The  Jews"  did  not
misanderstand  his  meaning.  They  under-
stood it  perfectly,  and  rebelled  against  it.

Ver.  42. — ^They  were  saying  {eKeyoi/) — the
one  to  the  other,  murmuring  in  critical  and
angry  mood,  and  not  necessarily  in  his  hear-
ing; for  he  did  not  reply  to  their  express
assertion,  and  proceeded  rather  to  enlarge
and  reiterate  the  great  theme  which  he  had
already  deduced  in  the  hearing  of  his  dis-
ciples.   Weiss  (vol.  iii.  6)  thinks  that  John


has  here  introduced  an  amplification  which
belongs  to  a  totally  different  connectioii.
Is  not  this  Jeans,  the  Son  of  Joseph— (c£
oh.  i.  46 ;  Luke  iv.  22).  We  cannot  argue
from  this  passage  whether  Joseph  was  living
still  or  had  died.  The  murmuring  is  ex-
plicable on  either  hypothesis.  The  tradition-
ary impression  is  that  "  Joseph  "  had  fallen
asleep.  Either  hypothesis  is  compatible
with  the  language — whose  father  and  mother
we  know  ?  They  may  have  merely  meant
"  whose  reputed  parentage  is  well  understood,"
without  implying  that  either  one  or  other
no  longer  lived.  The  fact  of  his  parentage
was  admitted.  This  is  an  apparent  point-
blank  contradiction  to  the  descent  of  hia
humanity  from  heaven.  The  supposition  of
the  truth  of  the  immaculate  and  supernatural
birth  of  Jesus  is  perfectly  compatible  with
the  ignorance  of  the  "  Jews  "  about  it.  This
deep  mystery  of  love  could  not  be  made
matter  of  public  discourse,  nor  do  our  narra-
tives suggest  that  the  fact  itself  was  pro-
mulgated until  after  the  Besnrrection.
Whatever  was  apprehended  by  the  sacred
society  of  the  hill  country  of  Judsea,  or  laid
up  in  the  breasts  of  Joseph  and  Mary  and
of  the  few  who  pondered  these  strange  things
in  their  holy  circle  at  Nazareth,  we  know
not.  The  synoptic  narratives,  though  they
assert  the  mystery,  do  not  give  the  smallest
indication  that  it  was  ever  referred  to,  or
made  an  article  of  faith,  by  Jesus  himself.
The  difficulty  that  besets  this  passage  is
rather  the  silence  of  John,  both  here  and  else-
where, concerning  the  manner  of  the  Lord's
birth.  He,  who  knew  the  mother  of  Jesus,
and  must  have  been  acquainted  with  the
langua<re  of  Matthew  and  Luke,  says  nothing
in  vindication  of  the  words  of  the  Lord.
Here  was  an  opportunity  for  putting  the
"  Jews "  in  the  wrong,  by  endorsing  the
synoptic  account  which  he  did  not  embrace.
We  have  already  seen  (cf.  notes,  oh.  i.  14 ;
iii.  1 — 6)  that  the  underlying  presupposition
of  the  miraculous  birth  is  the  best  explana-
tion of  his  own  words.  StUl  his  silence  is
remarkable.  It  is  best  accounted  for  by  the
fact  that  he  was  evermore  looking  to  the
moral,  spiritual  significance  of  all  the  miracles
he  records,  as  well  as  of  those  to  which  he
vaguely  refers.  He  is  content  with  the
words  of  Jesus.  They  are  the  surest  ex-
planation of  the  synoptic  narrative.  The
Jews,  on  the  basis  of  their  general  know-
ledge, are  struck  with  consternation.  How
(now)  therefore  ^  doth  he  say,  I  have  come

'  B.T.,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westoott
and  Hort,  Alford,  Tregelles,  have  accepted
yOv  instead  of  oSj",  on  the  authority  of  B,  C,  T,
although  T.E.  reads  oGv,  with  Lachmann,  on
the  authority  of  N,  A,  D,  L,  r.  A,  other
uncials  and  cursives,  and  the  Italic  Version,


264


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,      [oh,  vl  1—71


down  out  of  heaven  1  This  was  not  an  irra-
tional nor  a  maligaant  criticism.  This  ques-
tion must  liave  been  asked  by  those  who  heard
for  the  first  time  the  stupendous  claim.  It
would  not  seem  that  tliese  interrogations
were  put  in  the  hearing  of  our  Lord.  His
"answer"  goes  back  to  the  "question"  as
it  shaped  itself  in  the  hearts  of  the  disciples,
and  involves  some  of  the  deepest  truths
which  he  had  previously  communicated  to
Nicodemus.  He  demands  and  must  have
a  new  humanity,  a  regenerated  audience,
subjects  for  his  kingdom  who  are  born  anew
or  from  above.  He  who  came  down  from
lieaven  insists  that  his  true  disciples  must
become  what  he  is — ^heaven-born,  must  have
a  life  out  of  heaven.  They  must  be  "  of  God."
they  must "  hear"  and  "  learn  of  the  Father,"
must  be  drawn  by  Divine  hands,  if  they
would  or  should  come  to  him.  No  lip-hom-
age, no  fickle  desire  for  the  Messianic  king-
dom, would  satisfy  him.

Vers.  43,  44. — Jesus  answered '  and  said  to
them,  Mnrmur  not  among  yourselves ;  or,  with
one  another.  He  had  searched  out  a  deeper
reason  for  their  murmuring  than  their  pro-
bable involuntary  ignorance  of  certain
miraculous  facts.  No  man  can  come  (is  able
to  come)  to  me  except  the  Father,  who  hath
sent  me  draw  him  :  and  I  will  raise  him  up
at  the  last  day.  In  the  previous  utterance
**  all "  which  the  Father  "  gives  "  to  the  Son
"comes"  to  him,  reaches  him,  enters  into
close  relationship  with  him.  Here  "  no  one
is  able "  by  the  nature  of  the  case  "  to
come  "  except  this  process  and  method  of
a  Divine  giving  is  realized.  The  Father's
"  giving "  to  him  is  deocribed  in  new  terms,
as  "  the  drawing  "  by  the  Father  who  hath
sent  him".  The  word  i\K^etv  almost  always
implies  resistless  or  at  least  successful  force,
in  the  stretching  of  a  sail,  the  dragging  of
a  net,  the  force  applied  to  a  prisoner,  the
drawing  of  a  sword  (ch.  xviii.  10 ;  xxi.  6,
11;  Acts  xvi.  19;  Jas.  ii.  6).  It  is  used
also  in  Attic  writers  for  the  internal  drawing
of  desire  towards  pleasure  (Plato,  '  Phsedr.,'
p.  238,  a ;  of.  Virgil,  '  Eel.,'  u.  65,  "  Trahit
sua  quemque  voluptas").  Our  Lord  also
uses  the  word  for  his  own  attractive  force,
for  the  Divine  magnetism  of  his  cross,  "  If
1  be  lifted  up,  I  will  draw  all  men  to  ma ; "
I  will  counteract  all  the  power  of  the  prince  of
this  world  (see  ch.  xii.  32,  note).  This  draw-
ing of  the  Father  to  the  Son  by  an  inturnal
operation  on  the  heart  must  be  interpreted

Vulgate,  both  Syriac  Versions,  and  patristio
quotations.  BMe  Eevisers  place  it  in  the
margin.

'  The  oSv  of  T.R.,  Lachmann,  Griesbach,
of  N,  A,  D,.  is  here  omitted  by  R.T.,  Tre-
gellc3,Tischeiidorf(8th  edit.),  with  B,0,K,L,
ftud  ten  others  and  numerous  versions.


by  the  attractive  force  of  the  love  and  saorifioa
of  the  Father  which  is  seen  in  Christ's  being
lifted  up  ;  and  still  fm-ther  explained  by  his
own  subsequent  assertion  in  ch.  xiv.,  "Noman
Cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me."    So
that,  while  the  whole  action  centres  in  Christ,
the  process  begins  and  ends  in  the  Father's
heart.     The  Father  loves  the  world;  the
Father  would  have  all  men  come  to  him,
have  access    to   himself.     To   secure   this
Divine  result  he  sends  forth  his  Son  with
all  the  attractive  force  of  love  and  death
This  Divine  hum mity  is  a  sufficient  revela-
tion of  the  perfect  will  and  infinite  love  of
God.     The  drawing  of  Christ  to  himself  is
nothing  less  than  the  drawing  of  the  Father
to  Himself;  for  Christ  came  to  do  the  will  of
him  that  sent  him.     Nor  is  this  all,  for  all
the  "internal  pressing"  and  revelation  of
need  and  peril,  the  conviction  of  sin  and
righteousness  and  judgment  by  the  Com-
forter, is  at  once  the  Father's  drawing  and
also   the   attraction   of  the   Son,   and  the
veritable  "  coming  "  of  a  soul  through  Christ
to  the  Father.     The  Father  "  gives  "  to  the
Son  by  this  double  process  :  (1)  he  manifests
his  own  fatherly  heart  in  Christ;  (2)  he
opens  men's  eyes  to  see  the  Father  in  the
Son.     "  No  man  can  come  to  me  except  tlie
Father,  which  hath  sent  me,  draw  him  ;  and  I
will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day.     I,"  says
Christ,  "  will  complete  and  consummate  his
life  at  my    great   day   of  coronation  and
triumph."    The  several  thoughts  must  be
tiiken  together,  and  they  explain  one  another.
The  coming  of  men  to  the  Father,  access  to
God  himself  in  the  glory  of  the  resurrectiun-
life,  is  the  sublime  consummation.     Christ
is  sent,  the  Only  Begotten  is  given,  he  is
lifted  up  to  draw  men  by  the  revelation  of
the  Father's  heart  to  himself,  and  thus  in
seeing  and  knowing  that  Christ  is  in  the
Fatlier  and  the  Father  in  him,  the  soul  is
diawn  by  the  Father  to  the  Son — is  drawn
by  the  Son  to  the  Father.    Yet  the  sub-
jective  work  of  the  Father  in   the  mind,
moving  it  even  to  see  the  full  meaning  of
the  Christ  and  to  yield  to  his  attractive  force,
is  strongly  suggested.     The  direct  contact
of  Gud  himself  with  each  soul  that  seeks,
finds,  and  comes  to  him  through  Christ  is
made  evident.      There  is,   as  Keuss  says,
"  la  base   mystique  de  la  theologie  Chrc-
tienne,"  rather  than  the  announcement  r-.l
a  predestinating  decree.    Even  Calvin  says,
"  As  to  the  kind  of  drawing,  it  is  not  violent,
so  as  to  compel  men  by  external  force ;  but
still  it  is  a  powerful  influence  of  the  Holy
Spirit  which  makes  men  wilUng  who  for-
merly were  unwilling."

Ver.  45. — ^li;  is  written  in  the  prophets  ;
eitlier  in  the  division  of  Scripture  ualltd
"  the  prophets,"  or  because  the  substance  of
the  statement  is  found  to  pervade  the  pro-


OH.VI.  1— 71.]      TUE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


265


phetB,  and  to  receive  express,  if  not  literal,
utterance  in  Isa.  liv.  13.  The  prophet,  on
describing  the  glorious  triumphs  of  the
Servant  of  the  Lord  in  his  new  kingdom,
added  (LXX,),  Koi  irdvTas  Tobs  viobs  ffov
Si^aKTobs  0eoO,  (col  iv  iroWf  elpiitni  tA  r^Kva
trov,  "And  all  thy  sons  [I  Will  make]  to  be
taught  of  God,  and  in  much  [great]  peace
thy  children "  (cf.  also  Jer.  xxxi.  [LXX.,
xxxviii.]  34,  for  the  same  thought  in  other
words).  Godet  suggests  that  the  former
passiige  was  in  the  haphtora,  from  the  pro-
phets— the  lesson  lor  the  day.  If  the  dis-
course was  uttered  in  the  synagogue  of
Cnpernaum,  this  is  not  impossible.  At  all
events,  the  "  and  "  (koQ  which  here  follows
suggests  that  the  quotation  is  taken  from
Isaiah.  And  they  shall  all  be  taught  of
God ;  i.e.  direct  teaching  by  God  is  the
prime  requisite  of  any  spiritual  apprehen-
sion, even  of  the  mysteries  of  Christ  the
Revealer.  This  solemn  truth  is  affirmed  by
the  entire  history  of  Christ.  The  vision  of
his  majesty,  even  contact  with  his  ineffable
love,  tlie  sight  of  his  humiliation  and  of
the  shedding  of  his  precious  bloud,  did  not,
by  any  necessarily  acting  law  of  mind,  in-
duce faith.  Divine  teaching  by  the  Spirit
of  the  Father  and  Son  is  the  preliminary
(see  notes  on  ch.  xvi.  5 — 8,  on  the  mission
of  the  Comforter)  to  believing  on  Christ.
"  Taught  of  God"  (SiSaKTo!  @eov),  translated
in  Vulgate,  docibiles  Dei  (of.  1  Thess.  iv.  9),
means  more  than  the  reception  of  one  lesson
in  the  school  of  God,  and  suggests  a  pro-
longed experience  and  a  rich  communion  be-
tween tlie  Teacher  and  the  taught.  Every
one  (therefore)  '  [irSs,  referring  to  the  TraVres
of  ver.  45o,  and  to  the  quotation,  is  not  so
much  every  human  being,  as  the  "  all "  of
the  Messianic  kingdom — the  "  all  "  of  God's
"sons"  and  "  children  "]  that  hath  heard*
from  the  Father,  and  hath  learned  (of  him),
oometh  unto  me.  Hearing  may  end  in  heed-
lessness, even  when  the  Lord  God  Almiglity
speaks  with  us.  His  revelations  at  great
epochs,  his  inner  voice  at  special  moments  in
our  religious  history,  may  be  disregarded.
The  voice  of  God  may  be  heard,  yet  not
obeyed;  the  voice  of  conscience  and  revelation
and  inspiration,  the  sacred  monitions  and
warnings  of  the  heart,  may  all  be  slighted.

'  OSy  of  T.R.,  with  later  uncials,  is  omitted
by  N,  B,  0,  D,  L,  etc.,  and  by  many  Italic
manuscripts,  the  Vulgate,  Coptic,  etc. ;  by
some  cursives  and  Fathers,  by  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  Tregelles,  K.T.,  Westcott  and
Hort.

2  'AKoiffas,  T.R.  and  E.T.,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  is  sustained  by  K,  A,  B,  0,  K,  L,
T,  Vulgate,  Origen,  and  Cyril.  Godet,  on  the
authority  of  the  later  uncials  and  cursives,
prefers  iKoiuv.


But  every  one  that  hath  heard  the  Father,
and  has  also  accepted  the  lesson — has  felt
the  Divine  drawing ;  being  willing  to  do  the
will  of  the  Father,  he  knows  of  the  doctrine,
whether  it  be  of  God,  and  he  comes  to
Christ.  Later  on,  Christ  said,  "  Every  one
that  is  of  the  trutli  lieareth  my  voice."  It
is  one  thing  to  "  hear,"  another  to  "  learn,"
another  to  "  come."  These  three  stages  still
further  illumine  the  "drawing"  of  the
Father,  and  the  method  which  the  Father
has  adopted  of  so  giving  men  to  Christ  that
he  may  ultimately  fold  them  in  his  arms
and  press  them  to  his  heart.  Lest,  how-
ever, the  hearers  of  Jesus,  then  or  now,
should  conclude  that  the  kind  of  direct
teaching  of  which  the.  prophets  spake,  and
which  he  endorsed,  was  of  that  immediate
kind  which  himself  enjoyed,  and  which
alone  justifies  this  language,  he  con-
tinued—

Ver.  46. — Not  that  any  one  hath  seen  the
Father,  save  he  who  is  from  God,  he  hath
seen  the  Father.  "Hearing"  and  "learn-
ing "  do  not  amount  to  the  beatific  vision.
"  No  one  [as  John  said,  ch.  i.  18]  hath
seen  God  at  any  time,  the  only  begotten
[Son]  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father
[Trphs  rbv  @e6v,  ch.  i.  1 ;  els  rhv  K6\Trov,  oh.  i.
18],  he  hath  declared  him  "  (cf.  Matt.  xi.
2").  The  full  revelation  of  the  Father  is
alone  possible  to  one  who  is  (irap^  toS  ©coS)
"forth  from  God,"  yet  evermore  standing
in  close  association  with  God.  Cyril  and
Erasmus  here  suggest  the  fact  that  Christ
distinguishes  himself  from  Moses,  and  some
suggest  that  Christ  protests  against  the
supposition  which  would  make  the  spiritual
"inner  Christ"  of  modern  speculation  of  more
value  than  the  historical  personality.  But
iraph  in  association  with  i>v  indicates  more
than  mission  from  God.  and  obviously  stands
in  indissoluble  relation  with  the  teaching  of
the  prologue,  viz.  the  eternal  pre-existence
of  the  personal  Logos — the  identity  of  the
Person  who  was  made  flesh  with  the  Christ
of  this  discouise.  These  words  bring  our
Lord's  teaching  back  to  a  full  justification
or  reassertion  of  the  statement  that  he  had
come  down  from  heaven.

Ver.  47. — Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  yon,
He  that  believeth  [on'  me]  hath  eternal
life.  He  has  here  given  a  new  turn  to  the
conversation,  and  repeated  what  had  been
the  substance  of  several  discourses  (ch.
iii.  16,  18,  36 ;  v.  24),  and  formed,  indeed,
the  starting-place  of  this  (vers.  27,  35,  36).

•  E(r  ffii  stands,  with  A,  C,  D,  r.  A,  and
cursives.  Fathers,  and  versions.  N,  B,  L,  T,
Armenian  (Syriao  adds,  in  Devm),  and
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort,
and  B.T.,  have  omitted;  Alford  and  Tre-
gelles bracket  it.


266


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      loh.  vi.  1—71.


The  Ml  acceptance  of  Christ  providea
"living  water"  for  the  thirsty,  "living
bread,"  "  bread  from  heaven,"  for  the  hungry
— an  inward  refreshment,  a  Divine  nourish-
tnent,  an  inexhaustible  supply.  "  He  that
believeth  on  me  "  (whether  the  tJs  in^  were
in  the  original  text  or  not,  they  are  involved
in  the  sense)  has  entered  on  the  possession
of  an  eterual  blessedness  of  being,  superior
to  death,  transcending  time  and  sense — he
«  hath  eternal  life."

Yer.  48  repeats  once  more  the  itatement
of  vers.  32, 35  (see  notes) :  I  am  the  Bread
of  life.  Not  only  do  I  give  you  more  than
Moses  gave  your  fathers,  but  I  am  the
Father's  Gift.  I  myself  am  the  Gift— I
am  the  Bread  of  which,  if  you  partake,  you
will  hunger  no  more,  you  will  need  no  more,
you  will  die  no  more  ;  the  life  then  thrill-
ing through  you  will  be  eternal.  "  The  in-
visible God  is  the  Source  of  eternal  life;
the  human  nature  of  the  Son  of  God  is  the
visible  form  which  contains  and  imparts
this  to  the  aonls  of  men  "  (Archdeacon  Wat-
kins).

Vers.  49,  50. — Youi  fathers  did  eat  the
manna  in  the  wilderness,  and  tkey  died.
The  Lord  went  back  to  the  very  words  of
the  Jews  in  ver.  81.  The  Heaven-given
manna  by  which  Jehovah  sustained  the
temporal  life  of  the  fathers  in  the  wilder-
ness did  not  convey  the  antidote  to  death.
"  The  carcases  [of  these  fathers]  fell  in  the
vrildemess."  He  does  not  say, "  perislied  out
of  God's  sight  for  ever,"  or  were  condemned,
but  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  eating
of  manna  which  arrested,  or  averted,  or
triumphed,  over  death ;  yet  he  added :  This
(Bread  of  life)  is  the  Bread  which  cometh
down  from  heaven,  in  order  that  any  one
(t2s)  may  eat  thereof  and  may  not  die.
The  eating  of  the  Bread  of  life  (the  life-
giving  Bread),  which  I  myself  am,  the
thorough  assimilation,  the  entire  acceptance
of  me  as  God's  Gift  of  life  to  the  worhl,  con-
fers the  very  principle  of  life;  and,  though
a  partaker  may  seem  to  perish,  he  does  not
die  (cf.  ch.  viii.  51— xi.  26,  noties) — ^he  will
not  "taste  of  death,"  "he  will  never  die.''
The  life  will  be  stronger  than  death;  it  will
survive  apparent  extinction.  Meyer  says
that  here  Christ  reserves  to  ver.  51  the  posi-
tive offer  "  of  his  own  concrete  Personality,
and  is  exhibiting  the  true  Bread,  according
to  its  real  nature."  Still  he  has  said,  "I
am  the  life-giving  Bread,"  and  is  undoubt-
edly preparing  for  the  following  announce-
ment, which  adds  a  new  and  startling
thought,  calculated  to  sustain  the  former
one.

Ver.  51. — I  am  (not  only  the  "  Bread  of
God,"  the  "Bread  of  life,"  the  life-giving
Personality,  but)  the  livijig  Bread  which
eaxi»  dvWB  out  of  bcavsa :  if  any  man  ezi  of


this  *  Bread,  he  will  lire  *  for  erer.  With
this  verse  we  see,  instead  of  monotony,  a
threefold  advance.  (1)  In  place  of  the  life-
giving  Bread,  he  declares  himself  to  be  ag
Bread,  yet  a  living  Person,  possessing  there-
fore in  himself  the  essential  principle  and
energy  of  life.  (2)  Instead  of  coming  down,
used  characteristically  or  universally,  he
points  to  a  definite,  concrete,  historic  fact —
"  that  has  come  down  out  of  heaven."  (3)
Instead  of  saying, "  he  may  not  die,"  we  find
the  glorious  assertion, "  he  vdll  live  for  ever."
The  kind  of  eating  of  which  he  speaks  be-
comes clearer;  thu  kind  of  food,  the  kind  of
death,  the  kind  of  life,  all  burst  into  light
which  points  back  to  the  first  great  word  of
this  discourse,  viz.  "Labour  tor  that  food
which  endureth  unto  eternal  life,  which  the
Son  of  man  will  give  to  you,,  for  this  one
the  Father,  even  God,  hath  sealed."  "  The
miraculous  feeding  of  yesterday  was  but
the  metaphor  by  which  I  was  conveying  this
thought,  that  I  was  providing  an  inexhausti-
ble supply  for  the  eternal  life  of  that  hu-
manity which  I  have  assumed."  In  the  last
clause  of  the  verse  he  made  a  yet  further
advance :  Yea,  and  the  bread  which  I  shall
give  is  my  flesh  (which  I  shall  give) '  for
the  life  of  the  world.  The  ko!  .  .  .  S^  of  the
commencement  of  the  clause  show  a  con-
tinuation of  the  thought  vrith  a  new  de-
parture, co-ordination,  and  progress,  "  Yea,
and  the  bread  which  I  shall  give  is  my
fiesh."  Though  the  word  "flesh"  is  often
described  by  some  of  its  frequent  character-
istics and  qualities,  and  might  be  and  has
been  regarded  as  the  bodily  and  sens'uous
nature,  and  also  as  the  seat  of  sin,  it  is,

•  Tisehendorf  (8th  edit.)  here  reads,  in
Tou  ifiov  &pTov^  with  N,  a,  e,  and  with  four
Latin  quotations.  Toirov  tou  ^prov  is  read
by  E.T.,  Westcott  and  Hort,  as  well  as
T.E.,  with  B,  O,  L,  T,  and  numerous  other
uncials  and  all  cursives  and  versions.

'  Tisehendorf  (Xth  edit.)  also  reads  f^o-ei,
with  N.  I),  L,  33;  the  reading  of  T.E.,  Al-
ford,  and  E.T.,  ffto-erai,  rests  on  the  great
bulk  of  other  authorities.

"  Tisehendorf  (8th  edit.)  here  reads,  'O
apTos  5e  Sv  iyit  5(&<Tw  {tirep  ttjs  rov  K6(Tfxov  C^TJs,
Tl  (rdp(  /lov  (ariv,  with  N  and  m,  and  quotation
from  TertuUian.  The  reading  of  'Tregelles,
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  B.T.  is  that  of  B,
q,  D,  L,  T.  The  Italic,  Syriae,  Thebaic  Ver-
sions, involve  the  omission  of  the  clause,  5i»
^7i  id>aa>.  This  clause  is  supposed  by  them
to  be  a  device  to  clear  up  the  difficulty  and
harshness  of  the  reading  they  prefer.  It  is,
however,  found  in  the  great  bulk  of  manu-
scripts (A  is  defective).  Meyer  and  Godet
regard  the  omission  of  the  clause  as  an  early
error,  occasioned  by  the  words  occurring  in
the  previous  part  of  the  sentence,


OH.  VI.  1—71.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


267


both  by  Paul  and  John,  used  for  the  nature
of  man  as  a  creature — ^its  totality  regarded
on  it8  earthly  side,  the  entire  "  humanity "
which  Christ  assumed,  the  common  anti-
thesis to  "  spirit "  viewed  as  the  Divine  su-
pernatural gift  to  man.  He  was  (1  Tim.  iii.
16)  "  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  in  "  the  likeness
of  sinful  flesh"  (Rom.  viii.  3) — ^in  a  flesh  free
from  all  sin.  He  came  "  in  the  flesh "  (1
John  ii.  16  ;  iv.  2).  This  humanity  of  his  he
gives,  or  rather,  when  he  spake  these  words,
he  would  give,  to  be  eaten,  to  be  assimilated
by  faith ;  and,  having  reached  this  point,  he
added  («.«.  if  we  retain  the  questioned  clause,
which,with  Meyer  and  Godet,  we  see  no  suifl-
cieut  reason fordiscarding), which  flesh, which
humanity  of  his,  he  will  further  give  to  be
slain  and  sacrificed  for  the  sake  of,  or  on
behalf  of,  the  world.  This  clause,  which  the
Vatican  Codex,  etc.,  reject,  proceeds  clearly
on  the  supposition  that  Christ  advances  here
to  the  prediction  and  promise  of  his  death.
It  is  so  worded  as  all  the  more  to  justify  the
emphasis  he  subsequently  lays  upon  the
death  itself  as  essential  to  a  full  participa-
tion in  himself.  In  this  verse  and  closing
utterance  he  prepares  for  further  disclosures,
and  the  flesh  of  Christ  receives  explanation
from  the  rich  and  varied  reference  to  it  in
the  final  words  of  the  discourse,  where  the
jlesh  is  the  great  metaphor  of  his  Divine
humanity,  and  the  bhod  is  the  expressive
deasription  of  his  awful  sacrifice.  He,  the
Life-giver,  the  Living  One,  the  Bread  of
life,  the  living  Bread,  will  give  himself  to
what  men  call  death,  that  they,  apprehend-
ing fully,  adequately  accepting  the  great-
ness of  the  Divine  gift,  may,  like  himself,
transform  death  (so-called  death)  into  the
portal  of  eternal  life.  These  words  are  the
new  starting-point  for  this  great  disclosure.
The  very  inner  thought  of  Jesus  seems  to
shape  itself  as  we  read.  The  Paschal  sacri-
fice, eaten  at  that  season  as  the  sign  that  the
theocratic  nation  had  been  chosen  to  cove-
nant and  eternal  relation  with  Jehovah,
idust  have  been  present  to  his  mind.  His
own  approachin";  death  and  sacrifice,  by
which  he  would  bind  those  who  receive  him
into  an  eternal  covenant  with  himself,  his
relation  to  the  whole  world,  the  gift  of  the
Father  to  him,  the  gift  of  himself  to  the
world  by  the  Father, — all  are  presented  to
him,  and  the  movements  of  his  great  heart
reveal  themselves  as  he  proceeds.

Vers.  52 — 59. — (d)  The  conflict  among  the
Jews  leads  Christ  to  insist  further  on  separate
participation  of  his  flesh  and  blood  as  the
condition  of  life.

Ver.  52. — The  Jews  therefore  strove  one
with  another  (^/hiJxovto  represents  more
vigorous  demonstration  of  their  difficulties
tiian  the  iySyyvCoy  of  ver.  41).  They  were
Tjpt  unaninious  in  their  judgment.     Some


■aid  one  thing,  and  others  said  another.
The  "  Jews  "  had  not  yet  come  to  a  unani-
mous opinion  that  this  wonderful  Being  was
talking  sheer  heresy  or  incomprehensible
mystery.  They  knew  his  habit  of  meta-
phorio  speech,  and  that  underneath  common
imagery  he  was  in  the  habit  of  conveying
doctrines  the  full  purport  of  which  was  not
at  once  apparent.  Some  denounced  him  as
uttering  an  intolerable  riddle.  Some  saw,
in  a  measure,  through  it,  and  hated  the
doctrine  that  was  thereby  conveyed.  How
could  he  be  so  essential  to  the  life  of  the
world  ?  and  how,  said  the  pure  materialist,
"  how  can  he  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat  ?  "  A
question  of  great  interest  arises.  He  has
already  identified,  in  ver.  35,  "  coming  to
him,"  "  reaching  him  "  under  the  drawing
of  the  Father,  with  the  transcendent  bless-
ing of  life  eternal,  of  victory  over  death,  and
resurrection.  In  ver.  40  "  beholding "  and
"  believing  "  are  cognate  or  equivalent  con-
ditions of  life  and  resurrection.  In  ver.  47,
again,  "believing,"  per  se,  is  the  essential
and  all-comprehensive  condition.  Now,  has
Christ  added,  in  this  verse,  anything  fresh
to  the  fundamental  ideas  ?  Let  it  be  pon-
dered that  he  has  already  equated  "  believ-
ing "  with  eating  a  bread  that  endureth  to
everlasting  life  (vers.  27 — 29).  He  has  de-
clared himself  to  be  the  "  Bread  of  life,"  and
to  be  appropriated  by"  coming  "  and ''  believ-
ing." He  has  spoken  of  himself  as  "  living
Bread,"  which,  coming  for  the  life  of  the
world  from  heaven  itself,  is  offered  as  food.
Now,  what  more  than  this  has  he  said  when
he  declared  that  he  will  offer  his  "/esfc  "  as
heavenly  food?  The  Jews  undoubtedly
show,  by  their  mutual  contest,  that  he  had
put  some  part  of  the  previous  oracle  in  a
still  more  enigmatical,  if  not  offensive,  form.
So  far  the  imagery  was  not  altogether  be-
yond them.  Here  it  takes  on  a  form  which
excites  angry  controversy.  If  they  under-
stood him  to  mean  "doctrine,"  "truth,"
"  cause,"  even  "  office,"  as  Head  of  a  spiri-
tual school — as  one  providing  by  his  gracious
will  ample  nutriment  for  all  who  would  eat  of
the  rich  banquet  of  his  words — they  would,
to  some  extent,  follow  him.  The  eating  of
the  tree  of  life  was  a  well-known  figure  in
Hebrew  Scripture  (Prov.  iv.  17 ;  ix.  5) ;  of.
the  language  of  Isaiah  (Iv.  2),  the  action  of
Ezekiel  (iii.  1 — 3),  and  the  imagery  of  Hosea
(x.  13).  In  the  '  Midrash  on  Eccl.  ii.  24 ;
iii.  12  ;  viii.  15,'  "  eating  and  drinking "  is
said  always  to  refer  to  the  Law  (Edersheim
and  Wiinsehe).  But  when  he  spoke  ol
giving  his  "flesh"  for  the  life  of  the  world,  he
passed  beyond  the  limits  of  their  interpreting
power.  They  did  not  see  through  his  imagery;
nor  did  Jesus  exactly  answer  the  angry  query
which  they  were  putting  one  to  another.
Vers.    53,    54.  —  Jesus    said    tp    them,


268


THE  GOSPEL  AOCOKBING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vi.  1-71.


7erily,  verily,  I  say  tinto  yon,  Except  ye
have  eaten  the  flesli  of  tbe  Son  of  man,  and
have  drunk  his  hlood,  ye  have  not  life  in
yonrselves.  Hethateateth  (tp<470>i',  "  eateth
with  pleasure,  eagerness,"  is  repeated  four
times,  as  perhaps  a  stronger  expression  than
(piyuv)  my  flesh  and  drinketh  my  blood,
haUi  eternal  Ufe ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at
the  last  day.  This  result,  it  should  be  seen,  is
identical  with  the  promises  made  to  "  behold-
ing," "  coming,"  "  beliemng."  Life  and  resur-
rection will  really  follow  these  acts  and
conditions;  but  then  it  Is  obvious  that
"beholding,"  "coming,"  " believing,"  must
veritably  cover  what  is  contained  in  this
last  statement.  There  is  no  mere  tautology.
These  words  express  more  fully  the  original
condition.  They  are  not  new  conditions,
nut  a  further  imaginative  exposition  of  the
former  ones.  The  believing  involves  an
assimilation  into  the  very  substance  of  the
believer's  nature  of  that  which  he  here
specifies  as  "  flesh  and  blood."  Reuss  and
Luthardt,  and  to  some  extent  Moulton,
admit  that  by  "  flesh  and  blood  "  he  means
no  more  than  "  flesh ; "  that  under  "  flesh  "
is  included  "  blood ; "  that  by  both  he  simply
means  "  himself."  Lange  urges  that  by
"flesh"  is  meant  "human  nature" — ^his
"manhood;"  but  by  "flesh  and  blood"
(see  Matt.  xvL  17;  Gal.  i.  16),  "inherited
nature  " — the  humanity  of  Christ  in  "  his-
torical manifestation."  But  he  passes  on  to
say  that  this  manifestation  culminates,  is
completed,  in  death,  and,  thus  completed,  the
life  of  Cbrist  is  the  nourishment  of  the  real
life  of  man.  Tholiick :  "  The  addition  of
alij.a  to  (TBpJ  only  expresses,  by  its  main  con-
stituents, the  sensible  human  nature."  The
great  bulk  of  interpreters  take  the  additional
mention  of  drinking  of  his  blood  to  con-
note an  entire  acceptance  of  the  atoning
sacrifice,  of  the  Paschal  blood-shedding,  to
be  effected  for  the  deliverance  of  the  world
(so  Augustine,  Luther,  Calvin,  Grotius,
Lucke,  Neander,  Keim,  Meyer,  Weiss,  etc.).
"Eating  of  the  flesh,"  then,  would  mean
acceptance  of  his  humanity,  of  the  mani-
festation of  the  eternal  love  in  the  Son  of
man;  and  "drinking  his  blood"  would
mean  entire  mental  assimilation  also  of  the
terrible  culmination  of  his  mission  in  violent,
sacrificial  death.  This  momentous  condition
of  life  eternal  is  stated  both  negatively  and
positively.  Without  the  participation  in  this
twofold  aspect  of  the  Lord  and  his  work,
there  is  no  life.  Unless  "  coming  to  him,"
"  believing  on  him,"  means  an  acceptance  of
his  humanity,  an  apprehension  of  that  Per-
sonality in  whom  the  Word  was  incarnate,
and  an  .utter  surrender  of  the  soul  to  tlie
rending  of  that  flesh  and  slieilding  of  the
bloo.l  which  is  the  life,  i.e.  to  the  death  of
the  Son  of  man,  it  is   not  the  coming  to


him  and  believing  on  him  of  which  he
has  already  spoken.  He  that  does  thus  eat
and  drink  will  satisfy  a  craving  after
nourishment  and  refreshment.  Unless  a
man  consciously  or  unconsciously  accepts,
absorbs,  the  sublime  and  wondrous  gift  of
the  Divine  humanity  from  the  second  Man,
the  Lord  from  heaven,  rather  than  from  the
first  man,  he  has  no  life  in  himself.  Human
nature  apart  from  the  new  creation  and  the
new  beginning  ii  a  dying,  not  a  living,
entity.  The  new  life  quickened  by  the
Incarnation  is  not  all  that  Christ  would
give.  The  blood  of  the  Son  of  man,  to  be
accepted  in  the  same  way,  is  a  further  ex-
position of  the  object  of  faith.  The  "eating"
and  "  drinking  "  are  therefore  phrases  which
portray  the  very  intimate  and  close  form
of  that  contact  with,  and  dependence  upon,
the  incarnation  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son
of  God,  which  Christ  erewhile  defines  in
broader,  vaguer  metaphor.  A  great  ques-
tion has  arisen  on  these  verses — whether  our
Lord  is  pointing  to,  or  making  prophetic
reference  to,  the  institution  of  the  Eucha-
rist, about  which  the  fourth  evangelist  is
strangely  silent.'  Certain  of  the  early
Fathers — Chrysostom,  Cyril,  and  Theophy-
lact — have  given  it  this  meaning,  though
the  great  bulk  of  the  patristic  writers — Ig-
natius, Ireneeus,  Origen,  Clemens  Alex.,
Tertullian,  and  even  Cyprian  (though  the
passage  may  be  applied  by  them  to  the
Eucharist  as  one  way  or  method  of  spiri-
tually eating  and  drinking  the  Son  of  man)
— do  most  obviously  interpret  the  passage
itself  of  direct  and  spiritual,  not  the  indirect
and  sacramental  manducation  of  the  living
Bread.  The  same  view  is  presented  by
Eusebius,  Athanasius,  and  Cyril  of  Alex-
andria. For  the  first  four  centuries  all  that
was  done  was  to  apply  the  argiiment  of  oh.
vi.,  in  order  to  press  the  importance  of  com-
municating sacramentally.  This  led  the
Bomanist  writers  to  go  further,  and  regard
the  participation  in  the  saoiamental  body
and  blood  as  essential  to  life  eternal.  Pope
Innocent  I.,  Bishop  of  Eome,  a.d.  402,  was
the  first  distinguished  man  who  brought  up
out  of  this  passage  "  the  necessity  of  com-
municating infants ; "  and  from  the  time  of
his  synodical  epistle  (a.d.  417)  the  Latin
Churches  interpreted  the  passage,  "  Except
yon  receive  the  Euoliaiist,  you  have  no  life  in
yon."  The  views  of  Angu.-3tine  were  vacill  it-
ing  or  are  dubious.  Pulgentius  shows  tiiat
he  had,  to  some  extent,  broken  loose  from
this  narrow  view  when  he  concluded  that
baptism  without  the  Eucharist  did  convey
all  the  benefits  of  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ.      Numerous     Schoolmen    (see    Al-

'  The  special  excursus  of  Lucke,  Lange,
and  Waterland,  on  'Eucharist,'  ch.  v.,  vi.


OH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL   ACCOUDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


269


bertinus, '  De  Euoharietia,'  lib.  i.  e.  30 ;  and
Wake,  '  Disc,  of  the  Eucharist,'  p.  20)  re-
jected the  Baoramental  interpretation,  and
the  Reformers  most  justly  repudiated  it.
Luther,  Melanothon,  Beza,  Grotius,  Owen,
Lampe,  Coooeius,  asserted  that  the  whole
construction  of  the  passage,  which  treats
"  coming,"  "  believing,"  as  the  complete
conditions  of  life  and  resurrection,  must
not  be  held  to  transform  an,  as  yet,  unin-
gtituted  ceremonial  into  the  sole  method  of
"believing."  Notwithstanding  this  wide
protest,  the  opponents  of  the  authenticity  of
the  Fourth  Gospel — Bretschneider,  Strauss,
Baur,  Thoma,  Hilgenfeld,  and  numerous
others — see  in  this  passage  the  conception  of
a  mystically  disposed  second-century  divine,
who  placed  the  Euobaristic  ceremony  in  the
lips  of  Jesus  long  before  the  institution.
But  while  this  view  can  be  without  liesita-
tion  rejected,  it  is  obvious  that  there  was
a  spiritual  participation  in  the  "  humanity  "
and  the  "sacrifice"  of  the  Son  of  God
which  Olirist  called  upon  the  Ciipernaites
to  experience — one  which  must  hnve  been
possible  to  Old  Testament  saints,  to  little
children,  to  all  who  are  acceptable  to  God
and  accepted  by  him.  Such  participation
is,  without  doubt,  aided  and  rendered  pecu-
liarly possible,  thinkable,  in  the  Eucharist.
These  words  were  timed,  therefore,  to  bear
the  rich  and  twofold  sense  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture. Observe :  (1)  The  use  of  ua/ia  rather
than  vdpi,  in  every  account  of  the  institution
of  the  Supper,  is  not  without  special  mean-
ing ;  fftSpl  and  ol/uo  meaning  the  whole  of
his  humanity,  and  the  entire  fulness  of  the
sacrifice  for  the  world  ;  while  a-ifia  real  aT/jia
suggest  that  organized  personal  life  in
which  the  Incarnation  culminated,  and  the
blood  which  was  shed  for  the  remission  of
Bins.  The  crUiia  is  not  without  reference  to
the  new  "body"  in  which  the  spirit  would
be  ultimately  enshrined.  (2)  The  phrase,
"  drinking  of  the  blood,"  is  peculiar  to  these
verses.  In  the  Eucharist  we  "  drink  of  the
cup  which  is  the  new  covenant  in  the  blood
of  Christ."  "  The  hand  of  history,"  says
Edersheim,  "has  drawn  out  the  telescope;
and,  as  we  gaze  through  it,  eveiy  sentence
and  word  slieds  light  upon  the  cross,  and
light  from  the  cross  carrying  to  us  the  two-
fold meaning — his  death  and  its  celebration
in  th»  groat  Christian  sacrament."

Ver.  55. — A  new  justification  is  given  for
this  great  statement :  For  my  flesh  is  true  '
food,  and  my  blood  is  true '  drink.  (The  two
active  verbals  are  adopted, "  eating,"  "  drink.

'  Tregelles,  Tisehendorf  (8th  edit),  West-
eott  and  Hort,  E.T.,  read  dKriBiis  instead  of
4\7jflSs  of  T.R.,  on  the  authority  of  X",  B,  0,
F%  K,  T.,  and  thirty  other  versions  and  quo-
tations.   'AXridws  is  one  of  the  readings  of  X.


ing;"  but  Ppairis  and  m6ats  are  used  vpi^
frequently  by  the  Attic  writers  for  "  food  "
and  "drink,"  as  well  as  for  the  processes
of  eating  and  drinking.)  That  is,  Christ's
flesh  and  blood  stand  in  the  same  relation
to  the  true  life  of  man  that  food  and  drink
do  to  the  physical  life  of  earth;  and  so,
unless  we  duly  and  fuUy  assimilate  Divine
humanity,  we  have  no  life  in  us.  If  we
cannot  assimilate  food,  we  die.  It  must
become  part  of  our  life-blood  and  permeate
our  system ;  so  "  the  coming  and  believing  "
must  mean  such  an  acceptance  of  the  Christ
that  the  love  of  God  penetrates  our  whole
being,  "  even  the  joints  and  marrow  of  soul
and  spirit ;  "  unless  it  does  so,  we  have  no  life
in  us.  Lange,  even  here,  presses  the  idea  of
the  flesh  and  blood  of  Obiist  as  being  true
food,  seeing  that  by  helieving  historie  con-
templation we  participate  in  the  "historic
form  of  his  manifestation,"  and  by  tpiritual
contemplation  and  fervent  faith  we  drink  in
the  blood  which  is  the  life.  The  difference
between  <iA.i)fl^s  and  d\riSas  is  nearly  that
between  dArjfl-ijs  and  a\n6lvos.  The  former
is  the  antithesis  of  the  merely  apparent
food ;  the  latter  would  have  meant  genuine
food  answering  to  the  ideal  of  food.  "  The
true  food  "  is  the  food  for  the  inner  man —
food  in  all  reality.  The  Lord  was  speaking
to  them  of  a  unique  relation  which  he  sus-
tained to  the  human  race,  and  which  cannot
be  explained  away  into  some  mere  euphem-
ism for  the  blessedness  and  stimulating
character  of  the  gospel  message.  This  is
made  still  more  evident  by  his  next  words —
Ver.  56. — He  that  eateth  my  flesh  and
drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I
(dwell)  in  him.  This  mutual  indwelling  is
illustrated  elsewhere  (ch.  xv.  1 — 5)  by  the
image  of  the  vine  and  its  branches.  The
vine  abides  in  the  branch  in  the  virtue  of
its  life-giving  forces.  Cut  away,  from  the
parent  stem,  it  can  do  nothing.  Pruitlessness
condemns  and  fire  consumes  it.  The  braneh
ahides  in  the  vine,  as  deriving  all  its  worth,
its  true  place,  its  possibility  of  growth  and
fruit,  from  the  vine  (cf.  also  oh.  xvii.  23  ;
1  John  iii.  24;  iv.  16).  The  dwelUng  of
the-believer  in  Christ  involves  an  utter  self-
surrender  to  him,  a  recognition  of  the
supreme  claims  of  the  God-Man  and  his
work,  a  complete  trust  in  him  as  the  Source
of  all  life,  a  sound  and  abiding  place  of
rest,  a  justification  before  God  as  one  with
Christ,  as  one  identified  with  him  in  his
well-pleasing  to  the  Father.  The  dwelling
of  Christ  in  the  believer  is  the  fulness  and
riches  of  the  Divine  life.  Christ  liveth  in
him  (Gal.  ii.  20),  thinks  in  his  thoughts,
moves  through  his  will.  This  is  sanctifica-
tton.  The  believer  is  in  Christ  as  the
members  are  in  the  body.  Christ  is  in  the
believer  as  God  is  in  his  temple.    What  ia


270


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  n.  1—71.


fhe  condition  of  this  mntual  indweUing?
Christ  puts  the  condition  of  this  Divine  in-
terpretation thus :  "  He  that  eateth  my  flesh
and  drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and
I  in  him." '  The  verb  is  in  the  present
tense,  implying  the  continuous  appropriation
of  the  Divine  sustenance.

Ver.  57. — Here  is  the  grandest  assertion
of  all.  Christ  began  by  spealiing  of  himself
as  the  Bread  of  God,  as  the  life-giving  Bread,
as  the  living  Bread  of  human  souls.  He
made  it  then  clear  that  he  was  this  by
reason  of  his  Divine  humanity  given  for  the
life  of  the  world.  He  added  to  this  that  he
was  specially  to  be  appropriated  and  ac-
cepted as  a  sacrifice,  as  the  death-sacrifice,
involved  in  his  giving  his  flesh  for  the  life  of
the  world.  The  power  conferred  by  his  death
in  life  and  life  in  death  for  man,  enabled  him
to  institute  eternal  life-giving  relations  be-
tween himself  and  those  who  entirely  accept
and  make  their  own  this  central  reality.
And  now,  to  meet  the  nascent  objection  as
to  the  unique  grandeur  of  his  position,  he
adds:  As  the  living  Father  sent  me.  The
phrase,  "living  Father,"  occurs  nowhere
else  (cf.  "righteous  Father,"  ch.  xvii.  25;
"holy  Father,"  ch.  xvii.  11;  "the  living
God,"  Matt.  xvi.  16;  2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Heb.
X.  31;  and  above  all,  ch.  v.  26,  "As  the
Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  be  gave  also
to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself").  Christ
is  speaking  of  the  human  position  he
assumed  before  them  as  sent  by  the  Father
who  has  life  in  himself,  who  is  more  than
all  his  laws  or  all  his  works.  Not  merely
as  the  Word,  but  as  the  Word  of  the  living
Father  made  flesh,  he  stands  before  them.
And  I  live  because  of  the  Father.  "  Because
he  lives,  I  live ;  my  life  is  guaranteed  by
his."  This  is  the  premiss,  the  platform  on
which  he  now  stands  (SiA  rhv  narepo  must
not  be  confounded  with  per  Patremi  or  Sick
ToC  Udrpos,  as  M'Leod  Campbell,  who,  in  his
interesting  discussion  on  "  Christ  the  Bjead
of  Life,"  made  this  expression  equivalent  to
the  means  and  condition  of  the  Saviour's
life).  From  this  premiss  the  Lord  argues  a
corresponding  relation  of  the  believer  to  him-
self:  So  he  that  eateth  me,  he  also  shall  live
because  of  me.  The  points  of  comparison
are :  (1)  The  Father's  life-impartinp;  relation
to  Christ,  and  Christ's  life-imparting  rela-
tion to  the  believer.  In  both  cases  the  life
of  one  is  the  guarantee  of  the  life  of  the
other.  (2)  The  sending  of  Christ  by  the
Father,  correlated  with  the  eating  of  Christ
by  the  believer.    (3)  The  peculiar  relation

'  D  here  adds,  Kaflis  iv  l/uol  6  Uariip  Kiyi)
Iv  rtf  UdrfH.  'A/t^i'  afii/v  \iya  I'/uv,  iii'  |i^
XajS-^Te  T^  ffujua  rov  &pBpwirov  &>5  rhv  &prov
TTJs  Co)^»  oiK  ^x*''*  f^V  ^''  avT^.  There
ue  lome  Latin  versions  which  retrain  it


of  the  believer  to  Christ.  "  He  that  eateth
me  "  gathers  up  and  really  comprehends  all
that  has  gone  before.  It  is,  then,  possible
for  the  believer  not  only  to  share  in  the
Divine  humanity  by  his  faith,  and  also  in
the  fulness  and  significance  of  his  (blood)
death,  but  to  have  full  possession  of  his
Divine  •personality.  "  He  that  eateth  me
shall  live  because  of  me"  (cf.  "Because  I
live,  ye  shall  live  also,"  oh.  xiv.  19).  This
is  the  vindication  of  the  previous  verse,  and
the  climax  of  the  argument.

Ver.  58. — Here  the  Lord  returns  once
more  to  the  starting-point  of  the  discourse.
This  is  the  bread  tiiat  came  down  from
heaven  (cf.  vers.  50,  51).  Already  he  had
said,  "I  am  the  living  Bread  that  came
down  from  heaven,"  and  he  has  expanded
the  statement  to  show  how  much  was  con-
tained or  involved  in  eating  it.  He  has,
moreover,  emphasized  the  two  sides  of  his
offer  of  himself  to  the  world,  and  shown  how
the  twofold  reception  af  both  sides  becomes  a
thorough  acceptance  of  himself,  and  a  two-
fold iden  tlfication  of  himself  with  his  people.
He  forthwith  returns  to  the  original  state-
ment, and  to  its  implied  contrast  witli  that
which  these  sign-loving  Jews  had  demanded.
Not  as  (i/our')  fathers  ate,  and  died:  he  that
eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for  ever.  Tliis
is  a  strong  reassertion  of  the  language  of
vers.  49 — 51.  Life  itself  in  its  highest  sense
shall  be  independent  of  death,  and  will
triumph  over  it.

Ver.  59. —These  things — probably  refer-
ring to  the  discourse  which  followed  upon  the
contest  and  discussion  of  the  Jews  among
themselves  (vers.  52 — 58),  or  it  may  include
the  entire  discussion  from  ver.  40  onwards —
he  said  in  synagogue  (or,  in  a  synagogue),
as  he  was  teaching  in  Capernaum.  Caper-
naum is  thus  distinctly  verifled  as  the  place
whither  the  multitudes  had  followed  him.
It  was,  as  we  learn  from  the  synoptists,  his
second  and  habitual  home  in  Galilee.  In
Warren's  'Eecovery  of  Jerusalem,'  p.  344,
a  description  of  Tell-Eum  and  of  its  ruins
occurs,  and  amongst  them  the  remains  of  an
ancient  synagogue.  "On  turning  over  a
large  block  of  stone,"  says  Wilson,  "we
found  the  pot  of  manna  engraved  on  its
face."  "  This  very  symbol  may  have  been
before  the  eyes  of  those  who  heard  the
Lord's  words"  (Westoott).  This  note  of
time  and  place  is  important,  as  showing  that
thus  early  in  his  ministry  oui  Lord  pro-

'  T.E.  and  Lachmann,  the  later  uncials
D,  A,  etc.,  and  the  Italic  Version,  Vulgate,
and  Syriac,  read,  vjuuv  rh  iiAvva,  (Nonnus
added  iv  rp  IpV^) ;  but  K,  B,  0,  D,  L,  T,
83,  Coptic,  Curetonian  Syriac,  JEthiopio,
omit  it,  and  so  Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.),  Meyer,  Westoott  and  Hort,  and  B-T.


CH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  81.  JOHN.


271


claimed  in  Galilee,  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem,
the  deepest  things  of  his  own  consciousness
and  intentions ;  tliat  the  teaching  in  Galilee
was  not,  as  Benan  would  have  us  apprehend,
nothing  more  than  an  idyllic  progress  of
personal  popularity  and  rapturous  hosanna.
The  Lord  knew  that  lie  must  offend  tliose
who  would  by  force  constrain  him  to  be
their  Messianic  King,  and  mode  it  by  this
discourse  clear  that  spiritual  communion
with  his  inner  life,  as  a  Divine,  Heaven-sent
Representative,  as  One  suffering  and  dying
for  the  world,  was  the  only  and  supremo
condition  of  deriving  and  sharing  in  his
own  supernatural  and  eternal  life.

The  effect  of  this  discourse  and  the  crisis
that  followed  in  his  public  ministry  is  now
described.  The  words  of  Jesus  led  to  deeper
faith  and  to  a  more  determined  antagonism.
"The  light  shone  into  the  darkness,  and
the  daikness  comprehended  it  not."  "He
came  to  bis  own,  and  his  own  received  him
not;  but  to  as  many  as  received,  lie  gave
power  to  become  sons  of  God."

Vers.  60—71 — (4)  Tfte  twofold  effect  of
these  instructions.

Vers.  60 — 66. — (a)  The  unbelief  of  some,
which  led  him  lo  predict  the  ascension  of  Ms
humanity  to  where  he  was  before.

Ver.  60. — Many  therefore  of  his  disciples.
This  word  is  used  in  a  wider  sense  than  of
the  twelve.  The  synoptists  tell  us  of  much
labour  already  done  in  this  neighbourhood,
and  a  considerable  harvest  of  souls  reaped,
so  far  as  a  general  acknowledgment  of  his
claims  and  an  expectation  that  he  was  the
Messiah  was  involved :  When  they  heard  it
(i.e.  the  entire  instruction  given  in  open
synagogue),  said.  This  is  a  hard  saying
^\6yos  cannot  or  need  not  be  confined  to
any  one  of  these  fiiinaTu,  but  may  easily
embrace  them  all).  The  discourse  was
(rxAi7p(ir,  Ijarsh,  the  opposite  of  iidKaK6s,  a
word  used  by  the  unprofitable  servant  of  his
master  (Matt.  xxv.  24).  It  does  not  mean
"hard  to  be  understood,"  but  difficult  to
accept  or  be  content  with.  Luthardt  here
reiterates  his  conviction  that  there  is  no
reference  in  it  to  the  death  of  Christ,  and
that  the  disciples  were  simply  unwilling  to
accept  the  idea  of  his  supreme  claims  and
Ids  constant  return  to  the  eating  and
drinking  of  his  flesh  and  blood  and  identifi-
cation of  this  eternal  life  with  participation
in  his  corporality.  But  surely  Meyer  and
Westcott,  etc.,  are  far  nearer  to  the  truth
in  referring  the  expression  to  tlieir  un-
willingness to  accept  the  bloody  death  of
their  Messiah,  or  to  entrust  themselves  to  a
Divine  Personality  whose  most  distinctive
act  wonld  be  bia  sacrifice.    This  was  the


gross  and  terrible  offence  which  made  the
cross  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jew  (see  ch.
xii.  34 ;  1  Cor.  i.  23  ;  Gal.  v.  11  ;  Matt.  xvi.
21,  etc.).  Who  is  able  to  listen  to  himi
This  seems  not  only  to  be  the  possible,  but
most  probable,  translation  of  the  genitive
with  aKoim.  It  was  the  language,  not  of
"  the  Jews,"  but  of  "  the  disciples."

Ver.  61. — But  Jesus,  knowing  in  himself —
not  necessarily  by  supernatural  penetration,
for  many  signs  of  impatience  may  have  been
manifested — that  his  disciples  murmured
(see  ver.  41,  ni)te)r  oonoerning  this  hard
argument,  said'  unto  them,  Soth  this  cause
you  to  stumble  'i  (see  note  on  ch.  xvi.  1).

Ver.  62. — If  it  does  put  difficulties  in
your  way,  then  how  will  it  be  if  you  behold
the  Son  of  man  ascending  up  to  where  he
was  before?  This  unfinished  and  ambiguous
sentence  and  query  have  been  variously
interpreted.  Some  have  argued  that  our
Lord  here  simpl  y  refers  to  the  "  resurrection ; "
that  he  told  his  hearers  they  would  have
an  opportunity  of  observing  that,  after  death,
he  would  return  to  where  he  was  before,
that  is,  to  the  conditions  of  earthly  life.  The
striking  antithesis  between  "  descending
from  "  and  "  aseemling"  almost  compels  the
repudiation  of  this  view.  Did  Christ,  how-
ever, mean  to  ask  them  whether,  under  the
new  condition  of  things,  all  ground  of
offence  would  not  be  taken  away?  or  to
imply  that  their  faith  wouW  have  to  be  put
to  a  still  greater  strain,  and  that  they  would
stumble  at  length  irretrievably?  Liicke,
De  Wette,  Kuinoel,  Meyer,  chiefly  urge  the
latter,  and  on  the  ground  :  (1)  That  in  John's
Gospel  the  death  of  Christ  is  always  looked
at  as  his  real  glorification,  and  that  therefore
by  avaBaiveiv  be  was  referring  in  his
euphemistic  fashion  to  his  death  in  the  true
Johannine  phrase  as  a  going  to  God  (of.  ch.
xiii.  3,  a  return  to  the  Father ;  xiv. ;  xvi.  5,
28).  (2)  That  John  does  not  describe  the
Ascension  as  a  physical  fact.  Meyer  does
not  allow  that  ch.  iii.  13  and  xx.  17  are
sufficient  with  this  phrase  to  justify  sunli  a
reference  to  the  great  event  referred  to  by
Mark,  Luke,  and  Paul,  and  the  author  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Against  Meyer
and  those  who  agree  with  him  it  should  be
noticed  that  avaBaheiv  is  never  used  for
"  death  "  of  Christ.  Tlie  phrases,  uirdyfiv  rf
ndrpi  and  e\Beti>,  etc.,  are  used  for  this
purpose.  Moreover,  when  a  phrase  was
wanted  to  denote  the  twofold  idea  of  up-
lifting on  the  cross  and  ascension  to  the
skies,  v\li!i9-liiiai  is  the  word  twice  used  in
the  Fourth  Gospel  (ch.  ill.  14;  xii.  32—
34).  Moreover,  if  death  could  be  realized
as  such  a  eeapeiv  of  glory  and  fulness  of  life,
the  offence  of  the  cross,  and  scandal  of
participation  in  and  dependence  upon  the
flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  would  be  reduced


872


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [ch.  vi.  1—71.


and  not  angmented.  To  Meyer's  objection
that  these  Galilscan  disciples  would  not  sec
the  ascending  Christ,  and  therefore  the
supposition  would  be  tantalizing,  it  is  sufS-
cient  to  reply  (1)  that,  in  a  similar  sense,
there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  they  would
see  the  Lord  suffer  and  die  upon  the  cross ;
(2)  that,  as  Christ  Jesus  was  evidently  "  set
forth  as  crucified "  among  the  Galatians
(iii.  1),  so  these  Galilsean  disciples,  through
the  vision  of  tlie  apostles,  would  verily  see
the  Son  of  man  suffer,  die,  and  ascend.
Apart  also  from  the  inappropriateness  of  the
word  Avafiaiyfiv  to  convey  the  subtle  thought
of  the  transfiguration  of  death  as  such,
there  was  not,  apart  from  resurrection  and
ascension  to  glory^-which  is  the  additional
matter  to  which  our  Lord  referred — any
justification  of  the  phrase,  wliereas  it
coincides  decidedly  with  the  expressions
used  of  the  pre-existing  glory  of  the  great
Personality  who,  though  calling  himself
"  Son  of  man,"  yet  consciously  refers  to  his
existence  before  the  world  was  (cf.  ch.  viii.
58;  xvii.  5,  24;  Col.  i.  17).  Again,  the
aiia^aipeiv  of  these  words  stands  in  imposing
antithesis  to  the  repeated  use  of  KaTa^alveiv
of  the  previous  discourse.  He  had  been  sent
"  from  heaven,"  "  sent  by  the  living  Fatlier,"
he  had  "  come  down  from  lieaven,"  "  to  give
himself  and  his  flesh  for  the  life  of  the
world,"  and  he  now  leads  his  disciples  to
suspend  their  murmuring  at  the  form  of  hia
discourse.  They  may  behold  and  see  a
greater  marvel  yet,  such  a  losing  of  his
humanity  in  God  and  glcry,  that  they  will
be  able  to  appreliend  more  fully  what  he
means  by  eating  his  ilesh  and  drinking  his
blood.  Of  course,  there  might  be  some  who
are  so  entirely  obtuse  to  the  conception  of
this  close  identification  with  him  during  the
time  of  his  manifestation  in  the  flesh,  that
they  will  be  still  more  powerless  to  receive
the  spiritual  interpretation  when,  for  believing
minds,  the  idea  would  become  clear.  John
recorded  this  discourse  a  generation  after
the  mighty  effects  of  the  ResuiTeotion  and
Ascension  had  been  produced.  We  know
that  long  before  he  presented  these  outlines
the  ideas  presented  in  it  had  been  widely
diffused.  St.  Paul  had  spoken  of  Christ  as
"  the  second  Man  from  heaven,"  as  invested
and  clothed  in  a  "spiritual  body,"  as  "  the
last  Adam,"  as  "  a  life-giving  Spirit,"  and
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  had  represented
him  as  "  having  passed  through  the  heavens  "
that  he  miglit  fill  all  things.  Whence  came
such  august  ideas  about  the  Man  Jesus,  if
not  from  himself?  The  offence  o(  the  cross
has  never  ceased,  and  Athenians  and  many
since  have  mocked  at  the  story  of  the
Resurrection  and  Ascension;  but  notwith-
standing this,  there  is  an  ever-increatting
multitude  who  fiom  the  day  of  hia  ascension


till  now  have  been  finally  convinced.  They
have  understood,  as  they  would  never  have
done  without  such  help,  that  it  was  possible,
since  he  had  passed  through  these  heavens
that  he  might  fill  all  things,  to  hold  the
most  entire  and  intimate  communion  with
him,  both  as  the  God-Man  and  as  the
Paschal  Lamb.  Moreover,  the  prince  of
this  world  has  been  cast  out  and  judged
because  Christ  has  gone  to  the  Father.  He
has  been  lifted  up,  and  is  drawing  all  men
to  himself.  When  the  Son  of  man  in  the
continuity  of  his  Person  shall  be  beheld  as
ascending  into  the  glory  from  which  he  in
his  Divine  nature  descended,  then  those  who
stumbled  at  the  idea  of  intimate  life-giving
participation  in  himself  will  "come  to  see
that  the  words  can  only  be  understood
spiritually"  (Moulton).  The  ascension  of
the  humanity  to  the  life  and  glory  of  the
pre-existent  Deity  of  the  Son  of  God  was  a
conception  firmly  grasped  by  St.  Paul  (Eph.
iv.  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  0 — 9).  and  must  have  been
based  on  the  Lord's  own  words.  It  is  only
by  the  exaltation  of  the  man  into  God  that
we  are  able  to  participate  in  the  Divine
humanity.  Weiss,  unfortunately,  cannot
believe  that  there  was  any  reference  to
the  visible  ascent  to  heaven,  but  simply  to
the  termination  of  his  earthly  labours.  The
question,  then,  of  ver.  62  is  left  to  find  its
own  answer  and  to  give  its  own  sugges-
tion. But  the  interpretation  here  offered  is
strongly  confirmed  by —

Ver.  63. — It  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth
(the  ri,  though  omitted  byN*,  is  retained  by
all  the  principal  editors);  the  flesh  profiteth
nothing ;  i.e.  the  "  flesh  "  taken  by  itself,  and
apart  from  the  life-giving  Spirit  which  is  its
principium.  The  antithesis  between  "  flesh"
and  "spirit"  occurs  frequently  in  the
Gospel,  and  is  one  of  the  great  points  of
Pauline  doctrine.  The  Lord  does  not  intro-
duce the  pronoun  /xov  to  -rh  nvivna  or  ri
ffipl,.  The  statement  is  generalized,  though
having  special  reference  to  himself,  or  to  the
spirit  and  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  "  Flesh,"
in  neither  St.  Paul  nor  St.  John,  means  the
sensuous  nature  as  opposed  to  the  intel-
lectual nature ;  nor  does  it  mean  the  "  body  "
as  antithetic  to  the  "  soul " — the  organized
material  frame,  to  which  the  Jews  were
attributing  so  much  and  felt  to  be  the
guarautee  and  seal  of  his  spiritual  efficiency
(Meyer) — but  the  "  creaturely  nature,"  the
"  humanity  "  per  «e  in  all  its  parts.  "  That
which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  that  which
is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  Christ  gud
his  humanity  was  fashioned  by  the  Spirit,
and  the  Spirit  dwelt  upon  him  with  im-
measurable potence.  "The  Logos  became
flesh,"  but  that  flesh  itself  was  so  ordered
and  prepared  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  that  it
should  sustain    this    lofty  oompanioiuiMp,


OH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOfiDlNG  TO  ST.  JOHN


273


Gmst's  own  flesh,  his  nature,  his  humanity
per  te,  and  apart  from  the  fulness  of  the
Spirit,  profiteth  notiiing.  Ttie  mere  liuman
lite,  however  spotless  and  ideal,  could  not
be  "  eaten,"  t'.e.  could  not  be  assimilated,
though  to  some  extent  it  might  be  imilated ;
but  imitation  is  not  faith.  The  "  glory  "
that  the  apostles  saw  "of  the  Only  Begotten
of  the  Father,  the  fulness  of  grace  and
truth,"  in  and  througli  that  wondrous  life  of
Christ,  was  the  glory  given  to  his  humanity
by  the  creative  Spirit.  Apart  from  this
consideration,  a  manducation  of  liis  flesh,
even  were  it  physically  possible,  was  useless.
It  was  not  possible  to  participate  in  his
humanity  save  through  the  Holy  Spirit
which  generated  him  and  regenerates  us.
The  sentence  doubtless  points  back  to  the
original  constitution  of  man,  the  specialty
of  whose  life  is  that  it  was  inbreathed  by
the  Lord  God  himself.  The  use  of  the  say-
ing here  was  to  make  it  still  more  clear  that
he  gave  his  flesh  to  eat,  not  through  any
physical  process,  not  through  any  sacramen-
tal rite,  but  through  the  Spirit  to  our  spirit.
Mr.  Sadler,  who  takes  the  strong  sacramental
view  of  the  entire  passage,  says,  however,
wisely  and  forcibly  here,  "  Even  flesh  cannot
be  given  to  a  corpse."  We  receive  the  gift,
we  know  the  love  of  God,  whether  saoramen-
tally  or  not,  through  the  Spirit.  Christ  does
not  deny  or  retract  the  statement,  "  Except
ye  eat  the  flesh,"  etc.  He  simply  shows  in
what  sense  he  meant  the  whole  mutual  in-
dwelling of  Mmaelf  and  Mb  people  to  te
understood.  The  Spirit  is  the  Quickener,
The  Spirit  is  the  life-fashioning,  life-pre-
serving Energy.  The  flesh,  the  human
manifestation,  apart  from  the  Spirit  which
makes  that  human  life  the  centre  of  Divine
effluence,  the  focus  for  its  Divine  energy,  pro-
fiteth  nothing.  Some  have  taken  these  words
(like  Chrysostom)  as  a  contrast  between  a
spiritual  and  literal  interpretation  of  Christ's
words.  Luther  and  many  Lutherans  have
urged  the  contrast  between  a  right  celebra-
tion and  a  merely  material  use  of  the  sacra-
ment. So  more  or  less  Augustine  and
Olsliausen.  Canon  Westcott  seems  to  limit
the  original  meaning  of  "flesh"  and
"  spirit,"  the  one  to  tiie  visible,  temporal,
corporeal  only,  and  the  other  to  the  unseen
eternal  order  of  things,  and  he  does  not
give  to  "flesh"  here  the  fulness  of  mean-
ing which  it  bears  in  the  New  Testament;
but  he  says  that  this  utterance  is  not  limited
to  either  of  the  views  just  referred  to,
though  it  may  include  them.  Archdeacon
WatWns  remarlcB,  "They  think  of  a  physical
eating  of  his  flesh,  and  this  offends  them ;
but  what  if  they,  who  have  thought  of  bread
descending  from  heaven,  see  his  body  ascend-
ing into  heaven  ?  They  will  know  tlien  he
cannot  have  meant  this.  The  descent  of  the
JOHK


Spirit  will  follow  the  ascent  of  the  Son."
The  words  that  I  have  spoken  *  onto  yon  are
spirit  and  are  life.  The  words  which  I  have
now  uttered,  these  teachings  of  mine  con-
cerning myself,  are  (not  merely  "  spiritual "
or  "life-giving," but) «ptn7  and  life,  i.e.  the
way  and  method  in  which  the  Spirit  can  con-
vey to  you  the  life  eternal.  The  words
which  r  have  spoken  at  all  times  have  been
the  eflfulgenoe  of  my  glory,  the  efSuence  of
my  Spirit.  The  seed  of  the  kingdom  is  the
Word  of  God.  The  contact  of  the  Divine
Spirit  with  the  human  spirit  is  not  through
teeth  and  palate,  but  through  mental  and
m(»al  processes.  "  Thou  hast  the  wordt  of
eternal  life,"  said  Peter  (ver.  68).  Christ
thus  works  his  way  back  again  to  the  lecep-
tivity  of  the  mind  and  heart  of  his  disciples.
Believing  is  not  only  "coming,"  but,  as  he
has  before  implied,  it  is  the  identical  process
which  he  has  called  "  eating  his  flesh  and
driuking  his  blood."  Christ's  words  are  the
ministry  of  himself,  because  the  chief
method  of  communicating  his  life-giving
Spirit,  In  ch.  xv.  4,  7  the  Lord  used  both
expressions,  "1"  and  "  my  words,"  in  iden-
tical relations:  "Abide  in  me,  and  I  in
you ; "  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words
abide  in  you,"  etc.

Ver.  64.— But,  be  adds,  there  are  some  of
yon  that  believe  not.  "  Some,"  not  many,
who  were  following  him  yet  felt  that  they
could  not  trust — could  not  accept  his
greatest  revelations,  these  Divine  assump-
tions, this  spiritual  position  of  his.  The
Divine  humanity,  the  offered  life,  the  cruel
death,  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  victory  over
death,  the  return  to  the  Father,  when  put
into  words  or  when  taught  in  metaphors
even,  were  grounds  of  offence.  The  evange-
list adds :  For  (the  ydp  introduces  the  ex-
planatory clause  of  the  disciple  who  testified
of  these  things)  Jesus  knew  (knew  abso-
lutely, rather  than  came  to  know)  from  the
beginning — referring  to  the  commencement
of  his  public  ministry,  when  men  began  to
close  round  him  (oh.  i.  43, 48 ;  ii.  24),  not  from
the  beginning  of  time,  or  the  beginning  of
their  unbelief  (Kling);  he  knew  by  his
Divine  penetration  into  their  character,  by
their  manner  and  spirit,  and  the  nakedness
and  openness  of  all  hearts  before  him — who
they  were  that  believed  not,  and  who  it  wai
that  should  betray  him.  Westcott  here  re-
minds us  that  the  first  indication  of  the  sin
of  Judas  occurs  in  close  association  with

'  Ae\AKriica,  with  N,  B,  C,  D,  K,  L,  and
many  other  uncials,  numerous  versions,  and
quotations,  and  adopted  by  Tregelles,  Mwer,
Tischendorf  (bth  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort,
B.T.,  etc.,  instead  of  \a\u  of  T.B.,  which
rests  on  slender  authority.  Godet  preferi
it,  however,


274


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  tO  ST.  JOHN.      [ch.  vi.  1—71,


preJiotionB  of  the  approachiDg  Passion.
This  foreknowledge  of  issues  is  no  inter-
ference with  free  self-ooniiciousness  in  itself.
It  may  imply  that  the  natures  thus  known
contained  in  themselves  the  seeds  of  the
future  growth.  He  knew  what  would  be,
but  he  did  not  compel  it.  There  was  pos-
sibly some  fresh  manifestation  of  feeling,  of
failuig  sympathy,  even  of  enmity,  which  led
the  evangelist  to  notice  the  manner  and
interpret  the  mind  of  the  Lord.

Ver.  65. — ^And  he  said,  For  this  cause  have
1  said  unto  you,  that  no  man  can  come  nnto
me,  except  it  were  given  unto  him  of  the
Father  (jjlov  is  omitted  by  B.T.  and  Tischen-
dorf  (8th  edit.) ;  the  authorities  seem  here
more  equally  divided);  see  notes  on  vers.
37  and  44.  Christ  has  come  completely
round  to  the  fundamental  principles  with
which  he  started.  The  coming  to  him,  the
believing  on  him,  the  spiritual  apprehension
of  his  Divine  humanity,  the  adoring  accept-
ance of  his  precious  blood,  the  reception  of
the  spiritual  life-giving  energy  which  went
forth  from  him  in  word,  depended  on  the
Father's  "  drawing  " — on  those  fundamental
characteristics  of  appetite  and  capacity  to
receive  the  grace  of  Christ  which  are  sub-
jective and  are  referrible  to  the  Father's
good  pleasure.  Christ  does  not  give  the
hunger,  but  the  bread.  From  the  beginning
he  saw  the  presence  of  the  appetite  after
that  which  he  came  to  bestow.  Sometimes
a  morbid  absence  of  all  hunger,  a  moribund
cessation  of  thirst,  may  be  and  is  transformed
into  passionate  and  life-saving  eagerness  by
the  sight  of  food.  The  Father  gives  both
the  hunger  and  the  food,  the  sense  of  need
and  the  heavenly  supply.  The  love  of  God,
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  is  the
drawing  of  the  Father  through  the  Son  to
himself.  The  drawing  of  the  Father  is  the
giving  of  souls  to  the  Son.  A  fresh  thought
is  here  added.  This  drawing,  thus  inter-
preted, is  God's  gift  also  to  the  human  soul.
The  question  arises — If  the  Lord  knew,  why
did  he  choose  the  traitor,  or  call  Judas  into
the  innermost  circle  (see  ver.  71)?

Ver.  66. — Upon  this  (Ik  toutou;  cf.  i^' ou,
equivalent  to  qua  propter).  Not  "  from  that
time  forwards,"  not  a  gradual  thinning
down  or  departure  of  some  disciples,  one
to-day  and  another  to-morrow,  but  a  kind  of
rush  and  stampede  took  place.  Those  who
a  few  hours  before  were  ready  to  call  him
their  Messianic  King,  were  entirely  disen-
chanted. The  claims  of  Christ  were  so  pro-
foundly different  from  what  they  anticipated
that  upon  this  many  of  his  disciples  went
back,  and  walked  no  more  with  Imu.  The
fascination  those  felt  who  had  seen  some  of
the  excellences  of  Jesus  led  them  to  put
themselves  at  his  disposal,  to  wait  upon  him,
to  desert  their  ordinary  occupations.    Hence


part  of  the  phraseology  of  redemption  was
derived  from  the  method  of  Christ.  Men
"  came  "  to  him ;  they  "  followed  "  him ;  they
"  walked  "  with  him ;  they  could  "go  hack,"
desert,  forsake  their  Lord.  These  actions  of
his  first  disciples  have  created  the  vocabulary
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Christ's  teaching
tested  as  well  as  attracted  men.  There  was
a  repellent  force  as  well  as  an  infinite  fasci-
nation. He  sifted  as  well  as  saved.  The
very  deeds  and  words  that  broke  some  hearts
into  penitence  roused  impatient  and  angry
remonstrance  in  others.  There  is  seen  in  this
Gospel  a  continual  departure  and  a  deepen-
ing faith.

Vers.  67 — ^71. — (ft)  The  loyalty  of  ffietuielve,
with  a  note  of  prophetic  warning.

Ver.  67. — Jesus  therefore  said  nnto  the
twelve.  He  spake  to  them  because  of  the
wide  defection  from  his  ranks.  "  The
twelve "  have  never  been  mentioned  before
in  the  Gospel,  but  this  passing  reference
reveals  acquaintance  with  the  fact  on  the
part  of  the  evangelist.  He  assumes  the
historic  number  as  perfectly  explicable  to
his  readers.  The  reference  to  the  twelve
baskets  in  ver.  13  almost  presupposes  that
there  were  the  same  number  of  disciples,
and  this  pathetic  appeal  is  in  harmony  with
the  synoptic  account  of  their  "  call."  Would
ye  also  go  awayl  mii  e4\ere  suggests  a
negative  answer,  "Te  cannot  wish,  cam
you  ?"  (Meyer).  Godet  says,  on  the  contrary,
"  If  you  wish,  you  can  I "  Westcott,  "  The
form  of  the  question  impLes  that  such  deser-
tion is  incredible,  and  yet  to  be  feared"  (cf.
ch.  vii.  47,  52 ;  xviii.  17,  25).  The  question
is  far  from  identical  with  that  query  which
once  more  the  Lord  put  to  the  twelve,  after
many  subsequent  months  of  varied  activity
and  critical  discourse,  which  showed  how
Jesus  had  at  length  broken  with  the  narrow
1  iteralism  of  Judaic  privilege.  On  that  occa-
sion he  was  summing  up  the  varied  convic-
tions produced  upon  the  Galilsean  multi-
tudes, and  he  asked, "  But  whom  say  ye  that
I  am  i' "  Here  he  is  simply  suggesting  the
posBibility,but  yet  the  incredibility,  of  his  de-
sertion by  the  twelve  apostles,  merely  because
he  had  afiSrmed  the  spiritual  aims  of  his
entire  mission,  and  had  made  an  unreserved
offer  of  his  Divine  humanity  to  their  need.
The  pathos  of  this  inquiry  shows  how
serious  a  crisis  was  being  enacted.  It  has
reference  in  its  issues  rather  to  himself  than
to  the  twelve.  The  critical  school  -see  in
this  verse  the  Johannine  treatment  of  the
great  apostolic  confessitm,  and  Weiss  here
agrees  with  it.  Even  Godet  thinks  that  two
such  questionB  with  their  answers,  under
comparatively  similar  conditions,  are  im-
probable. He  suggests  that  the  ^k  toiItou
(ver.  66)  points  to  a  great  scatterhig,  and  that
months  may  have  elapsed  before  the  scene


OH,  VL  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,


275


\rhioh  John  here  condenses.  It  is  more  likely
that  John  omits  the  later  scene,  and  prefers
to  give  this,  which  stands  closely  related
with  the  immediate  circumstances  (cf.  also
Luke  ix.).  The  context  and  surrounding  of
tlie  scene  in  Matt.  xvi.  13 — 17  and  Mark
viii.  27 — 29appear  to  difft'f  in  place, occasion,
query,  and  answer,  and  in  the  correspond-
iag  teaching  that  followed.  The  question
WiiB  "  the  anticipation  of  Gethsemane "
(Eilersbeim).

Vers.  68,  69. — Simon  Peter — prominent
here,  and  in  oh.  xiii.  6 — 11, 24, 36 ;  xviii.  10 ;
XX.  2 — 10;  xxi.  7,  etc. ;  just  as  he  is  in  the
synoptic  Gospels  (see  portrait  of  St.  Peter,
Introduction  VIII.  3  (4)) — [then ']  answered
him,Lord,to  whom  shall  we  go?  Perhaps  an-c-
KevtriiieOa  is  even  stronger  than  the  inriyuv;
Hast  thou  not  drawn  us  to'  thyself,  and  sup-
plied a  need  and  craving  which  thou  hadst
first  of  all  excited  1  Is  there  any  teacher  to
rival  thee?  Can  we  look  for  another  while  we
have  thee  1  "  Da  nobis  alterum  te  "  (Augus-
tine). The  second  part  of  this  immortal
reply  points  clearly  back  to  ver.  63,  where
the  Lord  had  declared  that  the  words  he
had  spoken  to  them  were  spirit  and  life.
Thou  hast  words  of  eternal  life,  Not  "  the
words,"  which  would  savour  too  much  of
the  dogmatic  and  technical,  biit  words  of
life — words  which  minister  the  Spirit  of  life ;
words  which  convey  the  Divine  power,  even
the  Holy  Spirit,  to  our  minds ;  words  which
bring  those  thoughts  before  us  which  we
can  believe,  and  believing  which,  we  have
eternal  life.  "  Thou  hast  such  words  "  (cf.
for  use  of  ^x*'".  1  Cor.  xiv.  26).  The  thiid
item  of  this  confession  is  twofold.  We  have
believed,  and  have  come  to  know ;  so  that  we
now  do  believe  and  know  that,  etc.  There
is  a  knowledge  which  precedes  belief,  and
there  are  some  great  facts  and  ideas  about
Christ  which  lead  to  a  higher  and  to  a
different  belief  (see  ch.  xvii.  8;  1  John  iv.
8) ;  but  again  the  fullest  knowledge  follows
belief,  a  notional  and  real  assent  leads  to
an  invincible  assent.  Faith  is  the  womb  of
assurance.  This  richer  knowledge  is  medi-
ated by  love.  "  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth
not,"  and  the  faith  that  evokes  "  love  "  also
excites  and  confirms  the  "knowledge"  that
is  life  eternal  (ch.  xvii.  2).  That  thou  art
the  Holy  One  of  God.'    The  recognition  of

'  Olv  of  T.E.  is  omitted  by  nine  principal
uncials  and  numerous  versions,  by  Tischen-
dorf  (8th  edit.),  Tregeiles,  Westcott  and
Hort,  E.T.  It  has  the  authority  of  E,  F,
H,  M,  Vulgate,  etc.

»  The  text  of  T.E.  is  that  of  the  great
mass  of  later  manuscripts  and  versions,  but
it  appears  highly  probable  that  it  was  trans-
ferred here  ftom  Matt.  xvi.  16.  The  older
maniucriptB,  K,  B,  0*,  D,  L,  give  6  Siyios


the  nature  of  the  Lord,  which  felt  short  of
the  great  utterance  of  Peter  in  Matt.  xvi.  16.
This  was  an  ascription  which  the  dtemoniacs,
or  the  devils,  by  their  lips  were  ready  from
the  first  to  proclaim  prematurely  (Mark  L
24;  Luke  iv.  34).  (On  the  holiness  of
Christ,  on  his  entire  consecration,  and  on
the  fact  that  he  was  sealed  and  sent  into
the  world  to  do  the  Father's  will,  see  ch.  x.
36;  1  John  ii  20;  Eev.  iu.  7.)  "Thou  art
Bent  on  the  highest  mission.  Then  canst
accomplish  all  that  thou  hast  told  us;  we
have  come  to  believe  it,  and  we  do  know  it.
We  cannot  leave  thee.  We  are  not  looking
for  temporal  honours  or  Messianic  splen-
dours, but  for  the  food  that  endureth  untu
everlasting  life."

Ver.  70. — The  answer  of  the  Lord  is  one
of  the  most  solemn  and  heart-rending  cha-
racter, and  a  further  hint  from  his  own  lips
of  what  the  evangelist  had  uttered  on  his
own  account.  It  is  an  outburst  of  bitter
grief  over  the  moral  imperfections  which  are
developing  under  this  strong  revelation  of
the  Divine  glory.  Sid  I  not  <dioose — I,
even  I  the  Holy  One  of  God — ^yon  the  twelve
to  myself  (^|EAE|c(/ti)i/),  and  of  yon  one  is  a
devil  1  This  "choice"  is  repeatedly  re-
ferred to  (eh.  xiii.  18 ;  XT.  16 ;  cf.  Luke  vi.
13;  Acts  i.  2,  24).  ■<  He  appointed  twelve
to  be  with  him,  that  he  might  send  fhem
forth  to  preach,  and  to  have  power  to  cast
out  diemons "  (Mark  ill.  14).  This  choice
was  made  in  the  full  human  self-conscious-
ness  and  knowledge  of  their  peonliarities.
It  is  morally  inconceivable  that  he,  in  his
Divine  foreknowledge,  chose  Juda»  to
special  reprobation,  knowing  him  then  to
be  devilish  in  his  nature,  and  so  that  he
might  have  his  character  demoralized  by
this  close  contact  with  Christ's  holiness,  and
thus  be  trained  for  the  damnation  of  the
traitor's  sin  and  doom.  Yet  this  choice,  to
Christ's  human  nature  and  self-conscioni-
ness,  was  early  seen  to  be  one  which  was
not  softening  but  hardening  the  heart  of
Judas.  He  brought  him  nearer  to  himself,
and  gave  him  fresh  opportunity  of  acquiring
just  ideas  of  the  kingdom  and  its  methods,
and  by  these  warnings  the  Lord  was  giving
him  chance  after  chance  of  escaping  from
what,  even  to  the  Lord's  prophetic  human
foresight,  looked  like  his  destiny.  "  One  of
you,"  says  he— "one  is  devil."    OfScial  re-

ToS  OeoS.  Some  of  the  early  versions  give
S  XpiffrSs  6  aytos  tov  06ov.  The  Latin  trans-
lations, i  Xpia'T6s  d  vibs  rod  ®€ov.  These
seem  a  gradual  approximation  to  the  fnll
text  of  Matt,  xvi.,  and  of  the  bulk  of  onr-
sives,  etc.,  which  is  S  XpurT6s  i  vlhs  toS  ecov
ToB  (avTos.  Tregeiles,  E.T.,  Westcott  and
Hort,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Meyer,  and
Godet  adopt  the  shorter  reading.


276


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST,  JOHN.      [oh.  vi.  1—71.


lation  to  tm  is  not  Balvatioti.  Even  the
admission  that  I  am  the  Holy  One  of  God
is  not  eternal  life.  We  may  compare  Christ's
severe  rebuko  to  Peter,  when,  after  the
grand  confession  (Matt.  xvi.  16),  he  counted
himself  worthy  to  disapprove  the  methods
of  his  Lord's  mercy,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,
Satan :  thou  art  an  offence  to  me ;  thou
savourost  not  the  things  that  be  of  God,
but  the  things  that  be  of  men."  Judas  did
far  worse — he  wanted  to  use  the  Divine
power  of  his  Master  for  his  own  personal
ends.

Vor.  71. — ^Now  he  spake  concerning  Judas
the  son  of  Simon  the  Iscaiiot  *  being  one  of

'  The  reading  'IffKapi^rov  for  'ItrKaptc^TTjv
justifies  this  translation ;  it  is  that  of  X°,  B,
C,  G,  L,  n,  and  is  preferred  by  Tregelles,
Westcott  and  Hort,  Tischendorf  (8tli  edit.),
B.X.,  »ad  Bengel;  but  Meyer  and  Godet


the  twelve.  (For  this  use  of  eKeye,  see  eh.
Ix.  19 ;  Mark  xiv.  71.)  Isoariot  is  most
probably  "of  Kerioth,"  a  tuwn  of  Judah,
mentioned  in  Josh.  xv.  25,  though  Westcott
cites  another  Kerioth  in  Moab  (Jer.  xlviii.
44).  If  this  Kerioth,  which  Simon  and  his
sou  Judas  have  degraded,  be  the  Kerioth-
Hezron,  then  it  would  seem  that  Judas  wag
the  only  Judxan  among  the  apostles.  For
he  it  was  that  was  about  to  betray  him  being
one  of  the  twelve  (cf.  ver.  64).  'O  -napaM-
aav  gives  a  somewhat  different  turn  of  de-
scription to  the  futurity  of  the  deed.  Had  it
yet  fully  dawned  on  the  soul  of  the  traitor  ?
Had  he  laid  any  plans  to  bring  his  Master
to  the  point  from  which  he  turned  lo  di-
vinely?   We  know  not.

prefer  the  other  text,  as  t<  reads,  htb  kh-
pudrou  as  the  -Tjy  is  the  reading  of  eleven
uncials.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 15. — The  miracle  of  the  loaves  and  fishes.  The  scene  of  our  Lord's
ministry  changes  once  more  to  (Jalilee,  where  he  remains  for  the  next  seven  months.
Large  multitudes  followed  him  on  account  of  his  miracles — "because  they  saw  the
miracles  which  he  did  on  them  which  were  diseased."

I.  The  sckne  or  the  new  mibacui.  1.  It  was,  as  Luke  tells  in,  at  a  "  city  called
Bethsaida,"  that  is,  Bethsaida  Julias,  in  Gaulonitis,  on  the  north-east  of  the  sea  of
Galilee.  2.  It  was  along  the  slopes  of  the  mountain  that  closes  round  the  lalfe.  "Jesus
went  up  into  a  mountain,  and  there  he  sat  with  his  disciples."  3.  It  was  a  thoroughly
secluded  district,  far  from  the  stir  of  human  life,  and  therefore  well  fitted  to  prepare  the
multitudes  for  the  solemn  lessons  they  were  about  to  receive ;  for  we  are  told  by  the
synoptists  that  the  miracle  followed  a  day  of  teaching  and  healing.

II.  The  occasion  of  this  mieacle.  1.  It  occurred  near  the  time  of  the  Passover.
"  And  the  Passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh."  This  was  the  only  feast  of  the
sort  that  our  Lord  failed  to  attend,  on  account  of  the  increasing  hostility  of  the  Jews.
2.  It  occurred  during  a  temporary  withdrawal  of  Jesus  from  society,  caused  by  the
news  of  the  death  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  by  the  need  of  rest  after  the  exhausting
labour  of  his  disciples  in  their  first  missionary  tour.

HI.  The  compassion  of  Jesus  fob  the  multitude.  1.  They  had  travelled  afoot
"  out  of  all  the  cities,"  many  of  them  long  distances,  to  see  our  Lord.  2,  They  were,
in  our  Lord's  eyes,  as  "  sheep  without  a  shepherd,"  and  therefore  "  he  was  moved  with
compaHiion  toward  them"  (Mark  vi.  34).  3.  They  had  remained  a  whole  day  in  "  the
desert,"  and  would  be  sure  to  faint  on  their  way  back,  if  they  departed  without  food.
How  considerate  is  our  Lord  for  the  physical  wants  of  men!

IV.  Mark  how  he  prepares  the  disciples  fob  suppltino  the  wants  of  the
multitude.  "  He  saith  to  Philip,  Whence  shall  we  buy  bread,  that  these  may  eat  ?  "
1.  Ife  makes  the  disciples  fed  the  inadequa^  of  their  resources  for  the  work  in  hand.
They  had  but  five  loaves  and  a  few  fishes ;  and  Andrew  might  well  say,  "  What  are
these  among  so  many  ?  "  The  sense  of  an  inadequacy  is  often  the  beginning  of  Divine
strength.  2.  He  makes  the  disciples  carry  their  inadequate  resources  to  himse^.  "  Bring
them  hither  to  me,"  as  Matthew  reports.

V.  Mark  the  ordeb  pursued  in  the  distbibution  of  the  food.  "Make  the
men  sit  down.  Now  there  was  much  grass  in  the  place.  So  the  men  eat  down,  in
number  about  five  thousand."  There  is  something  moral  in  the  idea  of  order  or
arrangement.  It  implies  an  economy  of  effoit  as  conducive  to  a  practical  result,
L  Se  distrSmtea  the  food  hy  meant  of  the  disciples.  "  He  gave  the  loaves  to  th«
diwiples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude."    Tnus  the  Lord  feeds  the  huQgering


OH.  VL 1-71.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  277

world  by  means  of  his  Church.  Let  us  all  learn  our  high  vocation  and  our  solemn
responsibilities.  2.  He  takes  his  place  at  the  head  of  the  "table  spread  in  the
wilderness,"  as  Father  of  the  family;  for  "he  gave  thanks"  before  the  distribution.

VL  The  mibaculous  multiplication  of  the  bread  and  the  fishes.  1.  The
disciples  might  douhtingly  and  sparingly  hegin  to  distribute,  but  they  would  find  each
one's  portion  increase  in  his  hands,  till  group  after  group  was  provided.  2.  Tlie  people
"  were  filled."  The  satisfaction' of  appetite  was  an  undoubted  fact.  How  clearly  this
food  symbolizes  the  Broad  of  Life  as  adapted  for  the  whole  race  of  man  I

VII.  Mark  the  economy  sugoested  by  o0b  Lord's  com'mand.  "  Gather  up
the  fragments  that  remain,  that  nothing  be  lost."  1.  A  gift  so  precious  and  obtained
so  mysteriously  was  not  to  be  wasted.  2.  Our  Lord  gathered  the  fragments,  perhaps,
for  the  use  of  his  disyiples  in  coming  days.

VIII.  Effect  op  the  miracle  on  the  multitude.  1.  They  recognize  him  at
a  Prophet  of  God ;  for  they  said, "  This  is  of  a  truth  that  Prophet  that  cometh  into  the
world."  2.  They  are  prepared  to  recognize  him  as  King  of  Israel.  "  Jesus  therefore,
perceiving  that  they  were  about  to  draw  near  and  seize  him  to  make  him  King,
withdrew  again  to  the  mountain  alone."  3.  2'hey  imagined  he  was  the  destined
Deliverer  of  Israel  from  the  Soman  yoke,  and  were  prepared  to  support  his  claims  to
a  temporal  monarchy.  4.  Our  Lord  anticipated,  and  therefore  prevented  their  design
by  withdrawing  from  the  crowd.  5.  He  passed  the  night,  as  the  synoptists  tell  us,  in
prayer,  on  the  mountain,  after  this  day  of  exhausting  toil  and  effort.  Prayer  restores
the  vigour  of  the  wearied  spirit.

Vers.  16 — 21. — Christ  walking  on  the  sea.  Our  Lord  had  sent  the  disciples  across  to
Capernaum,  to  detach  them  from  the  influence  of  the  excited  multitude.

I.  The  disciples  exposed  to  danger  on  the  lake.  "  And  it  was  now  dark,  and
Jesus  was  not  come  to  them.  And  the  sea  was  agitated  by  a  great  wind  that  blew."
1.  The  sea  of  OalUee  was  often  exposed  to  dangerous  storms,  2.  The  darkness  of  the
night  must  have  intensified  the  fears  of  the  disciples.  3.  The  absence  of  Jesus  must  have
made  them  feel  their  helplessness.  4.  They  were  not  relieved  till  the  danger  had  reached
its  highest  point.  The  boat  had  now  reached  the  middle  of  the  lake ;  "  they  had  rowed
about  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  stadia."  As  it  was  about  six  miles  across,  the  boat  was
therefore  in  the  middle  of  the  lake.

II.  Christ's  sudden  intervention.  "  They  see  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  and
drawing  nigh  unto  the  ship  :  and  they  were  afraid."  1.  Nothing  will  keep  Christ  from
his  people  in  their  hour  of  danger.  2.  He  is  superior  to  winds  and  waves.  He  can
walk  on  the  surface  of  the  water ;  he  can  still  the  winds.  3.  The  words  of  Jesus  still
the  fears  of  his  people.  "It  is  I;  be  not  afraid."  His  gracious  presence  supports  us  in
all  risks  and  in  all  afflictions.  4.  The  willingness  of  the  disciples  to  receive  Jesus  in
their  distress.  "Then  they  were  willing  to  receive  him  into  the  ship."  How  dear  he
is  in  the  hours  of  our  loneliness,  our  desertion,  our  helplessness  1  5.  Jesus  dues  not
leave  his  disciples  till  he  sees  them  in  absolute  scfety,  "  And  immediately  the  ship  was
at  the  land  whither  they  were  going."

Vers.  22 — 29. — The  dialogue  between  Jesus  and  the  Jews  in  the  synagogue  of
Capernaum.  The  multitude  followed  our  Lord  on  the  following  day  across  to
Capernaum.

I.  Jesus  discloses  to  them  the  selfish  motives  that  governed  theib  oonduot.
"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  signs,  but  because
ye  ate  of  those  loaves,  and  were  filled."  1.  Jesus  knew  the  hearts  of  men.  2.  He
exposes  their  inward  character  with  an  unshrinking  boldness.  3.  How  seldom  it  Christ
sought  for  his  own  sake  I  The  Jews  followed  him  for  selfish  ends,  for  mere  worldly
advantage.  Lange  says,  "  Instead  of  seeing  in  the  bread  the  sign,  in  the  sign  they
beheld  only  the  bread."  Their  search  after  Jesus,  therefore,,  had  a  pre-eminently
unspiritual  character.

II.  Jesus  directs  them  to  the  true  way  op  beekino  him.  "Work  not  for
the  food  which  perisheth,  but  for  the  food  which  endureth  in  life  eternal."  1.  He  does
not  counsel  any  neglect  of  the  due  dischs^rpe  of  our  daily  calling.  All  men  must  work
for  "the  meat  that  perisheth."    "If  any  man  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat."


278  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.       [oh.  vi.  1—71

Yet  the  best  things  of  this  life  are  fading  and  perishing.  2.  fle  proclaims  the  essential
superiority  and  indispensahleness  of  "  the  food  which  mdv/reth  in  life  eternaV  (1)  This
is  a  permanent  principle  of  life ;  it  is  eternal  life  itself.  (2)  We  are  to  work  for  it ;
not  that  our  salvation  is  of  works,  but  our  woik  is  limited  to  the  appropriation  of  the
gift  offered  for  our  acceptance.  Our  work  would  be  in  vain  without  this  gift.  Faith
supplies  all  that  is  involved  in  this  gift.  (3)  It  is  the  gift  of  Jesus — "  which  the  Son  of
man  shall  give  unto  you."  We  are  saved  entirely  by  grace.  Jesus  grants  faith  and
repentance,  and  through  these  all  the  ble3sinp;s  of  redemption.  (4)  Jesus  is  specially
consecrated  to  this  work — "  for  him  hath  the  Father,  God,  sealed."  (o)  The  Father
appointed  him  to  be  the  Saviour  of  his  people ;  (6)  he  approved  him  by  the  Spirit's
descent  upon  him,  and  a  voice  from  heaven  declaied  him  to  be  his  beloved  Son;  (c)  he
sealed  him  as  such  by  miraculous  signs.  What  security  for  his  salvation  is  thus
possessed  by  every  believer !

III.  The  human  sign  m  the  act  op  salvation.  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,
that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  senj."  The  Jews  asked  what  works  of  God
should  they  do  as  conditions  precedent  to  their  receiving  this  gift.  1.  They  were
seeking  for  life,  not  iy  faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  Law.  They  imagined
there  was  some  higher  work  yet  to  be  done  than  any  commanded  by  the  Law  of  Moses.
2.  Ow  Lord  points  to  faith  as  the  only  work  to  be  done.  "This  is  the  work  of  Ctoi,
that  ye  believe  oil  him  whom  he  hath  sent."  It  is  the  work  of  God  (1)  because
God  demands  it ;  (2)  because  God  gives  it ;  (3)  because  God  approves  of  it — "  without
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God;"  (4)  all  other  works  are  acceptable  only  when
done  in  faith — "  faith  is  the  life  of  works ;  works  are  the  necessity  of  fnith."  3.  Our
Lord  points  to  the  true  Object  of  faith.  "  Him  whom  he  hath  sent."  (1)  It  is  the
Messiah,  sent  by  the  Father  as  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  (2)  Jesus  is  not
only  to  be  an  Object  of  intellectual  belief,  but  of  the  heart's  strongest  trust.  (3)  The
faith  in  question  is  not  to  be  a  mere  single  act,  establishing  a  contact  with  the  Bedeeraer,
but  a  continuous  state  of  faith.

Vers.  30 — 33. — The  nature  of  the  gift  from  heaven.  The  Jews  demanded  "a  sign
from  heaven."

I.  Theib  demand  fob  a  fbesh  mibaolb.  "  What  sign  then  dost  thou  do,  that
we  may  see,  and  believe  in  thee  ?  what  dost  thou  work  ?  "  1.  Tliey  thought  they  were
entitled  to  demand  afresh  miracle,  much  in  advance  of  the  miracle  at  Bethsaida  Julias ;
because  that  was,  after  all,  not  so  remarkable  as  the  miracle  of  the  manna  in  the
wilderness.  "Our  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  desert;  as  it  is  written,  He  did  give
them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat."  2.  They  still  evidently  understood  the  higher  benefit
promised  by  our  Lord  as  material,  and  not  spiritual.  3.  They  meant,  by  their -seeing
and  believing  in  Christ,  to  reduce  faith  to  a  mere  matter  of  sight — a.  mere  belief  of  truth
in  tlie  testimony  of  their  senses.  ■  They  were  quite  unspiritual  in  their  conceptions.

II.  Our  Lord's  answer  to  their  demand.  He  corrects  their  misapprehensions.
1.  He  asserts  that  it  was  not  Moses,  but  Ood,  who  fed  the  people  with  manna.  "  Moses
tave  you  not  the  bread  from  heaven."  It  was  a  truly  Divine  work  to  feed  two  millions
of  people  in  the  desert  from  day  to  day.  Therefore  there  could  be  no  comparison
between  Moses  and  Christ.  2.  //e  asseits  that  the  Bread  he  speaks  of  is  not  material,  hut
spiritual.  "  But  my  Father  giveth  you  the  true  Bread  from  heaven.  For  the  Bread  of
(.iod  is  he  who  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and  giveth  life  unto  the  world."  (1)  Mark
how  gradually  our  Lord  passes  from  figure  to  reality.  The  Jews  think  of  bread  like
manna ;  Jesus  speaks  of  himself,  though  he  has  not  yet  directly  done  so.  (2)  The
Bread  from  heaven  was  true  Bread,  because  it  satisfied  the  deepest  wants  of  man's
nature.  It  had  true  life-giving,  life-upholding  virtue.  3.  It  was  continuous  in  its
supply  of  man's  wants.  "It  cometh  down  from  heaven."  4.  It  was  not  limited  to  one
people,  but  offered  to  the  whole  race  of  man.  The  age  of  Jewish  particularism  was
past.

Vers.  34 — 40. — The  divergence  between  the  thoughts  of  Jesus  and  those  of  the  Jews.
A  rupture  was  clearly  at  hand.     The  people  had  hopes  of  merely  material  blessing.

I.  The  Jews  ask  for  tw-  bkkad  from  heaven.  "Lord,  evermore  give  us  this
bread."     1.  They  ask  for  a  continuous  supply  (/it,     2.  Their  demand  betray$  a


CH.  VI.  1— 7i;j      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  279

carnal  spirit,  that  speaks  of  either  sensual  want,  or  covetousness,  or  the  spirit  of
idleness  ;  for  no  more  labour  would  be  expended  upon  the  production  of  food.

II.  Jesus  reveals  himself  plainly  as  the  Bbead  or  life.  "I  am  the  Bread
of  life."  1.  -He  represents  himself  as  the  Sastainer  of  the  life  he  commimicates  ;  for  he
is  that  "  Eternal  Life  which  was  in  the  beginning  with  the  Father  "  (1  John  i.  2).  He
thus  presents  the  objective  side  of  salvation.  2.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  its  recep-
tion. "  He  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger ;  and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall
never  thirst."  (1)  Faith  as  a  coming  suggests  its  more  active  aspect.  (2)  Faith  as
a  believing  its  more  restful  aspect.  3.  Tliis  Bread  will  bring  thefuU  satisfaction  of  all
wants.  The  receptive  spirit  will  have  no  desire  for  any  other  food  than  Christ.  It  will
have  (1)  strength  from  the  food,  arid  (2)  peace  from  the  appeasing  of  the  thirst.

III.  Jesus  plainly  declares  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews.  "But  I  said  unto
you,  Ye  have  seen  me,  nnd  yet  ye  believe  not."  1.  They  had  asJced  to  see,  and  their
desire  had  been  fully  gratified.  2.  Yet  they  refused  to  believe  in  him.  An  impression
exists  that  if  men  could  see  Christ  they  should  all  surely  believe  in  him.  The  Jews  saw
him  from  day  to  day,  witnessed  his  miracles,  heard  his  words,  and  yet  were  none  the
better  for  that  immediate  experience.  We  enjoy  the  higher  blessing.  "  Blessed  are
they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."

IV.  Yet  Jesus  declares  the  ultimate  accomplishment  of  his  Father's  will,
IN  THE  FACE  OF  Jewish  UNBELIEF.  "All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  reach
me;  and  him  tliat  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  1.  Ee  declares  the  Divine
purpose,  in  virtue  of  which  "  all  that  the  Father  giveth  " — his  seed,  his  spouse,  his
Church,  his  inheritance — shall  he  everlastingly  saved.  Th^y  will,  surely  reach  the
Saviour.  2.  He  declares  at  once  the  subjective  side  of  this  salvation,  and  his  attitude  as
a  Redeemer  toward  those  who  come  to  him  as  their  Refuge.  He  will  in  no  wise  cast
them  out  of  (1)  his  love ;  (2)  his  arms ;  (3)  his  Church ;  (4)  his  glory.  3.  The
security  for  the  salvation  of  all  who  come  to  him.  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  him  that  sent
me,  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but  should  raise  it  up  at
the  last  day."  (1)  Christ  has  no  separate  will  from  his  Father.  (2)  The  Father's
will  has  a  double  aspect ;  it  respects,  (a)  the  delivery  of  his  people  from  destruction ;
(5)  their  restoration  into  the  transfigured  manhood  of  the  resurrection.  4.  The  further
confirmation  of  this  security.  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  that  every
one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him,  may  have  everlasting  life :  and  I  will
raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  The  previous  verse  presented  the  objective,  this
verse  presents  the  subjective,  side  of  this  blessed  truth.  (1)  Men  must  see  Christ  in
order  to  obtain  everlasting  life.  They  are  naturally  blind.  The  Spirit  opens  their  eyes
that  they  may  see,  not  merely  themselves,  their  sin,  their  helplessness;  but  Christ,  his
righteousness,  his  peace,  his  grace,  his  salvation.  (2)  Men  must  trust  in  him  to  obtain
everlasting  life.  There  must  be  an  actual  reliance  upon  Christ.  (3)  The  end  is  ever-
lasting life  ;  not  mere  escape  from  hell,  or  the  absence  of  loss.  (4)  It  is  resurrection
in  glory.    Christ  will  be  the  efficient  Cause,  as  he  is  the  Firstfruits  of  the  resurrection.

Vers.  41 — 51. — Our  Lord's  explanation  of  Jewish  unbelief.  A  rapture  was  clearly
near  at  hand.

I.  The  murmuring  of  the  Jews.  "The  Jews  then  murmured  concerning  him,
because  he  said,  I  am  the  Bread  which  came  down  from  heaven."  It  sprang :  1.  Partly
from  doubt.  (Ch.  vii.  12.)  2.  Partly  from  contemptuous  surprise.  3.  Partly  from
dissatisfaction.

II.  The  ground  op  their  murmuring.  "And  they  said,  Is  not  this  Jesus,  the
Son  of  Joseph,  whose  father  and  mother  we  know  ?  "  1.  The  Jews  of  Capernaum  must
have  been  personally  acquainted  with  the  humble  family  at  Nazareth,  which  was  not  far
distant.  2.  They  did  not  know  of  the  miraculous  conception  of  Jesus,  which  was  yet
concealed  in  the  heurt  of  Mary,  and. was  not  to  be  revealed  till  after  his  resurrection.
3.  The  miracles  that  Jesus  wrought  could  not  undo  the  impression  made  upon  their
minds^by  the  ei/rcumstances  of  his  familiar  life  at  Nazareth.  He  was  still,  notwith-
standing all  his  miracles,  but  the  carpenter's  Son.

III.  OuB  Lord's  answer  to  their  murmured  dissatisfaction.  1.  He  attributeg
it  to  tlieir  incapacity  to  understand  his  saying.  Their  moral  condition  explained  their
ignorance.     2.  Be  emphasizes  the  necessity  of  a  Divine  influence  to  worle  faith  in  their


280  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [ch.  vi  1—71

hearts.  "  No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  him."
(1)  The  reason  is  that  men  are  naturally  in  a  state  of  alienation  and  darkness,  at  once
estranged  from  God  by  their  "  carnal  enmity,"  and  unable  to  see  the  true  Li^ht.  (2)
.  Eaith  is  God's  gift  (Eph.  ii.  8 ;  Phil.  i.  23).  (3)  The  attracting  power  of  the  Father  is
(a)  not  mere  moral  suasion.  (6)  It  is  nothing  merely  arbitrary,  (c)  It  has  no  com-
pulsory efficacy ;  for,  as  Bernard  says,  "No  man  is  saved  against  his  will."  (d)  It  is
something  distinct  from  the  power  of  doctrine  or  miracles,  (e)  It  is  that  influence
which  makes  a  sinner  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power  (Ps.  ox.  3),  eulightening  his
understanding,  renewing  his  will,  and  alluring  his  heart  by  the  power  of  his  gracs.
"  He  draws  with  the  bands  of  love."  (4)  Yet  there  is  a  human  side  to  the  process  by
which  sinners  are  drawn  to  Christ.  ,"  It  is  written  in  the.  prophets,  And  they  shfiU  be
all  taught  of  God.  Every  man  therefore  that  hath  heard,  and  hath  learned  of  the
Father,  oometh  unto  me."  (a)  The  teaching  which  is  contained  in  the  writings  of
Moses  (vers.  46,  47)  and  the  Word  of  God  in  general  (ver.  38)  discloses  sin,  and  makes
the  sinner  realize  the  nothingness  of  his  own  righteousness.  (6)  The  teaching  enables
us  to  learn  concerning  the  Father's  love,  grace,  and  mercy,  so  that  the  sinner  is  led  to
commit  his  soul  to  Christ,  (c)  This  teaching,  however  precious,  is  not  immediate.
"  Not  that  any  man  hath  seen  the  Father,  save  he  which  is  of  God,  he  hath  seen  the
Father."  (o)  We  are  bound, notwithstanding,  to  believe  in  the  revelation  of  the  unseen
Father  juSt  as  we  rejoice,  believingly,  in  the  unseen  Saviour  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  ($)  Because
that  revelation  reaches  us  through  him  who  is  a  sharer  in  Deity,  "  who  is  of  God."
(5)  Christ  makes  a  further  advance  in  his  teaching,  (o)  He  repeats  several  truths,  (o)
The  connection  between  faith  and  eternal  life.  "  He  that  believeth  on  me  hath  ever-
lasting life."  (fi)  The  fact  that  he  is  himself  the  Bread  of  life,  (y)  The  fact  that
their  fathers  were  fed  on  the  manna,  and  yet  died.  (S)  The  life-giving  properties  of  the
true  manna  that  "  cometh  down  from  heaven."  (J)  And  then  he  explains  its  life-giving
properties,  "  And  the  bread  that  I  will  give  him  is  my  flesh,  which  I  wi^l  give  for  the
life  of  the  world."  (a)  This  refers,  not  to  his  incarnation,  but  to  his  atoning  death,  for
he  speaks  of  the  gift  as  still  future.  (jS)  The  design  or  application  of  the  gift.  "  For
the  life  of  the  world."  There  is  here  no  narrow  particularism.  His  life  was  to  be
sacrificed  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.

Vers.  52 — 59. — I%e  increasing  difficulties  of  Jewish  unhelief.  The  further  teaching
in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum  only  developed  the  more  decidedly  the  unbelieving
temper  of  the  Galilseans.

I.  The  stbitb  amonq  the  Jews.  "The  Jews  therefore  strove  among  themselves,
saying,  How  can  he  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat?"  1.  Some  of  them  evidently  were  in  his
favovr,  and  understood  his  words  in  their  true  sense ;  but  the  majority  were  as  evidently-
opposed  to  him.  2.  Those  who  are  carnally  minded  are  apt  to  put  a  wrong  sense  upon
the  words  of  life,  to  their  own  undoing.  3.  Tet  our  Lord  does  not  alter  his  words  to
meet  the  moral  difficulties  present  to  their  minds.

II.  Consider  how  our  Lord  deals  with  their  question.  "Except  ye  eat  the
flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you.  Whoso  eateth
my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last
day."  Here  he  gives  his  explanation,  first  in  a  negative,  then  in  a  positive  form,  to  the
effect  that  the  atoning  obedience  of  Christ  is  the  cause  of  life  to  men  (Rom.  v.  18).
He  had  first  connected  the  life  with  his  Person;  he  now  connects  it  with  his  work.  1.
Our  Lord  does  not,  as  some  imagine,  refer  here  to  the  Lordls  Supper,  (1)  becau.se  this
ordinance  had  not  then  been  instituted,  and  the  Jews  could  not  possibly  have  under-
stood his  reference  to  it ;  (2)  because  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  every  one  who  partakes
of  the  Lord's  Supper  either  has  or  shall  have  eternal  life ;  (3)  and  Roman  Catholics,
who  insist  upon  this  interpretation  of  the  text,  are  not  consistent,  by  denying  the  cup
to  the  laity,  though  "  drinking  his  blood"  is  expressly  declared  to  be  as  essential  to
life  as  "  eating  his  flesh."  2.  He  does  not  refer  these  words  to  his  doctrine,  or  his  system
of  ethics,  or  his  example.  Such  an  interpretation  is  exceedingly  shalloW.  3.  He  does
not  refer  to  the  Incarnation,  as  the  sole  channel  for  the  communication  of  life,  according
to  those  who  hold  the  mystical  theory  of  the  atonement,  as  if  his  death  were  the  mere
climax  of  his  dedication  to  God,  and  not  a  true  sacrifice  for  sin.  4.  Se  refers,  in  these
expressive  words,  to  his  atoning  death  on  Calvary,  -ii  which  the  Paschal  lamb  yas  but


OH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  281

the  shadow.  With  their  awe  of  blood,  the  Jews  would  think  it  strange  to  hear  Jesus
assert  the  necessity  of  drinking  his  blood ;  but  the  strangeness  disappears  when  he  vir-
tually says  to  them,  "  I  am  the  Substance  or  Reality  of  that  type."  (1)  Consider  the
import  of  the  life  that  is  thus  imparted  to  the  sinner,  (a)  It  presupposes  men  as
without  life,  as  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  (Eph.  iv.  18),  because  they  have  not  the
love  of  God  in  them  (ch.  v.  42).  (i)  It  is  something  freely  provided  and  beistowed  by
God.  (c)  It  is  eternal  in  its  nature,  incapable  of  break  or  interruption,  finding  its  com-
pleteness in  the  final  resurrection  of  the  body.  (2)  This  life,  so  far  from  being  an
ab-iolute  or  uupuichased  gift,  is  secured  through  the  atoning  obedience  of  Christ.  The
Prince  of  Life  submits  to  death ;  he  gives  his  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world.  The
words  point  to  a  priestly  act  of  oblation  (Eph.  v.  2).  (3)  This  life  is  received
through  faith.  Oar  Lord  uses  tlie  terms  "eating  his  flesh"  and  "  drinking  his  blood  "
as  interchangeable  wiih  believing  in  him  (vers.  35,  40,  47).  The  terms  imply  that
sinners  are  to  receive  Christ,  as  a  hungry  man  partakes  of  food.  Thus  the  atonement
becomes  not  merely  a  divine  expedient  for  man's  salvation,  but  a  profound  personal
necessity.  6.  The  crucified  flesh  of  Christ  is  the  essential  food  of  the  immortal  soul.
"  For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drink  imleed."  The  reason  is  that  the
food  of  the  old  sacrifices  was  only  thfi  type  of  which  Clirist  crucified  was  the  trans-
cendent reality.  6.  Explanation  of  the  life-giving  virtue  of  Christ's  flesh  and  blood.
"  He  that  eateth  my  fiesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him."  This
implies  a  union  of  the  closest  kind.  (1)  Believers  dwell  in  the  heart  of  Christ  as  in
a  place  of  refuse  and  rest.  (2)  Christ  dwells  in  the  heart  of  believers  by  faith  (Eph.
iii.  17) — a  wonderful  instance  of  condescension  on  the  part  of  our  Divine  Redeemer.
This  indwelling  secures  to  the  believer  all  that  is  Christ's.  7.  The  true  ground  of  the
coiumon  life  of  Christ  and  believers.  "  As  the  living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live
by  the  Father,  so  he  that  eateth  me  shall  live  by  me."  (1)  Jesus  himself  has  access  to
the  Source  (jf  life ;  (a)  for  he  has  his  life  by  the  Father,  and  (6)  has  been  sent  by  the
Father,  who  is  the  Fountain  of  life.  (2)  Thus  the  believer  who  feeds  on  Jesus  lives
upon  the  Father  himself.  "The  true  God,  the  livins?  Fatlier,  gives  himself  to  One
alone,  but  in  liim  to  all  who  feed  upon  this  only  One."  (3)  Thus  is  realized  the  great
mystery  of  the  gospel — "  the  gatherino  together  of  all  things  in  one  "  (Eph.  i.  10).  8.
Jesus  now  reaches  the  climax  of  his  revelation  to  the  Jews,  for  he  tells  them  plainly  that
death  or  life  hangs  upon  their  acceptance  or  rejection  of  himself.  "  He  that  eateth  of
this  bread  shall  live  for  ever."  9.  The  scene  of  this  long  discourse.  "  Jesus  said  these
things,  teaching  in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum."  Modern  exploration  has  identified
Tell-HAm  as  the  site  of  Capernaum,  and  brings  to  light  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  syna-
gogue, in  which  has  been  found  a  block  of  s'one  with  the  pot  of  manna  engraved  upon
its  face.  The  discovery  suggests  that  the  Jews  as  well  as  Christ  may  have  seen  this
very  stone.

Vers.  60 — 65, — The  growth  of  discontent  and  unbelief  among  his  disciples.  The
burden  of  this  teaching  was  too  heavy  to  be  borne,  even  by  those  disciples  who
followed  Jesus  for  a  time,  without  realizing  the  true  conditions  of  disoipleship.

I.  The  teial  of  thbib  faith.  "JMany  therefore  of  his  disciples,  when  they
had  heard  this,  said.  This  is  a  hard  saying;  who  can  hear  it?"  1.  The  saying  was
hard,  not  in  the  sense  of  being  obscure,  but  offensive  to  their  judgment.  2.  The  ground
of  offence  was  not  (1)  the  bloody  death  of  the  Messiah ;  (2)  nor  the  assumption  on  the
part  of  Jesus  that  the  salvation  of  the  world  was  linked  with  his  Person  ;  (3)  nor  his
claim  to  have  come  down  from  heaven ;  (4)  but  the  statement  of  the  paramount  need
of  their  eating  the  fiesh  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man.  To  their  vulgar
perception  it  was  repugnant  to  the  moral  sense.

II.  OoR  Lord's  answer  to  their  murmured  discontent.  "  Doth  this  offend
you?  What  then  if  ye  should  behold  the  Son  of  man  ascending  where  he  was
before  ?  "  1.  The  words  refer  to  his  ascension  v/p  to  heaven  after  death.  2.  It  would
then  be  manifest  in  what  sense  they  would  eat  his  flesh,  for  it  would  be  impossible  to  eat
it,  in  their  gross  sense,  after  his  ascension  to  glory.  3.  The  words  imply  Christ's
previous  existence  in  heaven.  4.  Explanation  of  the  nature  of  the  life-giving  principle.
"It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth;  the  flesh  protiteth  nothing."  (1)  Je.sus  asserts  that
the  life-giving  principle  is  not  in  the  material  substance  of  the  flesh,  which  would,


282  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING-  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vi.  1—71.


indeed,  after  the  ascension,  be  beyond  the  reach  of  man.  (2)  The  great  reality  wa«
the  forthcoming  Pentecostal  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  (a)  Thus  the  second  Adam
becomes  a  quickening  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xv.  45).  (6)  Thus  the  words  that  Jesus  speaks
"  are  spirit  and  life,"  that  is,  they  are  "  the  pure  incarnation  of  the  Spirit  and  the
vehicle  of  life."

III.  Yet  some  abb  inacobssiblb  to  this  LiFE-aivnro  influbncb  by  their
UNBELIEF.  "  But  there  are  some  of  you  that  believe  not."  1.  Tkey  were,  perhaps,
hut  a  small  portion  of  his  disciples.  2.  Tet  their  unbelief  was  no  surprise  to  one  gifted
with  omniscience.  "  For  Jesns  knew  from  the  beginning  who  they  were  that  believed
not,  and  who  it  was  that  should  betray  him."  3.  The  explanation  of  their  unbelief.
"  Therefore  I  said  unto  you,  that  no  man  can  come  unto  me,  except  it  were  given  unto
him  of  my  Father."  (1)  It  is  impossible  to  understand  the  interaction  of  the  will  of
God  and  the  will  of  man  in  salvation ;  (2)  yet  our  I^ord  asserts  plainly  that,  as  faith  is
God's  gift,  the  salvation  of  man  depends  upon  his  efficacious  grace.

Vers.  66 — 71. — The  crisis  reached  at  last.  The  Galilsean  disciples,  in  many  cases,
revolted  against  Christ's  teaching.

I.  The  defection  in  Galilee.  "  From  that  time  many  of  his  disciples  went
back  and  walked  no  more  with  him."  1.  These  disciples  retwrned  once  more  to  the
world,  with  its  old  occupations,  and  to  the  religious  guidance  of  the  scribes  and
Pharisees.  2.  They  ceased  to  attend  upon  our  Lord's  ministry,  or  to  follow  him  from
place  to  place  in  his  errands  of  truth  and  mercy.  3.  The  cause  of  their  defection  was  their
unbelief.  "  There  are  some  of  you  which  believe  not."  (1)  There  are  many  persons
who  profess  to  be  Christ's  disciples  for  a  time,  and  afterwards  fall  away  from  their
profession.  (2)  Though  Jesus  foresaw  this  defection,  it  must  have  been  a  bitter
disappointment.

II.  OuB  Lord's  touching  appeal  to  the  twelve.  "Will  ye  also  go  away?"
1.  Though  he  has  suffered  from  the  sudden  thinning  of  the  ranks  of  his  disciples,  he  yet
holds  open  the  door  for  the  chosen  twelve  to  follow  them  if  they  are  so  inclined.  2.  Tet
such  an  additional  defection  would  have  added  immensely  to  his  trial,  as  the  apostles
were  nearer  to  him  than  the  Galilsean  disciples.  ■  3.  Our  Lord  seeks  to  find  a  small
company  of  true  disciples,  as  the  last  support,  of  his  word,  who  would  be  impregnable
against  apostasy.

III.  Peteb's  prompt  and  fervent  answer.  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?
thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life."  1.  The  answer  is  cjiaracteristic  of  the  apostle's
impulsive  nature ;  for  he  does  not  take  the  trouble  to  inquire  whether  it  represents  the
convictions  or  feelings  of  all  his  colleagues.  2.  The  answer  recognized  the  impossibility
of  the  return  of  the  apostles ;  (1) -Either  to  the  guidance  of  the  sciibes  and  Pharisees,
who  taught  for  doctrines  the  commandmints  of  men,  and  were  blind  leaders  of  the
blind ;  (2)  or  to  the  Law  of  Moses,  by  which  there  was  neither  life  nor  righteousness.
3.  It  recognized  the  essential  fitness  of  Christ  to  be  the  Teacher  of  the  apostles.  (1)  He
had  words  of  eternal  life,  (a)  Either  promises  of  eternal  life  made  before  the  worM
began,  and  put  into  Christ's  hands ;  (6)  or  the  doctrines  of  eternal  life,  which  exhibit  the
way  of  salvation  through  a  crucified  Saviour.  (2)  The  ground  of  this  conviction.
"  We  believe  and  know  that  thou  art  Christ,  the  Holy  One  of  God."  (a)  The  belief
is  first,  as  it  is  the  foundation  of  a  right  understanding,  while  the  right  undeistanding
distinguishes  the  belief  from  mere  opinion.  (6)  The  confession,  strangely  recalling
that  of  the  demoniacs  (Mark  i.  24 ;  Luke  iv.  34),  was  the  recognition  of  Christ  as
God's  Son,  scaled  unto  the  work  of  giving  liis  life  for  the  world.

IV.  Our  Lord's  disclosure  of  the  secret  chabactee  of  one  op  his  apostles.
"  Have  I  not  chosen  you,  the  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ?  "  1.  The  choice  is  to
apoitleship,  not  to  salvation.  (Luke  vi.  13.)  2.  Our  Lord  sees  the  truly  devilish
character  of  one  apostle  through  all  disguises.  Jurlas  was  (1)  a  deceiver,  (2)  a  liar,
(3)  a  murderer.  3.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  Judas  was,  unlike  the  eleven  disciples,
who  were  all  Qalilseans,  a  native  of  Jxidsea.  "  He  spake  of  Judas  Iscariot  the  son  of
Simon."  He  belonged  to  the  village  of  Kerioth,  in  Judaja  (Josh.  xv.  25).  The  betrayer
of  our  Lord  belonged  to  that  Judaea  where  the  hostiliti';s  of  the  Jews  reached  its
highest  point.  4.  Our  Lord  makes  the  apostles  aware  of  the  character  of  Judas,
partly  that  he  may  prepare  them  for  the  commg  betrayal — "for  he  it  was  that  sloiild


OH.  vt  1— 71-]      THE  GCSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  283

betray  him '' — partly  to  convince  them  that  they  could  only  stand  steadfast  in  their
faith  and  allegiance  by  reliance  on  hia  grace.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  20. — "It  is  J  I"  They  who  endure  many  evils,  anticipate  more;  they  are
bowed  down ;  and  every  touch,  however  kindly,  seems  a  blow  to  smite  them,  and  to
thrust  them  lower  still.  When  the  apostles  were  tossed  on  the  stormy  waters  of  the
lake,  and  almost  despaired  of  deliverance,  Jesus  himself  drew  nigh.  But  the  presence
of  their  best  Friend  affrighted  them.  Only  his  voice  could  soothe  the  terror  which  hia
presence  roused.  There  is  no  voice  which  can  rise  above  the  storms  of  life,  to  soothe
the  spirit  and  to  hush  the  turmoil,  save  the  voice  of  Christ.  What,  then,  is  the  impoit
of  his  reassuring  declaration,  "  It  is  I  "  ?

I.  It  is  I  WHO  WATCH.  Although  the  disciples  did  not  know  it,  their  Master  was,
from  the  neighbouring  height,  by  the  fitful  moonbeams,  watching  the  little  vessel  as
she  struggled  with  the  tempest.  He  knew  exactly  how  matters  were  with  his  friends,
and,  when  he  came  down  from  the  height,  he  knew  where  to  find  the  storm-tossed
boat.  So  does  he  ever  watch  his  people's  course  over  the  waters  of  life,  and  with
especial  interest  when  that  course  is  one  of  peril.

IL  It  is  I  WHO  LiNQBR  AND  DELAY.  Although  Jesus  knew  the  state  of  his
disciples,  he  did  not  at  once  come  to  the  rescue.  He  waited,  perhaps  to  try  their  faith,
und  to  make  his  interposition  the  more  welcome.  Often  do  Christ's  people  fancy  that
their  Lord  is  careless  of  their  state  of  anxiety,  alarm,  or  danger.  But  they  are  mistaken.
He  has  his  own  reasons  for  delay.

III.  It  is  I  WHO  LOVB.  Christ's  kindness  may  not  always  show  itself  just  in  the
way  which  would  be  acceptable  to  us.  Yet  his  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  his  own ;
he  has  loved  them  with  an  everlasting  love.  If  there  is  one  time  when,  more  than  at
another,  his  heart  yearns  over  his  beloved  ones,  that  time  is  the  season  of  afSiction,
calamity,  and  apprehension.

IV.  It  is  I  WHO  COME.  At  the  right  moment  Jesus  drew  near.  The  "  voice  of  the
Beloved  "  was  heard  above  the  storm,  assuring  the  distressed  disciples  that  he  was  near.
And  his  very  presence  brought  comfort  and  confidence  to  the  heart.  Christ  comes  to
his  needy  and  afflicted  ones — those  "  tossed  with  tempest,  and  not  comforted."  His
language  is,  "  Fear  not ;  I  am  with  thee  :  be  not  dismayed ;  I  am  thy  God."

V.  It  is  I  WHO  SAVE.  He  is  the  Lord  of  nature,  and  all  nature's  powers  are,  like  the
storm,  subject  to  his  control.  He  is  the  Friend  of  man,  and  every  heart  may  be  reached
by  his  sympathy  and  cheered  by  his  encouragement.  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  as
such  he  can  bring  the  souls  he  has  redeemed  from  the  depths  of  earthly  danger  and  of
fear  into  the  calm  of  heavenly  security  and  peace.

"  If  Thon  wert  less  than  One  Divine,
My  soul  would  be  dismayed ;
But  through  thy  human  lips  God  sayii
"TisI;  be  not  afraid  I'*'

T.

Ver.  24. — " SeelHng  Jesus"  The  Lord  Jesus  came  to  earth  to  seek  and  to  save  that  .
which  was  lost'.  And  a^ain  and  again  in  the  course  of  his  ministry  he  was  sought  by
those  whom  he  was  seeking.  There  were  periods  of  popularity  when,  from  various
motives,  the  multitudes  resorted  to  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.  Their  seeking  Jesus  was
emblematical  of  the  conduct  becoming  in  all  men,  when  Christ  comes  nigh  to  them  in
the  messages  of  his  Word  and  the  ordinances  of  his  Church.

I.  Seeking  Jesus  implies  needing  Jesus.  Men  do  not  seek  what  they  do  not
want.  The  soul  that  is  without  Christ,  and  has  a  perception  of  its  destitution  and
need,  is  urged  to  go  in  quest  of  him.  Men  may  have  health,  luxury,  wealth,  learning,
fame ;  yet  if  they  are  without  him  who  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  who  brings  God  near
to  man,  they  are  strangers  to  the  highest  good  which  we  are  capable  of  partaking.  If
there  be  any  spiritual  awakening,  then  the  actual  need  becomes  a  conscious  want,
and  the  pressure  of  spiritual  indigence  urges  to  undertake  this  spiritual  quest  and
pilgrimage.


284  THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vt  1— 7L

II.  Sbbkino  Jesus  is  prompted  by  pbizdjo  Jesus.  He  is  the  Treasure  hidden  in
the  field,  he  is  the  costly  Pearl ;  they  who  recognize  him  as  such  are  constrained  to  use
every  endeavour  to  make  him  their  own.  Since  to  find  him  is  to  fiml  all  spiritual
blessings — forgiveness  of  sin,  help  for  duty,  fellowship  with  heaven,  and  life  eternal — it
is  natural  enough  that  those  who  understand  and  feel  this  should  set  a  high  value  upon
Christ,  and  should  seek  him  with  all  their  heart.

III.  Seeking  Jesus  is  crediting  and  honouring  Jesus.  It  is  hit  wish  to  be
sought,  nay,  it  is  his  command  that  men  should  f'eek  him.  Tliere  is,  therefore,  no
presumption  in  this  attitude  and  action  of  the  soul ;  it  is  just  what  the  Lord  himself
expects  and  desires  from  us.  He  will  neither  hide  himself  from  those  who  seek  him,
nor  will  he  repel  and  dismiss  them  from  bis  presence.  For,  in  coming  to  him,  they  take
him  at  his  word,  and  render  to  him  the  honour  which  is  his  due.

IV.  Seeking  Jesus  involves  trusting  and  loving  Jesus.  They  who  earnestly,
patiently,  persistently  seek  the  Lord,  are  drawn  to  him  growingly  by  the  bonds  of  a
Divine  attraction.  The  closer  they  keep  to  him,  the  stronger  grows  their  faith,  the
warmer  grows  their  love.

V.  Seeking  Jesus  leads  to  finding  Jesub.  His  own  word  of  assurance  is  ample
warrant  for  this :  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  Many  good  things  may  be  sought  with
diligence,  and  by  a  lifelong  search,  and  yet  may  be  sought  in  vain.  Of  the  best  of  all
blessings  this  cannot  be  said.     "Every  one  that  seeketh  findeth."

Application.  Here  is  a  picture  of  the  action  which  is  becoming  to  every  one  to
whom  the  gospel  comes.  It  is  not  enough  to  admire  the  character  of  Jesus  and  to
approve  his  work.  Our  will,  our  active  nature,  must  be  engaged  in  the  effort  to  attain
and  to  enjoy  him.  And  we  have  this  promise  to  cheer  us:  "Seek,  and  ye  shall
find."— T.

Ver.  21,— Fruitless  amd  fruitful  toU.  Our  Lord's  miracles  did  not  end  in  themselves.
Uut  of  them  there  often  grew  interviews,  conversations,  and  discourses  of  the  greatest
interest  and  profit.  Such  was  the  case  with  the  miracle  of  the  multiplication  of  the
loaves.  The  provision  made  for  their  bodily  wants  prompted  the  people  to  resort  in
numbers  to  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.  And  thus  our  Lord  had  the  opportunity,  which
he  did  not  fail  to  use,  of  presenting  to  the  multitudes,  upon  the  suggestion  of  the
miracle  he  had  wrought,  lessons,  reflections,  expostulations,  and  appeals  of  vast  and
lasting  value.  Especially  did  he  put  in  a  true  light  the  relative  claims  of  the  body  and
the  soul  upon  the  attention  and  the  endeavours  of  mankind.

I.  An  ebbob  bebueed  ;  i.e.  the  very  common  habit  of  living  and  working  merely
for  the  sake  of  the  supply  of  bodily  wants.  Our  Lord's  words  have  sometimes  been
misunderstood.  He  could  not  have  intended  to  reprove  poor  men  for  labouring  hard  in
order  to  secure  an  honest  living  for  themselves  and  their  families.  What  was  it,  then,
which  he  so  gravely  reprehended  ?  It  must  have  been  the  concentration  of  all  himian
interest  and  effort  upon  the  existence  and  comfort  of  the  body,  upon  the  securing  an
abundance  of  material  good,  upon  the  attainment  of  opulence  and  the  enjoyment  of
luxury.  Such  a  course  of  life  may  be  termed  an  idolatry  of  the  body  and  of  this
passing  earthly  life.  How  many  there  are  who  pursue  with  all  the  energy  of  their
nature  the  so-called  "  good  things  of  this  life,"  forgetful  that  these  things  are  destined
to  perish  and  to  pass  away  I  To  such  the  ancient  admonition  of  the  prophet  is
applicable,  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?"

II.  An  effobt  enjoined  ;  t'.e.  the  earnest  endeavour  to  obtain  spiritual  provision.
1.  Our  Lord  here  gives  a  very  striking  and  just  representation  of  himself.  He  is  "  the
Bread  of  life."  Knowledge  of  him,  fellowship  with  him,  feed,  nourish,  strengthen,  and
cheer  the  soul.  To  know  his  truth,  to  feel  his  love,  to  do  his  will, — this  is  an  aim  in
life  worthy  of  all  pursuit,  worthy  of  the  nature  with  which  the  Creator  has  endowed
us.  2.  Our  Lord  reminds  us  that  "  labour  " — strenuous  and  persevering  exertion — is
necessary  in  order  that  we  may  partake  of  Christ,  and  enjoy  the  advantages  of  his
spiritual  fellowship.  No  mere  passive  acceptance  is  sufficient.  The  spiritual  nature
comes  to  appropriate  and  enjoy  the  Divine  Saviour,  through  sincere  and  constant  effort,
through  the  study  of  his  character,  through  growth  into  his  likeness,  through  devotion
to  his  cause.

III.  A  MOTIVE  fbebented  ;  iji.  the  assurance  that  this  spiritual  provision  abideth


OH.  Tt  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDmO   TO  ST.  JOHN.  285

unto  eternal  life.  Earthly  supplies  can  only  satisfy  bodily  wants.  The  need  and  the
provision  are  alike  perishable  and  perishing.  But  the  heavenly  Bread  is  especially
provided  to  feed  the  immortal  soul ;  and  they  who  eat  of  it  shall  never  hunger,  and
shall  never  die.  The  living  water  springs  up  unto  life  eternal,  and  they  who  drink  of
this  fountain  shall  never  thirst.  To  the  disappointed  and  the  distressed  such
representations  should  bring  comfort  and  inspir-ation.  The  witness  of  our  Saviour  to
himself  is  worthy  of  all  acceptation.

IV.  A  PBOMisE  GIVEN ;  t.c.  that  the  Son  of  man  will  surely  give,  to  all  those  who
labour  to  attain  it,  the  satisfying  and  imperishable  food  of  heaven.  If  we  were
convinced  of  the  excellence  and  the  attractiveness  of  the  Bread  of  God,  we  might  still
have  no  belief  in  its  accessibility  to  man ;  and  in  this  case  they  would  be  cruel  who  should
dwell  upon  the  advantages  of  a  possession  which  could  never  be  appropriated.  But  the
very  purpose  of  Christ's  mission  to  earth,  of  his  teaching  and  miracles,  of  his  sufferings
and  death,  was  that  he  might  give  himself  to  the  hungermg  heart  of  humanity.  Never
does  he  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  those  wlio  believingly  and  humbly  approach  him  with  the
entreaty,  "  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread." — T.

Vers.  28,  29. — The  work  of  Ood.  It  is  not  easy  to  decide  what  was  the  spirit  in
which  the  Jews  took  up  the  admonition  of  Jesus,  "  Work  not  for  the  meat  that  perish  eth,' '
etc.,  and  ujxjn  its  suggestion  urged  the  question  which  called  forth  our  Lord's  reply.
Probably  they  had  a  very  imperfect  apprehension  of  the  meaning  of  the  words  they
used,  when  they  asked,  "  What  must  we  do  that  we  may  work  the  works  of  God  ?  "
yet,  as  there  is  no  eviilence  that  at  this  stage  they  had  ill  feeling  towards  Jesus,  it  is
better  to  assume  that  their  question  was  not  captious  but  sincere.

I.  An  ADiriiRABLB  INQUIBT.  1.  It  reveals  a  noble  conception  of  the  higher  life  of
man,  which  may  be  justly  said  to  consist  in  working  the  work  of  God.  2.  It  embodies
a  worthy  aspiration  and  purpose ;  for  it  implies  that  those  who  spoke  thus  believed
themselves  to  be  prepared  to  do  whatever  needed  to  be  done,  in  order  that  by  them  the
work  of  God  might  in  some  measure  be  accomplished.  3.  It  is  a  question  which  is
becoming  to  all  thoughtful  students  of  human  life,  and  to  all  who  desire  a  law  to  direct
their  individual  energy.  It  is  too  unusual ;  for  whilst  there  are  many,  especially  amongst
the  young,  who  ask — What  shall  we  do  to  be  rich,  honoured,  powerful,  happy  ?  there
are  few  who  eagerly  inquire  how  they  may  work  God's  work.  They  who  do  so  in
sincerity,  with  docility,  and  with  the  resolution  to  obey  the  directions  given,  are  certain
to  be  led  aright.  For  this  question,  when  urged  by  ardent  natures,  excites  joy,  not
only  in  the  minds  of  Christ's  ministers,  but  in  the  very  heart  of  Christ  himself.

II.  A  MEMORABLE  AND  DECISIVE  REPLY.  1.  It  is  a  Seeming  paradox.  Why,  when
the  question  was,  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  should  the  answer  be,  "  Believe  "  ?  An
unexpected  response  1  1'hey  who  look  at  the  matter  superficially  are  wont  to  say-
Never  mind  what  you  itlieve,  so  that  you  do  what  is  right.  But  Christ  puts  faith
first.  2.  Belief  in  Christ  is  obedience,  because  God  sent  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  as  the
Object  of  human  faith.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  men  should  believe  on  his  Son.  It
is  the  supreme  moral  probation  of  every  man,  when  Jesus  comes  to  him  and  demands
his  faith.  Christ  points  away  from  many  works  to  one  work.  3.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
belief  in  Christ  is  the  turning  of  the  soul  to  righteousness.  For  this  is  the  means  of
securing  pardon  and  acceptance,  of  becoming  rignt  with  God,  and  aiso  of  securing
spiritual  strength  and  guidance  tor  the  duties  of  the  earthly  life.  4.  It  is  a  great  moral
principle,  which  the  gospel  takes  up  and  uses  for  highest  ends,  that  faith  underlies
doing.  A  man's  inner  convictions  determine  what  his  habitual  works,  his  moral  life,
shall  be.  Such  is  the  relation  between  faith  and  works,  as  taught  by  both  Paul  and
James ;  the  one  apostle  laying  stress  upon  faith,  the  other  upon  works,  and  both  plead-
ing the  authority  of  this  and  other  sayings  of  the  great  Teacher  himsell  Believing  is
the  beginning,  work  is  the  continuation,  of  the  life;  belief  is  the  inner,  work  is  the
outer,  process ;  belief  is  the  motive,  work  the  result ;  belief  is  the  cause,  work  the
effect.  The  Divine  life  for  man  is  a  work;  but  it  is  a  work  based  upon  a  Divine
Person,  and  it  is  faith  which  so  bases  it,  which  unites  the  worker  to  the  living  and
personal  Power. — ^T.

Ter.  82. — The  true  Bread.    From  any  other  than  Jenu  Christ  this  language  would


286  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  tl  1— 7L

have  been  egotistical  in  the  extreme.  Coming  from  his  lips,  referring  as  it  did  to
himself,  this  declaration  is  natural  enough.  For  since  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  no  claim
inferior  to  this  would  have  been  just.  It  is  a,  marvellous  metaphor,  this,  in  which  oiu
Lord  proclaims  himself  the  true  Bread,  the  Bread  from  heaven,  the  Bread  of  God,  the
Bread  of  life.

I.  CoNSiDEB  THE  HCNOEB  OF  THE  BOUL  WHICH  IS  PRESUMED.  The  body  IS  dependent
upon  food  for  life,  health,  and  strength ;  and  the  appetite  of  hunger  prompts  to  the
seeking  and  partaking  of  food.  There  is  a  correspondence  between  the  hunger  that
craves  and  the  bread  that  satisfies  ;  an  adaptation  of  the  supply  to  the  necessity.
There  is  a  parallel  arrangement  in  the  spiritual  realm.  Man  is  a  weak,  dependent,
craving  being,  with  an  ineradicable  desire  for  the  highest  good — a  desire  not  to  be
appeased  by  earthly  provisions.  It  is  a  spiritual  appetite,  which  in  many  is  deadened
by  carnal  indulgence,  by  sinful  habit,  yet  which  ever  and  anon  recurs.  What  a  revela-
tion of  soul-yearning  would  there  be,  could  the  inner  nature  and  experienca  of  any
congregation  be  exposed  to  an  observer's  view !

II.  Consider  the  Bread  of  the  soul  which  is  provided.  1.  Christ,  as  the  true
Bread,  is  the  gift  of  the  Father.  All  the  family  are  dependent  upon  the  liberality  and
thoughtfulncss  of  the  great  Father  and  Benefactor.  If  "he  openeth  his  hand,  and
satisfleth  the  desire  of  every  living  thing,"  it  is  not  to  be  believed  that,  providing  for
the  lower  wants,  he  will  neglect  the  higher.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  has  not  done
su.  2.  Christ  is  the  Bread  "  from  heaven."  As  such  he  was  prefigured  by  the  manna
of  the  wilderness.  This  gift  is  bestowed  from  the  sphere  of  the  spiritual  and  supernatural,
which  is  thus  brought  near  to  our  souls.  3.  He  is  the  true,  the  real  Bread.  There  is
no  hollow  pretence  in  this  gift.  God  is  not  a  Father  who,  if  his  son  ask  bread  of
iiim,  will  give  him  a  stone.  He  who  made  the  soul  of  man  knows  how  that  soul's
wants  can  be  fully  and  fur  ever  met.

III.  Consider  the  satisfaction  of  the  soul  which  is  secubeo.  1.  Christ  is
partaken,  not  by  physical  eating,  but  by  communion  of  the  spirit  with  the  Saviour.
Faith  is  the  means  of  appropriating  the  Divine  provision.  Jesus  in  this  conversation
especially  warned  his  disciples  of  the  error  into  which  some  of  them  afterwards  fell — the
error  of  confounding  carnal  with  spiritual  participation  of  his  body  and  blood.  2.  The
result  of  feeding  by  faith  upon  the  Bread  of  life  is — satisfaction  and  gladness,  he«lth
and  vigour  of  soul,  and  a  life  which  is  immortal.  "  If  a  man  eat  this  Bread,  he
shall  live  for  ever."  As  the  hunger  of  the  Israelites  was  appeased  by  the  manna,  as
the  hunger  of  the  multitude  was  appeased  by  the  miraculous  multiplication  of  loaves
in  the  wilderness,  so  have  myriads  in  every  age  partaken  of  the  true  and  spiritual
Bread,  and  have  lx>rne  witness  to  its  efficacy  to  satisfy  their  deepest  cravings,  and  tu
nourish  their  spiritual  life. — T.

Ver.  44. — The  Father  draws  the  loul  to  Chritt.  We  have  to  acknowledge  a  debt  of
gratitude  to  God,  first  for  giving  and  sending  his  Son  to  be  our  Saviour,  and  then  for
guiding  us  unto  his  Son,  in  order  that  in  fellowship  with  him  we  may  experience  the
blessings  of  salvation.  For  in  these  two  ways  does  the  Father  furnish  us  with  a  com-
plete display  of  his  love ;  in  these  two  ways  does  he  completely  secure  our  highest  good.

I.  The  drawing  of  the  soul  by  the  Father.  1.  The  soul  needs  to  he  divinely
drawn.  And  this  because :  (1)  By  reason  of  sin  it  is  estranged  from  God,  is  far  from-
God,  is  even  at  enmity  with  God.  (2)  There  are  other  attractions,  very  powerful,  and
such  as  men  are  wont  to  yield  to,  which  draw  man's  nature  in  an  opposite  direction.
"  The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  °  have  great  power ;  and  in  the  case  of  very  many
exert  that  power  ef&caciously  to  keep  the  soul  from  God,  and  even  to  increase  the
distance  by  which  it  is  so  separated.  2.  The  instrumentalities,  or  spiritual  forces,  by
whuA  the  Father  draws  human  souls  to  Christ.  (1)  The  presentation  of  truth  adapted
to  man's  intelligence.  The  next  verse  brings  this  agency  before  us  in  explicit  statement:
"  They  shall  be  all  taught  of  God."  (2)  The  utterance  of  moral  authority  addressing
the  conscience.  Passion  and  interest  may  draw  men  from  Christ ;  duty,  with  a  mighty
imperative,  bids  them  approach  their  Lord  and  tSaviour.  (3)  Love  appeals  to  the  heart
of  man  with  mystic  power.

"  The  moon  may  draw  the  sea ;
The  clond  may  etoop  from  heaven,  and  take  the  shape,
With  fold  to  fold,  of  ntountain  or  of  cape."


CO.  tL  1— tl.]     TflE  GOSPteL  ACCOEDING  TO  St.  JOHN.  isl

The  attraction  of  Christ's  character  and  life,  of  his  gracious  language,  and  ahove  all  of
his  sacrifice  upon  the  cross,  is  the  mightiest  moral  force  the  world  has  ever  felt.  "  I,"
said  he,  "  if  I  am  lifted  up,  will  dratr  all  men  unto  myself."  Thus  in  many  ways,
adapted  by  his  own  wisdom  to  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  men,  is  the  Father
drawing  men  unto  Christ.  3.  The  manner  in  which  the  Father  draws  the  Knd  unto
himself.  (1)  This  attraction  is  not  of  a  physical,  mechanical,  forcible  kind.  Such
compulsion  would  be  out  of  all  character,  would  not  harmonize  with  man's  moral
freedom.  And,  indeed,  it  would  not  be  the  drawing  of  the  soul.  (2)  It  is  a  moral,
spiritual  attraction,  in  accordance  with  the  nature  both  of  him  who  draws  and  of  those
who  are  drawn.  The  Holy  Spirit  of  God  is  the  power  to  whom  we  owe  the  action  of
those  moral  constraints  which  are  the  chief  and  most  benefictnt  factors  in  the  moral
life  of  mankind.  (3)  Mighty  though  this  drawing  be,  it  is  for  the  most  part  gentle
and  gradual.  Its  influence  is  not  always  at  once  apparent ;  it  becomes  manifest  with
the  growth  of  experience  and  the  lapse  of  time.  It  is  continuous,  lasting  in  the
case  of  many  from  childhood  to  old  age.  (4)  The  power  and  efficacy  of  this  agency
is  not  to  be  disputed.  The  Father  calls,  and  the  child  answers.  The  magnetism  is
exercised,  and  the  soul  flies  to  the  attracting  power.  The  light  shines,  and  the  eye
turns  towards  the  welcome  ray.

II.  The  cominq  of  the  soul  to  Christ.  1.  There  is  an  indispensable  condition
without  which  no  soul  can  come  to  Christ.  Christ  must  first  come  to  the  soul.  The
gospel  must  be  preached,  and  must  be  received,  for  it  is  the  Divine  call,  which  alone
can  authorize  the  approach  of  sinful  man  to  the  Holy  One  and  Just.  2.  The  soul's
method  in  coming.  It  is  easy  enough  to  understand  how  when  Jesus  was  on  earth
men  came  to  him  ;  they  came  actually,  bodily,  locally.  Yet  the  principle  of  approach
is  ever  the  same ;  for  our  Lord  said  indifferently, "  Come  unto  me,"  and  "  Believe  on  me."
The  coming  of  the  bodily  form  was  useless  apart  from  spiritual  approach,  sympathy,
aud  trust.  As  it  is  the  soul  which  the  Father  draws,  so  it  is  the  soul  which,  being
drawn,  finds  itself  near  the  Saviour  and  in  fellowship  with  him.  3.  The  soul's  purpose
in  coming.  It  is  impelled  by  conscious  need  of  the  Redeemer,  as  the  Prophet,  the
Pi'iest,  the  King,  divinely  appointed.  It  hopes  to-  find  in  him  that  full  satisfaction
which,  sought  elsewhere,  is  sought  in  vain.  4.  The  soul's  experience  in  coming.  (1)
There  is  welcome  and  acceptance ;  for  he  who  comes  is  never,  in  any  wise,  cast  out.
(2)  There  is  a  perfect  response  to  the  desire  and  need.  The  hungry  is  fed,  the  thirsty
finds  the  water  of  life,  the  weary  meets  with  rest,  and  the  man  who  longs  to  serve  has-
revealed  to  him  the  law  and  rule  of  consecration.  (3)  There  is  the  eternal  abiding ;  for
the  soul  that  comes  to  Jesus  neither  leaves  him,  nor  is  left  by  him.  5.  The  soul's
obligation  in  coming.  (1)  Gratefully  to  acknowledge  the  infinite  mercy  by  which  this
attractive  influence  has  been  exercised,  and  to  which  the  fellowship  with  Christ  is  due.
(2)  Diligently  to  act  as  the  Father's  agent  in  bringing  other  souls  to  Jesus.  We  can
trace  the  Divine  power  in  the  human  agency  which  was  employed  to  lead  us  to  the
Saviour.    The  same  God  can  still  use  the  same  means  to  the  same  result. — ^T.

Ver.  62. — Tlie  Ascension  foretold.  The  aim  of  our  Lord's  conversation  with  the  Jews
was  to  convince  those  who  were  prepared  for  the  revelation,  that  he  was  the  Divine
Mediator,  and  that  union  with  him  was  the  one  hope  of  salvation  for  sinftd  men.  An
inferior  claim  he  could  not  have  made.  Yet  this  assertion  of  his  power  and  dignity
was  an  offence  to  many  who  heard  the  Saviour's  language,  and  who  could  not  believe
that  the  lowly  Nazarene  occupied  a  place  so  exalted  in  the  counsels  of  the  Kternal.
Jesus,  perceiving  that  both  the  cavillers  and  the  disciples  were  perplexed  by  his  state-
ments and  demands,  instead  of  withdrawing  anything  that  he  had  said,  asked  them
how  they  would  be  impressed  should  they  witness  his  ascension  to  his  proper  abode  ?
Although  the  evangelist  John  does  not  record  the  Ascension,  this  is  not  the  only
passage  in  which  he  attributes  to  Christ  language  referring  to  that  great  event ;  a  fact
in  favour  both  of  the  actual  occurrence  of  the  Ascension  and  of  John's  acquaintance
with  it.     This  great  and  final  event  in  our  Lord's  earthly  ministry  was —

I.  A  sititable  conclusion  to  his  cabeeb  on  eabth.  As  his  birth  had  been  super-
natural and  his  ministry  likewise,  as  his  resurrection  from  the  dead  had  in  this  respect
corresponded  with  all  that  had  gone  before,  it  was  proper  that  his  final  departure  from
eartk  should  be  distinguished  by  whM  was  more  than  human  in  incident  and  in  power.


«88  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOSK.      [ca.  vi.  i—ll.

He  could  not  die  a  second  time ;  how  could  he  disappear  from  among  men  more  appro-
priately than  in  the  manner  he  himself  had  foretold  ?

II.  An  evident  pboop  of  the  Divinity  op  his  Fbbbon  and  mission.  And  this  m
two  ways.  1.  Jesus  had  expressly  and  repeatedly  foretold  that  he  should  ascend  into
heaven ;  the  fact  of  his  doing  so  proved  his  Divine  foreknowledge.  2.  At  the  same
time,  his  ascension  distinguished  him  from  all  others.  He  was  not  even,  like  Elijah,
taken  up ;  he  ascended  in  the  exercise  of  his  own  native  power.

III.  A  NEOESSAKT  CONDITION   01"  THE  OUTPOUBINO  OP  THE  SPIRIT.      He  hlmself  had

said,  "  If  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come."  His  work  was  to  be  completed
in  the  bestowal  of  spiritual  influence  for  the  enlightenment  and  conversion  of  mankind.
It  was  when  he  ascended  on  higli  that  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  received  gifts  for
uien.

IV.  A    PKEPARATION   FOB   THE    B8PE0IALLT    CHRISTIAN   LIFE    OP    FAITH    AND   8PIBI-

TUALITT.  Through  the  Ascension  Christ's  friends  and  followers  realize  their  imion
with  an  unseen  Saviour.  The  invisible  sphere,  which  apart  from  this  seems  so  remote,
is  thus  brought  near.  Christians,  risen  with  Christ,  set  their  affections  upon  things
above.

V.  A  POINT  OF  DEPABTUBE  FOB  THE  CHnscH's  iiABOUBS.  No  onc  Can  read  the  Book
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  without  feeling  that  the  ascension  of  Christ,  recorded  in
the  first  chapter,  is  the  key  to  the  whole  of  the  narrative.  The  Lord  went  into  heaven,
but  left  his  servants  upon  earth,  to  carry  out  his  instructions,  and  to  advance  his  cause
and  kingdom.     The  trust  came  home  to  their  hearts,  and  animated  their  ministry.

YI.  The  oround  of  a  blessed  hope.  Jesus  departed  with  bis  hands  outstretched
in  the  attitude  of  blessing.  Blessing  his  people,  he  ascended;  blessing  them,  he  lives
and  reigns  above;  and  blessing  them,  he  will  return.  It  is  his  own  assurance,  "I  will
come  again ; "  it  is  the  assurance  of  his  angels,  "  He  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye
beheld  him  go  into  heaven."

Application.  If,  as  our  Lord's  language  intimates,  his  ascension  must  needs  awaken
surprise,  still  more  should  it  enkindle  gratitude,  arouse  to  eomeeration,  and  inspire
hope.—'T.

Yer.  63. — The  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  Our  Lord  here  teaches  a  great  lesson  which  be
several  times  repeated  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  and  which  is  most  emphatically
'  inculcated  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  especially  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  There
are  two  different  principles  of  religion — one  carnal,  i.e.  earthly  and  human  ;  the  other
spiritual,  i.e.  heavenly  and  Divine ;  and  of  these  the  second  is  the  true  and  satisfactory
principle.  "  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing  " — the  religion  which  is  external  and  ceremonial,
which  rules  itself  by  the  letter,  is  vain;  "the  Spirit  quickeneth" — ^the  religion  which
begins  with  the  inner  nature,  and  lays  all  stress  upon  the  laws  and  the  life  of  the  soul,
is  Divine,  acceptable,  and  enduring.

I.  The  stn-ERioRiTY  of  the  Spirit  to  the  flesh  is  appaeent  in  the  vital
question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  union  op  the  Christian  with  Chbist.  The
re'igion  of  the  flesh  teaches  that,  if  a  man  could  only  eat  the  Lord's  body  and  drink  his
blood,  he  must  be  saved.  The  religion  of  the  Spirit  tells  us  that  physical  contact  in  itself
is  worthless ;  and  that  the  matter  of  all  importance  is  the  spiritual  connection  between
the  believer  and  the  Saviour.

II.  Spiritual  wobship  is  betteb  than  mebs  booilt  obsebyanoeb.  There  is  a
very  powerful  tendency  in  human  nature  to  lower  religion  into  a  system  of  form  and
ceremony.  Many  under  the  Mosaic  economy  were  carried  away  by  this  tendency,
whilst  the  more  spiritual  Jews  saw  clearly  into  the  true  nature  of  acceptable  worship.
Oil  this  point  our  Lord's  language  is  most  explicit,  especially  in  his  conversation  with
the  woman  of  Samaria.  "  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship
him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."

III.  A  SPIRITUAL  CONCEPTION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD  18  8UFEBI0B  TO  OKB  THAT  IS

OABNAL.  It  is  often  regarded  as  something  of  the  nature  of  a  human  organization ;
yet  our  Lord's  parables  should  convince  the  student  that  there  is  a  kingdom  altogether
different  from  any  human  institution,  whether  political  or  ecclesiastical.  Many  are  the
mischiefs,  as  Church  history  abundantly  teaches  us,  which  have  flowed  from  the  foun-
tain error  of  regarding  the  Divine  kingdom  according  to  "  the  flesh."


OH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  289

rV.  The  8A0RAMBNTB  THEMSELVEB  ARE  ONLT  MGHTLT  DEEMED  OF  WEEN  THEY  AKB

VIEWED  m  THE  LIGHT  OF  T&E  SpiBiT.  The  outward  obseTTances,  the  visible  signs,  are
valuable  and  necessary.  But  they  are  material  expressions  of  apiritiul  truth  and  reality ;
they  are  earthly  means  to  spiritual  ends.

y.  Christian  obedience  ib  that  whioh  la  bkndebed,  not  biuplt  bt  the  bodilt
NATURE,  BX7T  BT.THE  BFIBIT.  Christ  IS  a  Master  who  asks  not  mere  outward  homage
or  conformity,  but  the  reverential  subjection,  the  cheerful  obedience,  of  the  whole
nature.  Let  the  spirit  serve  him,  and  the  devotion  of  the  bodily  power*  will  follow,  to
prove  the  sincerity  of  love. — T.

Vera.  66 — 69. — Desertion  and  adhesion.  It  Is  Instructive  to  observe  that,  in  th«
course  of  Christ's  ministry,  there  were  those  among  his  professed  friends  who  forsook
him.  And  it  is  also  instructive  to  observe  that  such  cases  of  desertion  led  Christ's  real
and  attached  friends  to  ask  themselves  what  it  was  that  held  them  to  their  Lord,  and
to  form  upon  this  matter  a  definite  and  decided  conviction.  Thus  the  desertion  of
merely  nominal  adherents  became  the  occasion  of  a  mental  process  which  was  singularly
advantageous ;  for  faith  and  love  were  thus  called  out  and  strenghtened.  Our  daily
observation  shows  us,  that  as  it  was  during  our  Lord's  ministry,  so  now  and  always
there  are  those  who  cleave  to  Christ,  and  those  who  quit  him.

L   How   IB   IT   TO   BE   explained   THAT    SOME   PROFESSED    CHRISTIANS    VOMAKI    THS

LoBD  ?  1.  Fickle  and  frivolous  natures,  when  the  novelty  of  discipleship  wears  off,
"evert  to  the  careless  and  irreligious  life  of  the  past.  Their  heart  is  in  the  world,  and,
like  Lot's  wife,  they  look  back.  Some  transient  excitement,  some  personal  influence,
induces  impressible  natures  to  acknowledge  in  words  that  Jesus  is  their  Saviour  and
Lord.  But  only  the  surface  of  the  soul  is  reached,  and  the  world  has  possession  of  the
inmost  depths.  2.  Christ's  claims  to  Divine  authority  are  rejected  as  too  lofty  to  be
accepted  by  those  accustomed  to  merely  humau  standards.  And  his  moral  requirements
are  too  stringent  for  a  low  ethical  standard  to  submit  to.  Many  would  hold  to  Christ
did  he  make  a-lower  claim,  or  impose  a  laxer  rule.  3.  The  doctrines  which  Christ  reveals
are  too  profound  and  spiritual  for  the  carnal  mind.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  find  that  if
they  would  know  the  Master's  thouglits  they  must  brace  themselves  to  an  arduous
effort  of  spirit.  From  this  they  shrink,  and  consequently  turn  to  a  creed  more  com-
monplace and  less  exacting.  One  thing  may  certainly  be  said  of  all  the  various  classes
who  are  chargeable  with  the  guilt  and  folly  of  forsaking  Jesus.  It  is  this :  those  who
leave  Christ  have  never  really  known  him.  If  they  had  found  eternal  life  in  him,  they
would  never  have  forsaken  him  for  causes  such  as  those  described.

II.  Why  Christians  should  cleave  to  Christ.  1.  Because  there  is  no  one  else  to
whom  to  go.  The  invitations  and  allurements  which  conflict  with  the  attractions  of  the
Saviour,  however  specious,  are  altogether  vain.  In  the  time  of  his  earthly  ministry,
to  whom  could  men  go,  if  not  to  Jesus  ?  They  could  find  no  satisfaction  in  the  teach-
ing and  society  of  Sndducees,  Pharisees,  Essenes,  etc.  So  is  it  now.  2.  Because  Christ
is  the  supremely  excellent.  As  the  Messiah,  the  Sou  of  Ckid,  able  to  secure  forgiveness
and  acceptance,  able  to  procure  us  all  spiritual  help  and  blessing.  He  is  beyond  all
comparison  the  most  precious.  To  desert  him  is  to  turn  the  back  upon  all  moral  per-
fection and  Divine  grace.  3.  Because  Christ  has  the  highest  of  all  gifts  to  bestow ;  i.e.
eternal  life.  With  this  what  can  the  promises  of  others  for  a  moment  compare?
4.  Because  Christ's  own  remonstrance  begs  us  to  stay  with  him.  "  Will  ye  also  go
away  ?  "  is  his  gracious  appeal.  As  much  as  to  say — For  your  own  sake,  and  for  my
sake,  remain  I  Since  Christ  has  not  forsaken  his  people,  his  people  are  bound  not  to
forsake  him.  Wonderful  as  is  the  fact,  it  is  certain  that  Jesus  is  pained  and  grieved
by  the  desertion  of  those  for  whom  he  has  done  and  suffered  so  much ;  it  is  certai  n
that  Jesus  is  gladdened  when  his  people  cleave  closely  to  him  in  the  season  of  tempta-
tion or  discouragement. — T.

Ver.  15. — The  human  and  Divine  idea  of  Jeingship.  We  have  in  the  connection :  I.  ^
wotiderful  miracle.  Five  thousand  fed.  2.  A  right  concltision.  "  This  is  the  Messiah."
3.  A  wrong  act.    They  would  take  him  and  make  him  King.    Notice —

I.  The  proposal  of  the  uultititoe.  "  To  make  him  King."  1.  The  proposal  was
sincere  and  enthusiastic  The  multitade  were  full  of  the  idea ;  it  burned  in  their  breasts,
JOHN.  ir


290  IHE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,      [ch.  vl  1—71.

boiled  in  their  thoughts,  flashed  in  their  counteoanceg,  and  blazed  in  their  words.  They
were  entiruly  swayed  by  it,  and  ready  at  any  moment  to  break  out  in  an  apparently
irresistible  action.  2.  The  proposal  waspopula/r.  The  vast  multitude  were  united,  and
eren  the  disciples  were  not  exempt.  They  were  naturally  drawn  to  the  vortex  of  the
terrible  whirlpool  of  the  popular  sentiment.  And  although  these  people  were  not
representative  men,  still  they  were  fired  with  the  national  idea,  and  attempted  to  carry
out  the  national  wish  with  regard  to  the  Messiah.  3.  It  was  thoroughly  secular.  They
wished  to  make  him  King  in  opposition  to  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  ^ecially
to  Gassar,  and  to  deliver  them  as  a  nation  from  the  hateful  yoke  of  Borne.  Thus  the
proposal  was  directly  seditious,  endangering  their  own  safety  as  well  as  the  eafety  of
Christ  in  direct  opposition  to  the  great  purpose  of  his  life.  4.  It  was  utterly  selfish.
(1)  They  wanted  to  use  him  for  their  own  purposes.  Instead  of  surrendering  them-
selves to  him  and  to  his  teaching  as  the  Messiah,  they  wished  him  to  surrender  himself
to  them,  and  to  serve  their  low  and  peisonal  purposes.  They  were  not  anxious  to  be
drawn  up  to  him,  but  to  draw  him  down  to  them.  They  thought  and  acted  under  the
inspiration  of  the  loaves  and  fishes.  They  are  not  the  first  nor  last  to  attempt  to  use
Christ  for  personal  and  worldly  purposes.  (2)  They  wished  to  compel  him  to  this.
They  would  make  him  King  by  force.  If  they  succeeded  they  would  really  be  lings,
and  he  the  subject  of  their  selfish  desires.  When  they  would  take  him  by  force,  they
little  thought  of  the  countcr-foice  they  had  to  contetid  with.  This  is  not  an  exceptional
conduct  with  regard  to  Christ,  to  make  him  King  by  force.  How  cl&ny  honours  are
forced  upon  him  which  he  declines  1  (3)  It  was  entirely  mistaken.  There  is  no  regard
paid  to  the  Divinity  and  dignity  of  his  Person,  the  nature  of  his  oiBce,  or  the  great
purpose  of  his  life.  They  were  doubtless  sincere  and  enthusiastic,  but  their  thoughts
moved  in  a  groove  unspeakably  lower  than  his.  Little  they  thought  that  the  honour
they  proposed  would  ill  fit  him;  that  the  sceptre  of  the  mightiest  empire  would  ill
become  him  who  wielded  the  sceptre  of  creation ;  that  the  thrones  of  the  Csesars  would
be  infinitely  too  small  and  mean  to  contain  him  who  occupied  and  filled  the  throne  of
the  universe;  that  the  most  brilliant  earthly  crown  would  be  a  worthless  toy  to  him
who  already  wore  a  crown  bedecked  with  stars  and  suns.  To  offer  an  earthly  kingship
to  him  was  a  mistake  and  an  insult.

IL  The  conduct  of  Jesus.  It  shows :  1.  The  vmselfishness  of  his  nature.  Consider :
(1)  The  proposal  was  real.  The  multitude  were  unanimous.  They  represented  the
national  idea  with  regard  to  the  Messiah.  They  were  terribly  earnest,  and  determined
to  make  him  King  at  any  cost,  even  by  force.  (2)  It  was  quite  possible.  It  was  not
the  wild  idea  of  a  few  enthusiasts,  but  that  of  a  vast  crowd  representing  the  sentiments
of  the  nation.  And  if  Jesus  were  to  consent  they  would  rally  round  him  with  enthu-
siasm untold,  and  with  such  a  General  would  be  soon  victorious.  (3)  From  a  human
point  of  view  it  was  very  tempting.  They  wanted  to  make  him  King — the  highest
honour,  power,  and  glory  that  peofJe  can  confer  on  their  fellow-man.  Think  of  his  low
position.  A  poor  Carpenter,  and  the  Son  of  a  poor  carpenter  from  Nazareth.  Under  the
circumstances,  who  but  Christ  would  not  gladly  accept  such  an  offer?  What  was
offered  him  in  a  mental  vision,  or  perhaps  by  the  personal  presence  of  the  prince  of  this
world  in  the  wilderness,  was  now  offered  him  in  a  more  practical  manner  by  the  multi-
tude in  another  wilderness.  But  such  was  the  unselfishness  of  his  nature,  that  the  worldly
honour  and  royal  dignity  and  glory  involved  in  the  proposal  appealed  in  vain  to  him.
They  had  no  response  from  his  nature  but  the  old  one,  "  Get  ye  behind  me."  2.  The  spiri-
timlity  of  his  mission.  (1)  Spiritual  in  its  nature.  It  would  not  blend  with  worldly
objects,  tor  fall  in  with  worldly  schemes.  (2)  Spiritual  in  its  sphere.  The  mind,
the  spirit,  the  soul,  and  heart.  (3)  Spiritual  in  its  means  and  operations.  (4)  Spiritual
in  its  end.  Ite  spiritual  life  of  man ;  the  salvation  of  the  human  race ;  the  libeity  of
the  captives  of  sin.  He  said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  Here  is  an  illustra-
tion and  a  proof  of  it.  He  is  offered  an  earthly  kingdom.  His  ideas  of  power,  honour,
and  glory  were  diametrically  opposed  to  those  of  the  world.  They  were  purely  spiritual.
3.  Impurity  and  strength  of  his  character.  (1)  His  character  was  in  perfect  harmony
with  his  mission.  His  mission  was  spiritual  and  his  character  was  true.  Strictly  true
to  his  mission  and  to  itself;  there  was  not  a  jarring  note.  (2)  His  chai'acter  was
delicately  sensitive  to  the  presence  of  evil.  Sensitive  to  its  invisible  promptings  and
motives.     "  He  perceived  that  t'uey  would  couie,"  etc.     He  was  sensitive  to  the  verj


BH.  Ti.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  261

breath  of  worldly  notions,  human  ambition,  and  petty  pride.  (3)  His  character  had  a
decided  resisting  force  against  evil  even  in  its  most  insidious  and  apparently  innocent
forms.  How  insidious  and  apparently  innocent  was  evil  in  this  proposal  of  the  multi-
tude! Was  it  not  kindness  and  gratitude?  Yes,  but  it  was  radically  against  the
nature  of  his  mission  and  the  purpose  of  his  life,  and  he  shrank  from  it  as  from  a
venomous  reptile.  It  was  one  thing  to  resist  the  proposal  of  the  devil  when  he  bare-
facedly offered  Jesus  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  with  their  glory,  on  the  humiliating
and  vile  condition  of  worshipping  him ;  it  was  another  thing  to  resist  him  in  the
apparently  innocent  proposal  of  the  multitude  to  make  him  King.  It  is  one  thing  to
resi.-t  the  evil  one  in  the  common  and  glaring  vices  of  society ;  it  is  another  to  resist
him  in  the  garb  of  kindness  and  in  the  hosannas  of  gratitude.  Jesus  did  this.  Ha
had  a  force  of  character  stronger  than  the  force  with  which  he  was  threatened.  He
became  poor  of  his  own  accord,  but  could  not  be  made  King  by  force.  A  child  could
win  him.  A  poor  blind  man  could  stop  him  by  crying;  for  help,  but  a  multitude  could
not  make  him  King  against  his  will.  He  was  taken  by  force  once,  but  not  before  he
gave  a  proof  that  it  was  by  permission.  He  gi)ve  himself  up  to  a  cross,  but  not  to  an
earthly  crown.  He  sacrificed  his  life,  but  would  not  saoiifice  his  principle,  bis  integrity,
his  mission,  and  heavenly  trust.  4.  The  wisdom  of  his  conduct.  (1)  He  resisted  the
evil  at  its  very  heginning,  "  When  he  perceived,"  etd  ;  before  it  had  gained  too  much
strength,  nipped  it  in  the  bud.  (2)  Eesisted  it  at  once.  "  Straightway,"  according  to
Mark — witiiout  any  hesitation.  (3)  Resisted  it  in  the  best  way.  The  disciples  were
sent  away  first,  then  the  multitu'le.  When  the  multitude  saw  the  disciples  depart,
they  lost  hope  and  courage.  He  did  not  u.se  extraordinary  means  when  ordinary  ones
would  suffice.  The  force  of  his  character  and  wisdom  were  sufficient  for  this.  5.  The
devotion  of  his  spirit.  "  He  departed  again,"  etc.  We  see :  (1)  The  manner  of  his
devotion.  Retirement,  alone.  (^£)  Hhe  spirituoH  dependence  of  his  nature.  Independent
of  the  crowd,  but  dejiendent  on  his  Father.  The  multitudes  were  filled.  He  was
hungry  now  lor  his  Father's  fellowship.  (3)  The  habit  of  his  life.  "  He  departed
again,"  etc.  It  was  not  the  first  time  nor  the  last.  Prayer  was  the  habit  of  his  life.
(4)  The  secret  of  his  power.  His  power  was  fed  and  nursed  in  secret  fellowship  with
his  Father.  He  went  up  the  mountain  to  meet  him,  and  came  down  with  fresh  inspi-
ration and  strength.  If  we  want  to  do  wonders  down  among  men,  we  must  retire  and
climb  the  mount  to  God.

Lessons.  1.  When  a  multitude  is  inspired  with  wrong  ideas  and  purposes,  bettor
disperse  it.  Thus  did  Jesus.  2.  The  best  of  teachers  often  find  it  difficult  to  gather
people  and  keep  them  together.  Jesus  often  found  it  difficult  to  send  them  away  ;  they
clung  to  him,  and  he  had  to  take  himself  away  from  them.  3.  When  Divine  and
human  forces  come  into  collision,  the  human  ought  and  must  give  way.  4.  If  Christ
deemed  it  wrong  to  take  man  and  make  him  his  subject  by  force,  it  is  wrong  for  man,
or  any  number  of  men,  to  attempt  to  make  him  King  by  force.  Voluntariness  is  the
principle  of  his  kingdom.  5.  It  is  better  to  be  alone  with  a  mountain  than  to  he  with  a
multitude,  when  it  is  entirely  inspired  with  wrong  and  dangerous  notions.  6.  Miu:h
honour  is  attempted  to  be  forced  on  Jesus  against  his  expressed  will.  Such  honour  to
him  is  dishonour,  and  will  not  have  it.  He  withdraws  from  it.  7.  The  highest  honour
we  can  pay  Jesus  and  ourselves  is  to  make  him  King  of  our  hearts  and  souls,  "  Enter
in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord."— B.  T.

Verg.  22 — 26. — False  seekers  and  a  true  Saviour,  We  have  here  in  relation  to  Jesus —

I.   A   MANIFESTATION    OF    AN    OUTWARDLY    PROPER    AND    HOPEFUL    CONDUCT.       These

people  sought  Jesus,  and  in  doing  so :  1.  They  strove  to  find  the  right  Object — Jesus.
Many  seek  unworthy,  worthless,  and  injurious  objects — objects  unworthy  of  them  and
their  efforts — ^the  very  thought  of  which  is  most  debasing  and  morally  dangerous;  but
these  people  seek  the  most  worthy,  valuable,  and  soul-benefiting  Object  it  was  possible
for  them  to  seek.  2.  It  was  most  important  for  them  and  for  all  to  find  him.  So
important  it  was,  that  Christ,  at  the  expense  of  the  greatest  condescension  and  self-
sacrifice,  placed  himself  in  their  way  so  that  they  may  know  and  truly  find  bim.  And  to
find  him  is  to  find  "  a  Pearl  of  great;  price  " — an  eternal  fortune  which  will  make  the
soul  really  rich  for  ever.  3.  They  strove  to  find  him  in  the  right  way.  They  sought
him.    Christ;,  as  well  as  all  the  blessin;^s  of  his  redemption,  ia  to  be  found  by  wekiuK.


298  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  ^j.  1—71.

"  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find,"  is  as  applicable  to  hjm  as  to  all  the  gpiritnal  blessings  of  his
kingdom.  4.  In  their  seeking  there  is  much  that  is  commendable  and  worthy  of
imitation,  (1)  There  is  much  enthusiasm.  (2)  Intelligent  observation.  They  observed
his  movements  and  those  of  his  disciples.  (3)  Diligent  sear(A.  They  spared  no  trouble
nor  effort.  (4)  Determined  perseverance.  While  others  had  given  up  in  despair,  they
persevered  ia  spita  of  the  conduct  of  others,  of  disappointment  and  difficulties.  When
they  were  convinced  that  he  was  on  the  other  side,  and  that  the  sea  was  between
them,  this  they  bravely  crossed.  (6)  Ultimate  success.  They  found  him,  their  efforts
were  rewarded  with  success — they  found  him.

n.  A  BEVBLATioN  OF  wBONO  MOTIVES.  "  Ye  Seek  me,  not,"  etc.  This  revelation
shows :  1.  That  Christ  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  real  character  of  men.  He  not
merely  knows  the  outward  actions,  but  also  their  inward  springs,  motives,  and
inspiration.  He  knew  the  character  of  these  men  better  than  they  themselves.  Be
cannot  be  deceived  by  any  amount  of  outward  show  and  profession ;  the  inward  man  is
open  to  him.  2.  That  much  outward  interest  is  often  manifested  in  Christ  frvm  wrong
and  improper  motives.  "  Ye  seek  me,  not,"  etc.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  these  people.
(1)  Their  motives  were  utterly  selfish.  They  sought  him,  not  for  his  sake,  but  for  their
own  ;  not  on  account  of  what  he  was  in  himself,  as  manifested  in  his  mighty  works,  bat
on  account  of  what  he  might  be  to  them  as  experienced  in  the  loaves.  They  sought
not  Jesus  at  all,  but  their  own  self-interest  in  the  results  of  his  miracles.  (2)  Their
motives  were  lamentably  low.  They  were  not  merely  selfish,  but  they  were  such  as
pertained  to  their  lowest  self.  "  Because  ye  ate  of  the  loaves,  and  were  filled."  They
sought  him,  not  even  from  intellectual  curiosity,  but  from  selSsh  gratification ;  their
inspiration  in  seeking  him  came  not  from  the  higher  region  of  the  heart  and  soul,  but
■  from  the  lower  region  of  the  appetites.  They  seem  to  have  partly  lost  the  national  idea
of  the  Messiah's  kingship  which  they  entertained  on  the  previous  day ;  they  now  wish
to  crown  him  as  the  King  of  human  food.  (3)  Their  motives  reveal  the  complete
ascendancy  of  the  animal  and  the  dormancy  of  the  spiritual  in  thrni.  They  seemed  to
have  been  entirely  under  the  reign  of  their  physical  nature ;  the  spiritual  seems  fast
asleep.  The  body  was  all  alive  and  loud  in  its  demands  and  satisfaction,  but  the
immortal  soul  uttered  not  a  word  about  her  existence,  wants,  and  misery — not  even  in
the  presence  of  Jesus.  3.  That  much  of  the  interest  manifested  in  Jesus  is  inspired  by
wrong  motives,  although  the  greatest  advantages  are  enjoyed  to  possess  the  rigSit  ones.
(1)  These  people  had  seen  the  mighty  works  of  Jesus.  They  had  seen  the  signs — not
one,  but  many ;  they  were  performed  before  their  very  eyes.  They  had  enjoyed  their
temporal  benefits,  and  they  possessed  the  required  capacities  to  comprehend  their
meaning  and  mission.  (2)  These  signs  were  eminently  adapted  to  furnish  them  with
right  motives  in  seeking  Jesus.  They  most  eloquently  and  convincingly  proclaimed
him  to  be  a  Divine  Person ;  their  Messiah,  the  Son  of  Gh>d,  come  od  a  special  mission,
not  to  feed  their  bodies,  but  to  save  their  souls ;  not  to  deliver  from  the  Soman  yoke,
but  from  the  yoke  of  sensuality  and  vice  and  spiritual  death.  (3)  But  in  spite  of  all
this  he  is  sought  from  low  and  wrong  motives.  "  Ye  seek  me,  not,"  etc.  The  right
and  natural  motives  are  ignored,  and  wrong  and  unworthy  ones  are  adopted.  The
loaves  are  more  valued  than  the  Divine  power  which  multiplied  them ;  the  streams  are
more  valued  than  the  fountain — the  means  than  the  end.  The  Divine  miracles  of
Jesus  are  prostituted  to  gratify  the  lowest  appetites ;  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come
are  prostituted  to  serve  the  low  ends  of  this,  and  an  attempt  is  made  to  make  the  Etn><
of  souls  the  slave  of  human  bodies.  4.  That  any  amount  of  interest  in  Jesus,  in  th»
absence  of  right  and  proper  motives,  is  quite  worthless.  A  right  motive  alone  can  make
an  action  morally  and  spiritually  right,  valuable,  and  acceptable.  As  such :  (1)  It  is
worthless  to  the  man  himself.  "  Though  I  speak  with,"  etc.  (2)  It  is  worthless  to
Jesus.  Nothing  is  valued  by  him  but  what  proceeds  from  right  motives  and  worthy
considerations — considerations  of  our  spiritual  wants,  and  his  willingness  and  power  to
satisfy  them.  Motives  with  Christ  are  the  final  test  of  character  and  attachment  to
him.  5.  That  Jesus  reveals  the  wrong  motives  of  men  in  relation  to  him  in  order
to  improve  them.  In  some  cases  he  seems  to  do  this  for  the  improvement  of  others;
but  in  this  case,  as  well  as  generally,  for  the  improvement  of  those  he  addressed.
(1)  The  revelation  is  made  directly  to  them.  "  I  say  unto  you,"  etc.  Not  to  some  one
else.    Christ  was  honest  and  straightforward,  and  told  people  their  faults  to  their  faces.


«H.ti.  1— 71.]      TflS!  GOSPSL  ACCOEDING  tO  ST.  JOHN.  298

He  holds  the  looking-glass  of  truth  before  the  man,  bo  that  he  may  see  his  moral  image.
And  it  is  a  great  help  to  improve  a  man  to  let  him  see  himself.  (2)  The  revelation  is
made  with  solemn  emphasis.  "  Verily,  verily,"  etc.  Indicating  the  absolute  truth  of
the  charge,  and  its  paramount  importance  with  regard  to  their  destiny.  (3)  The
revelation  is  in  a  reforming  spirit.  It  is  firm  and  condemnatory,  still  is  moderate — a
simple  and  plain  statement  of  facts;  and  its  evident  intention  was  to  benefit,  correct,
and  improve  them,  elevate  their  tastes  and  motives,  raise  them  from  the  material  to  the
spiritual,  from  body  to  the  soul,  and  from  the  temporal  to  the  eternal.  "  Ye  seek  me,
not  because  ye  saw  the  signs,"  etc.  There  you  lost  it.  You  must  retrace  your  steps  and
look  at  me  through  the  miracles,  and  not  through  your  own  low  self-interest ;  through
your  spiritual  nature,  and  not  through  your  physical  appetites.  Then  you  will  see  that
the  spiritual  wants  of  your  souls  are  infinitely  more  important  than  those  of  your
bodies,  and  that  I  am  divinely  sent  to  feed  and  save  you.

Lessons.  1.  That  Jesus  could  not  6e  deceived  hy  popular  demonstrations  in  his
favour.  And  what  would  cheer  religious  teachers  generally  rather  saddened  him,
for  he  could  see  the  inward  motives  as  well  as  the  outward  movements ;  he  judged
from  within,  and  what  a  man  was  inwardly  he  was  really  to  him.  He  found  this
wanting  often,  even  when  the  outward  was  promising.  2.  That  Jesus,  with  regard  to
his  followers,  went  in  for  quality  rather  than  qucmtity.  He  invited  all,  aud  would
welcome  all  with  equal  readiness  and  joy.  But  only  the  genuine  he  would  receive  and
encourage ;  the  ungenuine  he  would  reject  and  reprove.  He  preferred  a  few  real  foUowere
to  a  multitude  of  "  loafers."  3.  On  the  great  day  of  revelation  it  mil  he  found  that
the  religion  of  many  was  hased  upon  selfish  and  worldly  considerations,  aud  not  upon
genuine  faith  and  love,  and  warm  attachment  to  the  Saviour.  4.  Inasmuch  as  purity
and  spirituality  of  motives  and  intentions  are  so  essential  in  relation  to  Christ  and  the
saluation  of  ov/r  souls,  we  cannot  be  too  careful  in  this  direction,  especially  when  we
consider  that  worldliness  and  selfishness  are  our  most  besetting  and  insidious  sins.
They  clandestinely  entwine  around  our-most  sacred  devotions  and  services,  and  appear
often  innocent  and  agreeable ;  but  nothing  can  so  efficiently  separate  from  Christ.  Hence
the  necessity  of  the  prayer,  "Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,"  etc. — B.  T.

Vers.  37 — 40. — The  Father's  win  and  its  Executor.  We  see :  1.  That  the  nuijority  of
Chrisfs  hearers  disbelieved  him.  .  His  verdict  at  last  was,  "  Ye  believe  not ; "  "  Ye  will
m  >t  come."  2.  That  they  disbelieved  him  in  spite  of  the  greatest  advantages  to  faith.
(Ver.  36.)  3.  That  in  spite  of  their  obstinate  unbelief  and  cruel  rejection,  the  gracious
purposes  of  Qod  and  the  mission  of  Jesus  will  not  be  void.  "  For  all  that  the  Father
giveth  me,"  etc.    Notice —

I.  The  Father's  will.  W«  see  in  this  will:  1.  That  he  has  given  a  certain
number  of  the  human  fan.ily  to  Christ.  In  a  general  and  a  true  sense  all  the  human
family  have  been  given  him ;  they  are  the  objects  of  his  saving  love  and  grace.  All  are
invited  to  the  gospel-feast,  and  commanded  to  repent.  The  earth  is  Immanuel's  land,
and  the  human  race,  without  exception  or  partiality,  are  the  objects  of  his  saving  mercy.
But  there  are  some  specially  given  to  Christ ;  they  are  spoken  of  as  such :  "  All  that  the
Father  giveth  me."  They  have  been  given  in  the  past  in  purpose;  they  are  given  in
the  present  in  fact.  This  suggests :  (1)  That  the  salvation  of  the  human  family  is  carried
on  accordingto  the  eternal  purpose  and  plan  of  Qod.  Everything  has  been  arranged  from
the  beginning.  Nothing  happens  by  accident ;  neither  the  Father  nor  the  Son  is  ever
taken  by  surprise.  (2)  That  the  mission  of  Christ  is  not  a  speculation,  but  with  regard
to  him  an  absolute  certainty.  Speculation  is  a  term  unapplicable  to  Divine  proceedings ;
they  are  fixed  and  determined  as  to  their  mode  and  result.  Jesus  lived  and  acted  on
earth  in  the  full  consciousness  of  this.  And  who  would  not  rejoice  that  the  blessed
Redeemer  was  not  in  this  hostile  world  as  the  creature  of  chance  and  at  the  mercy  of
fate,  but  ever  fortified  with  the  knowledge  of  his  Father's  will  and  purpose,  the
consciousness  of  his  Father's  love,  and  the  certainty  of  the  success  of  his  own  mission  ?
2,  That  the  Father  gave  these  to  Christ,  because  he  knew  that  they  would  come  to  him.
Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  division  of  time,  as  past,  present,  and  future,  is  nothing
to  God.  All  time  to  him  is  present.  In  his  plans  and  election  he  experienced  no
difficulty  arising  from  ignorance,  but  all  was  divinely  clear  to  him.  And  we  see  that  h«
)8  not  arbitrary  in  his  selections.    We  know  that  his  authority  is  absolute ;  that  he  has


294  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDlNa  TO  ST.  JOHN,     ton,  vi.  i—li

the  same  authority  over  man  as  the  potter  over  the  clay.  He  can  do  as  he  likes,  an^
perhaps  this  is  the  only  answer  he  would  give  to  some  questioners, "  I  can  do  as  I
like."  But  we  know  that  he  cannot  like  to  do  anything  that  is  wrong,  UDreasoDahIe,or
unfair.  He  cannot  act  from  mere  caprice,  hut  his  actions  are  harmonious  with  all  his
attributes,  as  well  as  with  the  highest  reason;  and  can  give  a  satisfactory  reason  for  all
acts,  and  justify  himself  to  his  intelligent  creatures.  The  principle  on  which  he  gave
certain  of  the  human  family  to  Christ  was  willingness  on  their  part  to  come  to  him.
In  the  gifts  of  his  providence  he  has  regard  to  adaptation — he  gives  water  to  quench  thirst,
etc.  But,  in  giving  human  souls  to  Christ,  he  had  a  special  regard  to  the  human  will.
He  knew  as  an  absolute  fact  that  some  would  refuse  his  offer  of  grace  in  Christ,  and  that
others  would  gladly  accept  the  same  offer  under  the  same  conditions.  The  former  he
neither  would  nor  could,  the  latter  he  graciously  gave.  It  is  an  invariahle  characterititic
of  those  given  to  Christ  that  they  give  themselves  to  him.  3.  Those  given  to  Christ  shall
certainly  come  to  him.  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall,"  etc.  Jesus  was  certain  of
this.  And  if  given,  they  come;  and  if  they  come,  they  were  given.  Divine  foreknowledge
is  never  at  fault,  and  Divine  grace  can  never  fail  to  he  effective  with  regard  to  those  thus
given  to  Christ.  Their  coming  was  included  in  the  gift.  There  was  the  knowledge  of
their  coming,  and  every  grace,  motive,  and  help  was  promised  with  the  gifts ;  so  that
their  arrival  to  Christ  is  certain.  They  shall  come,  in  spite  of  every  opposition  and
difSculty  from  within  and  without.  4.  That  these  were  given  to  Christ  in  trust  for
special  purposes.  These  are  set  forth :  (1)  Negatively.  "  That  I  should  lose  nothing  "
(ver.  39).  Not  one,  not  the  least,  and  not  even  anything  necessary  to  the  happiness  of
that  one.  (2)  Affirmatively.  "  May  have  everlasting  life."  The  highest  good  they
could  wish  and  enjoy.  (3)  That  they  should  have  these  blessings  on  the  most  reasonable
and  easy  terms.  By  simple  acceptance  of  the  gift,  and  simple  and  trustful  faith  in  the
Giver  (ver.  40).

II.  Jesub  as  the  Executob  and  Trustee  of  the  Father's  witt.  In  these
capacities :  1.  Ee  is  most  gracious,  for  (1)  the  work  involves  the  greatest  responsibilities.
It  is  true  that  those  given  shall  come  to  him.  But  look  at  their  miserable  condition.  They
are  guilty ;  he  must  procure  their  pardon.  They  are  conrlemned ;  he  must  justify  them.
They  are  corrupt ;  he  must  cleanse  and  sanctify  them.  They  are  sick ;  he  must  hesd  them.
They  are  in  debt ;  he  must  pay  it.  The  responsibilities  are  infinite.  (2)  It  involves
the  greatest  self-sacrifice.  To  meet  these  responsibilities  required  the  greatest  self-
sacrifice  possible.  Before  they  could  be  justified,  he  himself  must  he  condemned ;  to
heal  them,  he  must  be  mortally  wounded ;  to  make  them  rich,  he  must  become  poor ;  to
pay  their  debt,  he  must  lay  down  his  life  as  a  ransom ;  and  to  bring  them  unto  glory,
he  must  be  made  "  perfect  through  sufferings."  What  but  infinite  love  would  accept  the
trust  and  execute  the  will  ?  2.  Se  is  most  tenderly  and  universally  inviting.  "  Him
that  Cometh  to  me  I  wiU,"  etc.  These  words  are  most  tender  and  inviting.  They  were
uttered  in  the  painful  consciousness  that  many  would  not  come  to  him,  although  there
were  infinite  provisions  and  welcome.  The  door  of  salvation  need  not  be  wider,  nor  the
heart  of  the  Saviour  more  tender,  than  this.  There  is  no  restriction,  no  favouritism.
"  Him  that  cometh."  3.  ffe  is  most  adapted  for  his  position.  This  will  appear  if  we
consider :  (1)  That  he  is  divinely  appointed.  "  The  Father  which  sent  me."  The  Father
appointed  him  to  be  the  Trustee  and  Executor  of  his  will.  And  he  knew  whom  to  appoint.
He  acts  under  the  highest  authority.  (2)  He  was  willing  to  undertake  the  trust.  It  is
true  that  he  was  sent,  but  as  true  that  he  came.  "  I  am  come  down  from  heaven  "
(ver.  38).  There  was  no  coercion.  His  mission  was  as  acceptable  to  him  as  it  was
pleasing  to  the  Father,  so  that  he  has  great  delight  in  his  work.  (3)  He  is  thoroughly
acquainted  with  the  Divine  will.  Perfect  knowledge  is  essential  to  perfect  execution.
Many  profess  to  know  much,  but  where  is  the  proof?  Jesus  proves  his  knowledge  by
revelation.  "  This  is  my  Father's  will,"  etc.  He  was  acquainted  with  all  its  responsi-
bilities, its  purposes,  and  sufferinss,  as  well  as  all  the  difficidties  in  carrying  it  out.  This
he  knew  from  the  beginning  before  he  undertook  the  trust.  (4)  He  is  enthusiastically
devoted  to  both  parties — to  the  Testator  and  the  legatees.  He  is  devoted  to  the  Father.
"  I  am  come  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  but,"  etc.  He  had  a  will  of
his  Qwn,  but  in  his  mediatorial  office  it  was  entirely  merged  in  that  of  his  Father.  He
is  equally  devoted  to  the  objects  of  his  Father's  love ;  for  "  him  that  cometh  to  me  I
will  in  no  wise  cast  out."    And  he  could  say  more — he  would  help  and  almost  compel


OH.  n.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  296

him  to  come  in.  (5)  He  ig  divinely  competent.  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  Elect  of  the
Father,  ever  conscious  of  his  capacities  for  this  work.  Not  a  shadow  of  doubt  in  this
respect  ever  came  across  his  mind.  He  was  serenely  conscious  of  fulness,  of  power,  of  life
— the  fulness  of  the  Godhead;  and  he  gave  ample  proof  of  his  Divine  competency  as
he  went  along.  The  sick  were  healed,  the  dead  were  raised,  the  guilty  were  pardoned,
and  all  penitents  who  appealed  to  him  were  saved.  Naturally  and  well  he  might  say,
"  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."  And  being  able  to  do  this,  he  can  do  all.  All  the
qualifications  necessary  to  execute  the  Divine  will  with  regard  to  the  human  race  fiill,"
meet  in  him.    "  His  will  be  done."

Lessons.  1.  The  purposes  of  the  Divine  will  are  in  safe  hands.  Not  one  shall
suffer  on  his  account.  2.  The  lives  of  believers  are  in  safe  custody.  Nothing  will  be
lost.  3.  The  mission  t^  Jesus  is  certain  of  success.  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me,"
etc.  4.  The  perdition  of  man  must  come  entirely  from  himself.  All  the  purposes  and
dispensations  of  God,  all  the  mediatorial  work  of  Jesus,  are  for  his  salvation.  All  that
God  in  Christ  could  do  for  his  deliverance  is  done.  Nothing  but  his  own  will  can  stand
between  him  and  eternal  life.  5.  The  duty  of  all  to  come  to  Jesus  and  accept  his  grace.
There  is  a  marked  difference  between  the  conduct  of  Jesus  and  the  conduct  of  those
who  reject  him.  He  receives  the  vilest ;  they  reject  the  most  holy  and  gracious  One.  He
opens  the  door  to  the  most  undeserving  ;  they  close  it  against  the  pride  of  angels,  the
inspiration  of  the  redeemed,  and  the  glory  of  heaven  and  earth.  Beware  of  trifling
with  the  long-suffering  mercy  of  Jesus.  The  last  thing  he  can  do  is  to  cast  out;  but
when  he  casts  out,  he  casts  out  terribly. — B.  T.

Ver.  66. — The  sad  departure  from  Christ.    Notice^

I.  That  the  ministry  of  Jesus  bbpbllbd  many.  "From  this  time  many  of
his  disciples,"  etc.  And  why  ?  1.  Because  his  ministry  revealed  their  true  character  to
themselves  and  others.  (1)  As  unreal.  They  were  miserably  wanting  in  sincerity,
honesty, and  earnestness.  (2)  As  worldly,  secula/r,  a.uA  carnal — wanting  in  spirituality
and  true  concern  for  the  soul.  (3)  As  selfish.  They  were  self-seeking  and  self-
righteous.  (4)  As  wicked.  (5)  As  unbelieving.  2.  Because  his  ministry  was
diametrically  opposed  to  their  real  character.  He  preached  repentance — inward  reform,
heavenly  biith,  and  honesty,  which  were  opposed  to  their  hoUowness  of  principle.  He
preached  the  superior  claims  of  the  soul  and  spiritual  things,  which  were  opposed  to
their  carnality  and  worldliness.  He  preached  self-sacrifice  and  love  and  exemplified
them  in  his  life,  and  these  were  ojiposed  lo  their  selfishness.  He  inculcated  holiness,
which  was  opposed  to  their  wickedness  and  vice.  He  demanded  practical  and  genuine
faith,  which  was  opposed  to  their  infidelity  and  indifference.  He  denounced  their
conduct,  and  enforced  opposite  principles  with  such  force  and  honesty  that  at  last  his
ministry  not  merely  became  unattractive  to  them,  but  obnoxious  and  painful.  3.
Because  his  ministry  was  uncompromising  and  unchangeable.  He  would  not  pander
to  their  likings  in  any  way.  He  was  the  true  and  faithful  Witness.  There  was  no
discord  in  the  music  of  his  ministry.  So  that  his  followers  bad  either  to  change,
exercise  faith  in  him,  or  follow  him  under  a  cloak  of  profession,  or  leave  him  entirely.
These  chose  the  latter ;  they  "  went  back,  and  walked  no  more,"  etc.

II.  That  it  is  possible  to  go  a  loko  way  with  Jesus  and  then  leave
HiH.  It  was  so  in  this  case.  We  have  here :  1.  A  sad  separation.  "  They  walked
no  more,"  etc.  (1)  They  left  Jesus,  and  not  Jesus  them.  He  did  not  send  them
away.  All  moral  separations  from  Christ  are  commenced  by  man.  Jud.is  shall
remain  in  the  society  of  Jesus  till  he  goes  out  himself.  An  illustration  of  what  our
Lord  had  just  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  (2)  They
separated  from  him  after  being  with  him  for  some  time.  "  They  walked  no  more  wi;h
him."  They  had  walked  a  good  deal  with  him.  They  were  his  disciples.  They  had
attended  his  ministry,  heard  his  gracious  words  and  saw  his  mighty  deeds,  but
separated  at  last.  (3)  They  separated  from  him  although  they  had  received  much  kindness
from  him.  Their  sick  were  healed,  their  miseries  alleviated,  and  their  hunger  satiated.
They  had  only  just  been  feeding  on  his  bounties  ia  the  desert;  but  now  they  leave  their
old  Benefactor,  who  was  willing,  able,  and  anxious  to  bless  them  spiritually  and
eternally.  What  ingratitude  and  perversity  !  (4)  They  separated  from  him  for  ever.
This  was  certainly  the  case  with  regard  to  his  society  in  this  world.    There  are  sad


296  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  ti.  1—71.

partings  often  on  earth,  and  painful  social  separations  by  distance  and  death ;  but  of  all
sad  separatioDS,  the  saddest  is  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  Christ — of  an  old  disciple
from  his  Master.  2.  A  sad  loss  to  them,  not  to  Jesus.  (1)  They  lost  what  they  had
gained.  We  can  scarcely  think  that  they  could  have  been  with  Jesus  without  being
somewhat  benefited.  Some  of  them,  we  may  conjecture,  were  almost  Christians,  but  in
leaving  Christ  they  lost  all,  even  what  they  had;  much  of  their  best  energies  were
wasted.  (2)  They  lost  what  they  might  have  gained.  What  they  had  from  Jesus  was
nothing  to  what  they  might  have.  What  he  had  done  for  them  was  only  introductory
to  what  he  would  do.  They  left  him  on  the  threshold  of  the  temple  of  truth  and  salva-
tion, and  thus  lost  the  best  society,  the  divinest  ministry,  their  only  Deliverer,  and  the
inestimable  blessings  arising  from  union  with  him.  What  a  sad  loss  I  3.  A  sad
retrogression.  They  went  back.  (1)  To  go  back  from  Christ  is  to  go  back  from  all
good.  For  he  is  the  incarnation  of  goodness,  the  exhaustless  Treasury  of  all  spiritual
blessings,  and  the  only  Saviour  of  the  soul.  To  go  back  from  him  is  to  recede  from  the
standard  of  moral  excellency,  and  the  centre  of  redemptive  help  and  grace.  (2)  To  go
back  from  him  is  to  go  on  towards  all  evil  and  its  consequences.  Man  cannot  be
spiritually  stationary ;  and  in  the  opposite  direction  of  Christ  there  is  only  evU — the
cold  breath  of  infidelity,  the  darkness  of  spiritual  death,  and  the  terrible  whirlwinds  of
despair  and  misery.  (3)  To  go  back  from  Christ  is  one  of  the  worst  symptoms  of  the
soul.  While  man  clings  to  Christ  there  is  some  hope  of  him ;  but  when  he  tears  away
from  him,  he  manifests  a  sinful  force  which  breaks  through  the  mightiest  moral  power
which  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  him,  and  his  character  seems  fixed  and  his  destiny
decided.  We  speak  of  going  back  in  the  world,  but  this  is  the  saddest  going  back  of
all — to  go  back  from  Christ.  "  Many  of  his  disciples  went  back  ; "  but  Christ  went  on
in  his  eternal  course  of  benevolence,  redeniption,  and  glory.

Lessons.  1.  What  ought  to  attract  people  to  Christ  often  drives  them  away  from
him.  It  was  so  here.  2.  There  are  arises  in  the  Christian  ministry  and  in  the  lives  of
disciples  which  severely  test  their  Christian  character  and  attachment  to  Christ.  "  From
that  hour,"  etc.  3.  Th^re  are  many  who  will  follow  Jesus  while  everything  runs
smoothly,  hut  leave  him  at  Hie  least  offence  or  difficulty.  They  will  not  stand  the  test.
4.  Thbse  who  leave  Jesus  early  rather  than  follow  him  under  a  false  profession  are
better  off  than  those  who  follow  on  thus  to  the  last.  These  disciples  who  left  him  now
were  better  than  Judas,  who  continued  to  the  bitter  end.  5.  It  is  better  not  to  follow
Jesus  at  all  than,  after  following  awhile,  turn  back  again.  They  are  worse  at  the  end
than  the  beginning — more  difficult  of  recovery.  And  the  recollection  of  their  time  with
Jesus  will  only  be  the  painful  memory  of  better  days,  brighter  hopes,  nobler  possibili-
ties, which  must  enhance  their  misery. — B.  T.

Vers.  67 — 69. — The  departure  of  the  many  consolidating  the  few.  Notice—
I.  Jesus*  QUESTION.  "Will  ye  also,' etc.?  This  impUes:  1.  Eisregard  for  the  freedom
of  the  will.  Christ  does  not  destroy,  nor  even  interfere  with,  the  freedom  of  the  human
will,  but  ever  preserves  and  respects  it.  He  ever  acknowledges  the  sovereignty  of  the
human  soul  and  will.  2.  That  it  was  his  wish  that  each  disciple  should  decide  for  him-
self.  "  Will  ye,"  etc.  ?  (1)  The  ^ej-sonaKty  ef  religious  decision.  Religion  is  personal.
Every  religious  act  must  be  personal,  and  is  ever  judged  as  such.  (2)  The  importance
of  reliaious  decision,  "Will  ye,"  etc.?  A  most  important  question  to  them  in  its
immediate  and  remote  issues.  Their  destiny  hangs  upon  it.  (3)  The  urgency  of  imme-
diate decision.  If  they  had  a  wish  to  leave  him,  the  sooner  the  better.  The  question
of  our  relationship  to  Christ  cannot  be  settled  too  soon.  It  demands  immediate  considera-
tion. 3.  Tfuit  it  was  not  his  wish  to  retain  them  against  their  will.  (1)  This  would
he  against  the  principle  of  his  oivn  life.  (2)  It  would  be  against  the  principle  of  all
spiritual  life.  (3)  And  against  the  great  principle  of  his  kingdom,  which  is  willing
obedience  and  voluntary  service.  Whatever  is  done  to  him  against  the  will,  or  without
its  hearty  concurrence,  has  no  virtue,  no  spiritual  value.  All  his  true  soldiers  are  volun-
teers. Unwilling  service  must  had  to  separation  sooner  or  later.  4.  His  independency
of  them.  (1)  He  is  not  disheartened  by  the  great  departure.  Many  went  back.  He
was  doubtless  grieved  with  this,  with  their  want  of  faith  and  gratitude,  but  was  not
dishearteneiL  (2)  He  is  independent  of  even  his  most  intimate  followers.  "  Will  ye,"
•to.  ?  If  even  they  had  the  will  to  go  away,  he  could  afford  it.    Que  might  think  that


OH.  VI.  1—71.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO-  TO  ST.  JOHN.  291

he  oould  ill  afford  to  ask  this  question  after  the  great  departure  from  him.  He  had
apparently  now  only  twelye,  and  to  these  he  asks,  "  Will  ye  also,"  etc.  ?  He  is  not
dependent  upon  his  disciples.  If  these  were  silent,  the  very  stones  would  speak ;  if  the
children  of  the  kingdom  reject  him,  "many  shall  come  from  the  east,"  etc.  5.  Hit  affec-
tionate care  for  them.  "  Will  ye  also,"  etc.  ?  In  this  question  we  hear:  (1)  The  sound  of
tender  solicititde.  There  is  the  note  of  independency  and  test  of  character ;  but  not  less
distinctly  is  beard  the  note  of  affectionate  solicitude  for  their  spiritual  safety.  He  did
not  ask  the  question  of  those  who  went  away.  (2)  The  sound  of  danger.  Even  the
twelve  were  not  out  of  danger.  Although  they  were  in  one  of  the  inner  circles  of  his
attraction,  they  were  in  danger  of  being  carried  away  with  the  flood.  (3)  The  sound  of
tender  warning.  "Will  ye  also,"  etc.?  You  are  in  danger.  And  their  danger  was  greater
and  more  serious  than  that  of  those  who  left ;  they  were  more  advanced,  and  could  not
go  away  without  committing  a  greater  sin.  (4)  The  sound  of  confidence.  The  question
does  not  seem  to  anticipate  an  afBimative  reply.  With  regard  to  all,  with  the  exception
of  one,  he  was  confident  of  their  allegiance.

II.  Thb  DI80IFLE8'  ANSWEB.  Simon  Peter  wag  the  mouthpiece  of  all.  The  answer
implies:  1.  A  right  discernment  of  t?ieir  chief  good.  "  Eternal  life."  This,  they  thought,
was  their  greatest  need,  and  to  obtain  it  was  the  chief  aim  of  their  life  and  energy;  and
in  this  they  were  right.  2.  A  right  discernment  of  Jesus  as  their  only  Helper  to  obtain
it.  Little  as  they  understood  of  the  real  meaning  of  his  life,  and  less  still  of  his  death,
they  discerned  him  (1)  as  the  only  Source  of  eternal  life ;  (2)  as  the  only  Sevealer  of
eternal  life;  (3)  as  the  only  CHver  of  eternal  life.  "  With  thee  are  the  words,"  etc.
3.  Implicit  faith  in  his  Divine  character.  "  We  believe  and  know,"  etc.  They  had
faith  in  him,  not  as  their  national,  but  as  their  personal  and  spiritual  Deliverer — the
Saviour  of  the  soul,  and  the  Possessor  and  Giver  of  eternal  life.  4.  A  determination  to
ding  to  him.  (1)  This  determination  is  warmly  prompt.  It  is  not  the  fruit  of  study,
but  the  warm  and  natural  outburst  of  the  heart  and  soul.  (2)  It  is  wise.  "  To  whom
shall  we  go?"  They  saw  no  other  one  to  go  to.  To  the  Pharisees  or  heathen  philoso-
phers ?  They  could  see  no  hope  of  eternal  life  from  either.  To  Moses  ?  He  would  only
send  them  back  to  Christ.  It  would  be  well  for  all  who  are  inclined  to  go  away  froix
Christ  to  ask  first,  "  To  whom  shall  we  go?"  (3)  It  is  independent.  They  are  deter-
mined to  cling  to  Christ,  although  many  left  him.  They  manifest  great  individuality  of
character,  independency  of  conduct,  and  spirituality  and  firmness  of  faith.  (4)  It  is  very
strong,  (a)  The  strength  of  satisfaction.  Believing  that  Christ  had  the  words  of  eternal
life,  what  more  could  they  need  or  desire  ?  (6)  The  strength  of  thorough  conviction.
They  not  only  believe,  but  also  know.  They  have  the  inward  testimony  of  faith  and
experience.  True  faith  has  a  tight  grasp.  Strong  conviction  has  a  tenacious  hold,  (c)
The  strength  of  willing  loyalty.  "  Lord,  to  whom,"  etc.  ?  "  Thou  art  our  Lord  and  our
Kino;,  and  we  are  thy  loyal  subjects."  Their  will  was  on  the  side  of  Christ,  and  their
determination  to  cling  to  him  was  consequently  strong,  (d)  The  strength  of  loving
attachment.  The  answer  is  not  only  the  language  of  their  reason,  but  also  the  language
of  their  affection.  Their  heart  was  with  Jesus.  They  oould  not  only  see  no  way  to  go
from  him,  but  they  had  no  wish,  (e)  The  strength  of  a  double  hold.  The  Divine  and
the  human.  The  hold  of  Jesus  on  them,  and  their  hold  on  him.  They  had  felt  the
Divine  drawing,  and  they  were  within  the  irresistible  attraction  of  Jesus.  They  were
all,  with  one  notorious  exception,  by  faith  safely  in  his  hand.

Lessons,  1.  Loving  faith  in  the  Saviour  is  strengthened  by  trials.  It  stands  the  test
of  adverse  circumstances.  In  spite  of  forces  which  have  a  tendency  to  draw  away  from
Christ,  it  clings  all  the  more  to  him.  2.  The  success  of  the  ministry  must  not  always
he  judged  by  addition*.  Subtractions  are  sometimes  inevitable  and  beneficial.  The
sincerity  of  the  following  should  be  regarded  even  more  than  the  number  of  the
followers.  3.  It  is  afar  greater  loss  for  us  to  lose  Jesus  than  for  Jesus  to  lose  us.  He
can  do  without  us,  but  we  cannot  do  without  him.  He  can  go  elsewhere  for  disciples  ;
but  "to  whom  shall  we  go?  "— B.  T.

Vers.  1 — 6. — TJie  feeding  of  the  five  thousand.  I.  A  thouohtless  cbowd.  Five
thousand  men  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  gathered  together  in  a  desert  place,  not
very  far  indeed  from  places  of  habitation  and  nourishment,  and  yet  far  enough  to  cause
faintness  and  famishing  f)efore  they  can  reach  them.    They  seem  to  have  drifted  into


298  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  tl  1—71.

this  position  vithout  any  thought  beforehand.  The  only  sufficiently  wise  person
among  them  was  •  bit  of  a  lad  who  bad  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  with  him.  Yet
these  men  most  not  be  hastily  reckoned  fools  as  the  world  counts  fools.  It  is  easy  to
be  wise  after  the  event.  It  was  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  for  this  crowd  to  get  into
this  helpless  state.  For :  1.  It  was  a  crowd.  Not  an  army,  not  a  disciplined  band ;  it
had  no  leader.  The  men  composing  this  crowd  never  supposed  when  they  started  off
that  five  thousand  of  them  were  going  to  be  in  a  desert  place  together.  2.  The  most
thoughtful  of  people  cannot  he  thoughtful  about  everything.  The  most  thoughtful  of
people  may  also  be  the  most  thoughtless.  Even  while  this  crowd  was  going  blindly  in
the  track  of  the  great  Wonder-worker,  many  of  them  would  have  hearts  filled  with
anxiety  because  of  their  private  affairs.  Not  all  our  thinking  and  pondering,  not  all
our  inquiring  and  superintending,  will  keep  us  out  of  sore  perplexities.  We  may  be  in
the  daily  habit  of  weighing  and  measuring  the  needs  of  life,  and  yet  some  day,  all  at
once,  there  may  start  up  a  need  the  possibility  of  which  we  were  not  able  to  guess.

II.  A  TuotroHTFUL  Jesub.  Jesus  himself  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  suggest  the
impending  difficulty  and  danger.  He  always  sees  whither  the  actions  of  men  are
tending,  and  what  complications  and  difficulties  they  are  all  unconsciously  bringing
about.  Jesus  himself  is  thoughtful  concerning  us,  even  when  we  are  without  thought,
and  without  fear  or  suspicion  that  there  is  anything  to  think  about.  It  is  the  business
of  Jesus,  so  to  speak,  to  be  thoughtful  for  every  one  of  us.  This  world  is  a  sinful  world,
a  suffering  world,  where  thousands  are  ever  on  the  brink  of  desperation,  forced  onwards,
as  it  seems,  with  no  choice  but  ruin  and  misery.  Happily  it  is  also  a  world  constantly
thought  of  by  a  higher  wisdom  and  power  than  are  to  be  found  anywhere  among  us.
Jesus  knows  that  sooner  or  later  every  child  of  man  will  have  to  accept  his  ministry.
Not  a  day  but  many  are  waking  up  to  a  want  more  pressing  and  terrible  than  any  the
body  can  feel,  and  Jesus  is  ready  for  the  waking  up.  He  thinks  concerning  all  of  us  all
the  time.

III.  A  PEBPLEXED  COMPANION.  Jesus  will  not  Only  be  a  Benefactor  to  the  hungry
multitude,  he  will  also  be  a  Teacher  to  the  disciples.  They  had  to  be  taught  con-
cerning difficulties  where  they  themselves  could  give  no  effectual  help.  It  belongs  to
humanity  that  men  should  ever  and  again  be  driven  into  a  corner  where  neither  can
they  help  themselves,  nor  can  any  other  help  them  by  the  ordinary  channels  of  human
endeavour  and  ability.  As  we  come  face  to  face  with  human  want  and  woe,  we
must  be  deeply,  humblingly  impressed  with  our  natural  inability  before  we  can  enter
into  all  the  strength  of  spiritual  ability.

IV.  A  PBOVIDINO  Jesus.  He  knew  what  he  would  do.  Of  course  he  did.  We  also
can  be  thoughtful  in  our  way.  But,  alas  1  the  more  we  think  the  less  we  are  able  to
do;  the  more  we  see  to  be  done,  and  the  more  we  see  our  own  iuability  to  do  it.  It  is
the  glory  of  Jesus  that  he  is  at  once  the  most  sympathizing  of  all  who  observe  human
need,  and  the  most  able  to  help  it.  With  him  pity  and  providence  go  together.  He  is
never  tied  to  our  ways  of  working.  He  is  never  taken  by  surprise.  He  is  never  over-
taxed by  the  number  of  needy  ones.  He  who  fed  five  thousand  could  just  as  easily
have  fed  five  millions.  He  can  be  prompt,  and  yet  neither  strain  nor  hurry.  He  gives
his  own  calmness  and  confidence  to  his  servants.  They  know  that  his  resources  are
theirs.  Note,  too,  the  responsibility  that  came  on  every  one  of  these  five  thousand,
because  of  his  share  in  what  was  provided. — T.

Vera.  1*2,  13. — Gathering  the  fragments.  I.  The  proof  op  thb  abundance.  There
are  distributions  where  the  quantity  is  so  limited  that  each  has  far  short  of  what  he
could  manage.  The  point  of  the  miracle  lies  in  this,  that  each  had  not  merely  some-
thing, but  enough.  And  the  proof  that  each  had  enough  lies  in  this,  that  fragments
were  all  strewn  about.

II.  The  evidence  that  this  mode  of  supply  must  be  only  very  ocoasional.
What  comes  easily  is  lightly  valued.  Though  the  people  had  got  a  meal  in  this  mar-
vellous way,  they  were  not  very  thoughtful  about  the  marvel.  They  ate  on  till  they
had  enough,  and  then  flung  the  residue  away.  Not  every  one  would  be  so  thoughtless,
but  a  great  many  must  have  been,  else  whence  the  twelve  baskets  full?  Habitual
beggars  are  wasteful  and  reckless  livers.  There  is  great  wisdom  in  the  ordinance  whereby
man  has  to  work  so  hard  for  his  bread.     He  learns  that  he  has  to  make  the  very  best  of


OH.  VI.  1—71.]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDma  TO  ST.  JOHN.  299

things  be  can.  It  li  a  pitiful  confession  to  make ;  but  most  men  are  compelled  into
foretliougbt  through  sheer  necessity.

HI.  The  BE8FE0T  WHICH  ouoHT  TO  BK  PAID  TO  BBEAD,  Lane,  !ii  Ms  *  Modem  Egyx>-
tians,'  says  of  them  that  they  show  a  great  respect  for  bread  aa  the  staff  of  life,  and  on
no  account  suffer  the  smallest  portion  of  it  to  be  wasted  if  they  can  ayoid  it,  "  I  have
often  observed  an  Egyptian  take  up  a  small  piece  of  bread  which  had  by  accident  fallen
into  the  street  or  road,  and  after  putting  it  before  his  lips  and  forehead  three  times,
place  it  on  one  side,  in  order  that  a  dog  might  eat  it  rather  than  let  it  remain  to  be
trodden  underfoot."  Consider  the  marvellous  transmutation  by  which  bread  becomes
flesh  and  blood.  Make  the  very  best  of  it,  then.  Remember  how  Jesus  has  taken  it
as  the  symbol  of  that  spiritual  sustaining  force  which  is  to  be  found  in  him.  One
would  have  expected  these  people  each  one  to  take  his  own  remaining  fragment  as  an
interesting  memento  of  the  wonderful  deed.  Even  if  it  had  become  hard  as  a  stone  it
would  stiU  have  been  there  to  recall  the  mercy  and  power  of  Jesus  on  an  occasion  of
great  need.

IV.   Wk  AKE  reminded  that  there  18  HO  ULTIMATE  WASTE  ET  THE  UMlVEitSE.     JeSUS

will  have  us  waste  nothing.  We  may  be  sure,  then,  that  he  wastes  nothing  himself.
A  great  deal  of  rain  falls  where  it  cannot  freshen  anything,  but  sooner  or  later  it  finds
its  work  and  does  its  mission.  We  must  cot  measure  utility  by  our  power  to  see  it.
What  are  called  waste  products  in  many  manufactures  turn  out  even  more  valuable
than  the  direct  products.  Things  reckoned  useless  are  experimented  on,  and  so  in  due
time  their  value  is  discovered. — Y.

Vers.  27 — 29. — Working  and  eating.  In  looking  at  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand,
we  must  not  allow  the  miraculous  provision  to  hide  the  equally  important  element  of
the  free  donation.  Jesus  might  have  provided  all  this  vast  supply  of  food  miraculously,
and  yet  have  said  also,  "  Now  you  that  can  pay  must  pay."  But  all  the  necessities  of
the  case  required  promptitude,  and  it  was  best  to  give  freely.  We  see,  however,  that
immediately  the  people  began  to  draw  wrong  conclusions  from  this  free  giving.  They
wanted  to  make  the  Being  of  so  much  ready  power  their  King,  to  be  at  their  beck  and
call,  so  that  the  table  might  never  be  without  a  meal,  the  cupboard  without  a  loaf.  Jesus
had  to  turn  the  people  sharply  away  from  these  dreams  of  sweet  nothing  to  do.  Jesus
is  a  Giver — Giver  of  ample  and  appropriate  gifts — ^but  always  upon  conditions.  Not
without  great  need  does  Jesus  speak  here  of  work.  Jesus  did  not  come  into  the  world
that  men  might  work  less,  but  rather  all  the  more.

I.  The  aim  or  work  accordiks  to  God's  wilIi.  This  work  must  be  for  much  more
than  the  getting  of  a  living.  Jesus  sees  us  sweating,  straining,  worrying,  all  to  support
natural  life ;  and  yet  this  support  will  neither  make  natural  life  safe,  nor  will  it  stave  off
the  decay  of  natural  powers.  The  old  man  does  not  get  out  of  bread  what  the  young
man  does.  Natural  life  is  but  a  means  to  a  life  more  precious  stilL  We  turn  things
upside  down  when  we  give  the  chief  thought  of  life  to  the  producing  of  daily  bread.
That  is  a  thing  we  must,  indeed,  think  about,  but  let  it  be  in  the  right  way.  A  joiner
must  think  about  the  sharpening  of  his  tools ;  if  he  lets  them  get  blunt  his  work  will
soon  come  to  grief.  But  suppose  a  joiner  thinks  so  much  about  the  sharpening  of  his
tools  as  never  to  do  anything  but  sharpen  them  ;  why,  he  will  soon  sharpen  them  out  of
existence  altogether.  He  does  enough  when  he  keeps  his  tools  sharp  for  then:  proper
work.  The  natural  exists  for  the  spiritual.  The  earthly  exists  for  the  heavenly.  Let
there  be  the  work  that  men  can  see,  but  alongside  of  it  let  there  be  work  just  as  hard,
just  as  steady,  having  for  its  aim  the  prosperous  growth  and  maintenance  of  the  life
that  men  cannot  see.

II.  There  can  be  no  sustainino  op  BprBiruAii  litb  without  work.  This  point
cannot  be  dwelt  upon  too  much.  There  is  no  danger  of  us  forgetting  that  we  must
work  for  the  perishable  bread.  The  world  is  full,  always  has  been  full,  of  them  that
work  with  their  hands.  Civilization  means  work — ^hard,  continuous  work.  But  some-
how, when  we  come  to  consider  spiritual  life  and  growth,  the  idea  of  work  seems  to  slip
out  of  the  mind  altogether.  So  much  of  our  talk  about  spiritual  life  and  growth  is
mere  talk,  without  basis  of  real  experience  and  urgent  desire  of  the  heart.  Then,  too,
we  talk  so  much  of  God's  grace,  and  God's  giving,  and  man's  inability,  and  the  Virtue
of  simple  trust,  that  it  is  very  easy  to  forget  the  need  of  spiritual  industry.    It  is  well.


800  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [va.  n.  1—71.

therefore,  to  have  Jesus  emphasizing  this  very  need.  Man  does  not  leave  the  earth  to
bring  forth  of  itself.  Other  things  being  equal,  it  is  work  that  tells  the  most.  And
surely  the  same  law  may  be  expected  to  apply  in  our  spiritual  concerns.  It  cannot  be
all  the  same  for  the  devout,  prayerful,  humble  reader  of  his  New  Testament  and  for
him  who  altogether  neglects  it.

III.  The  main  element  in  spiritual  ind0stby.  •'  Believe  in  him  whom  God  hath
sent."  -  True  faith  is  true  work.  We  are  apt  to  get  confused  in  distinguishing  between
faith  and  works — ^as  if  faith  were  not  work,  and  very  hard  work  too.  Distinguish  between
faith  and  works  as  much  as  you  please,  but  let  it  be  a  distinction  between  one  kind  of
work  and  another.  Is  it  to  be  supposed  that  a  real,  calm,  intelligent,  steady  trust  in
Jesus  can  be  got  all  at  once  ?  Surely  it  is  one  of  the  great  attainments  of  the  regene-
rated heart,  coming  after  much  experience,  to  say  as  Paul  said,  "  I  know  whom  I  have
believed."— Y.

Ver.  27. — Never  turned  away.  It  is  the  disposition  of  somq  men  so  to  act  as  if  they
should  have  it  written  up  on  their  doors,  "Him  thatcometh  to  me  I  always  send  empty
away."  Others  go  to  the  opposite  extreme.  They  have  the  giving  disposition,  but  they
give  without  judgment.  Here  we  are  directed  to  a  Giver,  a  Helper,  who  never  turns  a
suppliant  away,  never  says  a  harsh  word  to  him,  is  always  both  able  and  willing  to  give,
if  only  the  needy  will  get  themselves  ready  for  what  is  offered.  Such  are  the  resources
of  Jesus,  such  his  sympathy,  such  his  insight  into  human  need,  that  he  can  ever  say,
"  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  The  words  are  at  once  a  finger-
post and  a  welcome.

I.  Remembbb  distinctly  the  dependent  condition  op  all  human  beinos.  We
are,  constantly,  every  one  of  us  going  to  some  one  or  other ;  and  just  as  constantly  others
are  coming  to  us.  The  dependence  is  none  the  less  real  bepause  we  come  with  money
in  our  hands.  Life  begins  with  dependence  and  ends  with  dependence.  We  are
members  one  of  another.  Jesus  himself  was  not  free  from  this  great  law  of  reciprocity
In  need.  It  was  part  of  the  fulness  of  his  humanity  that  he  should  come  to  other
human  beings  for  the  supply  of  common  wants,  just  like  all  the  rest  of  us.  Even  in  the
higher  matters  connected  with  his  great  spiritual  purposes,  there  is  a  coming  of  Jesus
to  us.  Not  only  do  the  branches  come  to  the  vine  for  the  life  that  is  to  make  them
useful,  but  the  vine  also  comes  to  the  bianches  to  find  places  where  it  may  deposit  and
manifest  its  life.  So  when  Jesus  speaks  of  coming  to  him,  this  great  fact  of  human
dependence  should  excite  in  all  of  us  the  deepest  interest  in  his  words.

II.  The  limits  op  this  dependence.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  buying
bread  and  begging  bread.  You  will  not  be  cast  out  as  long  as  you  have  money  to  pay
for  the  loaf.  But  go  begging  instead  of  buying,  and  you  will  soon  be  cast  out.  _  If  you
were  to  give  to  every  one  asking,  turning  not  away  from  a  single  suppliant,  such  an  army
of  askers  would  gather  round  you  as  would  soon  bring  your  giving  to  an  end.  A  great
deal  must  be  done  in  the  way  of  casting  out  for  this  reason,  if  for  no  other,  that  our
resources  are  so  limited.  We  are  not  as  Elijah  when  he  lodged  with  the  widow  at
Zarephath.  The  secret  of  the  unwasting  barrel  of  meal  and  the  unfailing  cruse  of  oil  is
not  with  us.

III.  We  have  One  with  unlimited  supplies.  Jesus  spoke  to  those  who  knew  the
attitude  of  the  suppliant  and  the  needy.  A  great  crowd  had  come  to  him,  hungerin;j;
for  the  bread  that  perisheth,  and  he  had  not  cast  them  out.  But  now  he  desired  them
to  conie,  seeking  for  a  better  bread.  We  are  not  as  concerned  about  spiritual  life  and
spiritual  sustenance  as  we  are  about  natural  life  and  natural  sustenance.  What  greater-
calamity  can  happen  to  the  natural  life  of  men  than  that  bread  should  become  dear  and
scarce,  and  those  who  go  seeking  to  find  it  cheap  and  plentiful  should  be,  as  it  were,
cast  out  ?  Such  may  happen  in  transactions  over  the  bread  that  perisheth.  Here  is
Jesus,  speaking  of  the  bread  that  endures  to  eternal  life.  As  the  appointed  Donor  and
Custodian  of  that  bread,  he  says  no  one  coming  to  him  will  be  cast  out.  You  dare  not
write  such  an  inscription  over  your  door.  The  most  capable  of  men,  the  man  of  largest
resources,  understands  perfectly  how  he  is  in  charge,  not  of  a  fountain,  but  of  a  reservoir.
Jesus  only  can  make  the  declaration  without  limit  as  to  numbers  or  to  time.  Coming
to  him,  we  come  to  One  who  speaks  out  of  the  infinite  and  the  eternal.

lY.  Those  who  fail  to  stay  with  Jebus  go  with  a  toluntabt  LEAVuia.


OH.  VI.  1—71.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  801

"Many  disciples  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  him."  But  they  were  not  driven
away,  cast  out ;  they  went  of  their  own  accord.  Jesus  never  turns  any  one  back  to  sola
dependence  on  the  things  of  time  and  sense.  If  we  like  to  call  refusal  of  selfish  desires
and  discouragement  of  frivolous  pleasures  a  casting  out,  we  may  do  so,  but  that  is  truly
no  casting  out  which  is  a  voluntary  going  out.  God  seems  to  say  to  us  every  morning
after  our  solid,  substantial  breakfast,  "  I  have  given  thee  the  natural ;  wilt  thou  not  also
have  the  spiritual  ? "  Days  will  come  when  all  the  abundance  of  bread  will  do  our
bodies  little  good.  The  flesh  will  fail.  The  outward  man  will  perish.  Jesus  makes
his  declaration  that  the  inward  may  be  renewed  day  by  day. — Y.

Ver.  67. — Apostasy  from  Jesus.  What  candour  there  is  in  the  Gospel  narratives  !
Many  went  away  from  Jesus,  and  no  concealment  is  made  of  the  great  apostasy.  We
are  not  to  suppose  that  the  whole  company  departed  simultaneously,  as  if  the  heart  of
one  man  was  in  their  breasts.  Probably  they  went  one  or  two  at  a  time.  Some
would  go  openly,  some  under  cover  of  darkness.  We  may  be  certain  Jesus  had  his  eye
on  each  one  as  he  departed,  and  he  desired  those  still  remaining  to  mark  those  who  had
gone.  A  critical  time  had  come.  Jesus  could  not  be  utterly  silent  about  the  apostates.
He  wanted  some  word  to  be  spoken  that  would  make  a  clear  line  between  those  who
went  and  those  who  stayed.  It  was  no  astonishment  to  Jesus  that  some  should  go
back  and  walk  no  more  with  him.  He  was  even  prepared  to  see  many  shrinking  from
his  searching  tests.  But  if  all  had  gone,  if  he  bad  been  left  in  utter  solitude,  a  Teacher
with  nobody  to  teach,  a  Messenger  with  none  to  welcome  his  message,  he  would  have
been  astonished.

I.  Consider  those  who  went.  1.  How  came  they  to  Jesus  at  all  f  This  is  best
answered  practically  by  considering  how  people  now  first  of  all  come  into  connection
with  Jesus.  Departure  is  ever  going  on  of  those  who  in  some  way,  for  some  time,  have
been  in  connection  with  Jesus.  What  can  be  a  more  decided  bringing  of  human  beings
to  Jesus  than  all  that  is  included  in  early  training.  Think  of  the. thousands  whom
loving  mothers  bring  to  Jesus  on  the  strength  of  his  own  strong  words,  "  Suffer  the
little  ones  to  come  unto  me."  Coming  is  a  thing  of  degrees,  as  departing  is  a  thing  of
degrees.  There  must  ever  be  movement  in  one  direction  or  the  other.  We  cannot,  as
Jesus  did,  single  out  particular  individuals.  There  would  be  neither  charity,  humility,
nor  advantage  in  doing  that.  In  truth,  Jesus  did  not  so  much  single  out  the  apostates  as
they  themselves  did.  2.  How  came  they  to  go  f  Their  own  plea  would  be  found  in  the
hard  sayings  of  Jesus.  They  would  profess  a  lack  of  the  sensible  and  the  practical  in
these  sayings.  That  is  just  where  the  mistake  generally  Comes  in.  We  want  all
speeches  and  actions  measured  by  our  estimate  of  the  possible  and  the  desirable.  If
mysterious  and  difficult  utterances  are  to  shut  out  Jesus  from  the  rule  of  human  hearts,
then  he  will  never  get  the  devotion  of  a  single  one.  Those  who  went  away  professed
to  find  the  sayings  difficult ;  that  does  not  mean  that  those  who  stayed  found  them
easy.  The  real  reason  for  departure  lay  in  this,  that  those  depaiting  had  never  faith
of  the  right  kind  in  Jesus  himself.  Many  words  of  Jesus  are  really  difficvdt — difficult
of  necessity  and  of  purpose — ^but  quite  enough  of  his  words  are  clear  and  plain  to  take
away  all  ground  for  basing  reasonable  apostasy  on  them.  No  one  can  know  better
ihan  Jesus  himself  how  often  bis  wisest,  deepest  words  have  been  made  the  base  and
carnal  excuse  for  unbelief.

II.  Consider  those  who  stated.  Listen  to  their  spokesman,  Peter.  Their  spokes-
man, but  not,  therefore,  the  real,  true  representative  of  every  one  of  them.  Recollect
Judas  stayed,  and  for  all  we  can  see  he  niight  just  as  well  have  gone  with  the  rest.
Peter's  answer,  up  to  a  certain  point,  was  satisfactory.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  he
understood  as  yet  the  essence  and  the  preciousness  of  eternal  life.  But  he  did  feel  that
what  Jesus  laid  such  stress  on  must  be  something  unspeakably  good,  and  so  he  must
stay  with  Jesus  to  make  sure  of  getting  it  for  his  own.  Gto  where  you  cannot  get
natural  food,  and  natural  death  will  soon  come.  Go  where  you  are  out  of  living  and
abiding  contact 'with  Christ,  and  whatever  beginnings  of  eternal  life  be  in  you  will  soon
perish.  Yet  there  is  a  saddening  element  in  the  answer.  One  would  have  liked  it
better  had  there  been  some  tender  expression  of  sympathy  with  Jesus  in  this  hour  of  so
many  desertions.  The  state  of  heart  by  which  Peter  was  to  look  at  things  more  from
Jesus'  point  of  view  was  to  come  after. — Y.


302


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO   ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vn.  1—63


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  vn.


Oh.  vii. — ^z.  contain  the  record  of  the
conflict  between  faith  and  unbelief  in  the
metropolis.  At  first  the  narrative  indicates
a  vast  amount  of  critical  inquiry,  of  un-
settled opinion,  of  angry  disappointment  and
a  certain  readiness  to  be  convinced  on  the
part  of  one  section  or  another.  The  secrecy
of  the  Galilsean  village  is  contrasted  with
the  broad  arena  of  the  temple-courts.  "  The
Jews,"  or  leaders  of  opinion  and  authority  in
Judsaa  and  Jerusalem,  who  were  hostile,  are
seen  in  contrast  with  "the  Jews  who  be-
lieved on  him"  (ch.  viii.  31).  There  are
multitudes  and  multitudes  (vers.  12,  SO,  31),
priests  and  Pharisees  (ver.  32),  the  synagogue,
and  the  blind  beggar  with  his  fearful  and
temporizing  parents  (oh.  ix.).  There  are
those  who  are  deeply  plotting  Christ's  de-
struction, and  those  who  are  indignant  that
any  such  plot  is  being  hatched  (ch.  vii.  20).
The  discourses  treat  the  deepest  questions  of
ethics  and  theology,  national  prejudices  and
the  Divine  correction  of  them.  The  conver-
s>tions  are  fragmentary,  broken  in  thread,
and  yet  closely  interwoven,  while  a  lifelike
circumstantiality  pervades  the  entire  narra-
tive, which  argues  strongly  in  favour  of  its
historicity  and  authentic  character.  It  is  the
record  of  definite  acts  and  genuine  questions,
veritable  rebukes  and  repartees,  which  have
a  permanent  value  as  an  insight  into  the
character,  mind,  and  Person  of  the  Lord.

Ch.  vii.  consists  of  three  distinct  parts:
(1)  the  conditions  of  the  journey  to  Jeru-
salem (vers.  1 — 13);  (2)  the  discussions
during  the  feast  (vers.  14—36) ;  (3)  the  last
day  of  the  feast  (vera.  37—52).  Topically
considered,  we  legaid  this  section  as  ex-
hibiting—

Ver.  l^oh.  viii.  11. — 8.  Christ  as  the  Source
»/  truth.

Vers.  1— 10.— (1).  Treatment  of  the  »n-
helieving  brethren  ;  the  hour  of  hit  full  mard-
festation  not  yet  come.

Vers.  1,  2. — And  aftei  these  things  Jesns
walked  in  Galilee:  for  he  was  not  willing
to  walk  in  Judeaa,'  beoanse  the  Jews  were

'  The  Anthorized  Version,  In  this  place,
livike  xxiil  S,  and  Paa  v.  13,  has  retained


seeking  to  kill  Um.  Now  the  feast  of  the
Jews,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  was  at  hand.
The  last  clause  supplies  a  valuable  chrono-
logical datum.  This  great  climacteric  feast
of  ingathering  and  joyful  memories  of  all
the  goodness  of  Jehovah  was  held  on  the
fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  (Lev.xxiii.
34 — 36).  Consequently,  aocoiding  to  John's
own  statement,  six  months  had  elapsed
between  the  transactions  at  Bethsaida  and
Capernaum,  and  those  which  he  now  proceeds
to  describe.  During  these  six  months  some
of  the  most  thrilling  events  in  the  synoptia
narrative  must  have  been  enacted.  The
Lord  "walked  in  Galilee."  He  had  dis-
cussed the  whole  question  of  Pharisaic  and
ceremonial  cleansing  and  food,  and  the  entire
principle  of  revelation  and  tradition  (Matt.
XV.  and  Mark  vii.).  He  had  given  express
illustration  of  his  own  teaching  by  venturing
even  into  heathen  cities,  and  there  heal-
ing the  Syro-Phoenician's  child.  He  had
journeyed  towards  the  north  of  Palestine,
into  the  Greek  cities  of  Decapolis  (Mark  vii.
31),  and  had  made  a  great  demonstration  of
his  healing  powers  on  the  mountain  heights
above  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  There  too  (Mark
viii.  1 — 9)  he  had  once  more  fed  mnltitudes
by  his  word,  on  the  second  miraculous  meal.
It  is  probable  that  the  multitudes  were
Gentiles,  whose  stock  of  food  would  have  been
exhausted  by  a  three  days'  sojourn ;  that  at
least  they  were  not  excitable  Galilseans,  who
might  come  by  force  and  make  him  a  King.
The  Pharisees  assailed  him,  asking  for  a  sign.
The  disciples,  by  the  mouth  of  Peter,  had
confessed  their  faith  (Matt.  xvi.  13 — 28)  in
more  explicit  form  and  force  than  before
(ch.  vl.  68,  69),  and  Christ  bad  explained
in  yet  more  definite  terms  than  in  the
synagogue  in  Capernaum  the  needs>be  for
his  Passion,  death,  and  resurrection.  The
Transfiguration  on  the  mountain,  with  its
inetfaceable  impressions,  had  followed,  with
numerous  miracles,  parables,  and  connected
instructions  (Matt,  xvi.,  xvii.,  xviii.).  Jesus
walked  for  six  months  in  Galilee,  knowing,
as  we  learn  from  these  verses,  that  the
authorities  in  Jerusalem  were  utterly  hostile
to  him,  and  had  neither  forgotten  nor  for-
given the  assertion  of  his  special  claims
when  he  was  on  the  last  occasion  in  Jeru-
salem at  the  unnamed  feast  (be  it  the  Feast
of  Passover  or  Tabernacles,  the  Feast  of
Purim   or   Trumpets).     The   outburst   of

the  old  word  "  Jewry  "  in  place  of  "  Judiea."
It  occurs  also  in  the  Prayer-book  Version  of
the  Psalms  (Ixzvi.  1);  and  in  «U  Uie  older
versions  except  Wiokliffe's.


OH.  TO.  1-63]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


803


hostility  which  kept  him  so  long  finm  Jero-
salem  was  ciroulating  in  angry  vibrations  to
the  Tery  borders  of  G&lilee.  The  hour  for  the
final  oonfliot  was  in  abeyance  until  he  had
preached  more  explicitly  the  Divine  gospel
of  loye  and  redemption,  and  had  left  the  in-
destructible seed  in  human  hearts.  There
was  malice  in  Galilee  as  well  as  in  Judsea,
but  it  took  a  different  form.  Thoma  regards
the  sixth  chapter  as  the  ideal  treatment  by
the  fourth  evangelist  of  the  events  recorded
in  the  synoptic  narrative,  and,  strangely
enough,  treats  the  wonders  on  the  sea  and  on
the  land  as  parallels  to  the  synoptic  account
of  the  temptation !  The  objection  to  this  is
not  so  much  the  underlying  dissimilarity  of
idea  as  the  chronological  position  assigned  by
Matthew  and  Luke  to  the  temptation  before
John  was  imprisoned,  whereas  these  events
occur  after  his  execution.  Further,  the
synoptists  record  these  two  miracles  in  their
proper  place  in  the  biography  at  well  as
describe  the  temptation.  That  the  deep
inner  meaning  and  teaching  of  ch.  vi.  corre-
sponds with  that  of  the  last  Supper,  no
reader  can  miss ;  nor  that  this  confession  of
Peter  is  the  highest  point  of  the  earlier  and
later  narratives  we  do  not  question;  but
their  striking  resemblance  to  eacii  other,
instead  of  transforming  this  Gospel  into  a
pliilosophical  allegory,  appears  to  us  to  prove
that  we  have  the  same  historic  Christ  in
both  narratives.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,'
the  a-iajvoirTiyia,  or  tent-pitching,  called  by
Philo  (TKrivai,  was  the  last  great  feast  of
the  sacred  year.  It  had  its  relation  to  the
natural  and  providential  goodness  of  God.
Just  as  the  Passover  coiumemorated  the
opening  of  the  harvest  and'  the  flrstfruita  of
the  grain,  and  as  Pentecost  celebrated  tlie
completion  of  the  harvest,  so  the  "  Taber-
nacles "  implied  the  ingathering  of  the  fruit
of  the  vine  and  of  the  olive,  and  summed  up
the  joyful  acknowledgments  for  the  whole
year.  Again,  as  the  "  Passover  '  recorded
the  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage  by
the  destroying  angel  who  spared  the  blood-
spiinkled  home,  and  the  "  Pentecost  "  prob-
ably (Maimonides)  commemorated  the
giving  of  the  Law,  so  the  "  Tabernacles  "
recalled  in  a  festive  form  the  time  of  Israel's
wandering  in  the  wilderness,  when  they
dwelt  in  tabernacles.  Joyfulness  and
astonishing  ceremonial  characterized  the
festival.  The  city  of  palaces  broke  out
into    booths  of  trees  and  leaves  in  every

'  See  Edersheim's  'The  Temple  and  its
Services,'  and  'Life  of  Jesus,'  ii.  148;  The
Talmud  (translated  by  Barclay),  Treatises
of  'Mishnah,'  with  illustrations  from  the
Gemaras,  vi.  "cm  Tabernacles;"  Ewald,
'  Alterthum,' p.  481;  Smith,  <  CictionaTy  of
the  Bible,'  vol,  iii.  1431.


possible  space,  on  walls  and  honsetopa  in
courtyards,  and  even  in  waggons  and  on  the
backs  of  camels.  The  people  carried  their
palm  branches  and  citrons  in  their  hands,
and  great  merriment,  almost  suggestive  of
heathen  rites,  prevailed.  It  probably  ga-
thered up  about  it,  as  some  Christian  festivals
have  done,  other  ancient  or  surrounding
customs.  The  number  of  bullocks  sacrificed
during  the  seven  days— one  fewer  on  each
day,  beginning  with  thirteen — amounted  in
all  to  sewnty  (13  +  12  +  11  +  10+9-1-8+7=
70).  This  the  rabbis  regarded  as  refer-
ring to  the  seventy  nations  of  heathendom.
Additional  peculiarities  were  conspicuous  in
the  immense  number  of  priests  who  were
required  to  take  part  in  the  sacrifices.
The  blasts  of  priests'  trumpets  which  regu-
lated the  ceremonial,  the  great  musical
procession  employed  in  bringing  water  from
the  Fool  of  Siloam,  then  within  the  city
wall,  added  another  noticeable  feature.
The  water  was  brought  in  a  golden  goblet,
and  poured  into  a  silver  funnel,  which
conveyed  it  by  pipes  to  the  Kedron,  and
was  thus  supposed  to  bless  the  thirsty  land.
This  act  was  accompanied  by  singing  the
great  Mallei,  and  the  shonts  and  songs  of
Zion  were  heard  far  over  hill  and  valley.
At  night-time  universal  illumination  pre-
vailed, and  huge  candelabra  in  the  temple-
court  shed  a  radiance  over  the  whole  city.
These  peculiarities  of  the  feast  rendered  it
the  most  popular,  if  not  the  most  sacred,  of
all  the  feasts  ('  Ant.,'  viii.  4. 1,  'EopTji  071-
cBTaTT;  Ktti  ix^yitTTii).  It  was  Q,  tlmo  when
the  national  sentiment  often  bur^^t  into
fierce  flame.  Various  historic  glories  of
the  past  were  called  to  remembrance,  and
spiritual  privileges  were  symbolized  in  the
ritnal.  The  fact  that  the  feast  held  this
important  place  in  the  affections  and  enthu-
siasm of  the  people  explains  the  anxiety  of
the  family  of  Jesus  that,  whatever  his  claims
really  were,  they  should  be  canvassed  in
the  metropolis  and  decided  by  the  only
authorities  adequate  to  the  task.

Ver.  3. — His  brethren  therefore  (pointing
to  the  high  significance  of  this  natioral  and
triumphant  feast)  said  unto  him.  These
brethren  were  (Matt.  xiii.  55)  James,  Joses,
Simon,  and  Judas,  and,  without  entering
once  more  on  the  much-debated  question  of
their  actual  relation  to  Jesus  (see  ch.  U.  12,
and  notes),  it  may  be  said  that  this  passage
in  a  very  marked  manner  discriminates
them  from  the  apostles  or  disciples,  and
practically  negatives  the  "  cousin "  theory
derived  from  the  supposed  identification  of
Alphseus  with  Cleophas,  and  consequently
of  the  sons  of  Alphwus  (James,  Judas,  and
Simon)  with  the  apostles  of  the  same  names.
The  lack  of  sympathy  shown  by  these  men,
and  the  positive  assertion  of  their  non-beUe/


304


THfi  GOSPfiL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  vn.  1— SS.


in  Jesu8,  is  incompatible  with  the  great
confession  bo  recently  made  (oh.  vi.  68,  69),
and  cannot  (with  Hengstenberg  and  Lange)
be  diluted  into  impeifect  appreciation  of
claims  which  they  wished  in  a  secular  sense
to  press  forward  to  full  assertion.  They
appeared  here  to  criticize  their  Brother's
prolonged  absence  from  Jerusalem,  and  his
abstention  from  the  Passover  and  other
national  festivals.  They  would,  perhaps
sincerely,  hurry  forward  his  public  demon-
stration, and  compel  him  to  say  to  the  great
world  what  he  had  been  saying  in  Galilaean
villages,  in  the  borders  of  Tyre,  and  in  the
cities  of  Decapolis,  Depart  henoe,  and  go
into  Judeea.  "  This  is  the  time  and  place."
Thoma  sees  in  this  advice  the  same  idea
which,  on  the  mount  of  Transfiguration,  was
suggested  by  Moses  and  Elijah  "  concerning
the  departure  which  the  Lord  was  to  accom-
plish in  Jerusalem."  The  Johannist  has
clothed  the  same  material  insinuation  in  a
dialogue  (dialogische  Verhandluiigy  It  has
been  said  that  this  kind  of  advice  is  rather
in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  that  these
brethren  were  older  than  Jesus,  and  possibly
the  children  of  Joseph  by  an  earlier  marriage,
who  thus  took  upon  themselves  the  function
of  advisers.  Such  a  hint,  however  (given
by  Westcott),  seems  very  shadowy  confirma-
tion of  the  theory.  Younger  brothers  would
be  just  as  likely  to  err  in  the  same  direction.
In  order  that  thy  disciples  also  may  behold
thy  works  which  thou  doest.  The  words
"  thy  disciples  "  may  ((Jodet,  Luthardt  for-
merly) have  had  special  reference  to  the  fact
that  our  Lord  had  made  in  Judisa  "  more
disciples  than  had  John"  (oh.  iv.  1),  that
there  were  even  members  of  the  Sanhedrin
who  had  to  some  extent  looked  favourably
upon  him  (ch.  iii.  1),  and  needed  confirma-
tion of  their  faith.  There  may  also  have
been  tacit  reference  to  the  circumstance
recorded  in  ch.  vi.  that  his  Galilsean  dis-
ciples had  deserted  him;  but  it  is  more
likely  (Meyer)  that  the  brethren  took  it  for
granted  that  those  who  in  numerous  places
had  received  his  word  would  be  gathered
together  in  Jerusalem,  and  would  have  an
opportunity  of  seeing  with  their  own  eyes  and
in  consociation  with  each  other  the  works  of
healing  and  might  which  were  being  variously
reported,  canvassed,  and  disputed  in  the
schools  of  Galilee.  "  Thy  disciples "  is  a
wiile  word,  and  may  easily  refer  to  all  who,
whether  in  Jerusalem  or  Galilee,  went  by
his  name.  It  is  a  designation  which,  how-
ever, does  not  include  the  speakers.  "  The
works  which  thou  art  doing  "  is  BufiSciently
illustrated  from  the  group  of  remarkable
events  which  had  signalized  the  previous
tweilve  months  of  the  Galilsean  ministry
(see  on  ver.  1 ),
Vw.  4. — For  no  man  doeth  anything  in


secret,  and  himself'  seeketh  to  be  known
openly.  Vulgate,  in  palam  esse.  Liicke
translates  in  Latin,  "  idemque  oupit  celeber
esse."  The  abrSs  answers  to  the  subject
of  the  verb  "doeth,"  who  yet  is  denied  to
exist  by  the  oiSels.  The  i»  itapfntaiif  ehai,
says  Meyer,  is  "to  be  the  opposite  of  a
shy  and  timid  nature,"  which  is  very  un-
meaning. Grimm  says  of  thu  phrase  ip
iraji^riiTlf,  "Is  Be  gcrendi  modus  quo  ali-
quis  omnibus  conspicuus  est,"  and  justifies
it  by  this  passage  and  by  ch.  xt  SI ;  Coss.
ii.  15  (of.  Wisd.  v.  1,  T<(t«  (mJo-eTni  ^i»  Trap-
fiilffiif  iroW-f  i  SUcuos).  So  Luthardt :  "  It
denotes  that  which  is  open,  in  contrast  to
that  which  is  concealed,"  Westcott  settles
the  meaning  of  the  word  by  the  remark  that
"  the  phrase  (  N'omsa  )  is  commonly  used  by
the  rabbinical  writers  for  'in  public,'  as
opposed  to  '  in  secret.'  "  The  man  who  per-
sists in  quiet,  secret  ways  of  acting,  and
strenuously  avoids  publicity,  is  not  the  man
who  seeketh  to  be  illustrious  and  conspi-
cuous. The  brethren  see  a  palpable  con-
tradiction between  the  claims  which  Jesus
is  making  and  the  comparative  retirement
to  which  he  is  confining  himself.  The
crowds  of  the  Galilsean  lake  are  blank  re-
tirement  when  compared  with  the  metropolis
in  the  great  climacteric  festival  of  the  year.
The  brethren  call  on  Christ,  to  solve  the
contradiction.  It  cannot  be  concealed  that
Jesus  had  (Luke  viii.  16;  zi.  33;  xii.  2)
repeatedly  said,  "  No  man  lighteth  a  lamp
and  putteth  it  under  a  bushel,  but  on  a
candlestick,"  etc. ;  and  so  the  brothers  use
Christ's  words  against  himself.  But  the
Lord's  idea  of  needful  manifestation,  both  as
to  degree,  time,  and  place,  was  accurately
realized  and  represented  in  both  narratives.
If  thou  doest  these  things.  The  el  is  simply
the  logical  premiss,  without  necessarily
throwing  doubt  on  the  facts.  It  is  not
equal,  however,  to  the  particle  ^irci, "  since."
Admitting  these  works  to  be  real,  and  these
mighty  deeds  to  be  correctly  reported,  there
is  from  the  standpoint  of  the  brethren  no
other  course  than  that  which  they  suggest :
Manifest  thyself  to  the  world ;  i.e.  "  pro-
ceed to  the  widest  arena  at  once ; "  "  thou
art  compromising  thyself  by  thy  retirement ; "
"  what  thou  art  doing  with  one  hand  thou
art  undoing  with  the  other."  "  All  the
Israel  world  from  all  lands  is  crowding  to
tlie  great  feast,  thy  disciples  amongst  them  ;

'  Tregelles,  BS,le  Kevisers,  Westcott  and
Hort,  aud  the  Bevisers  have  put  into  their
margin,  with  "some  ancient  autborities,"
aliTd  in  place  of  al/ris.  These  authorities
are  B,  D*,  Sahidic,  Coptic  (Curetonian
Syriao).  Lachmann  introduced  it  into  the
text,  which  would  thus  read,  "  seeketh  it  ta
oe  known  openly."


OH.  vn.  i— 53.]     THE  GOSPEL  A.CCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


^05


make  thyself  known ;  claim  the  place  that
belongs  to  thee."  It  must  be  remembered
that  the  disciples  (Judas,  not  Iscariot,  espe-
cially) said  on  the  very  night  of  the
Passion,  "  How  is  it  that  thou  -^t  manifest
thyself  to  us,  and  not  unto  the  world?"
This  slight  note  of  resemblance  with  the
form  of  the  present  admonition  of  the
brothers,  is  more  coincident  in  the  letter
than  the  spirit,  and  receiTed  from  the  Lord
a  profoundly  different  reply  (see  ch.  xIt.
22,  23,  notes).

Ver.  5. — For  not  even  did  his  brethren
believe  in  him.  The  evangelist,  writing  a
generation  later,  and  keenly  remembering  the
attitude  the  brothers  had  assumed  before  the
Resurrection,  adds, "  not  even  his  brothers,"
who  ought  to  have  been  the  most  prominent
of  his  disciples, "  did  up  to  this  time  believe
on  him,"  t.e.  entrust  themselves  to  him,  dis-
pose of  their  prejudices,  change  their  con-
ceptions, accept  his  spiritual  lead,  acknow-
ledge his  Divine  mission,  or  know  him  to  be
the  Holy  One  of  God.  They  had  not  come
Into  the  position  of  the  twelve.  What  ideas
soever  they  grasped  fell  immeasurably  short
of  "  eating  his  flesh  and  drinking  his  blood,"
of  coming  to  him,  being  given  to  him  and
drawn  to  him  by  the  Father.  It  was  a
world-Messiah,  a  theocratic  King,  a  Prophet-
Captain,  a  royal  Christ,  that  they  sought  and
would  have  been  glad  to  find  in  him.  This"
treatment  of  the  Lord  was  another  striking
parallel  to  the  temptation  of  Jesus  as  de-
scribed by  the  synoptists,  "  All  these  things
will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and
worship  me  "  (see  note  on  ch.  iv.,  and  Introduc-
tion, VIII.  5).  The  non-belief  of  the  brothers
is  in  remarkable  unison  with  the  widespread
unbelief  of  the  people,  who  were  anxiuua  to
discern  the  Christ  of  their  own  traditional
expectations,  and  ready  to  press  almost  any
possible  claimant  to  premature  demonstra-
tions. The  Pharisees  and  the  people  sought
some  sign  from  heaven.  But  while  the
people  demanded  it,  they  expected  that  he
would  and  might  gratify  them  if  he  chose.
The  Pharisees  cynically  tempted  him  to
proclaim  what  they  believed  would  prove
his  irremediable  failure  (Weiss,  'Life  of
Christ,'  vol.  iii.  Bng.  trans.,  pp.  167—188).

Y(>r.  6. — Jesns  then  saith  to  them  (to  his
brothers).  My  time  (the  "  season  "  for  my  full
manifestation  to  the  nation  of  what  I  am,
or  the  time  to  disclose  my  own  idea  of
my  own  commission)  is  not'  yet  present.
The  season  or  opportunity  for  my  final
self-revelation  pauses,  and  I  pause  for  an
intimation  of  the  Father's  will.  This  lali-
guage  corresponds  with  the  reply  to  his
mother,  "  My  hour  is  not  yet  come "  to  do

'  K  here  reads  oi  for  oi'Tru,  hnt  ia  not
followed  by  modern  editors.
JOHN.


what  you  Mindly  desire.  TOe  kind  of
manifestation  he  subsequently  made  on  that
occasion  was  one  of  love  to  the  needy,  not
one  of  power  to  dazzle  the  world  (see  notes,
ch.  ii.  11).  The  underlying  thonght  which
the  postponement  suggested  was  that  the
approach  of  Jesus  to  Jerusalem  with  the  pil-
grim-throng would  be  the  signal  for  the  final
outburst  of  bitter  hostility  which  he  knew
was  smouldering  in  the  hearts  of  the  Sanhe-
drisfs,  and  would  also  be  the  torch  applied  to
the  magazine  of  combustible  passion  in  which
he  would  sacrifice  his  life.  But  your  time  (the
season  which  is  yours)  is  always  ready.  The
brothers  were  at  liberty  at  any  time  to  show
themselves  and  theii  works  to  the  world.
They  had  plans  akin  to  those  of  the  world.
They  shared  the  fashion  of  religious  thought,
the  ideal  of  the  Isiaelitish  world,  completely.
James,  for  instance,  Nazarite  though  he
may  have  been,  punctilious  in  traditionary
ritual,  and  honouring  the  conservative
passions  of  his  order,  might  at  any  time
secure  the  acclamations  or  approval  of  the
chief  powers  of  the  world — their  little  world.
"  I "  (Christ  implied)  "wait  for  the  predeter-
mined hour,  for  the  kind  of  appearance  in
Jerusalem  nhich  will  be  the  giving  of  my
flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world.  You  are  so
much  in  harmony  with  the  world  that  at  any
time  you  may  say  all  that  is  in  your  heart.
If  I  go  as  you  suggest,  it  must  be  as
Messiah ;  you  go  as  pious  pilgrims  to  share
in  this  national  celebration."

Ver.  7. — ^The  world  cannot  hate  yon ;  but
it  hateth  me,  because  I  hear  witness  concern-
ing it,  that  its  works  are  evil.  The  "  world"
is  here  used  in  the  current  Johannine  sense
of  "  humanity  unregenerate,  humanity  with-
out grace,  or  apart  from  God."  The  hatred  of
the  world  to  CSirist  was  pressing  down  upon
his  spirit  like  an  intolerable  load.  He  ad-
mitted that,  from  its  own  standpoint,  there
was  soiTje  justification  for  the  feeling.  The
world  hates  its  censor;  it  repels  the  judgment
passed  upon  it.  It  is  satisfied  with  itself
and  its  own  idea  of  righteousness.  It  is
satisfied  with  its  own  standards  and  cries
and  professions,  so  that  to  be  accused  of
wrongful  notions,  of  a  depravity  under  the
clothing  of  Pharisaic  propriety,  of  a  hidden
leprosy  which  is  eating  into  its  vitals,  rouses
all  its  animosity.  If  Christ  were  to  go,  he
must  deliver  his  souL  Already  the  thunder-
peal of  Matt.  xxii. — xxv.,  to  be  shortly  de-
livered after  full  assertion  of  the  nature  of
his  work,  and  in  the  metropolis  of  the  theo-
cracy, was  hurtling  in  his  soul,  and  he
foresaw  the  outburst  of  maddened  lage
which  would  follow;  but  with  melancholy
and  some  gentle  irony  he  said,  "  Tlie  world
against  which  I  have  to  deliver  my  pro-
phetic burden  cannot  (oh  Sirarai,  moral  im-
possibility) hate  you  I    Tow  aim  is  to  fall


806


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [ch.  vn.  1—53.


in  with  its  demands,  to  realize  its  oorrnpt
and  unspiritual  dreams.  You  are  violating
none  of  its  cherished  fancies ;  you  are  abas-
ing none  of  its  idols ;  yimr  time  U  always
ready ;  my  time  is  not  yet  come."

Ver.  8. — Go  ye  up  to  the'  feast.  "Join
the  pilgrim-bands.  Take  part  in  tbe  cere-
monial of  sacrifice  and  lustration.  Be  there
in  good  time  for  the  booth-building.  You
have  no  testimony  to  deliver  against  the
corruption  of  the  holiest  service,  the  hoUow-
nesB  of  the  ritual  thanksgiving."  I  go  not
yet' unto  this  feast.  The  text  as  it  here
stands  frees  the  lan^age  of  our  Lord  from
the  charge  of  Porphyry,  or  proves  that  it
was  founded  on  false  premisses ;  though  the
fact  that  the  apparent  refusal  was  so  soon
followed  by  a  compliance  makes  it  probable
that  the  real  point  of  the  sentence  rests  not
60  much  on  the  oifirai  as  on  the  Tairnv  iopr'liy.
Not  as  a  pilgrim,  not  in  triumphal  proces-
sion, would  he  go  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.
He  reserved  that  solemn  sacrificial  act  for
a  later  occasion.  He  would  suffer  as  the
Paschal  Lamb,  not  go  to  Jerusalem  to  as-
sert the  completion  of  its  acceptable  year,
and  to  foment  the  self-satisfaction  of  its
religious  guides.  This  is  not  satisfactory,
because  there  is  no  feast  the  special  features
of  which  seemed  to  furnish  our  Lord  with
more  obvious  illustrations  of  his  own  work
and  Person.  Moreover,  he  did  make  his
appearance  in  the  midst  of  the  feast.  So
Godet  and  Meyer  accepted  the  ow'/c,  and  urge
therefrom  the  fact  that  Jesus  deliberately
altered  his  intention,  so  soon    as  a  new

'  The  authorities  for  Tain\ii  are  X*,  r,  A,
A,  eight  uncials,  with  many  cursive  manu-
scripts, some  Italic  and  Syriao  Versions;
but  tbe  corrections  of  K,  a,.6,  and  B,  D,  K,
L,  T,  X,  n,  fifteen  cursives,  and  numerous
quotations,  omit  it.  It  is  deleted  by  Tisohen-
dorf  (8th  edit.),  Scholz,  Lachmann,  Tregelles,
Westcott  and  Hort,  E.T.,  etc.  It  looks  Uke
a  transfer  from  the  next  clause.

'  The  two  texts,  oi«  and  oina,  are
curiously  balanced  in  the  ancient  authorities
and  by  modem  editors.  Thus  for  the
former,  N,  D,  K,  M,  n,  may  be  quoted,
several  ancient  versions  and  some  cursives ;
while  Porphyry  confirms  it  by  making  a
handle  of  the  negative  to  accuse  Christ  of
vacillation,  ami  Epiphanios  commented  at
length  upon  the  omission.  So  Augustine,
Jerome,  etc.  The  reading  oCtoi,  with  T.E.,
Oriesbach,  Scholz,  Lachmann,  and  B.T.,
rests  on  B,  L,  T,  X,  r.  A,  A,  some  Italic
Versions,  and  Syriao ;  but  TreKoUes,  Meyer,
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  and  Godet  prefer
ouK.  Tliis  is  one  of  the  important  texts
where  K  and  B  are  on  opposite  sides,  and
where  B.T  follow  the  Vatican  reading.
Scrivener  and  Westcott  and  Hort  coincide.


motive  sufficiently  strong  presented  itself.
With  the  assistance  of  oi^s,  or  with  snch
an  emphasis  upon  the  present  tense  (uw-
Paiva)  as  to  make  it  equivalent  to  the  intro-
duction of  a  vw,  the  passage  means,  "  I  am
not  going  up  now."  Chrysostom,  Lficke,  De
Wette,  see  in  this  suggestion  the  solution  of
the  problem  and  a  preparation  for  what
follows.  The  word  lyyis,  "  nigh  "  (ver.  2),
may  reasonably  be  interpreted  with  more
latitude  than  is  generally  done.  It  might
easily  mean  a  date  sufSciently  near  to  be
the  topic  of  conversation  in  the  family  circle,
even  were  it  still  a  month  before  the  cele-
bration. Tbe  preparations  may  have  been
made,  the  pilgrims  were  beginning  to  as-
semble for  their  long  journey,  and  the  "  not
yet "  and  the  emphasis  on  the  present  tense
of  avaPaiva  may  easily  have  been  con-
ditioned by  some  of  the  special  work  which
had  still  to  be  completed  in  Galilee  on  the
way  to  Judssa  and  Persa.  Because  my
season — my  special  opportunity — ^has  not
been  yet  foMlled;  ox,fMyeome.  Probably
this  clause  points  to  the  completion  of  tbe
predestined  hour  of  his  consummation,  of  the
baptism  with  which  he  should  be  baptized,
the  fire  that  he  would  kindle,  the  work
which  he  would  finish.

Ver.  9. — Having  said  these  things  to  them,
he  abode  in  Galilee.  Such  a  respite  cannot
mean  a  few  days  only.  Not  until  after  this
period,  and  possibly  after  the  brethren  had
started  on  the  pilgrimage,  did  "he  stead-
fastly set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem."
A  great  question  arises  as  to  the  possibility
of  harmonizing  this  journey  with  the  great
intercalated  portion  of  Luke's  Gospel  (ix.
51 — xviii.  31).  This  is  not  the  place  to
consider  the  numerous  and  complicated
problems  involved.  One  thing  is  certain —
that  the  synoptists  all  describe  the  final
departure  from  Galilee,  which  followed  a
period  of  partial  retirement  from  the  multi-
tude, and  of  instructions,  miracles,  and  advice
rendered  in  the  inner  circle  of  his  immediate
followers.  They  also  (Matt.  xvii.  24;  xix.
1 ;  XX.  17 ;  and  Mark  x.  1  especially)  indi-
cate that,  on  our  Lord's  journey  to  Jerusalem
after  closing  his  Galileean  ministry,  he  went
into  Judtea,  and  thence  to  the  land  of  Persea
on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan.  This  latter
statement  is  perfectly  in  harmony  with
John's  representation  (oh.  x.  49),  where,
after  an  extended  journey  in  Jndiea  and  the
neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  we  hear  that
he  spent  three  months  beyond  Jordan.
Numerous  critics,  whose  views  are  well
entitled  to  consideration,  urge  that  on  this
occasion  our  Lord  did  resume  his  Galilsean
ministry  and  effect  his  final  departure  rs
described  in  Matt.  xix.  1.  Now,  the  oir-
oumstantial  way  in  which  Luke  describes
incidents  upon  the  last  journey  to  Jerusa'


OH.  TO.  1— «3.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


307


lem  leads  many  to  look  for  the  full  chrono-
logical detail  of  this  last  transnotion.  It
contains,  however,  many  incidents  between
oh.  ix.  51  and  zviii.  31,  where  the  final
events  of  the  last  approach  to  Jerusalem
are  brought  into  chronological  relations  with
the  other  tliree  Gospels,  which  could  not
all  have  been  connected  with  the  journey  to
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Edersheim  and
Weiss  alike  infer  that,  since  Luke  says
nothing  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  he  has
reckoned  in  this  period  the  events  apper-
taining to  the  Persean  ministry  and  the  re-
turn to  the  Feast  of  Dedication,  as  well  as  the
final  determination  to  challenge  the  authori-
ties at  Jerusalem,  with  his  assertion  of  true
Messiahship,  and  the  last  approach  to  Je-
rusalem. Luke  does  not  describe  the  route
taken,  but  implies  on  several  occasions
Christ's  glowing  determination  to  confront
Jerusalem ;  and  also  implies  that  he  h»d
visited  it  "  often  "  (Luke  xiii.  31—34),  with
the  purpose  of  gatheringit  under  his  gracious
sway  and  protection.  There  are,  moreover,
a  few  incidents  mentioned  which  synchro-
nize with  the  journey  to  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles. He  went  through  Samaria  instead
of  by  the  frequented  Persean  route  on  the
other  side  of  Jordan  (Luke  ix.  52).  There
the  Samaritans  refuse  to  receive  him,  because
liis  face  was  as  though  he  would  go  to
Jerusalem,  and  the  Boanerges  are  rebuked
for  their  Elijah-like  desire.  The  incident
of  the  cure  of  ten  lepers,  one  of  them  a
Samaritan,  probably  belongs  to  the  same
journey;  and,  above  all,  the  interesting
fragment  of  the  visit  to  Martha  and  Mary
at  a  certain  village.  This  village  may,  as
Edersheim  suggests,  have  been  the  retire-
ment from  which  our  Lord  emerged  in  the
midst  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Many
other  of  the  narratives  belong  to  the  closing
period  of  our  Lord's  life.  The  most  difficult
event  to  harmonize  with  the  suggestions  of
this  passage  of  John  and  with  the  subsequent
hints  of  chronological  arrangement,  is  the
choice  of  the  seventy  disciples,  which  Weiss
regards  as  a  kind  of  misapprehension,  but
which  Edersheim  (Zocei<.,vol.ii.  135)  believes
to  have  been  one  of  the  great  events  of  this
journey  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  It
must  be  admitted  that  it  is  strangely  incon-
sistent with  tlie  journey  which  was  con-
ducted as  it  were  "in  secret."  It  would
be  more  natural  to  believe  that  it  was
one  of  the  incidents  of  the  ministry  in
Pertea,  of  which  Mark  gives  traces,  and  for
which  John  provides  the  true  place  (ch.  x.
40).  Lange  and  Godet  argue  that  between
the  departure  from  the  capital  (eh.  ix.)  and
the  Feast  of  Dedication,  our  Lord  resumed
his  work  in  Galilee,  and  tliere  pursued  the
abundant  ministry  recorded  between  Luke
X.  nud  xviii.  (se«  notes  of  Gtodet  and  Lange,


X.  22 ;  X.  40) ;  and  that  the  final  departure
from  Galilee  was  with  a  great  convoy.
Ewald  and  Meyer  regard  this  as  a  violent
attempt  at  harmonistic  arrangement  of  the
details  before  us.   To  resume  the  narrative —

Ver.  10. — But  when  his  brethren  were
gone  np  to  the  feast,'  then  went  he  also  up.
not  manifestly,  but  as  it  were  in  secret.  Th<
emendation  of  the  text  is  important,  for  ii
draws  attention  to  the  fact  that,  while  th<
brethren  went  up  to  the  feast,  he  simply
went  up,  towards  Jerusalem — ^nnt,  however,
in  the  pilgrim-caravan,  but  as  a  quiet  way-
farer, blessing  lepers,  comforting  souls,  pour-
ing forth  on  a  favoured  few  his  truth,  till
he  reached  the  certain  village  at  the  very
gates  of  Jerusalem.  What  a  contrast  there
was  between  the  first  visit  (oh.  ii.),  when  he
appeared  suddenly  in  the  temple,  and  cast
out  the  money-changers,  or  that  when  (ch.  v.)
he  went  to  the  "  unnamed  "  feast  as  a  pilgrim  I
The  hostility  has  deepened;  the  "world"
hates  its  Saviour,  because  he  would  save  it
from  its  sins,  interpret  it  to  itself,  and  offer
spiritual  ratber  than  teniporal  benediction.
The  phrase, "  in  secret,"  has  led  some  of  the
Tiibingen  school  to  suggest  a  docetic  view
of  the  Person  of  Christ;  but  the  suggestion
is  reckless  and  absurd.  Moulton,  who  con-
ceives that  the  mission  of  the  seventy  dis-
ciples preceded  this  advent,  says  even  tliis
does  not  clash  with  the  idea  of  a  virtually
secret  and  retired  advance.

Vers.  11 — 19. — (2)  The  controveny  amrnig
"  Jews  "  concerning  Chritt — hi$  firit  ditcuttion
with  them,

Yer.  11. — The  Jews  therefore  sought  him
at  the  feast.  The  ruling  and  hostile  powers,
the  unbelieving  hierarchy,  Caiaphas  and  his
party  (ch.  vi.  41,  52;  vers.  13,  15),  because
of  his  non-appearance  in  the  GalUssan  cara-
van, went  hither  and  thither,  saying.  Where
is  he  t — eVeiTOj,  "  that  notorious  Person,"
whose  claims  maddened  us  some  months
agone,  and  whose  deeds  are  being  talked  of
throughout  the  city,  whom  the  Galilseans
would  have  constrained  to  take  up  arms  and
crown :  where  is  he  7  Luther  said  that
their  malice  was  so  great  that  they  forbore
to  name  him.  But  we  can  hardly  press  the
fKetvos  so  far  as  that.

Ver.  12. — And  there  was  much  murmuring
among  the  multitudes  oonoeming  him.  This
vivid  dramatic  touch  lifts  a  veil,  and  we  see
the  eager  excitement  of  those  who  fancied
themselves  duped,  or  who  were  at  least  dis-

'  The  authorities  for  the  transposition  of
eij  eopT^ji/  from  after  kvifii)  to  before  rcfrr
Ko!,  are  N,  B,  K,  L,  T,  X,  n,  some  important
cursives  and  versions  ;  they  are  followed  by
Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Hort,
B.T.,  etc.  The  T.B.  rests  on  D,  r,  ^  a,  and
other  uncials  and  cursives.


S08


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [ch.  vn.  1—63.


appointed  by  his  non-appearance.  Some
said  one  thing,  and  some  another.  One  group
was  loud  in  his  praises,  and  another  sus-
picious either  of  his  orthodoxy  or  his  patriot-
ism, or  both.  Some  said,  He  is  a  good  man ;
t.e.  one  who  was  nnselfish,  kind,  true,  bene-
ficent, and  honest  in  his  intentions,  and  one
personally  trustworthy.  But  others  said —
or,  were  saying ;  i.e.  the  murmur,  the  head-
shaking,  of  others  was  a  flat  denial  of  his
aydioTTi! — Nay ;  but  (on  the  other  hand)  he
leadeth  the  multitude  astray.  The  "multi-
tude "  in  this  clause  is  probably  the  vulgar
crowd,  and  the  contemptuous  reference  to
thtm  may  be  the  language  of  the  Jerusalem
populace  rather  than  the  provincial  cara-
vans. The  multitude  would  escape  from
the  Pharisaic  leading-strings,  should  they
embrace  his  views  either  concerning  the
sabbath  or  the  expected  Messiah.

Ver.  13. — Howbeit  no  man — either  those
who  murmured  to  each  other  a  favourable
or  a  calumnious  judgment — spake  out  openly
eonceming  him,  by  reason  of  (their)  fear  of
the  Jews.  The  hierarchy,  the  guardians
of  orthodoxy,  the  authorities,  the  rabbis  by
whose  verdict  the  character  and  claims  of
Jesus  must  be  decided,  had  not  publicly  de-
livered their  opinion.  Those  who  believed
in  the  "  goodness "  of  Jesus  were  silenced,
or  did  not  proceed  beyond  a  feeble  murmur
•f  applause,  however  much  some  may  have
felt  the  truth  of  their  own  impression.  Those
who  came  to  an  adverse  opinion  were  also  so
mucli  cowed  by  the  "  Jews,"  by  the  ecclesi-
astical authorities,  that  even  they  did  not
venture  to  express  themselves  save  "witli
bated  breath  and  whispered  huuibleness,"
lest  they  might  err  in  the  form  of  their
condemnation.

The  section  vers.  14 — 36  contains  three
discourses  :  one  of  which  (vers.  14—24)  de-
scribes the  nature  and  ground  of  his  human
ministry ;  vers.  25 — 29,  while  treating  the
insolence  of  the  multitude,  portiay  an  ani-
mated scene  of  conflicting  opinion,  in  the
course  of  which  the  Lord  renewed  the  assur-
ance of  his  Divine  origin,  as  well  as  of  the
Divine  sources  of  his  teaching ;  vers.  30 —
36  refer  to  his  approaching  death  or  depar-
ture, as  part  of  a  Divine  plan  concerning
him.  Throughout,  with  drarnatio  propriety,
the  varying  opinions  of  different  classes  of
the  people  are  introduced.

Ver.  14. — When  it  was  already  the  midst
of  the  feast ;  or,  when  already  the  festival
kad  reached  the  middle  etage.^     Since  the

'  For  this  use  of  hktoSv,  of.  Exod.  xii.  29
md  Judith  xii.  5 ;  common  in  the  classics,  but
not  elsewhere  found  in  the  New  Testament.


feast  lasted  seven  or  eight  days,  this  is  rea-
sonably supposed  to  be  on  the  fourth  day.
Wu  may  presume  that  he  had  been  spending
a  few  days  at  Bethany  (Luke  x.  38),  from
retirement  of  which  he  issued  rather  as  a
Prophet  and  Teacher  than  as  the  Messiah  of
the  popular  expectation.  He  went  up — he
came  suddenly — into  the  temple,  into  the
midst  of  the  crowds  where  his  followers
would  be  found,  who  would  shield  him,
humanly  speaking,  from  the  covert  designs
of  his  angry  assailants.  "  He  was  adorned
with  the  wreath  of  popular  veneration,  till
this  wreath  was  torn  and  withered  by  the
poisonous  breath  of  their  enmity"  (Lange).
He  went  up  into  the  temple,  and  taught
(l5i5o<rK«,  continuously  taught).  We  can
only  conjectiire  the  theme  of  tlicse  instruc-
tions. They  must  have  been  sufSciently
varied  and  peculiar  to  have  excited  much
attention.  Either  parable,  or  apothegm,  or
stirring  appeal,  or  quotation  and  interpreta-
tion from  the  Old  Testament,  or  voice  from
the  fathomless  depths  of  bis  own  conscious-
ness, may  have  formed  its  staple.  In  bis
burning  summons  to  conscience,  and  liia
gracious  oifers  of  mercy,  the  people  who  had
listened  to  him  on  the  mountain-side  or
lake-side  were  accustomed  to  say,  "  He
speaks  with  authority,  not  as  the  scribes."

Ver.  15. — The  Jews  therefore  marvelled,'
saying,  etc.  "The  Jews,"  as  elsewhere,
mean  the  ruling  and  learned  class,  the  men
of  power  and  weight  in  the  metropolis,  who
must  have  heard  his  teaching.  The  imme-
diate effect  of  the  appearance  and  words  was
great  astonishment.  In  spite  of  themselves,
they  are  moved  by  the  command  he  mani-
fested over  all  the  springs  of  thought  and
feeling.  The  point  of  their  astonisluuent  is,
not  that  he  is  wise  and  true,  but  that  he
could  teacli  without  having  been  taught  in
their  schools.  How  doth  this  maa  know
letters?  (not  the  "Holy  Scriptures,"  Upa
ypififiara,  nor  riaas  yfa<pds,  but  simply
ypafx/iara,  literature,  suoh  as  we  teach  it ;
cf.  Acts  xxvi.  24).  He  can  interpret  our
oracles ;  he  is  acquainted  with  the  methods
of  teaching,  though  he  has  not  learned — has
never  sat  in  any  of  our  schools.  Saul  of  Tar-
sus was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.
And  ordinarily  a  man  was  compelled  to
undergo  a  lengthened  noviciate  in  tlie  schools
before  he  was  allowed  to  assume  the  office  o(
a  teacher.  'I'he  inherited  wisdom  of  the  past
is  in  the  great  majority  of  oases  the  basis  of
the  most  conspicuous  teaching  of  the  most

'  'EBaiiiaCov  oiv  is  the  reading  of  N,  B,  D,
L,  T,  X,  1,  33,  42,  and  versions;  adopted  by
Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westoott
and  Hort,  B.T. ;  against  Kal  ieai/iaCov  of
T.R.,  which  rents  on  r,  A,  A,  n,  and  other
uncials  and  numerous  versions.


dti.  vii.  1— S3.]     THE  GOSPEIL  ACCORDI'&G  TO  ST.  JOtlir.


309


eriginal  and  unique  of  the  great  sages.  The
"  Jews "  were  sufBoiently  aoquaiated  with
the  origin  and  training  of  Jesus  to  be
astonished  at  his  knowledge  of  the  inter-
pretations of  Scripture  and  other  wisdom.
"  This  tells  powerfully  against  all  attempts,
ancient  and  modern,  to  trace  back  the  wis-
dom of  Jesus  to  some  school  of  human  cul-
ture "  (Meyer).  The  attempts  to  establish
a,  conn  action  between  the  teaching  of  Christ
and  the  hidden  wisdom  of  the  Zeudavesta,
or  esoteric  utterances  of  Buddha,  or  even
the  traditionary  teaching  of  the  Essenes,  or
the  Platonizing  schools  of  Alexandria  or
Epheaus,  have  failed.  The  mystery  of  his
training  as  a  man  in  the  village  of  Naza-
reth is  one  of  the  evidences  given  to  the
world  that  there  was  an  unknown  element
in  his  consciousness.  He  had  not  even  the
advantage  of  the  schools  of  Hillel  or  Gama-
liel. His  own  wondrous  soul,  by  much
pondering  on  tlie  genuine  significance  of
the  Scriptures,  is  the  only  explanation  to
which  even  liis  enendes  can  appeal.  Jesus
knew  the  meaning,  heard  the  murmuring
of  their  surprise  oa  this  head,  and  so  we
read —

Ver.  16. — Jesus  therefore '  answered  them
and  said,  etc.  He  met  tliis  particular  alle-
gation as  follows :  Uy  teaching  is  not  mine.
The  "  my  "  refers  to  the  tpaching  itsel  P,  the
"mine"  to  the  ultimate  authority  on  whiohit
rests.  I  am  not  a  self-taught  Man,  as  though
out  of  the  depths  of  my  own  independent
human  consciousness  I  span  it.  I  do  not
mean  you  to  suppose  that  my  mere  human
experience  is  the  sole  source  of  my  instruo-
tions  (ch.  V.  31).  If  you  have  sat  at  the
feet  of  those  who  taught  you,  I,  too,  am  a
Eepresentative  of  another ;  but  (the  aAXet
after  oiic  is  not  equivalent  to  tarn  .  .  .  quam.
It  introduces  here  the  absolute  source  of  all
his  teaching)  it  is  the  teaching  of  him  who
sent  me.  I  have  not  learned  in  your  schools,
but  am  uttering  the  thoughts  that  come  from
an  infinitely  deeper  source.  "  He  who  sent
me  "  gave  them  to  me.  I  have  been  in  in-
timate communion  with  him.  All  that  I  say
is  Divine  thought  I  have  drawn  it  all  from
the  Lord  of  all.  I  came  from  him,  and
represent  to  you  the  wiU  of  God.  This  is
a  lofty  prophetic  claim,  more  urgent,  more
complete,  than  that  made  by  Moses  or  Isaiah.
Special  messages,  oracles,  and  bunluns  were
delivered  by  the  prophets  with  a  "Thus

'  N,  B,  r.  A,  A,  n,  and  many  other  manu-
scripts and  some  versions  here  introduce
oiv.  Tliey  are  here  followed  by  Griesbach,
Scholz,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and
Hort,  and  R.T.  There  is  general  assent  to
the  absence  of  offi'  in  cursives  end  snme
Latin  and  other  Tenrions.  There  is  much
foroe  in  the  particle.


aaith  the  Lord."  But  Jesus  says  his  thoughts
are  God's  thoughts,  his  ways  God's  ways,
his  teachings  not  his  own,  but  altogether
those  of  him  who  sent  him.

Ver.  17. — The  moral  test  is  then  applied
to  the  great  dictum  which  he  had  just
uttered.  If  any  man  willeth — not  merely
desires,  but  performs  the  distinct  act  of
willing — to  do  his  will — as  his  will — he
shall  know ;  i.e.  his  intellectual  faculty  will
be  quickened  into  high  activity  by  this
moral  and  practical  effort.  If  the  Divine
will  concerning  conduct  meets  the  sponta-
neous act  of  the  human  will,  if  a  man's  will
is  set  to  fulfil  the  Divine  will,  to  will  and
do  what  is  revealed  to  him  by  God,  the  eye
of  the  soul  will  be  opened  to  see  other  tilings
as  well,  and  especially  will  have  power  to
discern  the  all-pervading  Divine  element
in  this  teaching  of  mine.  He  shall  know
concerning  (-nep^  the  teaching,  whether  it  he
of  (^k)  God,  or  whether  I  speak  from  myself
— from  the  simple  ground  of  my  own  inde-
pendent, self-taught  humanity.  The  first
and  natural  application  of  this  mighty
dictum  and  condition  was  a  test  'by  which
the  Jews  might  come  at  once  to  the  under-
standing of  his  more  than  prophetic  claim
to  teach — ^he  liaving  never  learned  in  their
rabbinical  schools.  It  amounted  to  this :
Your  moral  harmony  with  the  will  of  God
as  already  revealed  to  you  will  be  the  sure
index  and  confirmation  of  the  great  fact  I
have  just  referred  to.  You  will  discern  the
Divine  in  my  words,  the  absolutely  true  in
my  teaching.  Here  the  Lord  again  refers
to  the  great  principle,  "  He  that  hath  heard
of  the  Father,  and  learned,  cometh  unto
me ; "  "  He  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my
voice."  This  moral  submission  to  God  will
quicken  all  your  powers  to  discern  and
come  to  an  invincible  assent  as  to  my  claims.
This  is  not  the  deep  subjective  testimony  of
the  inner  intuition  of  those  that  already
believe,  by  which  u  verbal  assent  becomes
a  full  consent,  an  unchangeable  convic-
tion, or  "  the  lull  assurance  of  faith ; "  but
it  is  addressed  to  uribelievera,  and  assures
those  who  are  bewildered  by  the  novelty  and
sweep  of  his  own  words  that,  if  they  are  set
on  doing  the  will  of  God,  they  will  become
perfectly  satisfied  th^t  his  own  teaching,
such  as  it  is,  is  a  stream  of  heavenly  truth
bursting  from  the  very  heart  of  God.  The
text  has  been  cited  by  certain  writers  as
the  sum  total  of  the  Christian  revelation,
almost  as  though  it  substituted  practical
obedience  for  true  thinking,  as  though
people  might  well  be  content  with  holy
living,  and  might  safely  leave  the  decision
of  all  difBcult  problems  of  thought  and
revelation  to  shift  for  themselves.  Nothing
could  be  further  from  its  real  meaning,
either  at  the  time  or  in  any  of  its  subsequent


310


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  tii.  1—63.


or  nnireiBal  applications.  The  solemn  ntter-
anoe  has  a  wide  outlook,  and  is  constantly
establishing  its  own  verity.  A  profound
tmd  voluntary  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God
is  the  best  preparation  for  intuitively  per-
ceiving the  Divine  authority  of  Christ  and
of  his  religion.  The  desire  for  holiness  of
principle  and  life  sees  in  Christ  not  only
the  loftiest  ideal  of  perfection,  but  the
surest  satisfaction  to  its  conscious  weakness,
and  casts  itself  upon  his  promises  of  saving
power.  The  faith  which  Is  satisfied  with
Christ  is  not  merely  a  conclusion  drawn  by
logical  processes  from  satisfactory  premisses,
it  is  the  consequence  of  a  new  nature  or  a
moral  regeneration.  In  other  words,  it  is
the  more  practical  and  expanded  form  of
the  truth  first  of  all  addressed  to  Kicodemus,
and  also  lying  at  the  heart  of  the  Beati-
tudes :  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  anew  [from
above],  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."
If  he  is  bom  again  he  will  see  it.  "  Blessed
are  the  pure  in  heart:  for  they  shall  see
God."  "  No  man  can  come  unto  me  except
the  Father,  which  hath  sent  me,  dr<iw  him."
The  sentence  presents  the  truth  in  a  liopeful
and  positive  form,  and  puts  the  criterion  of
the  Divine  informant  within  the  reach  of
practical  ethics.  It  is  an  appeal  to  the  con-
science as  well  as  to  the  understanding.
Apart  from  the  subjective  moral  element,  all
other  evidences  of  the  presence  of  the  Divine
in  nature,  in  history,  in  Christ,  will  be  unim-
pressive and  unimportant.  A  willingness  to
do  the  will  of  God  is  not  a  substitute  for,
but  a  condition  of,  true  knowledge.

Ver.  18. — The  following  sentence  is  per-
fectly general  and  applicable  to  all  teachers
of  Divine  truth,  though  it  only  reaches  its
highest  expression  in  Christ  himself.  But
while  it  has  numerous  applications,  its  first
use  is  to  ratify  the  previous  statements,  and
prepare  the  way  for  what  is  to  follow.  He
that  speaketh  from  himself  This  was  an
act  which  he,  in  his  own  case,  disclaimed.
The  "himself"  was  here  the  personality
which  tlien  was  in  question  as  a  human
Teacher.  He  that  speaketh  from  himself
as  the  Source  of  all  his  instructions.  He
who  would  take  the  credit  of  being  the
primal  Cause  and  Origin  of  the  message
which  he  delivers  is  a  man  who  seeketh  his
own  glory,  his  own  reputation,  at  the  expense
of  those  who  instructed  him.  The  Jewish
schoolmen  were  most  unxious  at  all  times  to
found  their  instructions  on  Babbi  "This,"
or  "  That,"  who  had  himself  quoted  from
some  more  ancient  father  of  their  erudition,
A  man  who  should  presume  to  teach  in  hia
own  name  would  be  one  who  was  manifestly
not  leeMng  any  higher  end  than  his  own
glory.  Ambition  of  personal  glory  and
renown  is  the  very  thing  the  absence  of
which  the  multitude  condemned  in  Christ'i


case.  The  brethren  of  Jesus  had  taunted
him  with  the  lack  of  bold  self-assertion.
Uur  Lord's  own  position  just  taken  was
that  his  teaching  was  not  self-originated,
but  was  the  teaching  or  message  "of  him
that  sent  him."  Bnt  whoso  (he  added)
seeketh  the  glory  of  him  that  sent  him,
whether  the  sender  be  a  mortal  man  and
earthly  teacher,  or  be  the  Lord  God  of
the  whole  world,  t.«.  "  whoso  loses  his  own
individual  purpose  in  the  will  of  Gud,  and
is  content  to  be  notiiing  so  that  God  may  be
glorified,"  this  person  (oStos)  is  true,  trust-
worthy; his  message  is  not  perverted  by
any  of  the  contaminating  inSuences  of  the
self-hood,  or  flesh,  and  there  is  no  nnright-
eonsuess  (aSiic/a  is  a  stronger  antithesis  to
i\ri6-lis  than  \jieSSos  is.  It  is  the  moral  basis
out  of  which  falsehood  springs) — ^no  unright-
eousness in  him.  The  sentence  is  general,
but  has  its  prime  application  to  Christ's  own
case.  It  is  a  reply  to  the  charge  that  "  he
deceiveth  the  peoijle."  It  is  a  further
challenge  to  those  who  are  willing  to  do  the
will  of  God.  It  is  a  summons  to  proceed  a
step  further,  and  recognize  the  fact  that  the
glory  of  God,  and  not  his  own  glory,  was
the  sole  end  of  his  teaching,  and  that  the
direct  command  from  him  that  sent  him
formed  the  substance  of  his  doctrine,  how-
ever much  it  might  clash  with  their  pre-
conceived ideas  or  dominant  prejudices.

Ver.  19. — Jesus  was  not  unaware  that
serious  charges  were  brought  against  hia
interpretation  of  the  sabbatic  law ;  that  the
Jews  sought  to  kill  him  for  his  identification
of  his  own  mind  and  working  with  the
Father's  mind  and  working.  On  this  account
for  a  considerable  time  he  had  confined  his
ministry  to  Galilee.  The  old  story  of  the
sabbath  healing  was  now  rife  once  more,
doubtless  augmented  with  the  rumours  of
the  healing  of  the  man  with  the  withered
hand,  and  other  actions  profoundly  in  har-
mony with  therleep  meaning  of  the  sabbath-
rest.  To  the  mind  of  the  fourth  evangelist
the  explanation  given  by  Christ  to  the
authorities  in  Jerusalem  was  of  prime  signi-
ficance in  the  whole  sabbatic  controversy ;
and  he  has  recorded  the  defence  Jesua  made
of  his  doctrine  which  placed  him  at  once  on
the  platform  of  the  men  with  whom  he  was
now  beginning  a  life-and-death  confiict.  He
used  their  methods,  and,  so  far  as  the  aile-
quate  grounds  of  connection  were  concerned,
he  was  triumphant.    Did'  not  Moses  give

'  The  authorities  are  equally  divided  on
the  text  Sc'SmKci',  which  is  the  reading  of
K,  L,  T,  r,  /k,  and  eight  cr  ten  other  uncials
and  many  cursives,  and  is  found  in  Cbry-
sostom,  Cyril,  adopted  by  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.),  witii  T.B. ;  but  tSuKev,  the  reading  ol
B,  D,  H,  and  a  few  eursives,  is  preferred  bj


CH.  vn.  1—68.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


311


7011  fhe  LawT — ^the  whole  revealed  Law  of
God  oonceming  moral  conduct  and  daily
ritualj  a  violation  of  the  real  spirit  of  which
would  be  &Smla,  and  of  which  jrou  accuse
me — and  (yet)  none  of  you  doeth  the  Law  t
Does  he  here  call  attention  to  the  universal
disobedience  of  mankind?  Is  he  forestall-
ing the  declaration  that  "all  have  sinned,
and  come  short; "  that  "  in  many  things  all
ort'end"?  Certainly  not.  He  is  about  to
show  at  greater  length  that  the  charge  of
a'Sifcfa  stands  equally  against  the  justifiable
transposition  of  the  letter  of  the  lower  law
by  the  incidence  of  a  higher  law.  They
must  all  know  the  innumerable  occasions  in
which  the  letter  of  the  law  of  the  sabbath
gave  way  to  tlie  law  of  mercy,  to  the  law  of
hunger,  to  the  exigencies  of  the  temple  ser-
vices. "Kone  of  you  doeth  the  Law,"  i.e.
in  the  sense  in  which  you  are  (from  other
motives)  expecting  me  to  do  it.  He  said
enough  to  strike  their  consciences  and
charge  home  their  cherished  if  secret  pur-
pose. Why  do  ye  seek  to  kill  me?  With
what  right,  since  this  is  the  case,  do  ye  vent
your  malice  against  me  i  Meyer  and  Godet
here  differ  as  to  the  emphasis  laid  upon  the
"me."  The  position  of  the  enclitic  jite  before.
fijTfire  gives  it  a  prominence  not  to  be  over-
looked. The  interpretation  of  many — that
the  intention  or  desire  to  kill  Jesus  is  the
inward  proof  that  the  conscience  of  the  Jews
would  admit  that  they  were  not  keeping  the
Law  which  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill " — is
very  far-fetched,  and  weak  in  its  force,
although,  according  to  the  entire  old  cove-
nant, tiiere  was  much  killing  which  was  not
murder.  Such  a  reference  would  not  cor-
respond with  the  profoundly  Hebrew  re-
sponse made  by  our  Lord.  Calvin  here
makes  this  reply  of  Christ  a  text  on  which
to  denounce,  in  his  own  day,  the  corruption
of  the  papal  court

Vers.  20—24. — (3)  Treatment  of  the  ignor-
ance and  insdetux  of  the  multitude.

Ver.  20. — The  multitude,  who  broke  out
in  angry  and  ignorant  remonstrance,
answered  (and  said),'  Thou  hast  a  daemon.
Who  is  seeking  to  kill  theet  Thou  must
have  some  evil  spirit  tormenting  thee  with
such  cruel  and  melancholy  forebodiug  (cf.
ch,  viii.  48 ;  x.  20).  This  was  an  outburst
of  insolent  and  ignorant  amazement  on  their
part,  that  One  who  taught  so  wonderfully
"  should  imagine  what  they  deem  a  moral
impossibility  and  dark  delusion"  (Meyer).
The  design  rankling  in  the  hearts  of  the

TregelleSjLachmann,  K.T.,  and  even  Godet.
Westcott  and  Hort  place  it  in  the  margin.

'  The  authority  for  ko!  the  is  very  small,
and  the  form  is  much  varied.  K,  B,  L,  T,  X,
83,  Bahidic,  Coptic,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),
*nd  B.T.  omit  it


•athorities  was  too  well  known  to  our  Lord,
and,-not  deigning  to  notice  the  interruptioa
and  the  insult,  he  continued —

Ver.  21. — Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them ;
i.e.  to  the  multitude  who  had  so -coarsely
treated  him,  and  to  the  "  Jews "  who  were
present,  who  were  all  marvelling  together
at  the  line  he  was  taking.  The  very  inter-
ruption was  a  proof  both  of  the  extent  and
consequence  of  their  wonderment.  One  work
I  did,  and  ye  are  all  marvelling.  This  one
work  was  a  very  small  fraction  of  his  mighty
signs,  but  it  was  one  which,  from  its  manner
of  operation,  and  &om  the  fact  that  it  was
immediately  brought  before  the  religions
authorities  as  an  unlawful  act  (ch.  v.),  and
which,  moreover,  became  the  occasion  for
one  of  the  greatest  of  his  discourses,  and  for
his  solemn  claim  to  be  the  Bon  of  God  and  the
Arbiter  of  life  and  death,  of  resurrection  and
judgment,  made  the  profoundest  impression
on  the  Sanhedrin,  compelled  them  to  think
that  he  was  a  Man  who  must  be  sooner  or
later  arrested,  and  who  deserved  condign
punishment.  He  must  be  either  submitted
to,  confined  as  a  madman,  or  killed  as  a
blasphemer.

Ver.  22. — SCoses  on  this  aoosont  (for  this
cause)'  hath  given  (assigned)  yon  the  ciroum-
oision  (not  that  it  is  of  Moses,  but  of  the
fathers).  If  we  accept  the  text  as  above,
the  question  arises — Does  it  refer  to  the
parenthetical  clause  or  to  the  principal  verb  7
Meyer  renders  as  follows :  "  Thereibre  Moses
gave  you  circumcision,  not  because  it  origi-
nated with  Moses,  but  (because  it  originated)
with  the  fathers,  and  so  ye  circumcise,"  etc.,
making  the  precedence  of  the  law  of  circum-
cision to  the  sabbatic  law  part  of  the  very
purport  of  his  appointment.  But  many
others, "  For  this  cause  " — to  teach  this  lesson
' — Moses,  who  gave  the  ten  commandments,
one  of  which  involved   the   sabbatic   rest,

'  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)  has  omitted  Sih
TovTo  altogether,  on  the  authority  of  X  alone.
There  are  certain  editors  who  associate  it
with  the  previous  verse,  which,  though
contrary  to  John's  usage,  would  be  a
simpler  construction;  followed  by  Lucke,
Hengstenberg,  Lange,  Godet,  and  many
others.  Since,  however,  some  fifteen  uncials
and  numerous  versions  associate  it  with
ver.  22,  it  has  been  adopted  by  H.T.,  al-
though they  have  placed  the  alternative
reading  or  pointing  in  the  margin,  as
follows :  5i&  roiro'  Muir^j.  This  is  the  read-
ing of  Tregelles.  Not  only  do  the  codices
accredit  the  more  difScult  reading  of  E.T.,
but  Chrysostom,  luther,  Erasmus,  Calvin
(in  his  translation,  though  not  in  his  com-
mentary), Bengel,  Luthardt,  Meyer,  West-
cott and  Hort,  and  Moulton  have  accepted
it  on  diflierent  grounds.


312


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  yh.  1—63,


took  np  into  the  Law  which  he  gave  yon  the
etill  older  law  of  the  Abrahamio  covenant,
and  laid  down  the  Btringent  rule  that  the
rite  must  be  perfonned  on  the  eighth  day
(Lev.  xii.  3) — a  principle  which  was  seen  to
involve  the  infringement  of  the  sabbath  law.
This  is,  in  substance,  the  view  of  Moulton,
[iange,  Westcott,  and  others.  To  expound
I  he  Sii  Toiro  by  the  oux"  <(■"  is  (Westcott)
contrary  to  the  usage  of  2  Cor.  i.  24 ;  iii.  5 ;
PhU.  iv.  17 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  9 ;  but  it  is  still
more  against  the  argument.  Moses  did  not
give  circumcision  because  it  was  of  the
fathers, — at  least  that  is  not  the  point ;  but
Jesus  argues  tliat  he  gave  circumcision  as
a  mode  of  legislation  which  will  involve  a
modification  of  his  own  sabbatic  regimen.
Stringent  as  was  the  law  of  the  sabbath,  it
would  have,  on  occasion,  to  yield  to  the
more  searching  and  stringent  rule  of  admis-
sion into  the  covenant  of  grace.  "  If  the
sabbath  could  give  way  to  a  mere  ceremonial
law,  how  much  more  to  a  work  of  mercy,
which  is  older  and  higher  than  any  ritual  1 "
'Mish.  Sabb.,'  xix.  1,  fol.  128,6,  "Every-
thing required  for  circumcision  may  be  com-
pleted on  the  sabbath  ; "  and  so  xix.  2.  The
reason  is  given :  '  Midrash  Tanolimna,'  fol.
9,  h,  "The  healing  of  •  sick  man  dun-
geiously  ill,  and  circumcision,  break  through
the  sabbath  sanctity."

Ver.  23. — If  a  man  on  (a)  sabbath  receive
circumcision,  which  was  the  removal  by
surgical  means  of  what  was  regarded  as  a
cause  and  sign  of  physical  impurity,  as  well
as  the  seal  of  the  covenant  made  with  the
family  of  Abraham,  that  his  seed  should  be
heir  of  the  world,  and  that  in  that  seed  all
the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,
in  order  that  the  law  of  Moses  might  not  be
broken.  It  is  not  withtjut  difficulty  that,  in
tlie  previous  verse,  the  law  of  circumcision
on  the  eighth  day  is  declared  to  be  older
than  Moses,  to  have  come  down  from  the
fathers  of  the  consecrated  race :  how,  then,
does  he  call  it  the  law  of  Motett  Clearly
he  refers  to  the  fact  that  this  particular  law
was  embodied  by  Moses  and  made  part  of
his  own  code,  even  though  in  one  respect  it
was  obviously  older  than  the  particular  form
of  the  fourth  commandment,  and  must  fre-
quently clasli  with  the  letter  of  that  com-
mandment. The  law  of  Moses,  then,  as  much
as  the  law  of  the  Abi  abamic  covenant,  would
liave  been  broken  by  any  infraction  of  the
rule  which  made  circumcision  incumbent  on
the  eighth  day.  The  common  custom  of  the
people  was  to  adminster  this  rite  on  that
day,  even  if  it  fell  on  a  sabbath.  "  None  of
you  keepeth  the  Law  "  in  its  strict  integrity,
said  Jesus.  Nay,  it  is  certain  that  the  older
laws,  which  Moses  endorsed  and  embodied
in  his  own  oode,  do  themselves  demand  such
TtoUtion  from  you.    This   appeal    to  the


spirit  of  the  Law — ^the  closest  approach  that
a  Jew  could  make  to  the  will  of  God— is  re-
produced in  Paul's  Epistles  (Col.  it  11 ;  Eph.
ii.  11).  Are  ye  then  wroth  with  me  (xoA.otc,
Xo\ai>  (from  xo^^i  bile,  gall) — ^to  be  bitter
with  wrath,  and  even  mad  with  rage
(Aristoph., '  Nub.,'  833),  is  found  in  3  Maoo.
iii.  1,  but  not  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testa-
ment)— ^because  I  made  an  entire  man —
i.e.  tbe  whole  frame  of  the  paralyzed  man
(not  his  spirit  or  mind  in  contrast  with  his
body) — sound— or,  healthy — on  a  sabbath
dayt  The  antithesis  is  not  between  heal-
ing the  wound  of  circumcision  ami  healing
the  paralytic.  Of  the  former  there  does  not
seem  the  faintest  trace,  notwithstanding  the
conjecture  of  Lampe.  Circumcision  was
the  removal  of  an  offending  portion  of  the
human  body,  the  sanitary  purpose  of  which
rite  was  strenuously  believed  in,  but  it  was  a
partial  cleansing  and  actual  excision  of  one
member  of  the  body.  To  accomplish  this  pur-
pose Moses,  by  his  enactment,  regarded  even
the  sabbatic  law  as  subsidiary.  Why,  then,  are
the  Jews  wrathful  with  Jesus  for  making  an
entire  man — a  whole  physical  frame — health-
ful on  the  sabbath  ?  The  stress  laid  on  the
Authorized  Version  and  R.T.  translations,
"  every  whit  whole,"  by  some  commentaries
is  unfortunate ;  for  it  would  throw  discredit
on  circumcision  altogether,  which  was  far
from  our  Lord's  contention  here,  and  would
reduce  the  force  of  his  argument.  Christ
does  not  in  this  argument  take  up  the  great
line  of  defence  pursued  in  ch.  v.  Nor  does
he  call  the  healing  of  the  paralytic  more
than  an  fpyoy,  a  "  work  ; "  but  it  must  be
remembered  that  he  had  spoken  on  the
previous  occasion  of  his  great  miracles  as
"works,"  the  like  to  which  he  saw  the
Father  ever  doing.

Ver.  21. — Judge  not  according  to  appear-
ance— the  superficial  aspect  of  things,  the
merely  formal  side,  the  unexplained  letter
of  the  Law.  'Oif>tj  id  quod  sub  visum  cadil  res
en  conspicuo  posita.  According  to  that,  the
healing  and  the  bed-carrying  consequent
upim  it  would  be  a  po3iti\e  inlraction  of  a
certain  enactment,  tint  judge  '  righteous
judgment.  Consider  the  case,  aiid  see  that
I  have  done,  in  this  act  of  healing,  less  than
yon  are  doing  yourselves,  notwithstanding
all  your  punctilio,  and  with  a  higher  justi-
fication. The  aorist  xplvarf  involves  pro-
bably "  the  one  true  and  complete  decision
which  the  case  admits"  (Westcott).

Vers,  25 — 29. — (4)  Special  perplexity  of
some  Jerusalemites,  and  Christ's  reply.  A
second  scene  is  here  described,  not  neces-
sarily on  the  day  of  his  first  appearance  in
the  temple,  though  it  took  place  in  the


'  The  reading  Kplvtrt,  of  B,  D,  L,  T,  it

adopted  by  Tregelle^.


OH.  VII.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


S13


temple  (ver.  28).  We  see,  however,  a  new
wave  of  feeling.  The  multitude,  or  part  of
it,  that  gathered  round  him  was  maddened
with  his  intimation  of  the  murderous  ani-
mosity of  the  authoritieB ;  1}ut  the  dwellers
in  Jerusalem  were  better  informed  of  the
malignant  spirit  he  had  excited.

Ver.  25. — Therefore — ^by  reason  of  his  bold
self-vindication — some  of  the  Jerasalemites
(this  word  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New
Testament,  except  in  Mark  i.  5)  were  say-
ing, Ii  not  this  he,  whom  they  seek  to  kill  T
If  the  multitudes  of  the  provincials  were
ignorant  of  the  design  of  the  hierarchy,  the
plot  was  not  a  complete  secret

Ver.  26. — And  behold  he  speaketh  openly
(see  vers.  4  and  13),  and  they  say  nothing  to
him.  They  neither  tackle  him  in  argument
nor  refute  his  self-vindication,  neither  do
they  arrest  him  or  carry  out  their  known
project.  Have  they  altered  their  minds?
Are  they  convinced  of  his  claims?  Has  he
successfully  rebutted  the  charge  of  sabbath-
breaking?  Does  it  all  vanish  on  close
approach?  Then  they  go  a  step  fxutber,
which,  if  it  were  the  true  explanation,  would
entirely  account  for  their  obvious  indecision.
They  even  say  to  one  another,  with  sufficient
frequency  for  the  reporter  to  have  heard  it.
Can  it  be  that  the  rulers '  indeed  know  (^^-
TtoTf  iyvuirav,  did  they  at  any  time  come  to
perceive?  The  particle  expects  a  dubious
though  negative  response,  "  we  don't  think
so;  but  is  it  probable?  surely  not!")  that
this  (person)  is '  the  Christ  1  The  rulers  must
decide  this  weighty  matter,  for  us  at  least
who  dwell  in  Jerusalem.  The  question
showa  how  widespread,  how  detailed,  was
the  idea  of  the  coming  Christ.  This  sup-
position with  reference  to  their  rulers  was
momentary,  and  conflicted  with  another
standing  objection  to  the  claims  of  Jesus.

Ver.  27. — Howbeit  we  know  this  Man
whence  he  is ;  that  is,  they  knew  liis  parent-
age, the  place  of  his  early  life,  the  father,
mother,  brothers,  and  sisters  (Matt.  xiii.
55,  58).  There  was  none  of  the  my&tery
about  him  wliiph  they  anticipated  for  their
Messiah.  It  is'  even  intimated  thai  it  was
known  where  he  was  bom  (vers.  41,  42),
and  that  the  Christ  would  be  born  in
Bethlehem,  so  that  the  mere  fact  of  birth-
place is  not  the  difficulty  that  occurred  to
them.  A  tradition  had  gathered,  which
was  perhaps  originated  by  Dan.  vii.  13  or

'  K  here  reads  ifxieptis,  not  followed  by
any  modem  editors,  though  some  of  the
versions  have  both  designations ;  the  second
kKii9as  of  T.B.,  Griegbach,  and  Scholz  rests
on  r,  ^,A,andeightother  later  uncials,  sever^
veniona,  but  is  omitted  by  K,  6,  D,  E,  L,  v7
X,  H,  and  by  more  than  twenty-iive  cursives,
by  numerous  versions,  ijaA  modern  editors.


Mai.  iii.  I,  that  he  would  make  a  sndden
descent  on  tlie  temple — a  dazzling  appear-
ance at  his  Messianic  entbronizution,  coming
in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  that  none
would  "  declare  his  generation."  So,  accord-
ing to  '  Sanl).,'  97,  a, "  three  things  are  wholly
unexpected — Messiah,  a  god-send,  and  a
scorpion"  (of.  'Mid.  on  Cantio.  ii.  9').
Justin  Martyr  puts  into  the  lips  of  Trypho,
'  Dial.,'  8,  "  But  Christ— if  he  has  indeed
been  bom, and  exists  anywhere — is  uaknown,
and  does  not  even  know  himself,  and  has  no
power  until  Elias  come  to  anoint  him  and
make  him  manifest  to  all."  So  these  Je-
rusalemitcs  said.  When  the  Christ  cometh
(epxvTai  makes  his  Christwise  manifestation
— is  in  act  of  coming),  no  one  knoweth  whence
he  is.  This  Messianic  manifestation  has
been  tardy  and  gradual,  if  it  be  one  at  all.
We  know  the  home,  the  daily  upbringing  of
Jesus — we  know  whence  he  is,  or  think  we
do;  and  so  the  whole  affair  olashes  witli  a
current  exprctation.  We  know  enough,  too
much,  of  this  Jesus  for  it^  to  be  jjossible  for
him  to  fill  up  this  portion  of  the  Messianic
programme.  This  may  have  been  the
outcome  of  the  general  criticism.  Other
defects,  according  to  tiieir  idea,  may  have
been  urged.  The  many-sidedness  of  the
hope,  the  vagueness  of  the  dream,  as  it
shaped  itself  in  current  Jewish  thought,
suffered  almost  any  amount  of  doubt  as  to
the  exact  form  of  the  apprcjaching  manifes-
tation. That  to  which  our  Lord  especially
replied  revealed  the  practical  and  ethical
claim  he  advanced  to  their  acceptance  from
himself  of  the  word  of  the  Lord.

Ver.  28. — Jesus  therefore  cried — lifted  up
his  voice  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  wide
astonishment.  (The  word  is  found  in  ch.
i.  15  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  ver.  87  and
ch.  xii.  44 ;  but  frequently  in  the  b\  noptists
and  Acts,  and  very  frequently  in  the  LXX.)
The  trumpet-peal  sounded  through  the
courts  of  the  temple,  and  the  crowds  rushed
in  the  direction  from  which  it  proceeded.
He  cried  in  the  temple.  This  clause  is
added,  notwithstanding  the  statement  of
ver.  14,  and  it  intimates  a  break  in  the  dis-
course, a  Eudilen  and  trenchant  response  to
certain  loudly  uttered  murmms  of  the
Jerusalem  multitude.  Ye  both  know  me,
and  know  whence  I  am.  Surely  (with  De
Wette,  Meyer,  Westcott,  Moultoo)  tiie  Lord
distinctly  concedes  to  the  men  of  Jerusalem
a  certain  amount  of  superficial  knowledge.
It  is  lamentably  defective  in  respect  of  that
for  which  they  imagjine  it  all-sufficient;
and  yet  this  knowledge  was  highly  signifi-
cant  and  important  as  far  as  it  went.
Such  knowledge  of  his  birthplace  and  his
family,  his  provincial  training,  his  Galiltean
ministry,  were  all  proofs  to  them  of  his
humanity — that  he  belonged  to  their  race,


314


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  vii.  1— M.


was  bone  of  their  bone,  and  sympathizing  I
in  tlieii  deepest  sonows,  nndeTstood  their  |
noblest  aspirations.  Such  a  concession,
moreover,  repudiates  the  supposed  docetio
character  of  the  Clirist  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.
Many  commentators  regard  the  exclamation
as  ironical  and  interrogatory  (Grotius,
Lampe,  CalArin,  Luoke,  and  even  Godet),
without  sufiSoient  warrant.  Our  Lord,  how-
ever, soon  shows  that,  though  they  are
rightly  informed  about  certain  obvious  facts,
there  were  others  of  stupendous  impor-
tance which  could  go  a  long  way  towards
reconciling  their  many-sided  and  conflict-
ing ideas  of  Messiah,  of  which  they  were
yet  in  ignorance.  And  yet  (all  commen-
tators show  that  there  is  a  certain  adversa-
tive force  about  this  third  xal ;  see  also  ver.
30;  ch.  viii.  20;  ix.  30;  Mark  xii.  12)  I
am  not  come  team,  myself  (see  ch.  v.  30).  I
have  not  risen  upon  the  wings  of  my  own
ambition.  It  is  not  my  mere  human  whim
and  purpose,  or  my  desire  for  self-glorifi-
cation, which  brings  me  before  you.  You
may  know  the  home  of  my  childhood ;  and
watched  as  I  have  been  by  your  eager
spies,  as  you  had  full  right  to  do,  you  may
Imow  all  my  public  proceedings,  and  yet
you  have  not  fathomed  the  fact  that  I  have
not  come  on  my  own  errand,  nor  does  my
humanity  as  you  have  grasped  it  cover  the
whole  of  the  facts  about  me.  There  is  a
peculiarity,  a  uniqueness,  about  my  coming
that  you  have  yet  to  leam.  I  have  been
sent  to  you ;  but  he  that  sent  me  is  real — a
reality  to  me,  which  m;ikes  it  an  absolute
reality  in  itsblf.  The  use  of  aKr\6iv6s  is
somewhat  peculiar,  and,  unless  with  some
commentators  and  Kevisera  we  make  it  equal
to  aXii9its,  and  thus  disturb  the  uniform  usage
of  St.  John,  we  must  either  imagine  under  the
word  a  real  "  Sender,"  or  one  really  answer-
ing to  the  idea  alicady  announced  as  of  Oite
competent  to  send.  "  He  that  sent  me,  the
Father,"  of  whom  I  spoke  (ch.  v.  37)  when
last  we  conversed  together,  is  the  over-
whelming Keality  in  this  ease.  Whom  yo
know  not.  The  Jerusalem  multitudes  were
suffering  grievously  from  the  superstitious
limitations  of  their  own  faith,  from  the
traditions,  the  symbolism,  the  letter,  the.
form,  which  had  well-nigh  strangled,  suffo-
cated, the  underlying  truths.  They  had  in
many  ways  lost  the  God  whose  great  Name
they  honoured.  They  failed  to  apprehend
his  awful  nearness  to  them,  his  love  to  every
man,  his  compassion  to  the  world,  tho  de-
mand of  his  righteousness,  the  condition  of
seeing  him,  the  way  to  his  rest — "  Him  ye
hnow  not."  This  was  a  serious  rebuke  of
the  entire  system  which  prevailed  at  Jerusa-
lem. Not  understanding  nor  knowing  the
■FaCher,  they  were  unable  to  see  the  possi-
bility of  bis  having  sent  to  them,  through


the  life  and  lips  of  a  Man  whom  they  knew,
his  last  and  greatest  message.

Ver.  29. — (But) '  I  know  him;  beoavse  I
am  from  him — my  inmost  nature,  the  centra
of  my  ego,  proceeds,  is  derived,  from  him.
I  have  come  forth  &om  him.  There  is  that
about  me  and  my  origin  which  has  brought
me  into  such  intimate  relations  with  the
Father  that  I  know' him  as  ye  do  not  know
him  (cf.  ch.  viii.  55) — and  he  (whom  I  thug
know,  and  to  whom  I  refer,  kKuvos)  sent  me.
This  sending  is  a  further  condition  of  the
knowledge  which  you  fail  to  appreciate,  but
which  would  make  all  things  plain  to  you.
If  this  knowledge  should  break  as  the  day-
star  on  their  darkness,  would  they  not  at
once  see  that,  up  to  that  point  at  least,  in
their  experience  they  did  not  know,  or  had
not  known,  whence  he  was,  in  the  grandest
sense.  The  charge  of  ignorance  and  the
claim  of  supernatural  knowledge.  Divine
origin,  Divine  commission,  was  too  much  for
these  Jerusalemites.  They  thought  it  blas-
phemy.

Vers.  30— 36.— (5)  The  divided  opiniani
and  conduct  of  the  different  groups  around
him;  the  attempt  on  hit  life,  and  its  failure,

Ver.  30. — They  sought  therefore  to  seize
him  :  and  (equivalent  to  "  but ; "  see  ver.  28)
no  one  laid  hands  on  him,  heoause  his  hour
had  not  yet  oome.  It  was  in  their  heart  to
combine  with  "the  Jews,"  but  none  dared
to  touch  him.  There  were  political  con-
siderations, there  were  lingering  and  corus*
eating  fires  of  enthusiasm  burning  in  the
hearts  of  those  who  had  seen  liis  great  works ;
and  probably  an  awe,  a  superstitious  fear,  of
some  stroke  of  his  reputed  power  held  them
back.  The  evangelist  once  more  notices  the
true  cause  of  this  arrest  of  their  malignity :
"  The  hour"  for  the  termination  of  his  self-
revelation,  for  the  completion  of  his  self-
surrender,  the  hour  which  to  the  beloved
disciple's  eye  was  the  very  consummation  of
the  ages,  had  not  struck.

Ver.  31. — The  antagonism  and  the  faith
come  into  sharper  expression.  As  the  spirit-
like words  stir  up  malignai^  passion,  they
also  excite  new  and  deepemng  confidence.
The  flash  of  lightning,  whicli  reveals  to  many
the  glory  of  a  landscape,  may  strike  others
blind  or  dead.  While  the  authorities  are
harder,  more  uuspiritual  and  blinder,  than
before,  yet  many  of  the  multitude— t.e.  of
the  general  crowd,  whether  belonging  to
Jerusalem  or  not — ^believed  on  him,  passed
into  the  glorious  illumination  which  falls
on  his  own  Person,  and  all  things  else.  We
cannot  say  that  the  whole  was  cleared  up
to  them,  but  it  was  an  acceptance  by  them

'  The  Si,  omitted  by  R.T.,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  and  Godet,  has  powerful  authority
in  its  favour :  t;,  D,  X,  against  B,  L,  T,  A.


OH.  VII.  1-53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.


SIS


to  Bome  extent  of  his  MesBianio  claims.
Ilci  was  more  than  a  meie  Prophet  to  them,
or  Leader,  as  is  obvious  from  the  tone  of  the
epeech  which  follows  :  And  they  said  (were
sayiu^  to  one  another),  while  others,  perhaps,
BO  SI  ion  as  they  liad  taken  his  side,  began
to  urge  liis  claims  on  those  that  doubted —
When  the  Christ  shall  come,  will  he  do  more
■igns  than  those '  which  this  Man  hath  done  1 '
The  omi.-,sion  of  roirav  makes  the  question
refer  to  the  entire  group  of  signs  which  hud
been  already  performed,  and  not-  confine
itself  to  the  prooecdiiigB  of  Jesus  in  Jerusa-
lem. They  expected  Messiah  to  give  proof
of  his  Divine  commission  (cf.  Matt.  xl.  4,  5,
20 — 25).  Has  not  Jesus  satisfied  nil  reasoii-
.sble  claims?  The  question  was  like  fire  in
touchwood.  A  conflagration  might  at  any
moment  burst  fmm  the  exuitable  throng
which  tio  decision  of  the  Sauhedrin  could
repress.  Something  must  at  once  be  done  to
allay  tlie  excitement.  In  the  crowd  which
was  pressing  the  claims  of  Jesus  were  many
Pharisees,  an  immensely  larger  element  in
the  population  than  the  chief  priests,  and
therefore  more  likely  at  once  to  bring  such
information  to  the  central  religious  authority.
Ver.  32. — The  Pharisees '  heard  the  mul-
titude (generally)  murmuring  these  things
itonceming  him ;  repeating  the  language  of
those  who  believid,  comparing  their  expec-
tations with  the  reality.  They  seem  to  have
occasioned  a  hasty  and  informal  session  of
the  Sanhedrin,  and  we  read  that  the  chief
priests  and  the  Pharisees*  seat  officers —
servants  "  clothed  with  legal  authority,"
and  tlierefore  intimating  a  decision  already
eome  to  in  the  supreme  council  (cf.  cli.  xi.
63 ;  xviii.  3,  12 ;  xix.  6 ;  Acts  v-  22,  26)—
to  seize  him  (cf.  this  description  of  the
Sanhedrin  in  Matt.  xxi.  45 ;  xxvii.  62).
The  "  chief  priests  " — a  phrase  often  occur-
ring in  the  writings  of  Luke,  and  here  for  the
first  time  in  tliis  Gospel — cannot  be  confined
to  tlie  official  "  high  priest,"  but  may  in-
clude the  ex-high  priests,  perhaps  the  heads
of  the  twenty-four  courses  of  priests  and  the
chiefs  of  the  priestly  party,  though  there  is

•  Toirav  of  T.E.  is  omitted  by  N,  B,  and
six  other  uncials,  forty  cursives,  and  nume-
rous versions,  by  Westcott  and  Hort,  B.T.,
Tiachendorf  (8th  edit.),  and  Godet.

'  'Eiroirjo-e — an  instance  of  the  aorist  which
clearly  includes  the  past,  time  up  to  the
present  moment  as  a  completed  whole.

=  K,  M,  V,  n,  add  oiv,  «,  D,  add  5>,  after
^Koucraj/ ;  not  accepted  by  modern  editors.

*  T.R.,  with  later  uncials,  place  ot  *opi-
<rcuot  before  ol  apxiepels ;  but  X,  B,  D,  with
eight  other  uncials  and  numerous  versions,
give  Ol'  ipxifpfls  first,  to  the  obvious  advan-
tage of  the  sense.  So  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hort,  E.T.,  Godet,  etc.


no  proof  of  it.  The  FhariseeB  and  prleati
were  often  at  enmity,  but  there  were  seTeral
oeeasions  during  our  Lord's  minisliy  when
they  combined  against  a  common  foe.  The
Pharisees  had  been  his  most  steady  opponent!
in  Galilee.  The  eighth  and  ninth  chapter*
of  Matthew,  vrith  parallel  passages,  reveal
the  growing  animosity  of  their  demeanour,
and  their  disposition  to  misunderstand,  to
oppose,  and  to  crush  every  great  self-revela-
tion made  by  him.  Their  chiefs  were  in
Jerusalem,  and  doubtless  formed  a  powerful
element  in  the  great  council.  The  formality
of  tills  session  of  the  council  may  be  reason-
ably questioned.  There  had  been  orders
given  for  the  arrest,  which  they  had  only  to
put  at  any  time,  if  they  dared,  into  immediato
opercition.

Ver.  33. — Jesus  therefore  said.'  We  are
left  in  doubt  to  whom  he  addressed  these
weighty  words,  probably  to  the  entire  group
of  friends  and  foes.  Yet  a  little  while  am  I
with  you  (six  months  would  bring  round  the
last  Passover).  The  movement  had  not
escaped  him.  It  is  as  though  he  had  said,
"  I  see  all  that  will  happen.  This  is  my
death-struggle  with  those  whom  I  am  sent
to  teach  and  save.  For  a  little  while  only
wiU  the  possibility  of  approach  to  me  for
life  and  peace  be  continued.  You  have
taken  steps  to  shorten  my  career.  Yoa
would  even  now  silence  me."  And  I  go  '  unto
him  that  sent  me.  I  am  going;  you  are
hurrying  me  back  to  the  Father  who  sent
me  on  this  commission  of  instruction  and  of
life-giving.  This  was  in  a  sense  enigmatical
and  puzzling.  It  might  bear  other  meanings
than  the  one  which  we  now  see  it  to  have
borne.  It  is  quite  extravagant  of  Beuss  to
describe  the  misunderstandings  of  Christ's
hearers  as  an  intolerable  contradiction.  We
are  not  so  ready  or  able  to  understand  any
of  our  Lord's  words  in  all  their  fulness  even
now.

Yer.  34. — ^Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not
find  me.  Many  interpretations  are  given  of
this.  (1)  Origen  and  Grotius  rtfer  it  to  a
hostile  search  for  him  which  would  not  be
gratified ;  but  the  whole  story  of  the  arrest

•  The  avTols  of  T.R.  has  no  authority
beyond  T  and  some  few  cursives  to  sustain
it.

'  "tTrdya.  Westcott  calls  attention  to  the
three  Greek  words  used  in  this  connection  for
"go :  "  "tTrdyte,  denoting  the  simple  personal
act  of  going  awav  (ch.  viii.  14,  21 ;  xiii.  3,
33, 36  ;  xiv.  4,  28  ;"xvi.  5, 10, 16,  T.E.);  wops6-
ofiai,  denoting  purposeful  going  to  accomplish
a  specific  end  (ver.  35 ;  ch.  xiv.  3, 12,  28 ;  xvi
7,  28) ;  dvepxo/Mai,  indicating  simple  separa-
tion (ch.  vi.  68  ;  xvi.  7).  Take  also  ch.  xvi.
7 — 10,  where  the  three  words  are  brought
into  striking  juxtaposition.


316


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [en.  vii.  1—53


which  foTlowg,  as  well  as  the  qnotation  of
these  words  in  oh.  ilii.  33,  prove  that  this
was  not  his  meaning.  (2)  Augustine  and
others  imagine  penitential  seeking  when  it
would  be  too  late.  This  is  not  justified  by
the  oonnuotion.  The  limitation  of  the  day
of  grace  for  seeking  souls  is  not  the  theme
of  this  address,  and  it  is,  saye  under  special
cirL-umstaTices,  no  teaching  of  the  New
Testament.  (3)  The  ideas  of  Hengstenberg
and  others,  so  largely  built  on  the  great  texts
ill  Prov.  i.  28  and  Amos  viii.  12,  show  that
the  Messiah  would  be  sought  by  them  when
they  had  utterly  rejected  Jesus.  We  do  not
believe  that  a  genuine  search  for  the  Lord
will  ever  be  disappointed,  but  a  vicious  and
vain  search  may  be  possible  when  'the
opportunity  for  due  approach  has  gone  by
for  ever.  Moments,  catastrophes,  did  arrive
in  their  tragic  history  when  they  had  pas-
sionately desired,  but  in  vain,  to  see  one  of
the  days  of  the  Son  of  man.  The  individuals
who  turned  to  him  found  the  veil  which
concealed  him  taken  away  (2  Oor.  lii.  16).
The  nation  as  a  whole  was  blinded ;  they
crucified  their  King,  the  Lord  of  glory ;  and
they  brought  uttermost  extinction  on  them-
selves as  a  nation.  "They  sought  their
Messiah  in  vain  "  (Weiss).  Where  I  am —
in  the  glory  in  which  I  dwell,  and  to  which
I  belong,  and  to  which  I  am  now  inviting
you — ^you  cannot  come.  "The  door  will  be
shut ;  "  you  will  not  "  have  known  the  day
of  your  visitation."  "  How  often  would  I
have  gathered  you,  but  ye  would  not  I "  The
seeking  cannot  be  the  search  of  penitence,
but  of  unavailing  despair.  Yon  have  the
opportunity  now.  In  a  little  while  I  go,
and  then  yon  will  find  it  impossible  to.
follow  me.

Ver.  35. — The  Jews  therefore  said  among
themselves,  Whither  will  this  Man  go,'  that
we  shall  not  find  him  1  With  their  murderous
designs  they  are  blinded  even  to  the  mean-
ing of  his  words.  They  pretend  tliat  he
was  not  making  any  reference  to  their
sworn  purpose  of  rejecting  his  claims.  They
would  not  lift  their  thoughts  to  that  etomtd
glory  in  which  he  would  soon,  by  their  own
execrable  acts,  be  enshrouded.  They  could
not  grasp  the  eternal  life  involved  in  the
acceptance  of  the  Father's  revelation  in
him.  They  are  resolved  to  put  ironical  and
confusing  meaning  into  his  words,  to  pour
an  air  of  contempt  over  his  reply ;  and  to
insert  veritable  thougli  unconscious  prophecy
of  their  own  into  his  words.  Will  he  go  '  to
the  Dispersion  (of) — or,  among — ^the  Greeks,
and  teaoh  the  Greeks  t  The  word  '' Greek"
is,  throughout  the  New  Testament,  the
Gentile,  the  Pagan  world,  at  that  time  so
largely  Greek  in  speech,  if  not  in  race.

'  Bee  note,  ver.  33.


Another  word,  "Grecian"  or  "Hellenist,"
is  used  for  the  Jmm  who  had  adopted  Greek
ideas,  habits,  and  speech.  Whatever  may
be  the  strict  meaning  of  tliat  word  (see
Boberts's  '  Discussions  on  the  Gospels,'  and
other  works,  where  that  writer  seeks  to
establish  the  Greek-speaking  peculiarity  of
all  Palestinian  Jews,  and  limits  the  word  to
Greek  ideas  rather  than  to  Greek  speech ),
the  word  "Greek"  is  the  antithesis  te
"Jew  "  in  every  respect.  The  Dispersion  (tup
'EfiJufiyav)  may  mean  (1)  the  Jewish  disper-
sion among  the  Greeks  beyond  the  limits  of
Palestine  (2  Mace.  i.  27).  It  is  also  found
in  Josephns  for  the  outcast  of  Israel  (see
LXX.  Ps.  cxlvi.  2 ;  cf.  Jas.  i.  1 ;  1  Pet,  i.  1).
There  was  a  wide  "dispersion"  in  Baby-
lon and  Syria,  throughout  Persia,  Egypt,
Asia  Minor,  and  Cyprus,  even  in  Acbuia,
Macedonia,  and  Italy.  The  Dispersion  was
the  Greater  Israel.  -  Most  intimate  relations
subsisted  between  these  scattered  Israelites
and  their  political  and  ecclesiastical  centre
in  the  metropolis.  Often  those  at  the
greatest  distance  irom  the  temple  were  the
most  passionately  loyal  and  patriotic.  But
for  the  Messiah  to  commence  a  prophetic
career  among  tbetn,  after  having  been  re-
pudiated by  the  great  council  of  the  nation,
was  a  bitter  sarcasm.  But  (2)  the  "  Disper-
sion" may  refer  to  the  wide  scattering  of
the  Greeks  themselves,  the  natural  antithesis
to  God's  covenanted  people.  Now  (1)  is  cer-
tainly a  very  awkward  and  nnique  rendering
of  the  genitive,  and  (2)  applies  the  "disper-
sion "  in  a  peculiar  sense  not  elsewhere  used.
Alford  says  the  word  means  the  land  where
the  Jews  are  scattered.  Still,  (2)  appears  to
me  a  fair  rendering  of  the  words,  especially
as  it  is  followed  by  "  and  teach  the  Greeks."
Nothing  could  more  adequately  express  the
utter  scorn  of  the  Jewish  mind  for  a  pseudo-
Messiah  who,  failing  with  his  own  people,
and  here  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,
would  tnm  to  the  Gentiles.  Snob  a  bare
supposition  would  bring  utter  discomfiture,
as  they  thought,  upon  his  claims.  What  a
forecast  they  made  in  their  mab'cious  sug-
gestions! Long  before  John  reported  this
speech  he  himself  had  taken  up  his  seat
in  Ephesus.  In  all  the  great  cities  of  the
empire  it  was  avowed  on  both  sides  that
"  in  Christ  Jesus  there  was  neither  Jew
nor  Greek."  Had  not  Jesus  already  given
indication  of  this  laxity  as  to  the  privileges
of  Israel :  "  Many  shall  come,"  etc.  (Matt
viii.  11)  ?  Had  he  not  deferred  to  the  ministry
of  Elijah  and  Elisha  severally  to  the  Syro-
Phoenician  and  the  Syrian  (Luke  iv.  25 —
27)  ?  Had  he  not  shown  culpable  lenienoy  to
the  hated  Samaritan  ?  Surely  they  meant
to  suggest  the  uttermost  treason  to  the
traditions  of  Israel,  when  they  thus  chose  to
put  a  meaning  into  his  words.  Like  Caiaphaa


OH.  Til.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


817


in  oh.  xi.  49 — 51,  they  said  and  prophesied
more  than  they  knew.  Archdeacon  Watkins
gays,  "  The  irony  of  history  is  seen  in  the
fact  that  the  very  words  of  these  Jews  of
Palestine  are  recorded  in  Greek,  by  a  Jew
of  Palestine,  presiding;  over  a  Christian
Ohnrch  in  a  Gentile  city."

Ver.  36. — What  is  thiiB  word  (A(f7or)  which
he  spake,  Te  shall  seek  me,  and  ye  shall  not
find  (me),'  and  where  I  am,  ye  cannot  come  1
This  Terse  is  simply  a  repetition  of  the
Lord's  sentence,  which,  notwithstanding  their
damaging  interpretation  and  unconscious
prophecy  of  great  events,  haunted  them  with
a  weird  power,  and  left  them,  as  his  word  left
the  officers  who  were  silenced  and  paralyzed
by  it,  with  a  sense  of  undiscovered  and  awful
meaning.  Both  here  and  in  ver.  45  we  see
that  the  evangelist  had  access  to  the  ideas
and  eonverse  of  the  "Jews,"  which  proves
that  he  had  special  sources  of  information
to  which  the  ordinary  synoptic  tradition
was  strange.  The  thought  grows  upon  one
that  John  was  more  than  the  mere  fisherman
of  the  lake.  He  was  a  friend  of  Nicodemus,
and  known  to  Caiaphas.  It  is  clear  that
some  further  time  elapses.  This  conversa-
tion, of  which  we  have  the  prominent  items,
the  chief  utterances,  was  producing  its  eifeot
upon  the  two-sided  multitude,  upon  "the
Jews,"  the  "  Pharisees,"  the  city  party,  the
chief  priests.  The  Lord  probably  retired
once  more  to  the  houi>e  of  Lazarus  or  of
John.

Vera.  37— 39.— <6)  The  claim  to  be  Organ
and  Giver  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Ver.  37. — Now  on  the  last  day,  the  great
day  of  the  feast.  A  question  arises — Was
the  last  day  the  seventh  or  the  eighth  day  ?
and  wliy  was  it  called  the  great  day  ?  The
question  cannot  be  finally  answered.  The
Feast  of  Tabernacles,  according  to  Numb.
xxix.l2  and  Deut.xvi.  13,is  said  to  last  seven
days ;  and,  so  far  as  the  Mosaic  ceremonial
goes,  the  ceremonial  of  the  seventh  day  was
less  imposing  and  festive  than  either  of  the
preceding  days.  But  Numb.  xxix.  35  shows
that  the  eighth  day  was  also  celebrated  as  a
solemn  assembly,  on  which  no  servile  work
could  be  done  (cf.  Lev.  xxiii.  36 ;  Neh.  viii.
18).  In  2  Maoc.  x.  6  eight  days  of  the
feast  were  spoken  of.  On  the  day  of  holy
convocation  the  people  removed  or  left  their
booths,  and  thus  commemorated,  with  great
rejoicing,  the  close  of  the  wildtmess-period
and  the  commencement  of  their  national
history.  It  may,  moreover,  have  been  called
"  the  great  day  "  because  it  was  the  closing
day  of  all  the  festivals  of  the  year.    Jose-

'  The  fie  is  introduced,  not  by  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  but  by  R.T.  and  Lachmann,  on
the  authority,  mainly,  of  B,  G,  T,  1,  and
three  versions.


phns  calls  it  "  the  Tery  sacred  close  (inimi-
paaiio)  of  the  year."  The  LXX.  gives  the
curious  translation  i^oiiov  for  azereth,  equi-
valent to  "  assembly."  This  i^oSlor  Philo
('De  Septenaris')  describes  as  the  end  of
the  festivals  of  the  sacred  year.  Meyer,
Alford,  Godet,  Lange,  and  many  others  re-
gard the  eighth  day  as  tliat  here  referred  to
by  the  word  "  great,"  and  find,  in  the  very
absence  of  the  ceremonial  of  drawing  water
from  the  Pool  of  Si  loam,  the  occasion  which
provoked  the  reference  of  our  Lord  to  his
own  power  to  meet  the  spiritual  tliirst  of
mankind,  thus  repeating  what  he  had  said
to  the  woman  of  Samaria  of  his  own  grace,
with  further  and  nobler  expansions.  The
songs  which  had  been  sung  on  every  pre-
vious day  of  the  feast  were  sung  without
the  special  rejoicings  and  water-ceremonial.
Hence  some  have  thought  that  the  very
contrast  between  the  previous  days  and  this
last  day,  "  great "  in  other  respects,  may
have  made  the  reference  quite  as  impressive
as  if  the  following  words  had  been  spoken
in  some  pause,  or  at  the  conclusion  of  the
great  Hallel  of  the  seventh  day.  So  West-
cott.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that
Rabbi  Juda  (in  the  Gemara  on  'Sucoah')
asserts  that  the  water-pouring  tookplar-e  on
the  eighth  day  as  well.  This  is  supposed,
by  Lange,  to  be  inaccurate  or  a  later  addi>
tion.  Edersheim,  however,  has  given  strong
reasons  for  believing  that  very  special
ceremonial  took  place  on  the  seventh  day.
The  people,  all  caiTying  in  botli  hands
their  palm,  myrtle,  and  citron  branches,
divided  into  three  companies,  one  of  which
waited  in  the  temple,  one  went  to  Moya  to
fetch  willow  branches  to  adorn  the  altar,  and
a  third  repaired  with  music  to  the  Pool  of
Siloam,  where  tlie  priest  filled  his  golden
goblet  with  water,  and  returned,  with  blast
of  trumpet,  by  the  water-gate,  to  the  court  of
the  priests.  There  he  was  joined  by  other
priests  with  vessels  of  wine.  The  water
was  poured  into  the  silver  funnel,  and  at
this  act  burst  forth  the  great  Hallel  (Ps.
cxiii. — cxviii.)  in  responsive  cho;us.  The
people  shook  their  palm  branches  as  tlieysang
the  words, "  Oh,  give  thanlcs  onto  the  Lord."
On  the  last  day,  the  great  day  of  the  feast,
the  priests  compassed  the  altar  seven  times
before  the  sacrifices  were  kindled,  and  the
songs  accompanying  the  oereniony  of  this
day  were  called  "  the  great  Hosaiina."  As
the  people  left  the  temple  they  shook  off
their  willow  leaves  on  the  altar,  and  beat
their  palm  branches  to  pieces.  Edersheim
thinks  that  it  was  at  the  moment  when  the
pause  after  the  great  Hallel  occurred  that
Jesus  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  there  is  much
probability  in  the  suggestion.  Alford,  ac-
cepting the  »io»-pouring  of  the  water  on  the
eighth  day,  considers  that  the  very  absence  of


818


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINtt  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  vii.  1—53.


that  ceremonial  provided  the  opportuuity  for
the  greut  utterance  which  follows.  Chrysos-
tom  Sfiys,  on  the  eighth  day, "  when  they  were
returning  home,  he  giveth  them  supplies."
Jesus  stood  and  cried — adopting  an  unusual
Attitude  of  command,  and  unaccustomed
energy  of  voice  (ch.  i.  35  and  ver.  28,  note) —
If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me,  and
drink.  Christ  thus  identilie6  himself  with
the  deepest  meaning  of  the  Old  Testament
and  the  Hebrew  ritual.  The  sabbath  and
the  temple  found  the  hi};hest  expression  of
their  meaning  in  his  life  and  work.  Godet
thinks  that  the  underlying  reference  here
was  to  that  of  which  the  ceremonial  was  a
memorial,  and  pointed  to  tlie  smiting  of
the  rock  in  the  wilderness,  from  whose  liid-
den  depths  the  rushing  waters  flowed.  The
cry,  "  If  any  man  thirst,"  might  oert.iinly
recall  the  terrible  drought  in  the  wilder-
ness, though  there  does  not  seem  to  me  any
definite  reference  to  it  in  what  follows.
The  libation  of  water  was  certainly  not
oifered  to  the  multitudes  to  drink,  but  the
ritual  use  of  water  treats  it  as  an  element
absolutely  essential  to  our  human  life.  The
people  gave  thanks  that  they  had  reached
a  land  where  fell  the  early  and  latter  rain,
and  fountains  and  wells  and  springs  of
living  water  ran.  Christ  ollered  more  than
all — the  utter  final  quenching  of  all  tor-
turing thirst.  The  people  sang  Isa.  xii.  3,
"  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the
wells  of  salvation."  He  said,  "Come  to
me,"  and  your  joy  shall  be  full.  To  the
woman  at  the  well  he  had  said  that  the
water  he  would  give  should  be  in  the  soul
as  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  eternal
life.  But  in  this  connection  he  promised  a
much  more  precious  gift.

Ver.  38. — He  that  believeth  on  me.  The
6  TTLaTfiiDv  in  the  nominative  absolute,  fol-
lowed by  another  construction,  gives  great
force  to  the  mighty  words.  This  is  not  the
first  time  that  Christ  has  represented  be-
lieving under  the  form  of  both  "coming"
and  "drinking."  The  one  term  seems  to
cover  that  part  of  faith  in  Christ  which
unites  the  soul  to  him,  which  sides  with
him,  which  utterly  abandons  self  to  take
his  word  as  true  and  his  power  as  sufBcient;
the  other  term,  when  applied  to  participa-
tion in  his  blood,  implies  receiving  into  the
soul  the  full  solace  of  his  imparted  life.  He
that  belinvelk  on  me,  as  the  Scripture  hath
said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  rush  torrents  of
living  water.  From  his  newly  given,  di-
vinely imparted  life  shall  proceed,  as  from
the  innermost  depths  of  his  consciousness,
illimitable  supplies  of  refreshment  and  fer-
tility for  othcis  as  well.  Each  soul  will  be
a  rock  smittcu  in  the  thirsty  land,  from
(vhi<h  crystul  rivers  of  life-giving  grace
shall  flow.    Godet  urges,  against  Meyer,  tbs


great  sufficiency  of  this  particular  illustra-
tion of  the  rock  in  the  wUdemess  as  justify-
ing the  reference  to  the  phrase,  "as  the
Scripture  hath  said,"  and  points  especially
to  Exod.  xvii.  6, "  Behold,  I  will  stand  before
thee  there  ...  in  Horeb ;  and  thou  shalt
smite  the  rock,  and  out  of  it  (Hsp)  water
shall  come,  that  the  people  may  drink  "  (cf.
Numb.  XX.  11 ;  Deut.  viii.  15  ;  Ps.  cxiv.  8  ;
passages  read  during  the  feast).    He  thinks
the  Koi\iai  avTov  corresponds  with  "  from  out
of  it"  of  Exodus.     Hengstenberg  laid  long
and  fantastic  emphasis  on  the  Cantiele8,viheie
theKoiA.(a  of  the  bride  of  Jehovah  is  described.
It  is  certain  that  the  numerous  passages
in  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  the  gift  of
refreshing  water  is  made  the   symbol   of
national  mercies  and  spiritual  blessings,  do,
for  the  most  part,  fall  short  of  this  remark-
able expression.     Still,  Isa.  xliv.  3;  Iv.  1;
Iviii.  11 ;  Joel  iii.  18 ;  Zech.  xiv.  8,  all  more
or  less  approach  the  thought;   but  Ezek.
xlvii.  1 — 12,  where  from  the  altar  the  living,
health-giving,  mighty  river  flows  for  the
healing  of  the  nations,  is  so  akin  to  the
saying  of  the  Lord,  as  soon  as  we  recognize
the  fact  that  he  is  greater  than  the  temple,
and  that  his  Church  is  God's  temple,  md
each  body  of  man  a  temple  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  that  all  real  difficulty  vanishes.    The
whole  history  of  the  Church  is  one  continu-
ous comment  and  illustration  of  the  exhaust-
less  fulness  of  his  Word.    Just  as  a  soul  of
man  comes  and  drinks  of  the  water  of  life,
he  becomes  himself  a  perennial  source  of  life
to  others.     He  supplies  not  cisterns  of  stag-
nant water,  but  rivers  of  living  water  (Eom.
viii.  9—11;    1  Cor.   iii.  16).      Chrysostom
adds,  "One  may  perceive  what  is   meant,
if  he  will  consider  the  wisdom  of  Stephen,
the  tongue  of  Peter,  the  vehemence  of  Paul ;
how  nothing  withstood  them — not  the  anger
of  multitudes,  nor  tlie  uprising  of  tyrants,
nor  plots  of  devils,  nor  daily  deaths— but,  as
rivers  borne  along  with  loud  rushing  sound,
they  went  on  their  way."

Ver.  39. — This  spake  he,  said  the  evange-
list, conceming  the  Spirit,  which  they  that
believe'  on  hLu  were  to  receive:  for  the
(Holy)  Spirit '  was  not  yet  (given '),  because

•  T.E.,  with  Tisehendorf  (8th  edit.)  and
Alford,  on  the  authority  of  X,  D,  X,  r,  A,  and
other  uncials,  almost  all  cursives,  the  Vul-
gate, and  nitmerous  quotations,  etc.,  reads
iria-TeiovTfs ;  the  E.T.,  with  Tregellesi,
Laohmann,  Westcott  and  Hort,  on  the
authority  of  B,  L,  T,  and  some  minor
authorities,  reads  irurTeia-avres.  Again,  T.E.
has  Tlvivfia  S.ytov  SeSo/ieKoi'.  Lachmann
added  the  SeBo/idvov  with  the  Italic  Versions;
but  this,  with  other  additions  and  v.iriants,
is  found  in  sundry  versions,  throwing  doubt
upon  them  all,  as  N,  K,  r,  H,  42, 91.    Origen


OH.  TO.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDmG  TO  ST.  JOHN.


319


Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified.    This  yerse  has
a  great  weight,  as  the  evangelist's  interpre-
tation of  the  previona  words  of  the  Lord,
nor  can  they  Bo  put  aside.    The  history  of
the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  on  Pentecost,
and  the  mighty  gift  of  the  risen  and  glorified
Jesus  to  those  who  believed  on  him,  are
their  abundant  justification.     If  the  thirty-
eighth  verse  were  not  an  immense  advance
upon  the  promise  of  the  thirty-seventh  verse,
it  would  not  be  easy  to  show  how  the  words
of  the  first  promise  could  only  find  fulfilment
in  a  future  and  as  yet  unrealized  condition.
Eternal  life  is  a  present  gift,     Satisfaction
(if  the  thirst  of  the  sonl  was  an  immediate
bestowment  of  Christ,  and  had  been  realized
by  untold  multituded  of  those  who  had  been
inwardly  cleansed  by  the  Spirit,  who  had
come  to  the  waters  of  life,  who  had  received
the  Logos,  and  known  that  they  were  sons
of  God.    But  the  thirty-ei^lith  verse  speaks
of  a  new  and  nobler  Ufe  flowing  to  others
from  belief  in  Christ.    It  looks  forward  to
the    production  of   a  worldwide   blessing
conditioned  by  what  was  yet   to  happen.
So  that  we  cannot  doubt  that  John  saw  more
deeply  into  the  Lord's  words  than  some  of
those  who    have  criticized   his    comment,
John,  says  Weiss,  does  "  not  mean  to  explain
the  metaphor  of  the  living  water,  but  he
intends  to  prove  the  truth  of  Jesus'  promise
from  his  own  blessed  experience."  • "  The
(Holy)  Spirit  was  not  yet"  is,  liowever,  a
strange  nnd  startling  statement.    The  work
and  Person  of   the   Spirit   are  spoken  of
throughout  the  Old  Testament — &om  Gen.
i.  2;  vi.  3;   Job  xxvi.  13;  xxxiii.  4;   Ps.
civ.  30;  cxxxix.  7;   to  Zech.  iv.  6.    The
redeeming  and  renewing,  quickening  powers
of  the  Spirit  are  represented  as  equipping
judges,  artists,  warriors,  and  prophets  for
tlieir  work,  as  sanctifying  the  individual
soul  (Ps.  li.  II;    Ezek.  lii,   24,  27),   and
building  the  temple  of  God  (Hag.  ii.  5).    The
prophetic  gift  is  especially  referred  to  the
Spirit  by  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xii.  10, 11 ;  2  Pet.
i.  21 ;  Traaa  ypatp'li  is  0eiJ?ry€i;o-Toi,  2  Tim.  iii.
16).    More  than  this,  our  Lord  himself  is,
in  the  synoptic  Gospels,  said  to  be  conceived
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  his  humanity  bap-
tized and  anointed,  empowered  and  directed
throughout  by  the  Spirit,  and  kept  by  him  in

and  Cyril  read  Ui/ev/M  by  itself;  some
manuscripts,  L,  X,  r,  read  ayion ;  others,  ri
&yiov.  B.T.,  Westcott  and  Hort,  Meyer,
and  Gudet  accept  the  reading  of  K;  i.e.
without  any  addition,  on  the  ground  that,
while  the  simple  reading  explains  all  the
additions  to  it,  in  the  numerous  groups  of
manuscripts,  etc.,  it  is  difficult  to  ima>;ine
how  the  shorter  form  could  have  been  derived
from  any  of  the  longer  forms.  Tregelles
brackets  iyioy.


sacred  consecration  and  personal  nnion  with
the  Logos.  The  union  of  the  Divine  and
human  nature  of  Christ  is  maintained  by  that
same  Spirit  who  is  the  union  of  the  Father
and  of  the  Son.  In  what  sense  can  it  be  said,
"  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet"  ?  Our  Lord
himself  has  thrown  most  light  upon  this
perplexing  saying  when,  on  promising  the
Paraclete,  he  said,  "He  shall  not  speak  of
[or,  'from']  himself:  he  will  take  of  mino,
and  show  unto  you"  (ch.  xvi.  13, 14);  and
when  lie  declared  (ch,  xvi.  7 — 10)  that  he
must  himself  go  to  the  Father,  resume  his
antenatal  glory,  carry  our  nature,  dishonoured
by  mnn,  but  now  clothed  with  an  infinite
majesty,  to  the  very  throne  of  God,  as  the
condition  of  the  gilt  of  the  Paraclete.  T)iere
was,  in  the  constitution  of  nature,  in  the
order  of  providence,  in  the  revelations  of
the  propliets,  in  the  Person  of  the  Son  of
man,  that  wlierewith  the  blessed  Spirit  was
ever  and  ceaselessly  working;  but  not  until
the  atonement  was  made,  till  God  had
glorified  his  Son  Jesus,  not  until  the  Person
of  the  God-Man  was  constituted  in  its
infinity  of  power  and  perfection  of  sym-
pathy, were  the  facts  ready,  were  the  truths
liberated  for  the  salvation  of  men,  were  the
streams  of  living  water  ready  to  flow  from
every  heart  that  received  the  Divine  gift.
In  comparison  with  all  previons  manifesta-
tion of  the  Spirit,  this  was  so  wonderful
that  John  could  say  of  all  that  had  goue
before — "  not  yet,"  "  not  yet."  The  Baptist's
expression,  "  I  knew  him  not "  (see  note,  ch.
i.  31),  and  the  scene  described  in  ch.  xx.  21,
22,  do  not  contradict  this  (see  note).  This
is  the  first  time  that  John  mentions  the  glori-
fication of  the  Son  of  man.  Jesus  certainly
looked  at  his  death,  with  what  followed  it,  as
his  glory  (see  ch.  xii.  23,  etc. ;  xiii.  31 ;  xvii.
5).  This  evangelist  does  not,  so  clearly  as
St.  Paul  (says  Westcott),  discriminate  the
two  stages  of  "humiliation"  and  "glory"
(of  Phil.  ii.  with  1  John  iii.  5, 8).

Vers.  40 — 53.— (7)  The  conflict  among  the
hearers,  and  divers  results  of  this  series  of
discourses.     The  Sanhedrin  and  its  officers.

Ver.  40.— Either  "some,"  or  "certain,"  or
"  many "  '  must  be  supposed  to  complete
the  text  of  the  oldest  manuscripts.  [Certain]
of  the  multitude  therefore,  when  they  heard
these  words  (\iyuv,  referring  to  vers.  37, 38),
said,  This  is  of  a  truth  the  Prophet,  In  all
probability  "the  Prophet"  predicted  by
Deut.  xviii.  15,  whom  the  Lord  God  would
raise  up  to  them  (cf.  Acts  iii.  22 ;  notes,  ch.
i.   21  and  vi.  14).    This  was  one  of  the

»  B.T.,  Tregelles,  Alford,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  and  Meyer  exclude,  witli  N,  B,
L,  T,  X,  and  numerous  versions,  iroAAo^
It  is  retained  in  T.B.,  r,  A,  A,  n,  with  other
versions.


820


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINd  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [ch.  vn.  1—68.


grand  features  of  the  Old  Testament  con-
ception of  the  Coming  One.  Whether  even
the  wisest  of  them  liad  learned  to  combine
all  tliese  features  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and
King,  of  Shiloh,  of  the  Branch  of  the  Lord,
of  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  Priaee  of  Peace,
into  one  indiridnal,  is  open  to  doubt.  Tliey
might  believe  that  their  eyes  saw  much,  and
yet  wait  for  more  (of.  John  the  Baptist's
message  from  tlje  prison).

Ver.  41. — Others  said,  This  is  the  Christ.
These  must  have  pressed  the  argument
further.  The  Lord  must  have  seemed  to
them  to  combine  the  yet  more  explicit  signs,
not  only  of  the  Prophet  tliat  should  come
into  the  world,  but  of  the  anointed  King
and  Priest — the  Christ  of  their  current
expectation.  Bat  some'  said,  Doth  the  Christ
come  out  of  Galilee  1  Here  criticism  was  at
once  at  work  upon  obvious  appearances,  but
misunderstood  facts.  Was  he  not  called
"Jesus  of  Nazareth"?  His  life  had  been
spent  there,  his  ministry  in  the  main
restricted  to  the  northern  province.  These
questions  give  a  vivid  scene  and  portray  a
gjeat  emotion.  The  people  are  resting  on
tlie  letter  of  prophecy  (Micah  v.  2),  where
the  Messiah,  as  undersiood  by  their  own
teachers  (see  Matt.  ii.  5),  was  to  proceed
from  Bethlehem;  but  tliey  overlook  the
remarkable  prediction  in  Isa.  ix.  1,  where
Galilee  is  spoken  of  as  the  scene  of  extra-
ordinary illumination.

Vers.  42, 43. — Hath  not  the  Scripture  said.
That  the  Christ  oometh  of  the  seed  of  David,
and  &'om  Bethlehem,  the  village  where  David
was  1  Therefore  a  division  arose  in  the
multitude  heoanse  of  him.  lie  Wette,  Baur,
Weisse,  Keim,  and  others  have  tried  to  prove
from  this  that  the  evangelist  was  ignorant
of  Christ's  birth  at  Bethlehem.  "  Hilgenfeld
candidly  owns  that  this  passage  assumes
the  author's  knowledge  of  this  very  fact"
(Godet)  It  was  unknown  to  the  multitude,
wlio  were  not  at  that  moment  aware  how
this  argument  would  ultimately  be  pressed
by  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel.  John
leaves  the  objection  unanswered,  because  he
knew  that  all  his  readers,  familiar  with  the
synoptic  narrative,  would  answer  it  for  them-
selves. As  respects  the  well-known  belief
current  in  John's  later  years,  and  confirmed
by  tlie  ecclesiastical  tradition  of  Hegesippus
(Eusebius,  'Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  19,  20),  that
the  relatives  of  Jesus  were  summoned,  as
descendants  of  David,  into  the  Emperor
Somitian's  presence,  it  is  clear  that  Jesus
was  believed  to  be  the  humble  heir  of  David's
throne  and  family,  so  that  his  readers  would
see  that  he  fulfilled  not  only  the  prophecy

•  B.T.  and  Tregelles,  with  B,  L,  T,  X,
read  ot  Si  instead  of  2iA\ai  of  Tischendorf
(Sth  edit).  'AAXoi  a  is  the  reading  of  T.B.


of  Micah  t.  2,  bit  those  of  Isa.  xi.  1  and
Jer.  xziii.  5,  passages  which  anticipate  the
Messiah's  descent  from  David.  These  were
minor  points  in  the  great  tableau  of  John's
Gospel.  He  who  believed  with  overwhelming
conviction  that  Jesus  wad  the  Logos  made
flesh,  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  risen  and
glorified  Lord,  bestowing  the  Spirit  of  his
own  wondrous  Person  upon  his  Church,
would  not  trouble  much  about  these  mis-
takes of  the  people  concerning  the  ancillary
details  of  his  earthly  career  which,  when  he
wrote,  had  become  universally  known.  It
was,  however,  instructive,  half  a  century
later,  to  see  how  flimsy,  uuveracious,  and
worthless  the  objections  were  which  passed
from  lip  to  lip  at  this  crisis  in  the  life  of
our  Lord.  A  Greek  of  the  time  of  Hadrian
would  be  surely  very  unlikely  to  have
represented  this  condition  of  the  Jerusalem
mind.  Now,  some  of  those  who  believed
that  he  was  a  great  Prophet,  the  predicted
Prophet,  yet  refused  to  agree  with  others
who  hailed  him  as  tlie  Christ.  The  division
or  violent  party-split  (o-xfff/ua)  in  tlie  crowd
on  that  "last  great  day  of  the  feast "  may
have  had  persons  friendly  to  him  on  both
sides;  but  on  one  side  at  least  there  were
those  who  were  ready  to  side  with  Pharisees
and  "  Jews  "  and  lay  hands  upon  him.

Ver.  44. — And  some  of  them ;  i.e.  of  those
who  refused  to  accord  him  Messianic  recep-
tion because  he  had  not  commenced  ma
ministry  at  Bethlehem,  and  had  not  flaunted
his  Davidic  ancestry.  Some  of  the  multi-
tude were  ready  on  their  own  account  to
act,  or  at  least  to  aid  or  abet  the  baffled
officers  of  state  in  their  task:  would  have
taken  him ;  but  no  man  laid  hands  on  him.
The  Slime  mysterious  power,  the  same  con-
flicting fear  of  the  result  among  the  en-
thusiastic crowd  then  waving  their  palm
branches  and  shouting  "  the  great  Hosanna,"
nay,  the  all-wise  providence  of  God,  re-
strained them  yet  again.  "His  hour  was
not  yet  come."

Vers.  45, 46.— In  ver.  32  we  learn  that  Pha-
risees and  chief  priests  had  sent  "officers"
to  lay  hands  on  him,  to  seize  their  opportu-
nity for  an  arrest;  but,  sharing  somewhat
the  outburst  of  enthusiasm  which  wavered
between  his  claims  to  be  the  Prophet  or  the
Christ,  and  only  subsided  for  a  moment  on
a  miserable  and  uuveracious  plea,  they  did
not  dare  to  execute  the  command  of  their
masters.  The  officers  therefore  came  to  the
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  (the  absence  of
the  article  toijs  before  iapiaatous  shows  that
they  were  regarded  as  one  body,  who  had
charged  these  officers  to  undertake  the  duty
in  which  they  signally  failed);  and  they
(^Kf ifoi,  the  latter)  said  to  them,  Why  did  ye
not  bring  him?  Foiled  in  their  intention
to  carry  out  the  order  of  the  committee


OH.  vn.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


321


of  the  oounoil,  they  return  empty-handed,
and  to  some  extent  baffled  and  chagrined.
They  had  fallen  into  the  dominant  enthu-
siasm of  the  crowd  for  a  moment.  They  had
heard  the  shouts  which  hailed  him  as  the
great  Prophet,  nay,  as  Messiah  himself,  and
their  reply,  according  to  the  curtailed  te^t,
was,  Never  man  bo  spake.'  It  mntlers  little
whether  the  additional  clause, "  as  this  Man
speaks,"  was  in  the  original  text  or  not,  the
idea  is  the  same ;  and  it  confirms  the  sup-
position to  which  we  have  often  referred —
that  John  only  gives  us  the  great  seiitences
which  tlie  Divine  Lord  made  the  text  of
a  discourse.  An  overwhelming  impression
was  produced  that  the  Speaker  had  a  deep
secret  to  disclose,  vast  treasure  to  bestow,
unlimited  power  to  meet  the  thirst  of  man,
and  even  to  miike  those  who  utterly  yield
to  his  influence  the  fountains  of  benedic-
tions to  others.  An  awe  as  of  unseen  things
fell  on  the  offlcerp  and  the  people.  They
could  not  resist  the  sense  of  benediction
which,  like  some  sacred  perfume,  Etome  su-
pernatural glamour,  fell  upon  them  in  his
royal  words.  "  Never  man  thus  spake."
The  whole  experience  is  new  and  wonderful.
"  These  sayings  of  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth
are  more  than  words;  they  have  living
powers;  they  have  confounded  and  dis-
armed us."

Ver.  47. — ^Tho  Pharisees  therefore  an-
swered them.  Evidently  the  Pharisees  were
the  leading  spirits  in  this  assault  upon
Jesus.  The  guardians  of  the  orthodoxy  of  Is-
rael, in  the  haughty  pride  of  their  order,  are
piqued  and  angi  y.  Have  ye  also — the  chosen
servants  of  the  august  council  of  the  nation
— ^been  led  astray  f  In  Matt,  xxvii.  63  these
Pharisees  speak  of  the  Divine  Lord  as  "  this
deceiver  (ixeivos  5  irxivos)."  Are  folly  and
weakness,  if  not  treachery  and  corruption,
at  work  so  near  the  centre  of  our  autliority  ?

Ver.  48. — Hath  any  one  of  the  rulers  be-
lieved on  him,  or  of  the  Pharisees  I  They
soon  find  they  have  reckoned  on  the  em-
phatic negative  of  the  query  {ii.i\  ns ;)  too
soon.  There  is,  however,  a  touch  of  weak-
ness in  the  question.  They  seem  to  say,  if
one  of  the  rulers,  one  of  the  Pharisees,  had
taken  a  difierent  course,  there  might  be
some  colour  for  the  pusillanimity  of  the
officers.    The  question  which  they  put,  thus

'  N°,  B,  L,  T,  X,  3,  33,  read,  oiiSArore
eh(i^r|a■fl/  o2r<9i  SarBprnros,  and  they  are  fol-
lowed by  Lachmann,  Tischenddrf  (6th  edit.),
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  K.T. ;  but  K*^  adds
the  old  appendage,  ois  oVros  XoAe?  6  dyBpoy-
iros,  which  is  the  reading  also  of  X,  r.  A,  n,
and  many  other  uncials  and  versions,  and  is
followed  by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Tre-
gelles,  Alford,  Meyer,  Godet,  etc.  Weym.
brackets  the  iis  alros  t  &>i9p(aiios.

lows.


expecting  a  negative  answer,  might  be  an-
swered difierently.  There  were  Pharisees
who  had  shown  some  sympathy  with  Jesus.
Certain  steps,  moreover,  taken  by  him  were
not  so  hopelessly  hostile  to  their  own  views.
In  their  momentary  animosity,  bUnded  by
passion,  they  are  ready  to  ignore  this  and
other  facts  as  well.  Some  of  the  higher
classes  in  Galilee  had  already  admitted  his
claims  (see  oh.  iv.  46;  Luke  vii.  36,  etc.).
The  language  of  the  Pharisees  has  been  a
stock  objection  to  every  great  spiritual  move-
ment in  its  beginning.  The  writer  thus're-
veals  a  knowledge  of  proceedings  to  which
he  must  have  had  some  exceptional  means
of  access.  The  obvious  familiarity  which
he  suggests  with  Nicodemus  and  with  friends
in  the  high  priest's  palace  (ch.  xviii.  15)  is
the  simplest  explanation.

Ver.  49. — But  this  multitude,  which  know-
eth  not  the  Law,  are  accursed.'  This  is  a
most  contemptuous  expression — am-lui-'arez,
equivalent  to  "this scum  of  the  earth,"  "the
unlettered  rabble."  The  Phariseea  were
accustomed  to  show  sovereign  contempt  for
those  who  had  no  admission  to  their  own
culture  and  methods  of  knowledge.  Eder-
sheim  and  Wunsche  quote  'Pes.,'  49,  6;
'  Baba,'  B.  8,  6 ;  and  '  Chetub.,'  iii.  6  in  proof
of  the  utter  inhumanity  of  their  judgments.
This  language  did  not  endorse  a  formal
excommunication  of  the  multitude — a  sup-
position in  its  own  nature  impossible  and
absurd— but  it  expressed  the  brusque  and
harsh  contempt  with  vrhich  the  Pharisees
then  present  wished  to  correct  the  weak
compliance  of  their  own  servants.  Lange
presses  the  utterance  too  far.  We  cannot
see  in  it  more  than  the  bitter  outburst  of
their  pent-up  spite.

Vers.  £0,  51. — They  were  hardly  prepared
for  what  followed ;  for  one  of  their  own  order,
one  of  their  "  rulers,"  "the  teacher  of  Israel,"
a  chief  among  the  Pharisees,  opens  his
lips  to  speak  to  them,  and  to  call  for  a  halt
in  their  rash  proceedings.  He  did  not  go
far,  but  he  directed  attention  to  a- funda-
mental principle  of  that  very  "  Law  "  which
the  Pharisaic  party  were  ignoring.  Nicode-
mus saith  to  them  (he  who  came  to  him  for-
merly, although  being  one  of  them).'    The

•  Lachmann,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.).
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  E.T.  here  read
f-irdpaTOi,  the  classical  form,  not  elsewhere
found  in  the  New  Testament,  with  ^$,  B,  T,
1,  33,  and  one  or  two  quotations;  T.B.,  ^iri-
Kariparol,  with  almost  all  the  other  authori-
tie«.

'  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  on  the  authority
of  K*,  omits  the  bracketed  clause  alto-
gether. Lachmann,  Alford,  Tregelles,  West-
cott and  Hort,  and  B.T.  retain  d  ixeiii'
vpis  airhy  irpirtpor,  with  B,  L,  T,  and  some


322


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  vu.  1—63.


parenthesis  shows  the  author's  strong  recol-
lection of  the  scene  (ch.  iii  1,  etc.),  when  the
Lord  had  opened  to  his  own  mind,  as  well
as  to  Nicodemns,  the  mystery  of  the  king-
dom, and  the  need  of  that  very  Spirit's
power  to  which  (John  knew  when  he  wrote
that)  the  Lord  was  referring  in  his  great
discourse.  Nicodemus  had  not  proclaimed
his  own  disoipleship,  but  he  meant  to  cover
and  shield  the  enthusiastic  crowd  from  the
sting  of  the  cruel  condemnation  of  this  Pha-
risaic junta.  Doth  our  Law  judge  a '  man
except  it  have  first  heard  from  himself,  and
have  come  to  know  what  he  doethl  (Exod.
xxiii.  1  margin,  "  Thou  shalt  not  receive  a
false  report ; "  Dent.  i.  Iti,  "  Hear  the  causes
between  your  brethren,  and  judge  righteously
between  every  man  and  his  brother  ").  The
Law  is  here  personified  in  the  person  of  the
judge.  The  process  is  not  followed  by  this
hasty  ex-parte'  statement.  The  Law  is  tra-
versed by  this  forgetfulness  of  the  first  prin-
ciple of  justice  as  between  man  and  man.
Tliey  might  have  rejoined  that  they  did  know
the  teaching  and  the  work  of  Jesus.  They
had  been  following  liim  by  their  representa-
tives, and  were  nowwitn  esses  of  his  extraordi-
nary assumptions,  and  had  evidence  enough
on  which  to  proceed.  The  retort  which  they
made  is  suflScient  proof  of  the  defective  and
passion-blinded  method  of  their  own  proce-
dure. Moreover,  it  shows  that  the  prophetic
lank  assigned  to  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the
main  question  in  the  mind  of  Nicodemus
and  his  Pharisaic  companions.  The  rules  for
the  judgment  of  a  prophet  were  stringent,
and  no  attempt  had  been  made  to  put  these
prophetic  claims  to  the  test  (Deut.  xviii.
19 — 22).  Moreover,  they  ran  off  upon  an
utterly  false  tack,  and  were  not  free  from
inaccuracy  in  their  solemn  appeal  to  Holy
Scripture.

Yer.  52. — They  answered  and  said  to  him,
Art  thou  also,  as  he  is  aud  his  supporters  are,
from  Galilee  t  and,  therefore,  is  this  criticism
of  yours  on  our  baffled  plan  the  dictate  of
provlneial  pride?  They  souglit  to.  fix  a
contemptuous  country-cousin  sobriquet  upon
this  distinguished  man,  instead  of  replying
to  his  sensible  inquiry.     Search,  aud  see,


versions.  T.E.,  with  E,  G,  H,  M,  etc.,  some
Italic  Versions,  Vulgate,  and  Syriao,  reads
yvitrSs  instead  of  irpircpoii ;  so  Godet  (cf.  ch.
xix.  39).

'  For  this  use  of  the  definite  article,  see
Matt.  XV.  11.  T.E.  reads,  Trap'  avrov  Trpdre-
pov,  with  a  great  array  of  later  uncials.  The
reading  of  E.T.,  with  Tregrelle.-i,  Tischendorf
(8th  edit.),  Alford,  and  Westoott  and  Hort,
is  rpSiTOV  Trap'  aiiroi.


that  out  of  Galilee  ariseth '  no  prophet  The
present  tense  has  very  nearly  the  force  of  the
perfect,  and  denotes  the  general  rule  of  the
Divine  providence  in  the  matter.  The  pro-
phetic order  can  scarcely  be  thought  to  have
been  recruited  from  the  northern  province.
Even  Rosea  had  his  origin  in  Samaria.
Amos  was  an  inhabitant  of  Tekoah ;  twelve
miles  south  of  Jerusalem.  Kahum  the  Bl-
koshite  cannot  be  proved  to  have  sprung
from  the  Galilsean  town  of  Elkosh ;  though
it  is  not  impossible,  it  is  at  least  probable,
that  Elkosh  in  Assyria,  on  the  Tigris,  two
miles  north  of  Mosul  and  south  of  Nineveh,
was  the  place  wl;ence  Nahum  and  his  pro-
phecies issued.  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  of  the
land  of  Gilead,  cannot  be  claimed  as  a  Gali-
Isean.  The  case  is  different  with  reference
to  Jonah  of  Gath-Hepher,  of  the  tiibe  of
Zebulon  (2  Kings  xiv.  25),  who,  as  a  solitary
and  by  no  means  morally  impressive  cha-
acter,  might  almost  as  an  exception  prove
the  truth  of  the  general  statement.  The
historical  error  is  far  from  difficult  to  ac-
count for  in  the  stress  of  the  discontent
which  these  Pharisees  were  now  manifest-
ing towards  everything  Galilsean.  Godet,
on  tlie  authority  of  iyiiyeprai  being  the  text,
would  have  it  that  "there  has  not  now
arisen  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  a  Prophet."
Baumlein  presses  this  still  further,  by
making  the  "  prophet "  mean  "  the  Messiah."
There  is  no  reasonable  ground  for  charging
on  these  Pharisees  "  an  incredible  ignorance
or  incompreliensible  misunderstanding."
Such  a  charge  is  more  like  one  of  the  in-
comprehensible misunderstandings  of  the
modern  critical  school  whenever  a  chance
opens  of  assailing  the  authenticity  of  the
Fourth  Gospel.

Ver.  53. — They  went  every  man  to  his
own  house.  This  clause  belongs  to  the  peri-
cope  of  the  woman  taken  in  adultery,  and
is  encumbered  with  the  textual  and  other
difficulties  involved  in  that  paragraph.  The
words  iipply  most  imperfectly  to  tlie  pre-
ceding narrative,  which  terminates  with  a
private  conversation  between  Nicodemus  and
other  members  of  the  Sanhedrin,  and,  at
the  same  time,  rather  suggest  the  scattering
of  the  crowd  or  the  return  of  the  pilgrims
to  Galilee,  both  of  which  form  a  very  im-
probable consequence  of  ver.  52,

'  The  present,  lyeipmu,Ta  preferred  by
Tregelles,  Alford,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),
Westcott,  and  E.T.,  on  the  authority  of  K,
B,  D,  K,  S,  etc.,  about  thirty  cursives,  the
Vulgate  and  numerous  versions ;  the  perfect,
iyiiyfpTai,  by  T.E.,  with  E,  G,  M,  and  nn-
merouB  cursives


OH.  vii.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING   TO  ST.  JOHN.  823


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  1. — Our  Lord's  stay  in  Cfalilee.  Notwithstanding  the  disconragements  of  the
last  few  days,  he  continued  to  reside  in  Galilee.  "  And  after  these  thiiigs  Jesus  con-
tinued to  abide  in  Galilee:  for  he  would  not  abide  in  Judsea,  because  the  Jews  sought  to
kill  him."

I.  He  took  needful  precaution  to  save  his  life.  1.  Se  could  have  put  forth
miraculous  power  for  its  preservation,  but  he  practised  that  economy  of  miracle  which
is  so  manifest  throughout  his  whole  mini-stry.  2.  Se  refused  to  expose  himself  to  pre-
m/iture  risk  at  the  hands  of  his  Judsean  enemies.  They  "  sought  to  kill  him."  He
acted  upon  the  counsel  he  gave  to  his  disciples,  that  when  persecuted  in  one  city  they
should  flee  to  another.  He  would  not  decline  risk  when  his  hour  was  come,  but  mean-
while he  used  all  prudence  to  avert  danger.

II.  His  continued  ministbt  in  Galilee.  1.  TTioiigh  discouraged  ly  the  defection
of  so  mariy  disciples,  he  continues  to  minister  in  Galilee.  2.  Sis  life  was  secure  amtmg
the  Galilseans.  The  diil'erence  between  the  Galilseans  and  the  Jews  was  that,  while  the
Jews  were  actively  hostile,  the  Galilasans  were  merely  indifferent.

Vers.  2 — 10. — The  appeal  to  Jesus  on  the  part  of  his  unhelieving  brothers.

I.  The  occasion  of  this  appeal.  "  But  the  Jews'  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  at
hand."  1.  It  was  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  three  yearly  feasts,  and  ocouired  in  our
month  of  October.  2.  It  was  intended  at  once  to  commemorate  the  forty  years'  wan-
dering in  the  wilderness,  and  also  to  celebrate  the  ingathering  of  the  yearly  harvest.
3.  The  pilgrims,  as  well  as  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,,  left  their  houses  for  seven
days  to  dwell  in  tents  made  of  boughs.  The  feast  was  at  once  a  solemn  and  a  happy
time.

II.  The  appeal  of  the  brothers.  "  Depart  hence,  and  go  into  Judssa,  that  thy
disciples  also  may  see  the  works  that  thou  doest."  1.  Who  were  these  brothers  f  They
are  not  disciples,  for  they  expressly  exclude  themselves  from  this  class  by  their  own
words  (ver.  3).  The  evangelist  says  expressly  (ver.  5)  they  were  not  believers,  and
Jesus  implies  by  his  answer  that  they  are  not,  for  the  hatred  of  the  world  could  not
touch  them  (ver.  7).  The  head  of  the  brethren  was  James,  afterwards  chief  pastor  at
Jerusalem.  2.  It  is  this  unbeliemng  attitude  that  explains  their  appeal.  "  For  neither
did  his  brethren  believe  in  him."  (1)  They  are,  no  doubt,  afterwards  found  identified
with  the  cause  of  Christ  (Acts  i.  14),  probably  drawn  to  him  by  our  Lord's  appearance
after  his  resurrection  to  James  (1  Cor.  xv.  7).  (2)  The  appeal  of  the  brethren  was  not
dictated  either  (a)  by  the  unnatural  desire  to  see  him  sacrificed  to  the  fury  of  his
enemies,  (J)  nor  by  an  eagerness  to  precipitate  events  in  his  own  honour,  (c)  but  rather
by  their  anxiety  to  put  an  end  to  the  equivocal  position  in  which  he  stood  in  their  eyes,
(o)  They  had  known  him  so  familiarly  from  childhood  that  his  claims  were  hard  to
understand.  (j8)  They  thought  that  he  ought  to  submit  his  claims  to  Messiahship
to  those  most  competent  to  judge  of  their  value.  "  For  no  man  doeth  anything  in
secret " — Galilee  was  an  obscure  corner  of  the  land,  far  from  the  centre  of  ecclesiastical
interest — "himself  seeking  to  be  famous.  If  thou  doest  these  things,  show  thyself  to
the  world."  (y)  The  capital  was  the  appropriate  place  for  the  recognition  of  liis  mission,
and  the  approaching  feast  presented  a  favourable  opportunity  for  making  it  known  to
Jews  from  all  parts  of  the  world.

III.  OuB  Lord's  answer  to  the  appeal.  1.  Sis  time  was  not  yet  come.  "  My
time  is  not  yet  come."  (1)  This  refers  to  the  period  of  his  final  manifestation,  only  to
end  in  his  death.  If  he  were  to  comply  with  the  request  of  his  brothers,  he  would  only
anticipate  that  period;  but  his  time  for  leaving  the  world  was  not  yet  come.  (2;  Om
Lord  regards  the  events  of  life  as  divinely  ordered  in  point  of  time.  "  Our  times  are
in  thy  hand."  (3)  He  niarks  the  necessary  contrast  between  his  own  position  and  tha'
of  his  brothers.  '.'  But  your  time  is  always  ready.  The  world  cannot  hate  you ;  bui
me  it  hateth,  because  I  testify  of  it,  that  its  works  are  evil."  (a)  There  was  nothing
discordant  between  the  views  of  the  brethren  and  the  views  of  the  world.  There  was
a  moral  sympathy  between  them  that  made  it  impossiblo  his  brothers  should  risk
anything  by  going  to  the  feast.    (S)  The  world's  hatred  to  Chriit  had  its  origin  in  his


324  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,     [oh,  m.  1— 53L

faithful  testimony  against  its  evil.  He  had  roused  its  antagonism  by  his  rebukes  of
Pharisaic  hypocrisy  and  wickedness.  "  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come
into  the  world ;  and  men  have  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are
evil."  The  works  were  evil,  (o)  because  they  were  done,  not  according  to  Divine
command,  but  according  to  the  tradition  of  the  elders ;  (/3)  because  they  were  done  from
a  wrong  principle,  not  from  faith  and  lore;  (y)  because  tliey  were  done  witli  a  wrong
motive,  not,  the  glory  of  God,  but  "  to  be  seen  of  men."  2.  Ee  commands  his  brothers
to  go  up  to  the  feast.  "  Go  ye  up  unto  this  feast ;  for  me,  I  go  not  up  to  this  feast,
because  my  time  is  not  yet  fidly  come."  (1)  He  urges  his  brethren  to  go  up,  as  it  was
a  matter  of  iiecessaiy  Jewish  observance.  (2)  He  signifies  certainly  that  he  will  not
accompany  Ihtm,  like  one  going  to  the  feast.    And  he  does  not  go  up  with  his  brethren.

(3)  His  going  up  will  be  as  a  "prophet"  (ver.  14)  appearing  suddenly  in  the  temple.

(4)  The  emphasis  that  he  lays  on  "  this  feast "  implies  that  he  is  not  going  up  in  the
sense  which  ihe  proposal  of  his  brethren  might  suggest— as  if  his  Messianic  entry  into
Jerusalem  were  to  occur  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  not  at  the  Feast  of  the  Pass-
over. It  was  true,  in  any  case,  that  his  "  time  was  not  yet  fully  come,"  not  in  allusion
to  the  two  or  three  days'  interval  between  their  going  and  his  coming,  but  to  the  time
of  his  death.  3.  Our  Lord's  secret  departure  for  Jerusalem.  "When  he  had  said
these  words  unto  them,  he  abode  in  Galilee.  But  when  his  brethren  were  gone  up  to
tlie  feast,  then  went  he  also  up."  The  passage  does  not  say  that  he  went  up  to  the
feast  at  all.  Contrast  the  privacy  of  this  journey  with  the  publicity  of  his  solemn
final  entry  into  Jerusalem  (ch.  zii  12).

Vers.  11 — 13. — Inquiries  and  speculatiotis  concerning  Chriit.  His  entry  was  bo
private  as  to  be  almost  unnoticed.

I.  The  anxiety  or  the  hostile  Jews  to  dibcoveb  eih.  "Then  the  Jews  sought
him  at  the  feast,  and  said,  Where  is  he  ?  "  1.  The  question  may  have  leen  ashed  partly
through  curiosity  and  partly  from  hostility,  for  it  implies  that  a  plot  already  existed
lor  his  destruction.  2.  Mark  ihe  contemptuous  form  of  the  question.  "Where  is  he?"
His  name  is  not  mentioned,  as  if  to  say,  "Where  is  this  fellow?"  But  the  very  form
of  the  question  implies  that  he  was  widely  known,  and  present  to  all  miuds  at  Jeru-
salem.

II.  The  divergence  of  opinion  conobrnino  him  ahono  the  worshippers  at
THE  FEAST.  "  And  there  was  much  murmuring  among  the  multitudes  concerning
him."  As  if  men  were  afraid  to  speak  out  their  inward  thoughts.  Mark  the  contrast
here  as  elsewhere  between  those  who  are  drawn  to  him  and  those  who  are  repelled  from
him.  1.  Mark  the  form  of  the  favowrahle  Judgment  upon  him.  "Some  said,  He  is  a
good  Man."  They  tested  his  principles  by  his  deeds.  As  one  who  "  went  about  every
day  doing  gooH,"  he  appeared  as  the  Author  of  deeds  that  spoke  of  goodness  ind  kindness
and  love.  2.  Mark  the  form  of  the  unfavowaMe  judgment  upon  him,  "  Others  said,  Nay;
but  he  deceiveth  the  people."  Ue  rejected  Moses'  Law,  despised  the  sabbath,  made
himself  equal  with  God.  This  judgment  sets  at  nought  the  argument  from  Christ's
personal  life.  It  is  a  judgment  against  the  facts.  3.  Mark  the  pressure  of  official
opinion  upon  the  whole  people.  "  Howbeit  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for  fear  of  the
Jews."  (1)  Authority  had  not  yet  formally  determined  the  question  of  .Christ's  claims.
(2)  The  fear  of  man,  "  that  bringeth  a  snare,"  has  a  strong  hold  upon  people  with
undecided  convictions.

Vers.  14 — 18. — Justification  of  his  doctrine.  Jesus  appeared  suddenly  in  the
temple,  and  began  at  once  to  instruct  the  people.

I.  Astonishment  op  the  Jews  at  his  teaching.  "  And  the  Jews  were  astonished,
saying,  How  knoweth  this  man  letters,  having  never  learned?"  1.  They  were
astonished  at  the  manner  of  his  teaching.  "  He  spake  as  never  man  spake ; "  he
"  spake  as  One  havinjj  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes  ;  "  thus  "  the  common  people
heard  him  gladly."  These  passages  give  an  idea  of  the  manner  ami  effect  of  his
teaching.  2.  They  were  astonished  at  the  matter  of  his  teaching.  He  had  not,  they
thought,  been  trained  in  any  rabbinic  school,  yet  he  seemed  to  understand  the  litera-
ture of  his  countrymen — which  was  essentially  theological — quite  as  ^rell  as  theii
ajiproved  religious  guides,


OH.  vii.  1—63.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDIN&  TO  ST.  JOHN.  326

II.  Our  Lord's  explanation  of  ms  teaching.  "  My  teaching  is  not  mine,  bul
his  that  sent  me."  1.  Hi»  doctrine  was  not  self-originated,  though  he  had  studied  in
no  school  of  the  rabbis.  2.  Jt  was  not  human  ;  for  it  waa  from  the  Source  of  all  truth,
God  himself.  3.  JTe  daims  to  5e  merely  the  Messenger  of  his  Father.  He  is  the  Word
of  God,  who  reveals  the  Father's  mind  to  men.

ILL  The  method  of  vkkifyinq  the  doctrine.  "  If  any  man  wiUeth  to  do  his
will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  myself."
There  is  a  twofold  method  of  veiification — one  internal,  the  other  external.  1.  The
internal  verification.  (1)  It  springs  from  the  disposition  or  desire  to  do  the  will  of
God.  (o)  The  will  of  God  represents  all  that  is  included  in  doctrine  and  duty,  but  it
specifically  regards  man's  salvation.  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctifi-
cation"  (1  Thess.  iv.  3).  (6)  It  is  not  deed,  but  will,  that  holds  the  primary  place  in
Christian  life.  The  will  represents  the  motive  power ;  the  deed  is  but  the  outcome  of
the  will.  Yet  they  are  inseparably  linked  in  the  designs  of  grace  as  wt  11  ai  in  th*
experience  of  the  saints — "  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you,  to  will  and  to  do  of  his
good  pleasure."  (2)  The  will  to  do  the  Divine  will  is  the  only  condition  of  Christian
insight.  We  cannot  understand  a  sensation  or  a  feeling  in  another  man  unless  we  have
the  radical  element  of  that  feeling  or  sensation  in  ourselves.  Even  the  heathen  Aristotle
says,  "  The  mind's  eye  is  not  capable  of  rightly  judging  without  moral  virtue."  It
follows  from  this  fact  that  (a)  unbelief  is  more  the  fault  of  the  heart  than  of  the
intellect.  Therefore  Scripture  speaks  expressively  "of  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief
(Heb.  iii.  12).  (b)  Religion  is  essentially  a  matter  of  life  as  well  as  of  thought.
Therefore  the  Jews  could  not  understand  the  will  of  God  concerning  the  Messiah,  for
they  were  altogether  out  of  sympathy  with  it.  (c)  Faith  is,  therefore,  not  the  result
of  a  logical  operation.  It  is  "  the  gift  of  God ; "  it  is  "  given  to  us  to  believe."  (3)  The
man  who  is  in  sympathy  with  God's  will  is,  therefore,  in  a  position  to  determine  experi-
mentally  whether  the  doctrine  of  Christ  is  of  God,  or  whether  he  is  an  impostor
uttering  merely  human  teaching.  2.  The  external  verification.  "He  that  speaketh
of  himself  seeketh  his  own  glory  :  but  he  that  seeketh  the  glory  of  him  that  sent  him,
the  same  is  true,  and  there  is  no  unrighteousness  in  him."  This  points  to  the  character
of  him  who  delivers  the  doctrine.  (1)  The  false  teacher  seeks  the  praise  of  men  for  his
own  exaltation.  The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  exulted  in  their  traditions  and  their
glosses  and  their  interpretations  of  the  Bible.  (2)  The  true  teacher  seeks  the  glory  of
God,  which  is  the  one  object  of  the  Bible  from  beginning  to  end.  This  supreme  aim
attests  at  once  (a)  the  truth  of  the  teacher  in  the  sphere  of  thought,  and  (V)  his
righteousness  in  the  sphere  of  action.  Thus  Jesus  can  bis  "no  deceiver  of  the  people."
Therefore  his  doctrine  is  to  be  received.

Vers.  19—24. — Justification  of  his  eondtict.  The  allusion  to  unrighteousness  is  the
point  of  transition  from  Christ's  teaching  to  his  conduct.

I.  He  is  charged  by  the  Jews  with  bbeakino  the  sabbath  law.  1.  He  had
healed  the  impotent  man  at  a  former  visit  to  Jerusalem  on  the  sahbath  day.  "  I
have  done  one  work,  and  ye  all  raarveL"  2.  The  Jews  would  have  stoned  him  as
a  transgressor  for  the  act.  "Why  do  ye  seek  to  kill  me?"  He  knows  the  designs
of  the  rulers,  though  the  multitude  may  not  have  suspected  them,  and  therefore  say,
"  Thou  hast  a  devil :  who  seeketh  to  kill  thee?"  But  Jesus  meekly  passes  over  the
reproach  without  a  reply.

II.  He  betobts  upon  the  Jews  exactly  the  same  chaege.  ''Did  not  Moses
give  you  the  law,  and  yet  none  of  you  keepeth  the  law  ? "  He  refers  to  the  sabbath
law,  and  shows  that  it  allowed  circumcision  to  be  performed  on  the  sabbath.  "  For
this  cause  hath  Moses  given  you  circumcision  (not  that  it  is  of  Moses,  but  of  the
fathers);  and  on  the  sabbath  ye  circumcise  a  man."  1.  They  ought  not,  therefore,  to
condemn  in  Jesus  what  they  approved  in  Moses ;  for  the  healing  of  the  impotent  man
was  as  necessary  as  the  circumcision  of  a  child  on  the  sabbath.  2.  The  principle  he
lays  down  derives  its  force  from  the  fact  that  "  the  sabbath  was  made  for  man."  Man
is  more  than  the  sabbath.  3.  The  fairness  of  Christ's  argument.  "  Judge  not  accord-
ing to  appearance,  but  judge  righteous  judgment."  The  argumentum  ad  homintm
is  (1)  effective  as  closing  the  mouth  of  ae  objector,  (2)  and  ought  to  prepare  the  way
for  an  impartial  judgment  on  the  merits.


328  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.      [oh.  vii.  1— 5a

Vers.  25 — 29. — The  true  origin  of  our  Lord.  The  opportunity  again  arises  of  assert-
ing his  Divine  origin.

X  The  peeplexity  of  the  Jerusalem  Jews  eespeotino  the  policy  and  viEwg
OF  THEm  BULEBS.  "  Then  said  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  Is  not  this  be
whom  they  seek  to  kill?  And,  lo,  he  speaketh  boldly,  and  they  say  nothing  to  him."
1.  The  question  is  put,  not  hy  the  Jews  from  foreign  lands,  who  were  attending  the  feast,
hut  hy  Jews  of  the  city,  who  understood  the  various  phases  of  change  in  the  temper  and
attitude  of  the  rulers  toward  Christ.  2.  They  were  aware  (^  the  plot  formed  at  the
Passover  hefore  the  last  to  kill  him.  3.  They  were  puzzled  to  account  for  the  passiveness
of  the  religious  guides  of  the  nation,  in  presence  of  provocations  so  stinging  as  these
supplied  by  our  Lord's  rebukes.  They  are  almost  disposed  to  believe  that  the  rulers
recognize  Jesus  as  the  Messiah.  "  Do  the  rulers  indeed  perceive  that  he  is  the  Christ  ?  "
4.  Their  own  olstinate  resistance  to  su^h  a  view.  "  Howbeit,  we  know  this  man  whence
he  is :  but  the  Christ,  when  he  comes,  no  one  will  know  whence  he  is."  They  pro-
fessed to  know  the  parentage  and  family  of  Jesus,  identifying  them  with  Galilee ;  but
they  held  that  the  origin  of  the  Messiah  would  be  utterly  unknown.  He  would  appear
suddenly  as  an  adult,  like  another  Melchizedek,  "  without  father,  without  motl^ier."
The  Scriptures  plainly  pointed  out  the  tribe,  the  family,  the  lineage,  the  place  of  the
Messiah's  birth.  Yet  they  said,  "  When  Christ  cometh,  no  man  knoweth  whence  he
is."    The  nature  of  their  ignorance  is  soon  made  manifest.

IL  Oun  Lord's  explanation  op  the  Jews'  pebplbxitt.  "Ye  both  know  me,
and  know  whence  I  am."  1.  He  asserts  that  they  knew  him  as  a  man.  2.  But  assertt
at  once  that  they  did  not  recognize  his  Divine  nature.  (1)  They  did  not  acknowledge
his  essential  Sonship.  "  But  I  know  him :  for  I  am  from  him  " — ^implying  that  his  know-
ledge of  his  Father  arose  from  his  community  of  nature  with  him,  (2)  They  did  not
acknowledge  his  Divine  mission.  "  He  hath  sent  me."  (3)  They  were  not  only  igno-
rant of  the  Son,  but  also  of  the  Father.  "  He  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  know
not."  (o)  It  was  a  severe  thing  to  charge  the  Jews  with  ignorance  of  that  God  whose
worship  was  their  boast.  (V)  The  trutli  of  the  Father  was  staked  upon  the  Messianio
mission  of  the  Son.  Therefore,  to  deny  Christ  was  to  exclude  the  Father  from  the
range  of  their  knowledge.

Vers.  30 — 36. — The  effect  of  our  Lord's  teaching  on  the  rulers  and  on  the  multitude.
His  claim  to  be  sent  from  God  roused  the  anger  of  the  rulers.

I.  The  action  of  the  bulebs.  "  Then  they  sought  to  take  him :  but  no  man  laid
hands  upon  him,  because  his  hour  was  not  yet  come."  1.  Their  efforts  are  for  the
present  limited  to  plots  against  his  life.  The  faithful  witness  to  the  truth  is  always
exposed  to  the  risk  of  persecution  by  a  world  with  no  love  for  the  truth.  2.  Their
efforts  are  restrained  hy  a  Divine  hand  which  can  "  restrain  the  wrath  of  men."  "  His
time  was  not  yet  come."  (1)  There  is  an  allotted  time  for  each  individual  life.  God
has  appointed  the  days  of  man,  and  fixed  the  bounds  that  he  cannot  pass.  The  time  of
Christ's  death  was  not  only  foreseen  but  foreordained.  (2)  The  second  causes  through
which  the  Lord  baffled  for  the  time  the  plots  of  the  rulers  were,  probably,  the  divisions
of  opinion  in  the  multitude,  the  growing  popularity  of  Jesus,  and,  just  as  probably,  the
majesty  of  his  presence  and  his  speech.

II.  The  eesponsb  op  the  multitude  to  oub  Lobd's  tbachinq.  "  And  many  of
the  multitude  believed  on  him,  and  said.  When  the  Christ  cometh,  will  he  do  more
miracles  than  these  which  this  Man  did  ?  "  1.  The  Jews  here  referred  to  were  those  from
abroad,  as  distinguished  from  the  Jews  of  the  city,  who  were  intensely  opposed  to
Christ.  2.  They  showed  a  progressive  faith.  Lately  they  conceded  that  he  was  "a
good  Man"  (ver.  12).  Now  they  admit  his  Messiahship.  3.  Their  faith,  genuine  at
it  is,  has  been  largely  due  to  his  miraculous  power.  The  tradition  was  that  tlie  Messiah
would  possess  such  a  power,  and  {ijese  Jews  believe  that  Christ  had  exhibited  it  on
a  scale  commensurate  with  the  Messianic  expectations  of  the  nation.

III.  Sudden  effect  op  this  chakoe  op  opinion  upon  the  policy  of  the
authorities.  "  The  Pharisees  heard  the  multitude  murmuring  these  things  concerning
him  ;  and  the  Pharisees  and  chief  priests  sent  officers  to  take  him."  1.  They  resolved
to  strike  a  blow  at  once,  so  as  to  save  their  religious  hold  upon  the  people.  They  had  no
■cruple  about  destroying  Christ,  for  they  believed  him  guilty  of  bkBphemy.    2.  The


en.  VII.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  827


divisions  of  religious  life  among  the  Jews  themselves  were  in  abeyance  under  the  influence
of  the  common  danger.  The  Pharisees  acted  in  harmony  with  the  chief  priests,  who
were  Sadducees.

IV.   ThEIB    action     8U0QESTS    TO     OtJB     LOBD     THE     IDEA     OP     HIS    COMING     DEATH.

"  Jesus  therefore  said  unto  them,  Tet  a  little  while  I  am  with  you,  and  then  I  go  unto
him  that  sent  me.  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  shall  not  find  me :  and  where  I  am,  thither
ye  cannot  come."  1.  He  invites  the  Jews  to  profit  by  the  time,  now  narrowed  to  six
months,  that  he  would  he  «ith  them.  2.  The  fatal  effect  of  disregarding  his  timely
warning.  (1)  He  would  soon  be  beyond  the  reach  of  their  malice,  for  he  would  "go  to
him  tliat  sent  hiin."  Jesus  still  emphasizes  his  death  as  a  return  to  heaven  and  to  his
former  glory  with  the  Father.  (2)  They  would  hereafter  seek  him  in  their  impotent
distress,  but  ihey  would  not  find  him.  Their  future  history  was  to  be  marked  by
a  constant  series  of  disappointed  expectations.  3.  Tlieir  strange  misapprehension  of
his  words.  (1)  They  see  no  trace  of  a  reference  to  his  death  or  to  his  return  to  heaven.
(2)  They  see  merely  an  allusion  to  some  transference  of  his  activities  beyond  the
bounds  of  Palestine  to  the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion,  and  through  them  ultimately  to  the
Gentiles.  "  Will  he  go  unto  the  dispersed  among  the  Greeks,  and  Jteach  the  Greeks  ?  "
(a)  This  was  an  involuntary  prophecy  like  that  of  Caiaphas.  (6)  The  Jews  of  the
Dispersion,  scattered  in  Babylonia,  Egypt,  and  Syria,  were  the  most  interesting  section
of  the  Jews,  the  links  to  connect  the  old  with  the  new  revelation,  and  in  their  syna-
gogues the  apostles  were  privileged  to  make  Jesns  known  as  the  Messiah,  (c)  It  is
a  significant  fact  that  this  unconscious  prophecy  should  be  recorded  in  the  Greek
language  by  a  native  of  Palestine,  dwelling  at  the  time  in  a  Gentile  city.

Vers.  37 — 39. — The  address  of  Jesus.    He  makes  no  reply  to  Jewish  objection.

I.  Occasion  op  this  address.  "The  last  and  great  day  of  the  feast."  1.. It  was
ike  eighth  day,  and  was  kept  as  a  sabbath.  2.  It  was  designed  to  commemorate  the
entrance  of  the  Israelites  into  Canaan.  3.  It  was  usual  on  this  day  for  the  people  to  go,
under -the  guidance  of  the  priest,  to  the  fountain  of  Siloam,  where  a  pitcher  was  filled
with  water,  and  brought  back  with  joy  to  the  temple.  This  usage  probably  suggested
the  figure  used  by  our  Lord  in  his  address.

II.  ChEIST  offers  THE   ONLY  SATISFACTION  THAT   CAN   MEET  THE   SPIRITUAL  WANTS

OF  MAN.  "  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink."  1.  7'he  language
implies  the  sense  of  spiritual  need.  (1)  There  is  in  man  a  thirst  for  righteousness.  (2)
There  is  a  thirst  lor  peace.  (3)  There  is  a  thirst  for  the  reconciliation  of  difBculties.
2.  The  language  implies  that  Christ  is  himself  the  Boch  in  the  wilderness,  out  of  which
the  waters  of  salvation  flmv.  (1  Cor.  x.  4.)  (1)  This  water  was  emblematic  of  future
blessing  in  the  ancient  prophets  (Ezek.  xlvii.  1, 12).  He  is  the  Fountain  of  gardens,
the  Well  of  living  waters,  "  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place  "  to  thirsty  souls.  There
is  fulness  of  grace  in  Christ;  it  flows  incessantly  into  the  hearts  of  his  people ;  they  can
drink  of  it  till  their  souls  are  as  a  watered  garden.  (2)  Mark  how  the  Lord  transfers
to  himself  figure  after  figure  of  Old  Testament  times — the  rock,  the  manna,  the  brazen
serpent,  the  fiery  pillar.  3.  It  implies  that  the  thirst  can  only  be  relieved  by  the  actual
drinking  of  the  living  water.    Our  Lord  lefers  directly  to  faith.

III.  The  BELIEVER  HIMSELF  IB  TRANSFORMED  INTO  A  ROCK.  "He  that  believclh
on  me,  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."
1.  We  have  here  the  refreshing  vigour  of  faith.  2.  The  reception  of  blessing  from  Christ
leads  to  its  fuller  distribution  of  believers  to  all  within  their  influence.  "Out  of  the
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."

IV.  The    EXPLANATION   OF    THE     NEW   ViaOTJB   AND     INFLUENCE     OF     THE  BELIEVER.

"  But  this  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  receive :  for
the  Spirit  was  not  yet  given ;  because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet  gloi  ified."  The  reference  is
to  the  approachinii  Pentecost.  1.  The  language  does  not  imply  that  the  Spirit  had  not
yet  existed  in  believers,  for  Old  Testament  saints  were  saved  in  the  same  manner  as
New  Testament  saints.  It  is  the  Spirit's  office  in  all  dispensations  alike  to  apply  the
redemption  of  Christ  to  believers.     2.  It  implies  that  the  Spirit  was  to  come,  not  for


828  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  vu.  1—63.


«f  Christ.  "  Because  that  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified,"  Jesus  must  first  die,  rise  a^in,
d  ascend  to  heaven  before  the  Holy  Ghost  would  descend  upon  the  Church.  This  ii
e  first  allusion  to  Christ's  glorification.

Vers.  40 — 44. — Effect  of  this  address  upon  the  multitude.   It  made  a  great  impression.

L  It  developed  differences  of  opinion.  "  Many  then  of  the  multitude,  who
bad  heard  this  discourse,  said,  Truly  this  is  the  Prophet.  Others  said,  This  is  the  Christ."
1.  A  section  of  the  multitude  was  favourable  to  Christ's  Messianic  claims — (1)  one
part  holding  that  he  was  the  prophet  (Deut.  xviii.  18),  and  therefore,  practically,  the
Messiah,  or  either  Elijah  or  Jeremiah,  who  was  to  be  a  precursor  of  the  Messiah  ;  (2)
another  part  holding  that  he  was  really  the  Messiah.  2.  A  section — perhaps  the  larger
part — held  that  he  could  not  be  the  Messiah,  because  he  was  bom  in  Galilee.  "  Doth  the
Christ,  then,  come  out  of  Galilee  ?  "  (1)  They  were  ignorant  of  the  true  place  of  his
birth ;  (2)  yet  they  were  acquainted  with  the  Scripture  that  spoke  of  Bethlehem  as
the  scene  of  the  Messiah's  birth.  "  Hath  not  the  Scripture  said,  That  Christ  cometh  of
the  seed  of  David,  and  out  of  the  town  of  Bethlehem,  where  David  was?  "  The  whole
incident  shows  (a)  that  they  did  not  take  pains  to  inquire  concerning  the  real  birthplace
of  Jesus ;  (6)  that  divisions  of  opinion  concerning  Christ  began  at  a  very  early  period,
and  still  continue.  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ?"  is  still  the  question  which  tests  the
Christian  attitude  of  men  and  Churches.

II.  The  differences  or  opinion  prevbntbd  the  immediate  arrest  of  Jesus.
"  And  some  of  them  desired  to  take  him  ;  but  no  man  laid  hands  on  him."  1.  The
unbelieving  Jews  would  have  gladly  arrested  Jesus,  and  brought  him  before  the  Sanhe-
drin  on  a  charge  of  blnspliemy.  2.  Their  hands  were  restrained  hy  Divine  Provideace,
mainly  through  the  risks  of  a  colhsion  with  those  Jews  who  were  inclined  to  favour
Christ's  claims.

Vers.  45 — 62. — Tlie  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrin.  The  position  of  the  official  guides  of
the  people  was  becoming  every  hour  more  gravely  compromised  by  the  movement  in
favour  of  Jesus.

I.  The  bxtraoedinart  report  of  the  officers  to  the  Sanhedbiv.  "Then
came  the  officers  to  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees ;  and  they  said  unto  them.  Why
have  ye  not  brought  him?  The  officers  answered,  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."
1.  This  report  was  delivered  on  the  holy  sabbath.  The  exigency  of  the  moment  may
have  seemed  to  justify  the  Sanhedrin  in  sitting  on  that  day.  2.  The  leaders'  indignant
question  murks  their  disappointment  that  Jesus  is  not  a  prisoner  in  their  hands.  3.  The
officer^  answer  is  singularly  frank  and  decisive.  (1)  They  use  no  evasions  to  excuse
themselves,  such  as  that  they  could  not  find  Jesus,  or  that  they  feared  the  multitude.
(2)  They  proclaim  without  fear  or  misgiving  the  profound  impression  made  upon  them-
selves by  our  Lord's  address.  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man  " — (a)  with  such
authority ;  (6)  with  such  a  grasp  of  Divine  truth ;  (c)  with  such  practical  force  and  per-
suasiveness ;  (d)  with  such  a  disregard  for  the  traditional  ideas  of  the  Jewish  teachers.

II.  The  contemptuous  ee.ioinder  of  the  Pharisees.  "Are  you  also  deceived?
Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees  believed  in  him  ?  But  this  multitude  that
knoweth  not  the  Law  is  cursed."  1.  The  evil  was  growing  fast  when  their  very  officers,
despatched  to  execute  the  law,  returned  with  such  a  tribute  to  the  power  of  Jesus.  2.
The  Fharisees  see  in  the  words  of  their  officers  the  evidences  of  nothing  but  d-ceptio/n,
"  Are  ye  also  deceived  ?  "  They  had  already-  stigmatized  Jesus  as  one  who  "  deceiveth
the  people."  They  were  all  the  while  ignorant  of  the  deception  which  shut  their  own
eyes  to  the  truth.  (1)  They  "  trusted  in  themselves  that  they  were  righteous."  (2)
They  thought  they  were  something  when  tliey  were  nothing.  (3)  They  followed  the
traditions  and  commandments  of  men,  which  could  only  lead  them  into  deeper  decep-
tion. They  were  deceived,  yet  they  knew  it  not.  3.  They  contrast  their  own  hardy
unbelief  with  the  too-ready  faith  of  the  multitude.  (1)  The  Pharisees  had  not  believed
in  him,  except  Nicodemus,  Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  and  a  few  female  disciples ;  but  the
discipleship  in  these  cases  was  rather  secret.  (2)  The  multitude  seemed  ready  to  accept
Jesus.  (o5  The  Pharisees  regard  them  as  "  ignorant  of  the  Law."  Whose  fault  was
that  ?  Was  it  not  the  fault  of  the  rulers  themselves  ?  (6)  They  ingard  them  as
"  cursed."    The  multitude  was  never  so  near  to  blessing.


OH.  VII.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  329

in.  The  effobt  madb  on  Christ's  behalf  by  one  of  his  secret  discipIiEs.
"  Nicodemus  saith  unto  them,  Doth  our  Law  then  judge  a  man,  before  it  hear  him,  and
know  what  he  doeth?"  1.  Nicodemus  appears  first  in  history  a$  a  secret  inquirer.
"  He  that  came  to  him  by  night,  being  one  of  them."  2.  It  is  a  sign  of  progress  that
he  makes  an  effort,  however  indirect,  to  turn  aside  the  blow  aimed  at  Jesus.  (1)  He
might  have  taken  a  bolder  course  and  professed  his  faith  openly.  (2)  Yet  his  cautious
strategy  was  effective.  (3)  It  does  not  at  the  same  time  exempt  him  from  suspicion  of
secret  sympathy  with  Galilsean  views.  "  Art  thou,  then,  also  of  Galilee  ?  "  3.  Theddvr
sion  of  the  Sanhedrin  respecting  the  real  origin  of  Jesus.  "  Search,  and  look :  for  nt
prophet  has  arisen  from  Galilee."  (1)  Jesus  was  a  Prophet  of  Judsea,  not  of  Galilee.
(2)  Mark  the  contempt  expressed  for  Galilee.  It  was  in  their  eyes  "  the  refuse  of  the
theocracy."  Were  they  right  in  saying  that  no  prophets  had  risen  in  Galilee?  Elijah
was  of  Gilead ;  Nahum,  of  Elkosh,  a  place  unknown ;  and  Hosea,  of  Samaria ;  and  if
Jonah  is  an  exception,  their  passion  might  have  led  them  to  disregard  the  circumstance
in  the  thought  that  Judaea  was  essentially  the  home  of  the  prophets.  4.  The  danger  to
Jesus  was  averted.  "  And  every  man  went  to  his  own  house."  The  Sanhedrin  broke
up  without  making  any  fresh  effort  to  check  the  progress  of  Jesus.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  6. — Brethren,  hut  not  believers.  In  recording  this  fact  the  evangelist  shows  his
usual  candour.  The  fact  that  some  of  those  who  were  nearest  akin  to  Jesus  withheld
from  him  their  faith  is  at  first  sight  surprising.  It  must  have  been  very  distressing  to
the  human  heart  of  our  Lord  to  meet  with  such  unbelief;  and  it  must  have  been  painful,
and  to  some  extent  discouraging,  to  his  avowed  and  ardent  disciples.  Yet  the  fact  is  so
suggestive  and  instructive  that,  upon  reflection,  we  cannot  wonder  that  it  was  thus  put
upon  record.

I.  It  is  possible  to  be  familiab  with  Christ,  his  hogtbine,  and  oosfel,  akd
TBT  NOT  TO  BELIEVE  ON  HIM.  In  reading  the  gospel  narrative,  we  meet  with  instances
of  unbelief  which  do  not  surprise  us,  which  seem  easily  accounted  for.  There  were
many  who  did  not  really  know  Christ,  who  iimply  took  other  people's  judgment  con-
cerning him,  or  "acted  upon  the  prejudices  natural  to  ignorance.  W'e  scarcely  wonder
that  the  selfish,  unscrupulous,  vmspiritual  rulers  and  scribes  at  Jerusalem  rejected
Christ's  claims,  and  acted  towards  him  with  hostility ;  or  that  the  Roman  procurator
Pilate  misunderstood  him,  and  finally  abandoned  him  to  his  foes.  But  we  are  shocked
when  we  learn  that  the  very  brethren  of  Jesus  wanted  faith — at  all  events,  thorough
faith — ^in  Jesus.  They  were  his  kin ;  they  had  known  him  for  many  years ;  they  must
have  enjoyed  many  opportunities  of  studying  his  character  and  verilying  his  claims.
Yet  they  withheld  their  faith,  at  least  for  a  time.  This  fact  is  not  unparalleled.  In
condemning  the  brethren  of  Jesus,  the  hearer  of  the  gospel  may  possibly  be  con-
demning himself.  In  our  own  day,  in  the  very  heart  of  Christian  society,  there  may
be  found  many  who  are  very  familiar  with  the  gospel,  who  are  frequent  readers  and
hearers  of  the  Word,  who  have  seen  in  their  nearest  friends  very  favourable  representa-
tives of  the  Christian  character,  who  yet  have  little  interest,  and  no  faith,  in  Christ
himself.

IL  Explanations  of  this  bbjeotion  of  Christ,  consistent  with  familiarity

WITH  HIM,   MAY   BE   DISCOVERED    IN   HUMAN    NATURE   AND    EXPERIENCE.      1.   There    are

cases  in  which  familiarity  itself  seems  adverse  to  faith.  A  striking  illustration  of  the
action  of  this  principle  is  recorded  by  St.  Luke.  The  Nazarenes  knew  Jesus  well;  he
had  been  brought  up  among  them,  had  dwelt  in  their  town ;  everything  they  had  known
of  him  must  have  been  favourable.  "  Familiarity,"  says  the  proverb,  "  breeds  con-
tempt ; "  and  in  vulgar  natures  this  is  true.  Accordingly,  the  people  of  Nazareth,
when  the  Divine  Prophet  visited  them,  were  not  only  incredulous,  they  were  hostile.
In  his  own  city  he  had  no  honour.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  same  with  our  Lord's
kindred ;  it  was  hard  for  tliem  to  believe  that  one  brought  up  among  them,  and  in
circumstances  resembling  their  own,  could  be  so  far  above  them,  in  true  rank  and  in
spiritual  authority,  as  Jesus  claimed  to  be.  To  how  many  has  the  name  of  Jesus  been
familiar  frow  ghildhood,  without  awakening  sentiments  of  reverence  and  faith  I    When


330  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST,  JOHN.     [OH.  in.  1—53.

some  snch  persons  have  the  dignity  and  the  power  and  preciousnesg  of  Jesus  brought
in  some  way  with  unusual  vividness  before  their  minds,  it  may  be  noticed  that  resent-
ment is  aroused  rather  than  laith.  Christ  has  occupied  a  familiar  place  in  their  stock
of  Itnowledge;  but  perhaps  on  that  very  account  they  are  indisposed  to  see  in  him
»hat  they  have  never  seen  before.  2.  There  are  cases  in  which  worldliness  and
sluggisiiness  of  spirit  are  a  barrier  to  faith  in  Christ.  Such  persons  may  be,  through
birth  and  association,  almost  as  brethren  to  the  Lord ;  yet  their  habits  of  mind  prevent
them  from  rousing  themselves  even  to  consider  his  claims.  They  live  at  a  low  level,
aud  tliey  hate  everything  that  would  raise  them  to  a  higher.  They  resist  any  demand
upon  admiration  or  faiih.  They  may  be  indisposed  to  believe  in  anyone  or  in  anything ;
how  much  more  in  a  Being  so  glorious,  in  doctrines  so  inspiring,  as  Christianity
presents!  3.  There  are  cases  in  which  example  explains  indifference  to  the  Saviour.
No  doubt  our  Lord's  kinsmen  ought  to  have  been  influenced  by  the  better  example  of
the  mother  and  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  But  they  appear  to  have  been  more  affected  by
the  negligence  and  unbelief  of  others.  It  is  observable  that  they  came  to  believe  at  a
later  period — perhaps  under  the  influence  of  the  growing  numbers  of  the  Lord's
adherents.  Certain  it  is,  that  many  of  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  have  no  better  reason
to  give  for  their  incredulity  than  the  faithlessness  of  others,  especially  of  those  with
whom  they  most  associate,  and  from  whom  they  unconsciously  take  their  moral  tone.
A  "reason"  this  is  not,  but  it  is  a  sufflcient  explanation  to  those  acquainted  with
human  nature.

III.  Valuable  pbactioal  lessons  mat  be  leaened  fbom  the  unbelief  of
Christ's  brethren.  Those  especially  who  have  long  enjoyed  many  religious  advan-
tages may  gain  profit  from  this  record,  which  contains  suggestions  of  very  serious
admonition.  1.  It  is  loolish  and  wrong  to  rest  in  outward  privileges;  for  these  of
themselves,  if  not  used  aright,  are  of  no  avail.  If  it  served  no  valuable  end  for  these
relatives  of  Jesus  to  be  so  near  him  in  blood,  we  shall  act  foolishly  if  we  rest  in  our
association  with  Christ's  Church.  2.  It  is  important  to  penetrate  through  superficial
acquaintance  with  Christ  to  real  spiritual  knowledge  of  him.  It  is  well  to  have  an
acquaintance  with  the  facts  and  doctrines  of  Chiistianity.  But  these  are  merely  means
to  a  higher  end,  to  faith  and  fellowship,  assimilation  and  devotion.  3.  Not  to  believe
in  Christ  is  to  reject  him  in  all  his  glorious  ofBces.  He  came  to  earth  to  be  a  Prophet,
a  Priest,  and  a  King.  To  refuse  our  faith  to  him  in  these  several  oflices,  is  to  forfeit  the
spiritual,  the  priceless  blessings  which  it  is  his  heart's  desire  to  confer  upon  the  children
of  men. — T.

Ver.  7. — Christ's  witness  against  sin.  The  "  world,"  which  is  here  affirmed  by  Jesus
to  have  hated  him,  is  not  to  be  distinguished  from  the  "Church,"  if  that  expression
may  be  ai'plied  to  those  who  professed  to  receive  the  revelation  and  to  do  the  will  of
God.  For  amongst  our  Lord's  enemies,  the  foremost  were  certainly  the  men- who  were
at  the  head  of  the  theocracy,  and  whose  sins  Jesus  most  severely  censured.  From  this
significant  fact,  people  professedly  religious,  and  even  people  who  sincerely  believe
themselves  to  be  religions,  may  take  warning,  and  may  learn  not  to  trust  in  their
outward  religiousness,  as  if  that  in  itself  sufficed  to  secure  them  against  identification
v.'ith  the  sinful  world.

I.  The  ways  in  which  the  Lobd  Jbsus  witnessed  against  the  world's  evil.
1.  By  his  language.  Meek  and  gracious  as  he  was  towards  such  sinners  as  were
penitent,  Jesus  was  unsparing  in  his  denunciations  of  hardened  and  hypocritical
offenders  against  the  Law  of  God.  Against  falsehood,  covetousness,  cruelty,  and
licentiousness,  the  Son  of  man  raised  his  voice  in  indignant  protest  and  censure.  And
against  such  sins,  when  cloaked  by  a  religious  profession,  he  was  severe  with  a  severity
unexampled  even  in  Scripture.  2.  By  his  conduct.  In  many  cases  there  is  no  protest
against  evil  so  effective  as  an  upright  and  holy  life.  This  protest  was  ever  offered  by
our  Lord;  it  was  natural  and  habitual  to  him.  The  calm  dignity  with  which  our  Lc  rd
lived  amidst  formalists  and  dissemblers  could  not  be  tmnoticed  either  by  friends  »r
foes,  and  by  his  foes  it  was  felt  as  a  rebuke  and  a  condemnation.

II.  The  eatbed  which  oub  Lord's  witness  against  the  world's  evil  aroused
against  him.  1.  This  hatred  evinced  a  moral  warfare  within  human  nature.  On  the
one  hand,  the  conscience   rf  sinners  ci  nourred  in  the  rebukes  uttered  by  the  holy


CH.  vn.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  831


Saviour ;  on  the  other  hand,  their  selfishness  and  pride  would  not  submit  to  these  rebukes.
Thus  there  arose,  as  in  such  circumstances  there  ever  arises,  an  inner  conflict.  And
in  order  to  repress  the  voice  of  conscience,  sinners  often  hardened  themselves  ao-ainst
its  expostulations  by  giving  themselves  more  resolutely  over  into  the  power  of  evil.
2.  This  hatred  led  to  calumny  and  slander  against  the  holy  Christ.  Only  thus  can  we'
account  for  the  absurd  and  wicked  and  scandalous  language  used  concerning  Jesus.
His  enemies  called  him  a  sinner,  a  deceiver,  and  declared  that  be  was  possessed  by  a
demon,  by  Beelzebub.  If  he  had  left  their  sina  unrebuked,  and  had  humoured  their  pre-
judices, he  might  have  secured  the  adherence  and  support  of  the  Jewish  leaders  ;  but
the  upright  course  he  took  in  dealing  with  them  brought  down  upon  him  their  malice
and  their  hatred.  3.  This  hatred  was  the  motive  of  the  plot  which  issued  in  the
apprehension  and  death  of  Jesus.  It  appears  that  the  hostility  of  the  priests  and
rulers  against  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  excited  by  his  pure  and  spiritual  teaching,  which
was  felt  to  be  a  rebuke  to  their  formality  and  hypocrisy,  and  by  his  denunciations  of
their  ambition  and  covetousness.  His  enemies  felt  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of  his
undermining  their  influence  over  the  common  people.  This  led  to  the  resolution  to
compass  his  death  by  means  however  foul.

III.  The  world's  hatred  became  thus  the  occasion  op  the  event  which
WROUOHT  THE  WORLD'S  DELIVERANCE  PROM  ITS  SIN.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  often
manifested  in  the  bringing  of  good  out  of  evil.  The  most  stupendous  and  glorious
instance  of  this  wisdom  was  afforded  in  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  testified
against  the  world's  evil;  the  hatred  of  the  world  was  thus  inflamed  against  him;  this
hatred  led  to  the  apprehension,  the  condemnation,  and  the  death  of  the  Holy  One  and
Just ;  and  his  death  was  God's  method  of  vanquishing  the  world's  sin,  and  of  saving
mankind  from  spiritual  destruction  and  ruin.— T.

Ver.  17. — A  good  will  the  condition  of  spiritual  discernment.  Intellectual  men  are
apt  to  set  too  high  a  value  upon  the  exercise  of  the  intellect.  And  in  this  error  they
are  often  confirmed  by  the  notions  of  the  ignorant  and  uninstructed,  who  look  up  with
wonder  to  the  learned  and  the  mentally  acute,  and  are  willing  to  think  such  prodigies
of  knowledge  must  be  assured  possessors  of  all  good  things.  But  the  fact  is,  that  the
highest  of  all  possessions  is  to  be  attained,  not  by  the  scholarship  or  the  ability  which
men  often  over-estimate,  but  by  the  trusting  heart  and  the  obedient  and  submissive
will.  Nowhere  is  this  great  spiritual  lesson  more  plainly  and  effectively  inculcated  than
in  this  passage.

I.  The  source  op  Christ's  doctrine.  This  was  a  mystery  to  many  of  the  Jews,
who  knew  that  Jesus  was  born  in  a  lowly  station,  and  that  he  had  not  been  trained  in
the  schools  of  rabbinical  learning,  and  who  could  not  understand  how  he  could  teach
with  such  justice,  profundity,  and  beauty.  With  this  difficulty  Jesus  here  deals.
1.  The  doctrine  of  Jesus  is  asserted  by  himself  to  be  derived.  He  repudiated  the  notion
that  he  spake  from  himself,  i.e.  from  the  experience  or  originality  of  a  merely  human
mind.  2.  The  doctrine  of  Jesus  is  asserted  by  himself  to  be  Divine.  It  was  neither
his  own,  nor  that  of  a  school  of  learning,  nor  was  it  a  mere  amplification  of  the  sayings
of  the  ancient  legislator  and  the  ancient  prophets.  Jesus  ever  claimed  to  have  come
from  God,  and  to  have  acted  and  spoken  with  the  authority  of  God.  This,  however,
was  his  assertion ;  how  were  his  hearers  to  verify  it?

II.  The  knowlbdob  op  Christ's  doctrine.  There  were  many  who  listened  to  the
discourses  and  conversations  of  the  great  Teacher,  who  were  familiar  with  his  language,
but  who  were  unacquainted  with,  and  indifferent  to,  the  spiritual  meaning  and  power  of
which  that  language  was,  to  sympathetic  souls,  the  vehicle.  How  can  this  meaning  and
power  be  known  ?  1.  There  must  be  a  will  in  harmony  with  God's  will.  Man  is  not
merely  an  intellectual  being;  he  is  emotional  and  practical.  And  the  will  is  the  man.
It  is  the  habitual  purposes  which  determine  the  man's  character.  Many  persons  have
insight  into  truth,  and  even  admiration  of  truth,  whose  moral  life  is  nevertheless  evil,
because  they  abandon  themselves  to  be  the  sport  of  every  fleeting  passion.  The  habitual
indulgence  of  passion.'pride,  and  worldliness  blinds  the  spiritaal  vision,  so  that  the  highest
good  becomes  indiscernible.  And  thus  those  who  are  not  without  natural  gifts  of  intelli-
gence become  incapable  of  judging  the  highest  type  of  character  or  ot  docirine.  On  the
Other  hand,  the  cultivation  of  a  will  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will  is  the  means  ut


38a  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  vu.  1-^53

purifying  the  spiritual  vision.  Wlien  the  good  is  habitually  chosen,  the  true  comes  to
be  habitually  sought  and  prizeil.  2.  The  will  thus  in  harmony  with  God's  will
recognises  the  Divine  origin  of  Christ's  teaching.  Both  by  reason  of  his  acquaintance
with  the  mind  of  God,  and  by  his  sympathy  with  the  Law  and  the  truth  of  God,  the
devout  and  obedient  man  is  fitted  to  pronounce  upon  the  origin  of  the  Lord's  teaching.
"  He  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  things ; "  he  has  "  the  mind  of  Christ."  Thus  it  is,
as  our  Lord  acknowledged  with  gratitude,  that  things  hidden  from  the  wise  and  pi-udent
are  often  revealed  unto  babes.  His  own  apostles  were  a  living  illustration  of  this  law.
And  every  age  furnishes  examples  of  clever  men,  and  even  learned  men,  who  have
misunderstood  and  misrepresented  Christ's  teaching,  because  they  have  not  been  in
sympathy  with  the  righteous  and  lioly  will  of  the  Eternal ;  whilst  every  age  furnishes
also  examples  of  simple  and  unlettered  men  who,  because  lovers  of  goodness,  have
displayed  a  special  discernment  of  mind  in  apprehending,  and  even  in  teaching,  Christian
doctrine.  In  this,  as  in  other  respects,  it  is  the  childlike  nature  that  enters  the  king-
dom of  heaven. — T.

Ver.  Zl.—Tlie  thirsting  invited  to  the  Fountain  of  living  waters.  It  was  our  Lord's
wont  to  make  use  of  the  most  familiar  objects,  the  most  ordinary  events,  the  most
customary  practices,  in  order  to  illustrate  and  to  enforce  spiritual  truth.  To  set  forth
man's  need  of  teaching,  of  heavenly  grace,  of  salvation,  Christ  spoke  of  hanger  and  of
thirst,  of  bread  and  of  water.  Oq  the  occasion  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  there  was  per-
formed a  ceremony  which  may  have  immediately  suggested  the  language  of  the  text.
This  was  the  drawing  of  water  from  the  Pool  of  Siloam,  which  was  borne  in  procession  to
the  temple,  and  poured  out  as  a  sacred  libation  before  the  Lord.  It  was  probably  upon
the  suggestion  of  this  ceremony  that  our  Lord  uttered  the  memorable  and  encouraging
words  of  the  text.

I.  The  thibst  or  tri;  humak  soul.  This  thirst  is  deep-seated  in  the  nature  of
man.  It  manifests  itself  in  the  many  forms  of  restless  activity  by  wtiich  men  seek  to
satisfy  their  aspirations.  The  powerlessness  of  the  world  to  quench  this  thirst  is  an
indication  of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  soul.  He  who  drinks  at  a  cistern  will  find  that
the  cistern  will  run  dry.  He  who  quaffs  the  water  of  a  pool  may  find  the  water  foul
and  turbid.  He  who  tries  to  quench  his  thirst  by  draughts  from  the  sea  wiUleam  that,
so  far  from  assuaging,  these  salt  waters  only  increase  the  thirst.

"  The  frail  vessel  thou  hast  made.
No  hands  but  thine  can  fill ;
For  the  waters  of  this  world  have  failed.
And  I  am  thirsty  still."

XL  Thb  BATisFTiHO  GIFTS  OF  God's  Holt  Spieit.  That  which  the  -world  cannot
do,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  do;  he  can  fill  the  created  nature  with  peace,  purity,  truth,
and  power.  The  river  of  God's  love  flows  on  for  ever ;  it  is  inexhaustible.  "  With  joy
shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation."  "  Blessed  are  they  that  .  .  .  thirst
after  righteousness :  for  they  shall  be  filled."

in.  The  invitation  and  pkomisb  of  Jbsdb.  1.  He  claims  himself  to  dispense  the
satisfying  gifis  of  the  Spirit.  He  is  the  Bock  in  the  wilderness,  from  which  flows  the
stream  of  living  water.  Thus  he  said,  " Let  him  come  unto  me ;"  and  at  an  earlier
period  of  his  ministry,  "  I  would  have  given  thee  living  water."  2.  The  terms  upon
which  this  blessing  is  conferred  are  such  as  are  most  encouraging  to  the  hearer  of  the
gospel.  Faith  is  required  from  the  thirsting  applicant.  This  is  evidently  intended  by
the  use  of  the  words  "  come  "  and  "  drink."  The  blessing  must  be  a|ipropriated.  And
yet  the  satisfying  provision  is  offered  fredy ;  it  is  not  bought,  but  given.  "  Drink  of
the  water  of  life  freely."— T.

Ver.  40. — The  prophet.  In  the  Jewish  dispensation  no  unimportant  place  was  filled  by
the  order  of  men  known  as  seers  or  prophets.  From  Samuel  to  Malachi,  they  were  the
spiritual  teachers  and  guides  of  Israel.  The  Lord  Christ  gathered  up  in  his  own  Person
and  ministry  the  s^ignilicance  and  power  of  the  prophetic  office.

I.  CasiST's  PROPHETIC  DESIGNATION.  He  was  knuwnas  a  Prophet  by  those  who  saw
in  him  more  than  a  rabbi,  while  yet  they  knew  him  not  as  the  Mes.siab.     It  had  been


OH.  nx.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  333

foretold  hy  Moses  in  the  Pentateuch,  and  by  the  last  of  the  prophets  vho  contributed
to  the  Old  Testament  canon,  that  a  great  Prophet  should  in  after-days  be  raised  up  by
the  Eternal.     And  this  was  fulfilled  in  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.

II.  Christ's  pbophbtio  qualifications.  His  Divine  nature,  his  intimacy  with  his
Father,  in  whose  bosom,  i.e.  in  whose  counsels  and  secrets,  he  was,  constituted  his
supreme  fitness  for  this  office.  And  his  humanity,  his  oneness  with  the  race  whose
nature  he  assumed,  enabled  him  to  communicate  prophetic  messages  with  inimitable
effectiveness.  A  prophet  is  one  who  speaks  for  God ;  this  Jesus  did,  as  none  else
could  or  can.

III.  Christ's  prophetio  acts.  His  miracles  were  such,  for  they  taught,  with  a
power  even  words  could  not  rival,  great  spiritual  and  eternal  truths.  His  conduct  in
cleansing  the  temple  with  authority  and  holy  indignation  was  an  example  of  action
becoming  in  a  Prophet  commissioned  by  God  himself.

IV.  Christ's  prophetic  words.  To  enumerate  these  would  be  to  repeat  a  large
portion  of  the  Gospel  records.  He  explained  the  Law;  he  preached  the  gospel;  he
foretold  things  to  come;  he  spake  as  One  having  authority;  yet  he  spake  as  One
having  winning  attractiveness  in  all  his  words.

v.  Christ's  prophetic  PBRPBTtriTT.  His  word  wag  reiterated  by  the  inspired
apostles,  to  whose  memory  all  his  sayings  were  brought.  It  is  continued  in  the  New
Testament,  the  Word  of  prophecy.  As  the  Prophet  of  this  spiritual  dispensation,  Jesus
inspires  his  Church,  convinces  human  minds,  changes  human  hearts,  hallows  human
society.  As  long  as  man  needs  teaching,  Christ  is,  and  will  remain,  the  one  great
Divine  ar>d  authoritative  Prophet  of  humanity. — T.

Ver.  41. — Hm  Ghrist.  In  order  that  the  language  recorded  in  this  passage  to  have
been  used  by  the  Jews  may  be  properly  understood,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
"the  Christ"  was  not  a  proper  name,  but  an  official  designation.  '  It  is  the  Greek
equivalent  for  the  Hebrew  "  Messiah,"  and  signifies  literally,  "  the  Anointed  One."
The  Christ  is,  then,  One  divinely  selected,  consecrated,  and  autliorized.

I.  It  was  known  bt  the  Jews  that  the  coming  or  the  Christ  was  foretold
IN  THE  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  Although  the  name  "  Messiah "  occurs  once
only,  and  that  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,  the  observant  reader  of  the  Psalms  and  of  the
Prophets  is  well  aware  that  the  advent  is  foretold  of  a  remarkable  Being,  who  should
in  due  time  appear  to  fulfil  the  benevolent  purposes  of  God  towards  men.  Upon
examination  it  is  found  that  this  person  was  predicted  as  Divine  and  yet  human,  as
of  royal  lineage  and  authority,  as  the  Bringer  of  blessings  to  Israel  and  to  mankind,
as  a  Sufferer  and  yet  as  a  Conqueror,  as  One  passing  through  death  to  victory  and  to
dominion.

n.  The  coMiNct  of  the  Christ  was  expected  by  the  Jews  and  by  their
KEIOHBOUBS.  1.  This  appears  from  the  insight  which  the  Gospels  give  us  into  the
minds  of  certain  persons  who  lived  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  ministry  and  advent.
Thus,  Simeon  was  led  to  expect  that  he  should  see  the  Lord's  Christ ;  men  reasoned
in  their  hearts  concerning  John,  whether  he  were  the  Christ ;  the  Samaritan  woman
remarked  to  Jesus  himself,  "  We  know  that  Messiah  cometh."  2.  The  same  appears  also
from  certain  tests  which  the  Jews  proposed  to  apply  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  in  order  to
verify  or  discredit  the  claim  to  Messiahship  advanced  on  his  behalf.  They  looked  that
the  Christ  should  be  a  descendant  of  David;  that  he  should  be  born  at  Bethlehem;
that  he  should  be  a  Worker  of  miracles ;  that  he  should  be  the  Restorer  of  the  kingdoui
to  Israel,  over  whom  he  should  rule ;  that  he  should  abide  for  ever.  So  far  as  there  was
correspondence  between  the  facts  of  Jesus'  ministry  and  these  circumstances,  so  far
there  was  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  some  to  acknowledge  his  Messiahship.

m.  There  were  obvious  and  powerful  hindrances  to  the  spread  of  the
BELIEF  THAT  Jesus  WAS  THE  Christ.  1.  The  life  of  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  in  some
respects  contradicted  popular  expectations.  He  was  lowly  in  station ;  poor  and
unfriended  by  the  great ;  he  put  forward  no  assumptions  of  worldly  power;  he  went
about  doing  good.  All  this  was  very  different  from  what  the  Jews  expected  in  ti.e
Messiah.  2.  Jesus  himself  discouraged  his  disciples  and  friends  from  noising  abroa  \
the  tidings  of  his  Messiahship.  3.  The  authorities  of  the  synagogue,  towards  the  close
of  our  Lord's  ministry,  threatened  with  excommunication  »ny  who  should  confess  him


834  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  vii.  1  -53.

to  be  the  Christ.    This  step  could  not  but  be  adverse  to  a  general  recognition  of  hii
rightful  claims.

IV.  That  Jebub  wab  the  Christ  was,  howbveb,  coediallt  believed  by  hib
DISCIPLES.  Collecting  together  the  Bomewhat  scattered  evidence  of  this  fact,  the
Btudent  of  the  Gospels  cannot  but  be  impressed  by  its  abundance  and  conclusiveness.
Andrew,  in  the  very  hour  of  his  call  to  discipleship,  acknowledged  Jesus  as  Christ ;
Peter,  at  a  later  period,  uttered  a  memorable  confession  to  the  same  effect ;  the  Sama-
ritan woman  and  her  neighbours  came  to  the  same  conclusion ;  Martha  of  Bethany
gave  explicit  testimony  to  her  belief  of  this  great  fact ;  some  of  the  Jews,  as  recorded
in  the  text,  did  not  hesitate  to  express  their  belief  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  It  may
be  added  that  the  very  demons  over  whom  he  exercised  authority  are  said  to  have
known  that  he  was  the  Divine  Messiah.

V.  Jesub'  claim  to  be  the  Christ  was  one  chief  ground  of  the  hostility
OF  the  Jewish  rulers,  and  was  the  occasion  of  his  condemnation  to  death.
At  our  Lord's  trial  before  the  high  priest,  one  of  the  charges  against  him  was  that  he
affirmed  himself  to  be  the  Christ;  and  it  was  upon  this,  and  upon  the  further  charge
that  he  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  that  he  was  deemed  by  his  enemies  worthy  ot
death.  A  rabbi,  a  prophet,  he  might  have  professed  himself  to  be  without  giving
offence.  But  for  a  lowly  peasant  teacher  to  claim  Messiah  ship  was  to  seal  his  own
doom !

VL  As  Christ,  Jesub  was  eaised  from  the  dead  ;  and  as  Chbist,  he  was
PREACHED  TO  THE  WORLD.  In  the  discourses  which  are  recorded  in  the  Book  of  the  Acts,
as  having  been  delivered  after  the  Ascension,  Jesus  is  set  forth  as  the  Christ  of  God,
evidently  proved  to  be  snch  by  his  resurrection.  And  the  Gospels,  as  John  expressly
tells  us,  were  written  that  their  readers  might  know  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  Here,
indeed,  are  the  glad  tidings  to  be  prcclaimed  to  all  men ;  for  it  is  because  Jesus  is  the
Christ  of  God  that  he  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world. — T.

Ver.  46. — The  incomparahh  words.  The  testimony  of  these  officers  was  at  least
impartial.  If  they  were  prejudiced,  it  was  not  in  favour  of  Jesus,  but  against  him.
Persons  in  their  position  were  likely  to  share  the  feelings  of  those  by  whom  they  were
employed,  and  by  whom  they  were  sent  oq  a  message  hostile  to  the  Prophet  of  Naza-
reth. But  the  demeanour,  and  especially  the  language,  of  Jesus  disarmed  them.
They  came  under  the  spell  of  his  wisdom,  his  grace,  his  eloquence.  And  when  they
returned,  without  having  executed  their  commission,  they  justified  themselves  by  the
exclamation,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  Man."

I.  Christ's  words  abb  incomparable  as  revelations  of  truth.  He  uttered  the
justest,  the  sublimest  truths  regarding  the  character  and  attributes  of  God ;  concerning
the  nature,  the  state,  the  sin,  the  peril  of  man ;  concerning  religion,  or  the  relation
between  man  and  God,  especially  concerning  the  Divine  provision  of  salvation,  and  of
spiritual  and  immortal  life.

II.  Christ's  words  are  incomparable  ab  annoditcino  laws  of  human  life.
Where  else  can  we  find  perfect  precepts  to  govern  conduct,  dictates  of  morality  so
spiritual,  motives  to  obedience  so  mighty?  Christ's  are  the  authoritative  words  of  a
Divine  Lawgiver,  who  claims  to  rule  the  hearts,  and,  through  the  hearts,  the  actions
and  habits  of  mankind.

III.  Christ's  words  are  incomparable  in  their  style  and  their  illustrations,
ADAPTiNo  them  to  READERS  OF  EVERT  CLASS.  They  are  simple  words,  however  pro-
found may  be  the  truth  they  embody ;  they  are  beautiful  words,  which  charm  a  pure
and  lively  imagination ;  they  are  earnest  words,  which  rouse  emotion  and  inspire  a
reverent  attention.  This  is  evident  both  from  the  place  they  have  taken  in  literature,
and  from  the  fact  that  they  are  equally  appreciated  by  the  young  and  the  old,  by  the
cultured  and  the  untaught.

IV.  Christ's  words  are  incomparable  in  efficienot.  This  is  the  true  test,  and
this  test  brings  out  the  unequalled  power  of  the  words,  which  are  mighty  because  they
are  the  expression  of  the  Divine  mind.  Many  of  our  Lord's  sayings  might  be  quoted,
which  have,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  revolutionized  the  thoughts  and  doctrines  of  million.<i
of  men.  Some  of  the  greatest  reform*  in  human  society  may  be  traced  up  with  cer-
tainty to  wordf  uttered  by  the  Kazareno.


CH.  vn.  1—63.]     THE  GOSPEI,  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  83S

Y.  Christ's  -words  are  inoohfabable  fob  their  ENDUBiua,  pebuakent  life  and
INFLUENCE.  The  worda  of  many  wise,  thoughtful,  and  good  men  have  perished.
There  are  words  which  are  full  of  meaning  and  preciousness  for  one  generation,  but
which  fail  to  affect  the  generations  which  follow.  But  Christ's  words  are  treasured
with  increasing  reverence  and  attachment  by  succeeding  generations.  His  own  saying
is  verified  by  the  lapse  of  time :  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words
shall  not  pass  away." — T.

Ver.  48. — Class  prefudiee  and  Ghristiwnity,  The  learned  and  '.he  rich  sometimes
hate  and  despise  a  form  of  religion  because  it  is  favoured  by  the  poor  and  the  ignorant;
and  these  in  turn  dislike  and  reject  a  different  form  of  religion  because  it  is  adopted
by  their  social  superiors.  Something  similar  to  this  antipathy  seems  to  have  been
manil'ested  among  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  our  Lord ;  only  it  was  not  a  form  of  religion
that  was  in  question,  it  was  religion  itself,  or  rather  that  Being  who  is  in  his  own
person  the  sum  and  substance  of  true  religion.  There  were  undoubtedly  serious  reasons
which  led  rulers  and  Pharisees  to  reject  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  That  mentioned  in  this
passage  was  not  the  most  serious;  but  it  was  a  real  and  influential  reason.  Jesus  was
reputed  a  Galiljean;  be  was  heard  gladly  by  the  common  people,  who  were  ignorant  of
the  Law.  This  was  reason  enough  for  his  rejection  by  those  who  respected  only  the
educated  and  ruling  classes  of  society.

L  The  assertion  imflied,  viz.  that  Jesus  was  not  received  with  faith  by  the  rulers
and  the  Pharisees.  This  was  not  universally  true.  The  attitude  of  Nicodemus  on  this
occasion  shows  that,  even  in  the  council  of  the  nation,  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ  was
not  unknown.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  also  was  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  though  secretly.
Yet,  broadly  speaking,  it  was  undoubtedly  the  case  that  the  upper  classes  of  his
countrymen  rejected  Jesus,  and  that  the  more  influential  among  them  hated  and
dreaded  him.  This  may  be  accounted  for,  partly  upon  the  general  principle  that  the
wealthy  and  educated  tend  to  conservatism ;  but  mainly  by  considering  how  the
teaching  of  Jesus  was  undermining  the  authority  of  the  Jewish  leaders,  and  was  even
threatening  to  out  off  some  of  the  sources  of  their  ill-gotten  riches.

II.  The  aboument  stroossTED.  The  language  suggested  some  such  argument  as
this — What  the  learned  and  leading  classes  reject  is  likely  to  be  incredible  and
unworthy  of  acceptance ;  now,  these  classes  altogether  repudiate  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as
the  Messiah,  or  even  as  a  prophet ;  there  is,  therefore,  no  room  for  accepting  or  even
considering  his  claims.  The  fact  of  the  hostility  of  the  rulers  was  by  this  time  matter
of  notoriety,  and  this  had,  no  doubt,  influence  with  many  who  were  accustomed  to  look
to  their  social  and  ecclesiastical  superiors  for  leading.  The  same  principle  which  was
so  influential  in  our  Lord's  day  has  in  subsequent  periods  of  human  history  induced
many  to  reject  the  Saviour.  Some  have  attached  importance  to  the  infidelity  of
princes,  others  to  that  of  leaders  in  fashion,  others  to  that  of  great  philosophers ;  and
have  permitted  their  blind  reverence  for  authority  to  turn  their  attention  away  from
the  weighty  credentials  of  Christianity,  and  firom  the  claims  of  Christ  himself.

III.  The  fallacy  latent.  This  is  to  be  found  in  the  assumption  that  learned
and  powerful  men  are  likely  to  be  right  upon  questions  of  religion.  The  events  which
followed  in  the  history  of  the  Son  of  man  were  enough  to  dispel  this  illusion.  Not  for
the  first  or  the  last  time,  the  judges  in  whom  public  confidence  is  chiefly  placed  were
wrong,  and  the  poor,  illiterate,  and  despised  were  right.  Against  a  fallacy  which  has
led  so  many  astray,  it  is  well  that  those  who  desire  above  all  things  to  attain  the  truth
should  be  upon  their  guard.  And  the  true  protection  is  this :  the  habit,  not  of  asking —
What  is  the  judgment  of  men?  but  of  asking — What  are  the  indications  of  the  will  of
God?  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  in  himself  adapted  to  our  needs  as  being  the
Prophet,  the  Priest,  and  the  King  of  humanity,  it  is  of  little  consequence,  so  far  as
practical  guidance  is  concerned,  to  consider  who  rejects  his  claims.  Let  every  one  who
is  a  seeker  of  truth  turn  his  heart  and  mind  to  Christ.  He  is  his  own  best  witness,  hii
own  most  convincing  evidence. — ^T.

Ver.  6. — Jesus  in  relation  to  time.    Notice—

I.  The  time  of  Jbsus.  "  My  time  is  not  yet  come."  His  time  to  go  up  to  the
feast,  or  his  time  to  manifest  himself.    We  have  l^ere :  1.  Jesws  as  the  Subject  of  timt.


838  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [oh.  Vn.  1—63,

During  his  earthly  career  he  was  the  Subject  of  time,  and  dependent  upon  it.  He  who
was  before  and  really  above  time  was  now  its  Subject.  As  such :  (1)  He  had  regard  to
its  events ;  what  were  taking  place  in  the  social  and  religious  world  around  him,  their
bearings  upon  each  other,  aud  especially  upon  his  movements  and  actions,  and  the
bearings  of  his  movements  upon  the  events  of  the  time.  (2)  He  had  regard  to  tha
character  of  his  time ;  to  the  men  who  acted  in  it — men  of  religious  and  social  authority
and  power — to  their  principles  and  attitude  towards  him  and  the  great  missioa  of  his
life.  (3)  He  shaped  his  course  accordingly.  He  had  a  certain  amount  of  time  to  live
and  do  his  work.  He  could  escape  death  if  he  wished ;  but  could  not  have  escaped
death  and  perform  the  mission  of  his  life.  He  might  have  shortened  his  days,  and
frustrated  their  end  by  indiscreetly  rushing  into  the  teeth  of  danger ;  but  as  a  Subject
of  time  he  had  due  regard  to  current  events  and  public  feelings  in  relation  to  him,  so
that  he  acted  with  perfect  wisdom  and  discretion.  2.  Jesus  as  the  Manager  of  time.
(1)  To  him  time  was  very  precious.  His  time  was  very  short,  and  he  had  an  immense
work  to  do.  Never  was  so  little  time  given  for  such  a  great  work.  Every  moment
was  an  age,  and  ages  were  compressed  into  a  moment.  He  made  the  best  of  time.
Every  moment  was  infinitely  precious.  (2)  He  had  a  special  time  for  every  work.
He  never  performed  a  single  miracle  nor  preached  a  single  discourse  at  random.  There
was  perfect  adaptation  and  correspondence  between  his  actions  and  the  time.  They
fitted  in  with  the  natural  sequence  of  events,  and  with  the  state  of  thoughts  and
feelings.  They  could  not  be  performed  at  any  other  time  with  the  same  results.
They  were  like  the  growth  of  spring  and  the  ripe  fulness  of  harvest.  (3)  He  had  some
special  work  for  every  portion  of  time,  so  that  every  hour  was  well  occupied  and  every
minute  well  spent.  He  had  a  season  for  everything,  and  everything  was  in  its  season.
(4)  The  exact  time  for  all  his  movements  was  well  known  to  him.  He  knew  when  it
had  not  and  when  it  had  come,  so  that  he  was  never  too  soon  nor  too  late.  He  could
not  be  induced  to  move  by  the  solicitations  of  friends  before  his  time ;  neither  could  he
be  stopped,  nor  be  driven  from  the  scene  of  duty,  when  his  time  had  arrived.  Punctuality
was  one  of  his  characteristics.  He  was  at  every  station  and  every  duty  in  due  time,
and  not  before.  He  was  never  waiting,  and  no  one  had  to  wait  for  him.  He  wai
bound  to  time,  and  time  was  bound  to  him.     He  was  both  its  Subject  and  its  King.

n.  The  time  of  his  bbbthben.  Their  time  and  his  differed  materially.  1.  Their
time  was  always  ready.  This  was  true  with  regard  to  going  up  to  the  feast,  and  also
to  the  manifestation  of  Christ  according  to  their  ideas.  They  were  ever  ready  and
anxious  for  this.  But  Christ's  time  was  not  yet  come.  Man's  time  is  often  before  that
of  Gkid.  His  ideas  are  more  limited,  God's  thoughts  and  plans  move  in  an  infinite
circle,  and  take  a  longer  time  to  be  accomplished.  Man's  time  is  often  after  that  of
God.  Now  is  God's  accepted  time  to  repent  and  believe.  It  is  at  some  more  convenient
season  often  with  man.  2.  Their  time  was  hy  selfi  his  by  the  general  good.  Their
notions  were  carnal  and  selfish,  and  were  inspired  in  all  their  movements  by  principles
of  self-interest;  but  Christ's  notions  were  spiritual  and  Divine,  and  he  was  ever
inspired  in  all  his  movements  by  Divine  and  benevolent  principles — the  glory  of  God
and  the  spiritual  redemption  of  the  human  family.  There  is  a  vast  difference  between
the  time  of  selfishness  and  that  of  self-sacrificing  love.  3.  Iheir  time  was  hy  the
present;  his  was  hy  the  future  as  well.  They  were  prompted  by  present  advantage,  by
considerations  which  only  embraced  the  limited  period  of  their  own  life ;  hue  Jesus  was
prompted  by  future  advantages,  and  by  considerations  which  embraced  endless  futurity,
Every  step  he  gave  was  givt-n  with  regard  to  all  future  ages.  His  time  was  regulated
by  eternity,  and  the  eternity  of  myriads  depended  on  his  time.  4.  Their  tims  was  hy
earth ;  his  was  hy  heaven.  Theirs  was  by  the  material  sun ;  his  was  by  the  eternal  throne.
Their  principles  were  in  perfect  accord  with  those  of  the  world,  and  their  notions  of  the
Messii  were  those  of  the  nation  at  large.  So  that  they  could  move  with  perfect
safety  whenever  they  liked,  they  were  in  no  dancjer.  But  the  principles  of  Jesus  were
in  perfect  accord  with  those  of  God — they  were  holiness,  spirituality,  benevolence,  self-
sacrifice,  and  mercy,  and  thus  in  direct  antagonism  to  the  world ;  so  that  an  unwise
move  might  result  in  an  untimely  and  fatal  collision.  5.  Their  time  was  hy  unbelief ;
his  was  by  faith.  We  are  told  that  his  brothers  did  not  really  believe  on  him.  And
unbelief  is  ever  impatient,  eommanding,  and  always  ready  for  some  carnal  demonstration
and  material  sign.    Faith  is  patient  aubntissive,  and  ever  grateful  for  a  tiuoq  when  i|


OH.  vn.  1—63.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORmNG  TO  ST.  JOHN.  837


comes;  but  if  it  comes  not  at  the  time  and  in  the  way  expected.it  waits  and  trusts
and  obeys.  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  and  the  Saviour  of  faith.  He  revealed  himself  to
faith,  and  faith  is  the  only  power  on  earth  which  could  see,  comprehend,  and  appre-
ciate his  real  character  and  his  Divine  mission ;  consequently  all  his  movements,  although
not  regardless  of  unbelief  as  precautionary,  yet  were  directly  made  in  the  interest  of
ffuth.  When  faith  is  ready,  he  will  be  at  the  feast,  and  vrill  manifest  himself  at  any  risk.
Lessons.  1.  We  are  in  as  much  danger  often  from  mistaken  friends  as  from  open
foes.  Jesus  was  so  now  from  his  brethren  and  the  multitude ;  they  wished  to  make
him  King.  2.  A  word  or  a  deed  in  season  is  much  more  effective  than  otherwise.
Christ's  words  and  deeds  were  ever  seasonable.  God  has  his  set  time  for  punishment
and  salvation.  3.  In  order  that  our  time  should  correspond  with  that  of  Jesus,  let  us
Idieve  on  him.  If  we  wish  to  have  his  company  to  the  feast,  let  us  exercise  implicit
trust  in  him.  4.  If  we  wish  to  make  the  most  of  time,  let  ua  follow  Jesus  in  watching
the  lest  season  for  everything.  Random  shots  seldom  kill  anything.  We  should  not
merely  be  diligent,  but  take  aim. — B.  T.-

Ver.  11. — "Where  ii  het"  This  question  may  indicate  different  thoughts  and
sentiments  with  regard  to  Jesus  as  asked  by  different  persons.  It  may  be  looked
upon —

L  As  THE  QUESTION  OF  OKNERAL  INTEBEST.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Jesus  was
the  most  interesting  person  of  that  age.  His  mighty  works  and  his  wonderful  teaching
had  excited  the  interest  of  the  general  public,  and  had  stirred  society  to  its  utmost
depth.  How  many  persons  there  were  concerning  whom  no  question  was  asked  I  They
might  come  and  go  almost  unnoticed.  But  not  so  Jesus.  The  general  question  with
regard  to  him  was,  "  Where  is  he  ?  "  His  movements  were  keenly  watched,  and  his
presence  or  absence  was  keenly  noticed.

II.  As  THE  QUESTION  OF  woNDEB.  Although  he  was  not  at  the  last  Passover,  still
he  was  in  the  habit  of  attending  the  national  feasts  at  Jerusalem ;  and  this  being  one
of  the  chief,  and  probably  rumours  had  reached  the  city  of  his  intention  to  be  present
and  being  now  late,  wonder  would  naturally  express  itself  by  the  question,  "  Where
is  he?"

TIT.  As  THE  QUESTION  OF  ouBiosiTT.  There  was  a  large  class  to  whom  Jesus  was
only  a  curiosity.  In  them  he  excited  no  other  sentiment.  They  stood  in  the  rear,
watching  with  avidity  the  actions  of  those  in  front.  They  had  neither  love  nor  hatred,
but  still  were  bnsy  and  interested  in  the  strange  phenomenon  of  his  life,  and  perhaps
no  sentiment  with  regard  to  him  would  ask  the  question  more  often  and  flippantly,
"Where  is  he?"

IV.  As  THE  QUESTION  OF  DOUBT.  Donbt  with  regard  to  Jesus  at  this  time  was  very
prevalent.  The  midtitude  who  represented  the  national  idea  of  the  Messiah  were  doubt-
ful of  him.  Many  of  them  had  recently  left  him,  and  had  apparently  given  up  the
hope  of  his  consenting  to  be  crowned  the  temporal  King  of  the  Jews.  Still  many  of
them  even  were  doubtful  as  to  this,  and  the  disciples  were  not  quite  free  from  doubt  on
this  matter.  They  still  clung  to  the  hope,  but  his  absence  from  the  feast,  fiom  such  a
public  gathering  and  an  advantageous  occasion,  would  make  the  most  sanguine  doubtful,
and  they  would  impatiently  ask,  "  Where  is  he  ?  "

v.-  As  THE  QUESTION  OF  HATRED.  No  feeling  could  be  more  present  in  the  question
than  this,  especially  when  we  consider  that  it  was  asked  by  the  Jews ;  for  the  dominant
party  were  bitter,  confirmed,  and  almost  unanimous  in  their  hatred  to  him  and  his
ministry.  And  in  the  question  as  coming  from  them  there  was  scarcely  a  spark  of
any  other  feeling  but  confirmed  and  seething  hatred.  They  were  in  a  region  far  below
that  of  curiosity  and  doubt ;  they  were  in  that  of  hatred  and  bloodshed.

VI.  As  THE  QUESTION  OF  8INCEBB  AFFECTION.  Those  who  entertained  this  feeling  were
in  a  small  minority,  still  it  is  not  too  much  to  think  that  in  that  vast  and  generally
antagonistic  crowd  there  was  many  a  one  who  would  re-echo  the  question  even  from
the  Ups  of  malice  and  hatred,  and  send  it  forth  filled  with  gratitude  and  love.  "  Where
is  he?" — ^he  who  healed  my  son  or  my  daughter,  he  who  is  kind  and  so  full  of  grace  and
truth?  We  know  of  one,  at  least,  among  the  members  of  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin  who
would  ask  it  as  a  question  of  love — Nicodemus.  Genuine  love  and  faith  were  not  quitA
unrepresented  in  the  inquiries  concerning  Jesus  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.

fOHK.  ~  I


338  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     iaa.  vn.  1—6$.

CoNCLnsiONS.  1.  The  ironderful  power  of  langvage  as  the.instrument  of  thougM  and
lentiments.  The  same  words  may  convey  different  feelings.  Murder  and  love  may
travel  in  the  same  vehicle.  "  Where  is  he  ? "  2.  People  in  all  ages  make  inquiries
concerning  Jesus  Christ  from  different  motives  and  with  different  intentions.  Their
language  may  be  almost  the  same — "  Where  is  he  ?  "  but  the  motive  s  and  intentions  are
different  and  various.  3.  It  is  of  paramount  importance  with  what  motives  and  inten-
ticms  we  inquire  for  Christ.  No  motive  nor  intention  is  worthy  of  him  but  faith  and
the  salvation  of  the  soul.  4.  Blessed  cure  those  who  ask  with  living  faith,  "  Where  is
he?"    He  will  soon  appear  and  satisfy  all  their  wants. — B.  T.

Vers.  40 — 44. — An  important  division.  We  have  here :  1.  A  great  feast.  That
pf  Tabernacles.  2.  A  great  day.  The  last  day  of  the  feast.  3.  A  great  preacher.  The
Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  4.  A  great  sermon.  "  He  cried ;  "  and  he  had  something  worth
cryina — the  living  water  for  a  thirsty  world.  5.  A  great  division.  "  And  there  was  6
division  among  the  people,"  etc.     Notice —

I.  Some  of  the  featukbs  op  this  division.  1.  Jesus  was  the  Subject  of  this  division,
"Because  of  Mm."  The  question  was — ^Who  was  he?  what  was  he?  A  good  or  a  bad
man,  a  true  (iophet  or  an  impostor?  2.  They  were  divided  in  their  opinions.  Some
thought  he  was  the  Prophet;  some  thought  he  was  the  Christ;  while  others  doubled,
objected,  and  opposed.  3.  Thet/  were  divided  while  it  was  important  that  they  should
agree.  If  he  was  an  impostor,  it  was  important  that  they  should  agree  to  expose  him
and  stem  his  influence;  but  if  their  Messiah,  it  was  all-important  that  they  should
agree  to  accept  and  obey  hira.  4.  They  were  divided  while  they  ought  to  he  unanimous,
Jesus  bad  told  them  who  he  was,  and  his  person,  character,  ministry,  and  his  mighty
works,  ill  were  in  perfect  harmony  with  his  claims.  With  perfect  unity  and  Divine
force  they  pointed  to  him  as  the  Son  of  God.  5.  In  this  division  error  dissents  from
truth.  Some  said, "  He  is  the  Christ."  Error  doubted  and  objected.  Truth  is  older  and
firmer  than  error,  right  than  wrong.  Error  and  wrong  are  negatives  of  truth  and  right.
6.  Amidst  this  division  Christ  remained  the  same,  and  shone  on.  The  different  opinions
of  xaen  make  no  change  in  Jesus  himself.  Christ  changes  men's  opinions,  but  their
epiniODS  produce  no  change  in  him.

II.  The  cudbrlyino  pbinoiplbs  of  this  division  and  its  consequent  vaeiett  op
OPINIONS.  1.  Home  were  prejudiced  agaimst  him.  (1)  Prejudice  is  unreasonable  (ver.  41).
It  makes  more  of  a  place  often  than  a  person.  The  highest  claims  of  a  person  are
ignored  through  unreasonable  objections  to  the  place  whence  be  hails.  (2)  Prejudice
makes  what  is  really  for  the  truth  to  appear  against  it.  (Ver.  42.)  Christ  was  of  the
lineage  of  David,  and  a  native  of  Bethlehem.  They  manifest  here  a  culpable  ignorance
or  a  wilful  suppression  of  knowle^e.  Prejudice  is  capable  of  both.  2.  Some  were
filled  with  hatred  against  him.  (Ver.  44.)  Through  this  passion  even  the  Son  of  God
appeared  as  an  impostor  and  a  demon.  A  Being  of  Infinite  love  could  not  be  accepted
nor  even  recognized  through  hatred.  3.  Some  were  well  disposed  to  him.  (Ver.  40.)  A
favourable  disposition  will  generally  find  the  truth  or  an  approximation  to  it.  "The
Prophet ; "  "  the  Christ."  This  was  probably  the  verdict  of  the  majority  of  that  age.
Their  heads  were  right,  their  hearts  were  wrong.  4.  All  seemed  sadly  indifferent.
The  most  earnest  were  his  haters.  Even  those  who  rightly  pronounced  him  to  be  the
Christ  seemed  to  lack  earnestness  of  soul.  The  great  "cry"  of  Jesus  on  the  last  day
of  the  feast  did  not  find  an  adequate  response  from  the  heart  of  the  multitudes.  There
was  a  division,  a  stir,  and  that  was  apparently  all.

CoNOLUBiONS.  1.  Christ  has  occasioned  great  divisions  in  the  world.  This  was  not
the  first  nor  the  last.  A  variety  of  opinions,  of  sentiments  and  feelings,  with  regard  to
him.  He  is  the  occasion,  not  the  cause.  He  is  the  Prince  of  peace  and  unity,  and  yet
divisions  with  regard  to  him  have  stirred  humanity  Into  the  highest  pitch  of  passion,
and  have  resulted  in  wars,  persecutions,  and  martyrdoms.  2.  The  most  important
division  of  humanity  is  that  on  Christ.  Nations  divide  on  important  questions,  but
upon  none  so  important  as  this.  Upon  this  bangs  the  eternal  destiny  of  the  world.  3.
In  this  division  all  are  divided  into  two  parties,  for  or  against  him.  There  is  no
neutrality.  4,  Tlirough  divisions,  after  all,  right  views  »f  Jesus  are  obtained.  We
must  obtain  peace  through  wars,  calm  through  storms,  and  unanimity  through  divisions.
Out  of  these  Btirrinf  divisions  Christ  will  come  forth  as  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Sayiour


OH.  ^n.  1—63.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  33«

of  man.  6.  In  aU  these  divisiom  it  is  all-importcmt  to  possess  an  earnest  spirit  and
a  weU-dispoied  heart,  /or  through  these  alone  can  we  see  Jestis  as  he  is.  6.  In  these
ditrisions  we  may  give  Jesus  a  good  name  and  nothing  more.  We  may  call  him  the
Christ,  but  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me.  Lord,"  etc.  He  demands  the  verdict  of
the  heart.    7.  In  this  division  where  do  we  stand— for  or  against  him  t — ^B.  T.

Vers.  46,  46. — Captivity  led  captive.    Notice—

L  Thb  ooukoii.'b  question.  "Why  did  ye  not  bring  him?"  There  are  several
feelings  and  sentiments  implied  in  this  question.  1.  Oreat  hatred.  They  hated  Jesus
to  such  an  extent  that,they  wished  to  put  him  to  death.  For  this  purpose  they  sent  the
officers  to  take  him,  and  the  hatred  which  inspired  this  contemplated  deed  was  implied
in  this  question.  Human  hatred  cannot  go  further  than  this.  Murder  is  the  last
cowardly  arjjument  of  bigotry  and  weakness.  They  had  no  reason.  Hatred  does  not
require  a  valid  reason ;  it  will  coin  one  for  itself.  It  was  seething  in  the  question,
"  Why,"  etc.  ?  2.  Oreat  surprise.  They  would  not  be  more  surprised  to  see  Jesus
there  without  the  officers  than  to  see  the  officers  without  Jesus.  They  were  not  some
men  sent  at  random,  hut  picked  officers,  furnished  with  authority  and  strictly  com-
manded to  bring  him.  But  they  are  returned  without  their  Victim — and  why  ?  They
are  lost  in  surprise.  3.  Oreat  disappointment.  They  had  calculated  upon  a  feast
more  enjoyable  to  them  than  that  of  Tabernacles.  They  had  stayed  away  from  the
latter  in  anticipation  of  a  greater  luxury — to  have  the  Victim  of  their  hatred  in  their
power.  But,  behold  the  officers  without  him  1  It  is  thought  that  the  best  opportunity
is  lost.  By  the  next  time  the  attempt  is  made  to  take  him,  he  will  perhaps  have  so
grown  in  power  and  popularity  that  it  will  be  in  vain.  A  good  opportunity  is  lost ;
the  feast  of  hatred  and  malice  is  missed.  "  Why,"  etc.  ?  The  question  trembles  with
disappointment.  Hatred  is  terribly  disappointed  when  it  cannot  obtain  what  it  wishes.
4.  A  great  insidt.  In  this  question  we  can  hear  the  quivering  notes  of  insulted  pride.
"  Why,"  etc.  ?  There  is  a  suspicion  that  their  authority  was  disobeyed  and  their  com-
mand set  at  naught,  and  that  by  their  inferiors,  their  dependents,  their  menials ;  and
they  demand  the  reason.  5.  A  severe  reproof.  We  can  well  imagine  their  voices
thunders,  their  words  lightnings,  and  their  visage  as  the  angry  sKy  just  before  a
storm,  as  they  asked  the  question,  "  Wliy  did  ye,"  etc.  ?  If  their  power  and  authority
were  equal  to  their  hatred  and  pride,  these  officials  would  soon  have  to  feel  the  terrible
weight  of  their  revenge.

n.  The  officbbs'  reply.  "  Never  man,"  etc.  1.  This  is  a  remmrhMe  testimony
of  unbiased  witnesses  to  Jesus.  If  they  had  any  prejudice  at  all,  it  would  certainly  be
against  him.  It  is  almost  the  general  rule  that  servants  are  inspired  with  the  spirit
and  sentiments  of  their  masters.  If  so,  we  can  well  imagine  how  these  officers  felt  and
spoke  as  they  went  forth  to  take  Jesus.  But  they  returned  in  a  different  spirit  and  with
a  different  tale.  "  Never  man,"  etc.  No  one  can  suspect  them  of  undue  partiality  to
Jesus,  but  rather  the  contrary;  therefore  their  testimony  is  remaikable  and  of  special
value.  2.  It  is  the  testimony  of  personal  experience,  as  well  as  that  of  popular  opinion.
It  is  not  the  result  of  hearsay  or  a  second-hand  report,  but  they  had  heard  Jesus  with
their  own  ears,  and  seen  with  their  own  eyes  the  wonderful  effect  he  had  on  the
multitudes,  and  this  was  the  testimony  of  their  own  personal  experience  and  observation  :
"  Never  man,"  etc.  S.  It  is  a  great  but  a  natural  testimony  to  Jesus  as  a  Teacher.
"  Never  man,"  etc.  There  bad  been  in  the  world  great  men  among  Jews  and  Gentiles
— mighty  orators,  eloquent  prophets,  and  sage  philosophers ;  but  "  never  man,"  etc.,  not
even  Moses.  "  Never  man,"  etc.  As  much  as  to  say  that  he  must  be  more  than  a
mere  man;  if  not,  the  fact  is  still  more  extraordinary  that  a  poor,  uneducated  GalilsBan
should  eclipse  all  his  illustrious  predecessors  in  wisdom  and  Divine  eloquence  as  a
Teacher.  Grant  him  to  be  the  Messiah — the  Son  of  God  incarnate — then  this  tc  stimony,
though  great,  is  iijost  natural.  What  else  could  be  expected  ?  4.  ITie  substantial  truth
of  this  testimony  is  amply  corroborated  hy  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  Although  we  have
not  the  fascinating  voice,  the  effective  utterance,  and  the  charming  presence,  yet
sufficient  is  recorded  to  prove  the  unquestionable  truth  of  the  testimnny .  The  testimony
of  these  officers  must  have  been  inspired,  for  they  could  not  fully  comprehend  it;  stiU
its  truth  has  been  confirmed  by  the  most  intelligent,  learned,  and  competent  judges  of
all  succeeding  ages.    "  Never  man,"  etc.    (1)  Never  man  spake  such  Divine  and  siiblimt


840  THE  GOStEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHU.     [oB.  m.  1—m.


truths — truths  concerning  man  and  God,  conoeming  this  world  and  the  other.  Never
man  spake  as  he  to  reason,  to  conscience,  to  the  will  and  heart.  (2)  Never  man  spake
with  siKk  authority,  ease,  naturalness,  transparency,  and  conviction.  (3)  Nevtr
man  spake  with  such  Divine  effect.  To  various  ohjects — to  nature,  to  diseases,  to  demons,
to  death,  to  man  in  all  conditions,  to  the  guilty,  to  the  penitent,  to  the  weary  and  heavy
laden,  etc.  5.  The  genuineness  of  their  testimony  is  attested  hy  the  fact  that  they
returned  without  him.  His  influence  over  them  is  patent  to  all.  The  strictness  of  the
command  and  the  fear  of  the  consequences  of  failure  to  carry  it  out  would  naturally
cause  them  to  strain  every  nerve  to  take  him.  But  they  failed,  and  they  could  assign
no  other  reason  for  their  failure  than  the  superhuman  influence  of  his  speech  and
doctrine.  It  is  recorded  as  a  proof  of  the  eloquence  of  Marcus  Antonius  the  orator,  that
when  Marius  sent  loldiers  to  kill  him,  he  ples^ded  with  such  eloquence  for  his  life  that
they  could  not  touch  him,  and  they  left  him  in  tears.  But  here  is  an  instance  of  a
more  captivating  eloquence.  Christ  did  not  appeal  to  the  pity  of  his  captors,  neither
did  he  plead  for  his  life;  but  he  appealed  to  the  conscience  and  heart,  and  pleaded  for
the  life  of  the  condemned  world  with  such  power  as  to  disarm  them.  They  returned
without  him,  amazed  and  spell-bound  with  his  magic  eloquence,  and  could  give  no
account  of  their  failure  but  in  the  simple  but  touching  story,  "  Never  man,"  etc.

Conclusions.  1.  We  have  here  a  singular  instance  of  the  wrath  of  man  being  made
to  praise  the  Lord.  Instead  of  these  officers  bringing  Jesus  before  the  council  to  be
tried  and  condemned,  he  sends  them  back  to  the  council  to  bear  witness  to  his  excellence
and  preach  his  glory,  even  to  his  bitterest  enemies.  2.  Servants  and  depettdents  are
(ften  more  open  to  conviction  than  their  masters  and  superiors.  Those  who  have  had
but  few,  if  any,  privileges  are  often  touched  by  Divine  truths  before  those  who  have
been  highly  favoured.  Thus  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  shall  be  last.  3.  Jesus
has  often  taken  those  who  would  take  him.  These  ofBcers  went  to  take  him,  but  he
took  them.  Sanl  of  Tarsus  is  another  instance,  and  the  history  of  conversions  through
the  ages  is  full  of  instances  of  Christ  leading  captivity  captive.  4.  2%e  testimony  of
these  officers  has  been  the  testimony  of  all  who  have  given  Jesus  a  fair  hearing.  Scholar-
ship and  common  sense  have  joined  the  believer's  experit-nce  in  saying,  "Never  man,"etc.
6.  It  is  not  enough  to  admire  Christ  as  a  Teacher,  hut  we  must  believe  and  obey  him. — B.  T.

Ver.  8. — The  time  of  Jesus — when  is  it  to  comet  The  course  of  life  in  every  living
thing  is,  to  a  great  extent,  according  to  a  fixed  order.  Every  human  being  has  that  in
his  whole  appearance  which  tells  something  of  the  number  of  years  he  has  been  in  the
world.  But  in  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  there  was  something  beyond  the  order  of  mere
natural  development.  There  was  an  order  in  his  life  which  it  depended  on  his  own
discernment  and  obedience  to  maintain.  His  brethren  wanted  him  to  rush  at  every
opportunity  that  seemed  likely  to  them.  But  Jesus  was  not  one  to  pluck  fruit  before
it  was  ripe.  He  began  quietly,  went  on  gradually,  builded  thii^  up,  and  then,  when
the  hour  for  full  revelation  came,  the  revelation  came  with  it.

I.  The  particulae  season  foe  which  Jesus  was  waitino.  His  brethren  wanted
him  to  make  the  best  of  the  crowd  that  would  be  at  Jerusalem  for  the  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles. The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  however,  was  only  a  secondary  occasion  compared
with  the  Feast  of  the  Passover.  There  could  have  been  nothing  to  remember  at  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles  unless,  first  of  all,  there  had  been  something  to  remember  at  the
Feast  of  the  Passover.  All  other  glorious  recollections  which  Israel  had  to  cherish  with
gratitude  and  hope  came  out  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt.  Thus,  at  the  Feast  of  the
Passover,  the  time  of  Jesus  fully  came,  and  the  coming  was  made  manifest  by  his
public  and  triumphal  entry.  The  mtiltitude  surrounding  him  had  come  up  for  the
Passover,  like  himself.  They  shout  "  Hosannah  1 "  that  is,  they  utter  forth  a  prayer
for  salvation.  And  this  prayer  was  soon  answered,  though  not  as  the  multitude
expected,  and  not  in  a  way  that  many  of  them  would  profit  by.  Jesus  was  just  about
to  be  delivered  over  to  men,  that  men  might  do  their  worst  to  him.  Then,  when  men  had
done  their  worst,  his  Father  iu  heaven  would  do  his  best.  Everything  was  done  just  at
the  right  time.  And  all  this  comes  forth  from  that  Lord  of  hosts  who  is  wonderful  in
counsel  and  excellent  in  working.  It  is  just  what  we  should  expect,  that  God's  great
dealings  in  grace  should  have  about  them  the  order  and  regularity  which  icark  his  deal-
ings in  nature.  '


OH.  vn.  1—53.]     THE  GOSPUL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  «4l

n.   How  WE  ARE  TO  PROFIT  BY   THE    FULL   COMINO  OP   THE   TIME  OP  JeSUS.      We  Can

only  profit  by  the  coming  of  this  time  as  we  make  it  to  profit.  The  time  of  Jesus  has
to  come  fully  with  each  of  us.  Not  a  human  being  who  has  ever  trod  this  planet  but
has  to  come  somewhere  and  somehow  in  contact  with  Jesus.  We  can  no  more  escape
Jesus  than  we  can  escape  death.  Life  is  narrowing  day  by  day,  and  we  are  getting
pushed  on  to  a  wicket-gate  where  face-to-face  dealing  with  Jesus  is  inevitable.  The
time  has  fully  come  for  Jesus  to  be  showing  aomelhing  of  his  saving  power  in  our
experience.  Whenever  Jesus,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  met  with  those  who  had  divers
diseases  and  infirmities,  the  time  was  lully  come  for  him  to  take  those  diseases  and
infirmities  away.  And  so  the  time  of  Jesua  is  fully  come  to  save  whenever  the  sinner
feels  his  need  of  saving.  When  the  lifeboat  is  built  and  put  in  the  lifeboat-house,  the
time  is  fully  come  for  the  boat  to  do  its  work.  Whenever  the  work  is  ready  for  it,  it  is
ready  for  the  work.  So  Jesus  is  ready  for  the  sinner  whenever  the  sinner  is  ready  for
him.  Ready  to  save,  ready  to  govern,  ready  to  comfort,  ready  to  put  in  the  way  of  a
full  recompense  for  an  obedient  life. — Y.

Ver.  17. — Chrisfs  authority  and  the  way  to  ascertain  it.  It  was  very  natural  for  a
Jerusalem  audience  to  say  with  respect  to  Jesus,  "Why  should  we  listen  to  this  Man?"
1.  It  is  very  natural  that  any  one  making  special  claims  should  be  regarded  with  special
caution.  Jesus  knew  quite  well  that  he  would  not  be  readily  received  on  his  own
valuation.  Thanks  are  owing  to  those  who  opposed  and  criticized  him  in  the  days  of
his  flesh.  Their  very  way  of  talking  to  him,  the  true  Teacher,  showed  how  little  the
instruction  of  other  teachers  had  done  for  them,  2.  Jesus  had  not  been  brought  up
among  the  people  who  were  recognized  as  having  the  right  to  send  forth  teachers.  As
we  should  say,  Jesus  had  not  been  to  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  He  would  not  speak  like
an  educated  Jew  of  Jerusalem,  but  like  the  son  of  a  working-man  from  far-off  Galilee.
So  Jesus  had  to  explain  the  marvel  how  he  seemed  to  know  the  Law  and  the  Prophets
at  least  as  well  as  those  whose  whole  lives  had  been  spent  in  acquiring  the  knowledge.

I.  Look  at  the  class  who  ake  specially  iuteeested  in  this  verse.  Those  who
wanted  to  know  something  certain  about  the  authority  and  doctrine  of  Christ.  These
people  in  Jerusalem  had  all  sorts  of  thoughts  about  Jesus.  Some  said  he  was  a  good
man;  others,  a  deceiver  of  the  people.  It  was  once  said  of  him  that  he  cast  out  demons
by  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  the  demons.  Some  thought  he  was  Elijah ;  some  Jeremiah,
or,  at  all  events,  one  of  the  prophets.  There  was  no  certainty  about  him  in  the  minds
of  many.  And  in  the  minds  of  many  the  same  uncertainty  still  prevails.  Learned  men
spend  years  examining  the  Gospels,  and  they  have  nothing  indubitable  to  report  in  the
end.  Yet  be  sure  Jesus  wants  effectually  to  help  all  that  are  in  real  perplexity  about
him.    Did  he  not  say,  "  Blessed  is  he  whosoever  is  not  offended  in  me  "  ?

II.  How  this  class  is  to  bk  helped.  This  class  will  always  find  a  stumbling-block
in  Jesus  till  it  grows  through  a  great  inward  change.  Those  who  have  no  will  to  do  the
will  of  God  will  never  find  out  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Our  own  self-will  and  self-
conceit  form  the  greatest  stumbling-block.  Self-willed  people  find  it  very  uncom-
fortable the  more  they  come  to  close  quarters  with  Jesus.  He  never  speaks  without
contradicting  some  dear  desire  of  the  unrenewed  heart.  Jesus  was  ever  on  the  look-out
for  people  who  wanted  to  do  the  will  of  God — people  who  felt  they  had  come  into  the
world  to  do  the  will  of  him  who  made  them  and  the  world  into  which  they  had  come.
God  has  his  wishes  just  as  much  as  any  of  us.  A  conscientious  and  loving  servant,  who
is  far  away  from  his  master,  will  ever  have  the  thought  of  the  master's  wish  before
him ;  and  when  oftentimes  he  sees  not  quite  clearly  what  the  master  would  have  him
to  do,  he  will  be  on  the  look-out  for  every  source  of  instruction.  If,  then,  at  such  a
moment  a  messenger  should  come  from  the  master,  meanly  clad,  and  with  a  message
written  on  a  scrap  of  the  commonest  paper,  he  will  not  think  less  of  the  message  if  it
tells  him  just  what  he  wants  to  know.  When  John  Williams  the  missionary  was
building  his  chapel  in  Barotonga,  he  had  occasion  one  day  to  send  to  his  wife  for  some-
thing he  had  forgotten,  so  he  scribbled  the  necessary  message  on  a  chip  with  a  bit  of
charcoaL  He  took  the  materials  at  hand,  but  the  message  was  none  the  less  valid,  none
the  less  understood.  And  so  the  greatest  of  all  messages,  from  the  infinite  and  eternal
God,  is  none  the  less  his  message  because  it  came  through  One  who  was  bom  in  the
lowliest  aunoundings  and  brought  up  in  tne  home  of  »  Galilnan  woikiug  man.    If  wf


842  THE  GOSPEL  ACX^ORDINa   BO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vin.  1—59.

are  resolutely  on  the  side  of  God,  Gud  will  help  us  into  all  truth,  security,  peaca^  mi
blessedness. — Y.

Ver.  37. — Good  news  for  the  thirsty.  Jesus  uttered  forth  this  cry  on  the  great  day
of  the  feast — a  time  of  ceasing  I'rom  wurk,  a  time  of  solemn  assembly.  Quietly  as  JesoB
had  gone  up  to  the  feast,  by  this  time  he  bad  become  the  Centre  of  a  vast  concourse.
Because  the  concourse  wotild  be  vast  and  not  over-quiet,  and  also  because  his  message,
if  important,  was  tremendously  important,  he  cried.  We  feel  that,  in  doing  this,  that
voice  which  spake  as  never  man  spake  would  only  rise  from  sweetness  to  sublimity.

I.  Why  did  Jesus  put  his  invitation  in  this  pabticulab  way  ?  It  could  hardly
be  becatise  of  the  present  surroundings  of  the  people.  Jerusalem  was  plentifully  sup-
plied with  water.  Not  a  soul  in  the  crowd  but  could  get  a  drink  very  quickly.  The
main  reason  must  be  found  in  the  feast  which  had  brought  the  people  together.  It  was
the  feast  instituted  to  commenaorate  the  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  and  serious
people  would  call  to  mind  all  the  events  of  that  period.  Prominent  among  the
experiences  of  wandering  Israel  was  the  miraculous  supply  of  water.  Where  would  the
people  have  been  but  for  the  God  who  turned  bitter  waters  into  sweet,  and  made  springs
to  burst  forth  in  the  desert  ?  Thus  the  observers  of  the  feast  would  be  led  to  think  of
the  intenser  thirst  of  the  inward  man.  Jesus  tried  to  put  the  truth  in  every  possible
way.  What  did  not  catch  the  experience  of  one  would  catch  that  of  another.  Not
everybody  would  this  appeal  of  the  Lord  touch.  They  would  not  have  been  through
the  experiences  and  reflections  which  gave  a  proper  feeling  of  the  urgency  and
the  pain  of  thirst.  But  if  in  all  that  crowd  hearing  the  cry  of  Jesus  there  was  but
one,  only  one,  who  had  known  the  agotiies  of  thirst  far  away  in  some  sandy  waste  where
no  water  was,  it  was  worth  while  for  Jesus  to  shout  aloud  so  that  that  single  man
might  hear.

II.  How  THIS  etvitation  is  to  be  made  attbaotive  to  us.  We  know  nothing  by
our  own  experience  of  dry  and  thirsty  lands.  Wander  anywhere  through  broad  Eng-
land and  you  can  get  a  drink  of  water  for  the  asking.  We  may  sometimes  have  been
inconvenienced  a  little,  but  that  is  no  sufficient  experience  of  thirst  which  lasts  only  for
an  hour  or  two.  Reading  accounts  of  some  shipwrecks,  we  may  gather  a  little  of  the
feeling.    Coleridge  puts  it  thus  in  '  The  Ancient  Mariner ' —

"Water,  water,  every where^
Nor  any  drop  to  drink."

Of  all  the  physical  wants  man  can  feel,  none  is  capable  of  being  raised  to  such  a  pitch  of
intensity  as  the  want  of  water.  So,  down  underneath  the  figure  Jesus  employs,  there  is
a  suggestion  of  the  terrible  suffering  some  have  to  undergo  in  finding  spiritual  truth  and
peace.  As  few  comparatively  know  the  full  suffering  of  bodily  thirst,  so  few  compara-
tively know  the  full  suffering  of  spiritual  thirst.  Few  know  such  a  state  of  heart  as
would  warrant  them  in  saying  that  their  souls  thirst  for  God.  The  way  of  agony  is  the
way  some  must  travel  before  they  can  be  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God.  But  intense
agony  in  the  sphere  of  the  spiritual,  as  in  the  sphere  of  the  natural,  must  be  an  excep-
tional thing.  Yet  who  can  tell  but  he  may  illustrate  the  exceptional,  and  so  need  to
get  guidance  through  the  word  of  Jesus  here?  'I'here  are  many  things  that  say,  "If  any
man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink."  Then  the  thirsty  drink,  and  find  their
thirst  unquenched  and  intensified.  We  may  have  our  natural  Elinis.  What  if  they
change  to  Marabs  ?  What  if  the  rushing  stream  dries  away  to  a  few  tantalizing  and
useless  drops  ? — Y.


EXPOSITION,
CHAPTEE  VIII.


Ch.  vil.  53 — viii.  11. — (8)  The,  perioope
adulters!,  (o)  Exrnrsiia  on  the  genuinenest
of  ch.  vii.  63 — viii.  11.  It  is  our  duty
to  examine  the  various  grounds  on  which
this  passage  has  been  almost  universally


conclurled  to  have  formed  no  portion  of  the
original  Fourth  (Gospel;  and  thun  the  in-
ternal grouuds  on-whioli  it  has  been  rejected,
and  some  of  the  speoulatious  as  to  its  origin
and  value.

Doubts  have  beset  the  authenticity  of  the
passage  from  the  fourth  and  fifth  oenturie*


OH.  vm.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


84S


in  the  Eastern  Church,  both  on  external  and
internal  grounds.  The  authority  and  prac-
tice of  Augustine,  Ambrose,  and  Jerome  gave
it  a  secure  resting-place  till  the  criticism
of  Erasmus  re-awakened  doubt.  Calvin  ex-
pressed a  more  favourable  opinion  concern-
ing it.  Jansenius  rejected  it.  Grotius  con-
Bidered  it  as  an  addition  to  John's  Gospel
from  the  hand  of  Papias  or  one  of  his  friends
and  fellow-disciples  of  John.  Wettstein,
Semler,  Griesbach,  and  Wegsoheider  seemed
to  leave  for  it  no  place  in  Scripture.  Lach-
mann  omitted  it  from  his  text.  It  has  been
condemned  as  spurious  by  tlie  great  bulk  of
modern  critics,  even  of  different  schools  and
on  somewhat  different  grounds.  Some  have
rejected  it  as  a  spurious  forgery  (see  Heng-
stenberg,  in  !oo.);  Keim  derives  much  the
same  conclusion  from  its  supposed  teaching ;
others  have  admitted  that,  though  it  is  not
without  a  powerful  apostolic  ring  about  it,
yet  its  proper  place  was  probably  at  the  close
of  Luke  xxi.,  where  it  is  found  in  cursive
69  and  three  other  cursives  (13,  124,  346).
Others  (Scrivener)  that,  from  its  interruption
of  the  narrative,  it  has  no  place  here,  but  may
be  possibly  regarded  as  an  appendix  to  John's
Gospel,  or  a  part  of  the  later  edition  of  that
Gospel  which  contained  ch.  xxi.  There  is  no
sufficient  ground  on  which  to  build  this  hy-
pothesis of  two  editions  (cf.  notes  on  ch.  xxi.
1).  Tliere  are,  however,  manuscripts  which
preserve  the  paragrapli  in  this  position,  viz.
the  cursive  1,  and  the  majority  of  the
Armenian  manuscripts.  A  very  damaging
note  accompanies  it  in  1  (see  Tregelles,  who
gives  it  at  length).  The  following  critical
editors  have  either  displaced  it  or  entirely
rejected  it  from  this  place  in  John's  Gospel,
though  many  among  them  admit  its  virtual
authenticity  as  a  record  of  a  genuine  occur-
rence in  the  life  of  our  Lord :  Lachmann,
Tregelles,  Tischendorf,  Alford,  Liioke,
Meyer,  Godet,  Milligan,  Scrivener,  Moul-
ton,  Westcott  and  Hort,  the  Revised  Text,
and  even  Weiss  8,nd  Wordsworth.  On  the
other  hand,  it  has  been  defended  by  Mill,
Lampe,  Miohaelis,  by  Bengel,  Scholz,  Wie-
seler,  Ebrard,  Lange,  Stier,  M'Clellan,  and
by  some  of  the  Tiibingen  school  like  Hil-
genfeld,  who,  attaching  it  to  the  Gospel,
have  made  use  of  it  to  destroy  the  historic
character  of  the  Gospel  itself.  Griesbach  re-
tains it  with  double  marks  of  doubt.    Farrar,


summarizing  Lttoke's  discussion  of  the  evi-
dence, inclines  rather  in  its  favour,  and
thinks  it  may  have  been  early  admitted  into
the  Fourth  Gospel  from  that  according  to
the  Hebrews,  or  from  some  Ur-marcua
(Holtzmann).  M'Clellan  and  Stier  vehe-
mently maintain  it  on  both  interaal  and
external  grounds.  Edersheim  says  that  it
presents  "insuperable  difficulties  in  the
"  un-Jewish  "  account  given  of  the  accusers,
the  witnesses,  the  public  examination,  the
bringing  of  the  woman  to  Jesua,  and  the
punishment  claimed."  Benan, '  Ecce  Homo,*
and  Farrar  have  made  very  powerful  bio-
graphic use  of  the  narrative.

The  evidence  against  it  is :  1,  That  H,  (A),
B,  (C),  (L),  X,  (A),  33,  131,  and  157  omit  it
A  and  C  are  here  defective,  but  they  leave
no  sufficient  space  for  its  insertion ;  L  and
A  leave  gaps,  to  notify  some  omission,  which
the  copyist  for  some  reason  did  not  or  dared
not  fill.  Though  found  in  D,  B,  F,  G,  H,  K.
M,  S,  Y,  T,  A,  A,  n,  and  numerous  cursives,
it  is  nevertheless  obelized  in  some  of  the
former  as  doubtful.

The  first  Greek  writer  in  the  twelfth  cen-
tury (Euthymius  Zygadenus)  who  in  this
portion  of  the  Gospel  refers  to  the  passage
distinctly  says  that  from  ch.  vii.  53  to  viii.  11
the  passage  was  not  found,  or  it  was  obelized
in  the  most  accwrate  copies;  wherefore,  he
adds,  it  was  first  a  gloss,  and  then  an  ap-
pendix (Trapiypawra,  "  written  alongside
of,"  Koi  irpoireiitcn,  "  added  to "),  and  « a
token  of  this  is  seen  in  tlie  fact  that  Chry-
sostom  had  made  no  mention  of  it."

2.  It  was  found  in  different  places,  even
in  several  of  the  manuscripts  which  contain
it  (see  above).

3.  Ancient  versions,  such  as  some  of  the.
Italic,  .SIgyptian,  Old  Syriao,  Gothic,  early
manuscripts  of  the  Pesohito  and  Armenian
Versions,  omit  it.

4.  It  was  not  read  by  Tertullian  (see  '  De
Pudio.,'  c.  6),  Cyprian,  Origen,  Theodore
of  Mopsuestia,  Chrysostom,  Cyril  of  Alexan-
dria, and  Theophylact,  where  it  might  have
been  expected.

5.  Though  found  in  D  (Codex  BezteX  yet
this  testimony,  without  confirmation,  throws
doubt  over  it,  by  its  adoption  of  the  paragraph.
D  has  given  us  several  other  additions
(such  as  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Luke  vi.  5),  which
have  never  passed  into  authentic  Scripture.


sa


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  Tin.  1—69.


Moreorer,  the  text  of  D  here  differs  from  that
of  the  later  uncials  in  which  it  occurs,  as  well
as  &orD  the  body  of  cursives  which  contain
it.  Liicke  powerfully  argues,  from  the  silence
of  Chrysostom  and  Origen,  that  they  were
in  pogitiTe  ignorance  of  the  existence  of  the
passage.  The  defenders  of  its  authenticity
allege  that  Origen's  commentary  and  homi-
lies are  lacking  or  mutilated  over  the  fifth,
sixth,  and  seventh  chapters.  While  this  is
true,  Origen  ('  Tom,,'  xix.)  points  out  the
connection  between  ch.  vii.  40  and  viii.  12
without  making  the  faintest  reference  to
this  perieope.  "  No  catenss  as  yet  examined
contiiin  notes  on  any  of  these  verses  "  (West-
eott  and  Hort).

6.  The  nature  of  the  text  differs  from  that
with  which  it  is  supposed  to  be  imbedded,
as,  for  instance,  in  the  use  of  the  particle  SJ
in  place  of  oJi/  (John's  favourite  particle),
anri  of  other  words  which  are  peculiar  to
itself,  and  certain  expressions,  such  as
*'  Mount  of  Olives,"  "  sat  and  taught,"  etc.,
which  are  current  in  Luke  and  elsewhere
(but  see  further  for  the  value  of  this  evi-
dence).

7.  The  Constant,  lection  for  Whit  Sunday
consists  of  ch.  vii.  37 — 52,  followed  imme-
diately by  cli.  viii.  12.  Such  an  omission  from
John's  Gospel  is  only  noticeable  elsewhere
wliere  special  reason  can  be  assigned  for  it.

8.  With  the  exception  of  the  'Apostolic
Constitutions,'  the  Greek  writers  and  com-
mentators are  ignorant  of  it,  and  there  is  no
proof  of  its  existence  in  any  extant  manu-
script earlier  than  the  sixth  century.

The  siun  of  this  is  that  the  most  ancient
known  authorities  are,  from  one  cause  or
other  (whether  necessary,  accidental,  or  pru-
dential), silent  concerning  the  passage ;  that
mutilations  of  Scripture  cannot  be  common
offences,  even  though  a  strong  ascetic  spirit
might  be  tempted  to  refuse  a  pMic  reading
of  this  paragraph,  and  to  abstain  from  pubUo
comment  on  so  difficult  a  passage.

The  evidence  for  the  paragraph  is :  1.  First
and  foremost,  the  Codex  D  and  the  later  un-
cials (E),  (P),  G,  H,  K,  M,  r,  (S),  T,  U,  A
(but  in  E,  F,  and  S  great  doubts  are  ex-
pressed; F  has  a  space  tover.  10  ;  Feuds  at
ver.  8).  D  probably  belongs  to  the  fifth  or
Bixth  century,  K  to  the  eighth  or  ninth,  and
the  remaining  uncials  belong  to  the  tenth,
eleventh,  or  twelfth  century.     The  whole


group  is,  with  the  exception  of  T,  represen-
tative of  the  Syrian  Becension.  Some  of  the
best  manuscripts  of  the  Vulgate  contain  it,
and  the  .^thiopio  and  Memphitio  Versions.
Griesbach  enumerates  a  hundred  cursiveg —
Alford  says  three  hundred — and  especially  in
Latin  manuscripts  referred  to  by  Ambrose,
Augustine,  and  Jerome.

2.  The  supposed  presence  of  it  in  the
'Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews'  turns
on  the  statement  preserved  by  Eusebius  in
his  account  of  Papias  (of  which  we  have
other  reasons  for  doubting  the  accuracy),
'Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii  40,  "He  exhibits  also
another  history  concerning  a  woman  (Sio"
P\i!eel<rns)  calumniously  accused  before  the
Lord  of  many  sins,  which  is  contained  in
the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews."  On
the  credit  of  this  statement,  that  apocryphal
Gospel  has  been  supposed  to  contain  the
famous  passage.  The  idea  is  thrown  out
that  John  or  his  earliest  editors  may  have
sought  to  find  a  place  for  it,  and  imagined
that  the  event  preceded  the  solemn  assertion
of  ch.  viii  15,  "Ye  judge  after  the  flesh;
I  judge  no  one."  This  ingenious  supposi-
tion tells  both  ways.  If  the  passage  is  an
importation  ftom  the  'Gospel  Moording  to
the  Hebrews,'  Ensebius  becomes  a  witness
that,  in  his  day,  and  by  him,  it  was  not
regarded  as  an  integral  portion  of  John'i
Gospel.  The  very  early  existence  of  the
narrative  is,  however,  avouched,  and  the  pos-
sible method  suggested  by  which  either
John  or  the  Ephesian  presbyters  adopted
it.  But  there  is  no  proof  that  this  narrative
is  identical  with  a  story  no  details  of  which
are  preserved.  The  elanderoits  or  secret
accusation  of  a  woman  is  not  parallel  with
the  autoptio,  uncontradicted  assertion  of  ch.
viii.  4,  that  she  was  "taken  in  the  verj
act."  Nor  is  the  accnsation  of  "  many  sins  "
identical  with  the  charge  of  one  revolting
crime.  It  is  significant  that  Buffinus,  in  his
version  of  Eusebius,  substitutes  "  a  woman,
an  adulteress,"  for  "a  woman  accused  of
many  sins."  This  may  have  been  due  to
his  acquaintance  with  Jerome's  translation
of  the  '  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews.'
Moreover,  on  the  supposition  of  identity,
the  story  would  more  probably  have  been
found  in  the  cognate  Gospel  of  Matthew
than  in  the  numerous  manuscripts  of  the
Fourth  Gospel.


OH.  Tin.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


346


S.  The  testimony  of  ancient  writers  can
be  set  over  ugainst  the  silence  of  Tertullian,
Origen,  Cyprian,  eto.  Thus, '  Apost.  Const.,*
ii.  24,  refers  to  the  narrative,  in  vindication
of  the  true  reception  of  penitents.  After
referring  -to  Luke  vii.,  the  writers  say,
"Another  woman  who  had  sinned,  the
elders  placed  before  him,  and  left  the  judg-
ment in  his  hands,  and  went  out ;  but  the
Lord,  who  knoweth  the  hearts,  having  in-
({uired  of  her  whether  the  elders  had  con-
demned her,  and  she  having  said  '  No,'  eaid,
'Go,  then;  neither  do  I  condemn  thee.'"
This  testimony  cannot  be  positively  made
to  show  that  the  passage  was  in  any  Greek
text  earlier  than  the  third  century,  and  no
reference  occurs  in  it  to  the  Gospel  of  John.
The  reference  is  valuable  for  the  antiquity
of  the  Gospel,  if  other  reasons  establish
this  passage  as  an  integral  portion  of  that
Gospel.

4.  The  passage  was  undoubtedly  admitted
as  part  of  the  Gospel  by  both  Jerome,  Au-
gustine, and  Ambrose,  and  many  later
Fathers  of  the  Westem  Church.  Jerome
did  not  discard  it  from  the  Vulgate  Version,
and  distinctly  says  that  it  was  found  "  in
multis  et  Grseois  et  Latinis  codioibus,"  and
that  it  was  read  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Pelagia
(October  8).  Ambrose  quoted  from  it  ('  De
Spir.  Sancto,'  iii.  2.  15),  and  reproached
those  who  made  a  bad  use  of  it.  Augustine
('Adv.  Pelag.,'  ii.  17)  admits  that  some
were  afraid  of  the  passage,  lest  it  should
lead  to  laxity  of  morals,  and  so  had  erased
it  (auferrenf)  from  their  codices.  Augustine
comments  on  it  verse  by  verse,  and  preached
from  several  texts  found  in  it.

5.  The  internal  evidence  in  favour  is  the
weakness  of  the  objections  which  are  said
to  arise :  (1)  From  the  use  of  words  and
phrases  foreign  to  Jolra,  and  of  proper
names  without  explanations.  Thus,  "Mount
of  Olives "  is  referred  to  for  the  only  time.
But  it  must  be  admitted  that  "Kedron"
thus  occurs  (ch.  xviii.  1).  nSs  S  \ios  is
said  to  be  discrepant  from  the  Johannine
phrase  tx^os,  used  so  frequently  in  ch.  vii.
and  elsewhere,  and  is  scarcely  answered  by
M'Clellan  when  he  says  it  is  antithetic
to  "  the  doctors  of  the  Law,"  itself  an
nn-Johannine  phrase.  The  statement  that
Jesus  "  sat  down  to  teach  "  may  not  else-
where be  found  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.     It


is  implied,  however,  that  he  was  seated
during  the  discourse  of  ch.  xiii.,  xiv.  The
use  of  such  words  as  xaraypiipeiv,  iyaiidprri-
Tos,  iiTiufVfiv,  KaTa\elire<r6aif  cannot  prove
anything  whatever,  as  we  may  find  in  every
chapter  of  John,  and  still  more  of  the  Apo-
calypse, fijraj  \fy6/ji.et'a.  Much  Is  marie  of
the  absence  of  odv,  John's  favourite  particle,
and  the  frequent  use  of  54.  But  John  uses
oSv  two  hundred  and  six  times  in  his  Gospel,
and  54  two  hundred  and  fo\ir  times.  More-
over, oSv  does  not  occur  in  ch.  i.  1 — 20;
iii.  1—24;  iv.  12—27;  xi.  22—30;  nor
in  ch.  xiv.,  xv.,  xvii.  (M'CleUan).  Very
little  argument  ought  to  rest  on  this  pecu-
liarity. (2)  It  is  stated  that  the  paragraph
breaks  the  continuity  of  the  narrative,
which  properly  follows  on  ver.  45  or  52.
This  is  not  so  clear.  The  Sanhedrin  and
the  people  disperse  at  tlie  conclusion  of
Christ's  discourse;  that  last  day  of  the
feast  is  ended.  Ch.  viii.  1  introduces  a  new
day,  the  dawn  of  the  morning  wlien  the
event  occurred  providing  Christ  with  his
illustration, "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world ; "
and  the  recent  occurrence,  with  the  potent
illustration  of  the  declaration,  "Ye  judge
after  the  flesh;  I  judge  no  one."  (3)  The
judgment  of  stoning  is  said  to  be  the  punish-
ment adjudged  to  the  man  and  woman,  if
the  woman  be  the  betrothed  spouse  of
aTiother  man.  In  Deut.  xxii.  22  and  Lev.
XX.  10  death,  wilhout  specifying  the  man-
ner of  it,  is  the  punishment  of  adultery ;
in  Deut.  xxii.  24  the  case  of  fornication
with  a  hetrothed  virgin  is  punished  with
stoning.  It  has  been  argued  by  some
that  the  specification  of  stoning  in  this  one
case  excludes  it  in  the  other  case,  and  by
others  that  the  one  crime  resembles  the
other  so  much  that  it  is  sufSciently  near  to
justify  the  legal  question  put  to  Christ.
In  'Sanhedrin,'  §  vii.  4,  adultery  is  not
mentioned  as  a  crime  punishable  with
stoning,  and  in  §  x.  4  it  is  made  punish-
able with  impalement.  That  scribes  and
Pharisees  should  make  use,  without  per-
fect accuracy,  of  Moses  to  tempt  Christ  does
not  appear  to  be  a  reason  sufficient  in  itself
to  doubt  the  authenticity  of  the  passage.

Our  conclusion  is  that  the  passage,whether
written  as  it  stands  by  John  or  not,  was
introduced,  in  very  early  times,  into  the
Westem  text  (according  to  Ewald,  '  Die


346


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [cn.  Tin.  1—59.


Job.  Soliiiften,'  271)  as  a  gloss  on  ch.  Tiii.
15) ;  that  the  external  evidence  is  extiemely
unsatisfactory  and  conflicting;  yet  it  must
be  admitted  that  the  silence  of  the  great
Greek  bathers  concerning  it  is  accountable
without  disbelieving  in  its  existence.  While
Chrysostom  ignores  it,  Ambrose  insists  upon
its  teaching,  and  Jerome  does  not  see  suffi-
cient reasou  to  expunge  it.  The  profound
originality  of  the  lessons  it  conveys,  and  the
diiBoulty  involved  in  a  careless  reading,
may  account  for  the  non-appearance  of  it
in  the  earliest  manuscripts,  and  make  the
motive  which  could  have  maliciously  devised
or  imagined  such  a  scene  inconceivable.
Liicke,  in  his  elaborate  treatment  (vol.  ii.
pp.  243—278),  Tregelles,  and  Alford,  Godet,
in  loco,  Lightfoot  (fiontemporary  Beview,
vol.  xxvi.),  Tischendorf,  Weotcott  and  Hort,
declare  against  it  in  the  most  positive  way.
Meyer  urges  that  it  is  not  to  be  for  a  moment
referred  to  an  oral  Johannine  source,  while  it
is  in  keeping,  he  says,  with  tlie  tone  of  the
synoptic  Gospels.  This  is  open  to  criticism.
Scathing  denunciations  of  every  kind  of
corruption  are  far  more  frequent  in  the  sy-
noptic Gospels  (cf.  Matt,  v.— vii.,  xxiii.,  etc.)
than  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.

The  most  formidable  objection  is  the  state
of  the  text,  which,  in  addition  to  its  defi-
ciency of  first-class  testimony,  is  unusually
discrepant  in  the  authorities  which  preserve
it.  Thus  there  is  the  abridged  form  of  the
narrative  in  Codex  Bezse  (D)  and  the  text
of  T.K.,  which  rests  on  a  large  number  of
later  uncials  and  cursives ;  and  a  third
text,  which  seems  like  a  mixture  or  con-
flation of  the  two  texts.  Lucke  and  Godet
have  suggested  that  the  passage  contains  an
extra-scriptural  fact  preserved  by  oral  tradi-
tion that  was  first  placed  iit  the  end  of  the
Gospels,  and  therefore  at  the  end  of  John's
Gospel,  and  was  by  some  editors  and  copy-
ists inserted  in  this  particular  connection,
and  by  others  in  Luke  xxi.  8,  in  the  midst
of  the  testing  to  which  the  Sanhedrin.and
tlie  sectional  parties  submitted  our  Lord
during  the  last  week  of  his  life.  Bishop
Lightfoot  {Contemporary  Bevieui,  vol.  xxvi.
847)  thinks  it  may  have  been  one  of  the
illustrative  anecdotes  in  the  Collectanea  of
Papias.  The  only  other  illustration  to
which  he  refers  is  the  supposed  saying  of
our  Lord  preserved  in  Busebius's  account  of


Papias,  with  reference  to  the  eztntordinary
fertility  of  the  vine  in  the  latter  days —
a  passage  which  Lightfoot  thinks  may  hare
been  originally  attached  to  Matt.  xxvi.  29.
That  such  an  event  did  happen,  and  that
we  have  here  an  authentic  record  of  what
occurred,  is  accepted  by  the  great  bulk  of
critics,  who,  nevertheless,  expunge  it  from
the  text  of  John,  on  the  combined  ground
of  its  internal  difficulty  and  deficiency  of
external  attestation.  The  difficulty,  how-
ever, is  one  indication  of  the  surpassing
originality  of  the  narrative.  It  is  hard  to
imagine  the  motive  which  should  induce
any  of  the  followers  of  Christ  or  of  John  to
have  invented  it,  while  there  are  reasons,
drawn  from  the  ascetic  tendencies  mightily
at  work  in  certain  sections  of  the  Church,
for  its  omission  or  the  silence  of  homilists.

Though  the  spirit,  atmosphere,  and  phrase
suggest  the  synoptic  tradition  rather  than
the  Johannine,  yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten
that  there  are  many  synoptic  passages  in
John's  Gospel,  and  Johannine  phrases  in
the  synoptists.  The  criticism  proceeding
from  moral  timidity  has  failed  to  recog^nize
the  grandeur  of  the  entile  proceeding.  It
contains  no  palliation  of  incontinence,  but
a  simple  refusal  of  Jesus  to  assume  the  posi-
tion of  a  civil  Judge  or  Executor  of  the  law
in  face  of  the  established  political  supremacy
of  Borne ;  while  the  Lord  made  a  demand
for  personal  holiness,  and  an  appeal  to  con-
science so  pungent  that,  in  lieu  of  condemn-
ing to  death  a  sinful  woman,  be  judged  a
whole  crowd  of  men,  convincing  them  of
sin,  while  he  gave  the  overt  transgressor
time  for  repentance  and  holier  living.

Ch.  vii.  53 — viii.  11. — (6)  The  plot  againit
the  honour  or  loyalty  of  the  Lord  Jesue  foiled.

Ch.  vii.  53. — And  every  one  went '  to  Ms
own  house.  If  the  plural  be  here  taken,  it
more  obviously  refers  to  the  breaking  up  of
the  assembly,  of  the  divided  group's,  as  well
as  of  the  nngry  Sanhedrin  for  the  day  now
drawing  to  its  close.  The  strong  opponents
of  the  passage  see  in  the  clause  the  mark  of
an  intirpolator  who  makes  use  of  a  phrase
strictly  applicable  from  its  presumed  place
to  the  Sanliedrin,  but  intended  clurMily  to
refer  to  the  crowdt  who  had  been  taking
part  in  the  dramatic  scene.      There  would,

"  D  reads  iiropeieti;  but  the  plural  is
better  attested.  Some  manuscrpts  and
versions  read  airti^.flej'  or  hm^\Bor,


CH.  VIII.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


347


however,  be  no  impropriety  in  the  reference
to  the  cessation  of  an  extraordinary  session
or  oommittee  of  the  Sanhedrin,  when  the
officers  liad  returned  without  their  prize.

Ch.  viii.  1. — But  Jesus  went  to  the
Mount  of  Olives.  This  resort  of  our  I.ord
is  not  elsewhere  referred  to  in  John's  Gospel,
although  it  was  mentioned  by  St.  Luke
(xxi.  37  ;  xxii.  39)  as  the  scene  of  the  Lord's
retirement  during  the  nights  of  the  last
week  of  his  life.  John's  mention  of  such  a
habit  as  this  at  an  earlier  period  would  in
almost  any  other  literature  be  regarded  as
mutual  confirmation  of  the  two  documents,
whQe  the  fact  that  "  Bethany  "  lay  on  the
opposite  side  of  th«  hill,  and  the  "  garden  "
was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  hidden  on  its  slopes,
and  that  both  of  these  facts  are  known  to  the
writer  (ch.  xi.  and  xix.)  deprive  the  bare
mention  of  the  name  of  any  inautheutic
character.

Ver.  2. — Now  at  daybreak.  The  word
ipBpov  does  not  occur  in  John ;  irpioi  and
irpaia  are  our  evangelist's  words  for  "  early
morning,"  though  tnrh  rhv  SpBpov  is  found  in
Luke  xxiv.  1  and  Acts  v.  21.  He  came
again  to  the  temple(the  temple-courts — UpSy,
not  vaSs,  is  here  used) ;  and  all  the  people
came  to  him,  The  form  itas  d  \a6s  is  a
deviation  from  John's  uscal  phrase,  although
Ka6s  is  found  in  ch.  xi.  50  and  xviii.  14.
There  is  some  ground  for  the  deviation.
The  scenes  of  the  previous  day  had  been
broken  up  into  various  groups.  The  favour-
in;;  crowd  from  the  provinces  sympathized
with  a  portion  of  the  Jerusalem  popu-
lace ;  then  the  hostile  crowd  at  the  beck  of
the  authorities  had  been  checked  by  the
"  officers  "  who  had  been  themselves  baffled
and  thunderstruck  with  the  dignity  and
claims  of  Jesus.  Great  excitement  had  pre-
vailed, and  before  the  stormy  scenes  and
recriminations  of  the  previous  day  recom-
menced, the  whole  temple  throng  came  unto
him.  If  the  eighth  day  of  the  feast  was
referred  to — i.e.  if  the  great  day  of  the  feast
were  the  eighth  day — the  difficulty  of  the
whole  people  having  gathered  about  him  is
diminished,  because  there  werespecial gather-
ings for  the  eighth  day  (see  notes,  eh.  vii.  37).
It  might  have  seemed  that  they  had  com-
posed their  differences,  and  were  now  waiting
some  symptom  and  signal  of  the  great
Leader's  will.  [And  he  sat  down,  and  was
teaching  them.']  This  expression  is  synoptic
rather  than  Johannine ;  i.e.  it  belongs  to  the
methods  of  the  Galilsean  ministry  (Matt,  v
I ;  Mark  ix.  85)  rather  than  to  the  hostile
encounters  of  the  metropolis  (but  see  Matt.
xxiii.  2).  He  was  prepared  for  long  dis-
course and  various  instruction.  Here,  aa
in  oh.  viL  14,  the  word  iSlStuTKe  is  used

'  This  clause  is  omitted  by  D.


without  specifying  the  topic  or  theme  on
which  he  dwelt.  The  calm  morning  was
soon  overclouded,  and  the  people  violently
excited,  by  a  very  ominous  disturbance,
planned  with  subtle  care  and  malicious  in-
tention on  the  part  of  the  authorities,  who
were  ready  at  all  costs  and  by  any  device
to  break  the  spell  which  Jesus  was  exerting
over  some  of  the  people.

Ver.  3. — And  the  scribes  and  Pharisees
are  bringing — dragging  by  main  force — (to
him  ■)  a  woman  taken  in  adultery ; '  and,
having  caused  her — forced  her,  notwithstand-
ing the  hideous  shame  of  her  discovery — to
stand  in  the  midst,  they  say  nnto  him.
Master.'  The  "  scribes  "  are  not  elsewhere
referred  to  in  John's  Gospel,  although  the
phrase,  "  scribes  and  Pharisees,"  is  veiy  fre-
quently used  in  the  synoptic  Gospels  for  the
opponents  of  our  Lord  and  the  subjects  of
his  invective.  They  come  together  in  the
final  scenes  as  combining  to  tliwart  and
tempt  him.  John  refers  to  "  Pharisees "
twenty  times,  and  four  times  in  connection
with  the  "  priests ; "  but  never  with  the
"scribes."  The  scribes  are  elsewhere  in
the  New  Testament  spoken  of  as  fo/xiKol  or
vo/ioSiSdffKaAoi,  and  also  as  "  rabbis  "  in  the
Mishna.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  are  no
deputation  from  the  Sanhedrin,  nor  are  tliey
representatives  of  the  party  of  Zealots,  as
some  have  pretended.  There  is  no  indica-
tion of  any  mere  sectional  animosity  or  of  any
genuine  desire  to  receive  an  authoritative  or
prophetic  response  to  their  inquiry.  The
Sanhedrin  itself  would  certainly  not  have
condescended  at  this  epoch  to  have  sub-
mitted any  question  of  its  own  action  to  the
arbitrament  of  Jesus.  Numerous  witnesses
of  the  act  of  adultery  are  inconceivable,
though  in  the  excitement  and  confusion  of
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  in  a  crowded  city
and  sul)urbs,  this  may  have  been  more
feasible  than  might  otherwise  be  supposed.
The  probability  is  that  the  act  was  undeni-
ably committed  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring
this  woman  under  the  cognizance  of  these
reformers  or  defenders  of  the  theocracy  who
cropped  up  on  all  sides,  and  that  a  group  of
bigots  saw  at  once  that  capital  might  bo  made
for  their  antagonism  to  Jesus  by  proposing
to  him  a  query  which  would,  however  it  might

'  Omitted  by  D  and  four  uncial  manu-
scripts, and  by  R.T.

'  'Eiri  in  D,  M,  S,  V,  and  a  hundred  cur-
sives; but  fv  in  E,  G,  H,  K,  etc.  The  M
is  preseived  by  E.T.  D  reads  a/iapTela;
most  other  authorities  read  iioi)cei<f.

'  J),  Aiyovffiv  iKireipdioPTCs  xvt6v  ol  hpus
tva  exSci!'  Karriyoplav  ahrov^  "The  priests
tempting  him,  that  they  might  have  accusa-
tion against  hira,  say."  This  clause  is
transposed  from  the  close  of  ver.  6.


348


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vui.  1—69.


b«  answered,  lower  his  prestige.  According
(over.  10  (amitted  in  Codex  B),  these  scribes
and  Pharisees  were,  if  not  the  "  witnesses  "
of  adultery,  the  "accusers"  ready  to  take
the  case  before  the  highest  court.  Consider-
ing the  long  desuetude  of  the  Law,  and  the
impossibility  of  even  the  Sanhedrin  legally
inflicting  tlie  penalty  of  stoning,  even  if  it
were  so  disposed,  the  whole  question  looks
like  a  subtle  but  fll-considered  plot  to  en-
tangle the  Lord  in  his  judgments,  and  to
induce  him  to  sacrifice  his  influence  with  the
people.  The  absence  of  the  guilty  ttutn  is
noteworthy  (Lev.  xx.  10 ;  Deut.  xxii.  22).

Ver.  4. — Master — Teacher — this  woman
has  been  taken  oonunitting  adultery,  in  the
very  act.  'ETravTotpiiptf  originally  meant
in  ipso  furto,  "  in  the  very  theft ; "  after-
wards more  generally  in  the  commission
of  this  particular  sin.  The  burning  shame
and  bestial  bluntness  of  the  charge  make
no  excuse  or  palliation  possible.

Yer.  5. — Now  Moses  in  the  Iiawcommanded
us,  that  such  should  be  stoned  (or,  to  stone
luch);  hut  what  sayest  thou?*  The  Law
(Deut.  xxii.  23,  etc.)  prescribed  stoning  for
both  parties  when  the  woman  is  the  hetrothed
bride  of  another  man,  and  if  she  make  no
sufficient  attempt  to  foil  the  purpose  of  her
seducer.  For  ordinary  adultery  the  death-
penalty  is  left  indefinite  (Lev.  xx.  10).  It  is
no  proof  that  strangulation  was  the  method  of
punishment  in  the,  days  of  our  Lord  because
the  Talmud  and  Maimonides  thus  express
it.'  Meyer  concludes  that  the  woman  was
a  betrothed  bride.  This  offeuce  is,  broadly
speaking,  "adultery"  of  an  aggravated
kind.  The  reference  to  the  metliod  of  the
punishment  is  not  demonstrable  proof  of
this,  because  it  would  be  easily  feasible  to
transfer  the  method  of  the  death  from  the
extreme  case  to  the  ordinary  case  of  nuptial
iuiSdelity  (of.  Exod.  xxxi.  14  for  the  punish-
ment of  unspecified  death  for  sabbath-viola-
tion (repeated  Exod.  xxxv.  2),  interpreted  of
"stoning"  in  the  apecial  illustrative  case,
Numb.  XV.  32—86).  This  is  Moses'  Law —
"what  eayeet  thoul"  This  query  involves
an  abcription  to  Jesus  of  the  right  of  authori-
tatively interpreting  the  Law,  thus  attribut-
ing to  him  the  functions  of  a  new  legislator.
Some  have  objected  to  the  bare  possibility
of  such  an  appeal  being  made  to  Jesus  by
any  species  of  Jewish  authority.  The  whole
context  shows  that  the  process  was  malicious,

•  D  here  reads,  Macrfli  Si  iv  rtf  v6iu»  txi-
fMinv  T&t  TOiairas  MBaCttr'  <rv  SI  vSv  rl
\iy*iti  T.B., '£»  61  Tif  y6iuf  Moio-^s  iuity
dvvrtiKar*  T^t  tow^oi  kiB»Po\.ei(r6ai'  ffv  aiy
tI  \fyeis  ;

*  "Filia  Israelites,  si  adultera  cumnnpta,
strangulaada,  cum  desponsata  tantum,  lapi-
danda"('Sanh.,'fol.  51.  2).


ironical,  crafty.  The  entire  audience  knew
that  this  law  bad  never  been  accepted  or
applied  literally;  that  the  Sanhedrin  had
not  enforced  it ;  and  that,  if  they  had  en  •
deiivoured  to  do  so,  the  Koman  power  had
taken  from  the  nation  the  jua  gladii.  'i'he
question,  therefore,  became  one  of  casuistry
inflamed  by  a  concrete  case,  and  having  as
its  ally  a  secret  sympathy  with  the  offenders.
It  was  not  uncommon  for  the  rabbis  to  dis-
cuss the  incidence  of  obsolete  laws.  Many
of  the  glosses  upon  the  ancient  law,  and
laborious  trifling  with  specific  regulations  of
the  so-called  oral  law,  turn  upon  customs
that  were  absolutely  impracticable  under  the
new  conditions  of  the  Jewish  life.  This,
however,  was  no  mere  quibble  of  words
about  possible  duties.  The  qjiery  was  put
with  dramatic  force  and  in  concrete  form.
The  shame  and  life  of  a  fellow-creature
were  the  materials  which  this  eager  and
bloodthirsty  gi-oup  were  utilizing  for  their
vile  purpose,

Yer.  6. — But  this  they  said  tempting  him,
that  they  might  have  (whereof)  to  accuse
him.  They  sought  a  ground  of  formal  accu-
sation against  Jesus.  This  implies  some
court  before  which  the  charge  they  desired
to  formulate  it  might  be  brought  The  pre-
cise accusation  is  difficult  to  determine,  and
sundry  distinguished  scholars,  Liicke,  De
Wette,  and  Alford,  declare  the  problem  or
question  insoluble.  Augustine  has  been
followed  by  a  great  body  of  expositors,  who
have  supposed  that  an  affirmative  reply
would  have  been  inconsistent  with  the
gentleness  and  mildness  of  our  Lord's  treat-
ment of  sinners,  whUe  a  negative  reply
would  at  once  have  given  them  a  charge  to
bring  before  the  Sanhedrin  of  such  a  relaxa-
tion of  the  Law  as  would  endanger  his
position  as  a  Babbi,  still  more  as  the  Prophet
like  unto  Hoses.  Almost  all  critics  agree
as  to  the  use  to  which  Christ's  enemies  were
ready  to  put  a  negative  reply,  and  therefore
they  coincide  with  Augustine  in  this  part
of  his  explanation.  But  the  interpretation
put  upon  the  affirmative  reply  would  not
furnish  the  ground  of  any  accusation  before
any  court.  An  apparent  inconsistency  would
be  no  civU  charge,  and  would  have  no  weight
before  any  legal  tribunal.  The  condemna-
tion of  adulterers  to  death  by  stoning  would
have  been  Christ's  allowance  of  the  letter  of
the  Law  to  stand.  The  Romans  could  take
no  umbrage  at  this  until  the  act  had  been  -
carried  into  execution.  It  may  probably
have  been  known  that,  let  the  Sanhedriu
record  what  verdict  and  punishment  they
pleased,  the  Boman  magistrates  would  not
have  carried  it  into  capital  execution.  How,
then,  could  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  have
carried  an  accusation  or  information  befora
a  Boman  tribunal?    The  solution  was  sug-


OE,  vm.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


S49


gested  by  BanmgaTten-Ornsiug  and  Luthardt,
Mid  adopted  by  Moulton,  that  Christ  was
asked  to  say  "Aye"  or  "No"  to  an  instant,
tumultuous  act  of  vengeance  upon  the
adulteress.  Let  him  say  "  No,"  they  would
Recuse  him  of  deliberately  ignoring  and
repudiating  the  authority  of  the  Law  of
Moses ;  let  him  say  "  Yes,"  they  were  ready
to  stone  the  woman  there  and  then,  and
subsequently  to  throw  the  responsibility  of
such  violation  of  Boman  jurisdiction  upon
the  Lord  Jesus  as  its  instigator.  Meyer's
objection,  that  no  question  at  all  had  been
put  to  Christ  on  this  supposition,  is  not
clear.  It  was  this.  Clearly  apprehending
that  adultery  is  a  capital  offence,  and  that
there  was  a  case  before-  them  upon  which
nu  doubt  could  be  thrown,  they  ask  him,
with  tlie  stones  in  their  hands,  "Shall  we  kill
this  damsel  or  not  ?  "  If  he  says  "  No,"  then
they  wi  re  prepared  to  denounce  the  Prophet
for  his  dogmatic  trifling  with  the  Law;  if
"  Yes,"  they  are  roady  to  do  the  deed,  and
fasten  upon  Jusus  all  the  shame  and  guilt
of  the  proceeding  before  the  Koman  governor.
It  was  a  very  analogous  problem  to  that
concerning  the  tribute  money  recorded  in
Matt.  xxii.  But  Jesus  stooped  down,  and
with  his  finger  was  writing  on  the  ground
(«i  tV  7Vt  iuto  the  earth).  Some  manu-
scripts, E,  G,  and  about  ninety  cursives,
add,  fiii  irpoairoioiixevoi,  "not  troubling  him-
»elf  with  them  " — "  as  though  he  heard  them
not"  (Authorized  Version).'  This  act  is
unparalleled  in  Scripture,  even  if  the  custom
is  still  occasionally  practised  in  the  East.
Mr.  O'Neil,  in  his  Instructive  volume,
'Palestine  Explored,*  records  a  curious
instance  of  a  youth,  who,  after  playing  some
practical  joke  upon  an  old  man,  feigned
utter  ignorance  of  the  surprise  and  cry  of
the  old  man  by  instantaneously  assuming
the  position  of  one  entirely  abstracted  from
all  sublunary  thought,ln  fact,  by  sitting  on  the
ground  and  scribbling  with  his  finger  in  the
dust,  "as  thougli  he  heard  and  saw  nothing
of  wliat  had  hiippcned."  Such  an  intention
can  only  be  uttributed  to  our  Lord  on  the  un-
derstanding that  it  was  a  current  method  of
indicating  an  indisposition  tohaveanytliing
to  say  to  the  intruUers.  He  was  seated ;  he
turned  aside  from  the  excited  crowd,  and  by
a  signiticant  symbol  expressed  his  displea-
sure at  their  proceedings,  and  his  perception
of  their  craftiness.  Conjecture  has  been
busy,  but  vainly,  with  the  inquiry  as  to
what  our  Lord  wrote  on  the  ground,  and
some  have  urged  (Godet)  that  he  wrote  the
memorable  sentence  which  follows,  as  a
judge  might  write  the  verdict  upon  the  case

'  Some  manuscripts  read  /cal  wpoairoioi-
fifvo<!,  eqnivRlent  to  "though  he  only  pre-
tended to  write."


submitted  to  him.  This  is  not  probable,
and  it  would  detract  from  the  symbolism  of
the  act.

Vers.  7, 8. — But  when  they  continued  ask-
ing him,  he  lifted  up  himself,'  and  said  unto
them.  He  that  is  without  sin,  let  him  first
cast  a  stone  at  her.  And  again  he  stooped
down,  and  with  his  finger '  was  writing  on
the  ground.  The  imperfect  tense  of  iypcupev,
twice  repeated,  seems  more  in  harmony  with
the  symbolic  meaning  of  the  act  than  with
the  record  on  his  part  of  any  special  sen-
tence of  his  supreme  wisdom.  Christ  refused
to  act  the  part  of  the  civil  magistrate,  or  to
countenance  a  stormy  outbreak  of  murderous
passion  against  this  flagrant  sinner,  to  save
himself  from  their  bitter  malice.  He  rose,
when  the  appearance  of  indifference  could
not  be  maintained,  and  at  once  arrested  the
outbreak  of  their  unscrupulous  fury  without
presuming  to  repudiate  the  letter  of  the
Law.  He  lifted  the  discussion  from  the
judicial  to  the  moral  sphere.  He  does  not
mean  that  none  but  the  sinless  can  con-
demn, or  proncmnr-e  verdict  upon  the  guilty ;
but  he  calls  for  special  freedom  from  similar
oifence  on  the  part  of  any  man  who  should
wish  or  dare  to  display  his  own  purity  by
taking  part  in  the  execution.  The  narrative
would  not  suggest  that  every  one  of  these
accusers  had  been  in  his  time  guilty  of  like
offence,  but  dra/mJprTiTOj  must  at  least  meen
that  he  was  &ee  from  the  desires  which
might  lead  to  the  commission  of  such  sin,
and  Christ  calls  for  inward  saintliness  and
freedom  from  all  irregular  propension.  He
calls  for  personal  chastity  as  the  only
possible  moral  condition  for  precipitately
eaecuWngr  this  ancient  and  severe  law.  The
question  before  the  crowd  (asked  so  craftily)
was,  not  whether  Moses*  Law  was  to  staiid
or  not,  but  whether  these  particular  men,
with  their  foul  hearts  and  spurious  ztai,
were  or  were  not  at  that  particular  moment
to  encounter  the  displeasure  of  Eoman  power
by  dashing  the  stones  at  the  head  of  this
poor  trembling  creature  of  sin  and  shame;
whether  they  were  morally  competent  to
condemn  to  immediate  death,  and  carry  the
verdict  into  execution.  Before  this  tremen-
dous summons  frum  the  Holy  One,  conscience
could  sleep  no  longer.  The  hypocrisy  of
the  entire  manoeuvre  stared  them  in  the
face.

Ver.  9.— And  they  when  they  heard  it

'  D  reads  &vfKu\fi(v  koI  ;  and  T.B.,  avaici-
ifias,  with  E,  G,  H,  and  fifty  cursives.

'  R.T.  here  follows  D.  The  mannsoript
V  and  others  have  a  curious  addition,  eis
T^v  yriv  kv)>s  lxi(TTov  avrav  "rhs  a/iaprlas,
"  into  the  ground  the  sins  of  each  one  of
them."  That  gloss  has  a  very  apocryphal
character.


350


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vin.  1—581


(being  oonvioted  by  their  *  own  consoienee),
they  went  oat  one  by  one.    Their  conscience
convinced  them  that  the  spirit  of  the  Law
is  greater  than  its  letter.    The  phrase  ex-
pressing the  action  of  conscience  was  pro-
bably an  explaniitory  and  true  gloss,  which
accounted  for  the  sudden  change  of  front.
It  was  a  proof  of  the  ally  which   Divine
law  has  within  tlie  human  breast.    Tbe
whole    crowd,    rather    than    the  humbled
woman,  is  condemned,  but  self-condemned
and  silent.    This  event  speaks  for  the  moral
sense  which  had  been  paralyzed  rather  than
obliterated  in  this  peojile.    (The  expression,
"one  by  one,"  fls  Kaff  th,  in  which  eis  is
treated  as  indeclinable,  is  occasionally  found
in  later  Greek,  but  only  once  in  the  New
Testament  (Mark  xiv.  19),  is  not  in  D,  but
in  several  of  the  codices  and  cursives,  and
it  is  retained  in  E.T.)    The  slow  rather
than  simultaneous  disappearance  of  the  gang
of  accusers  is  a  highly  dramatic  touch,  and
the  remaining  clause,  beginning  from  the
eldest,  even  onto  the  last,  heightens  the  im-
pression.    The  phrase  irpeaffurtpay  need  not
refer  to  ofSce,  but  to  age,  and  the  "last"
need  not  necessarily  mean  the  youngest,  but
those  that  were  left  when  the  most  respon-
sible men  found  that  they  had  carried  their
question  too  far,  and  had  retired.  And  Jesus
was  left  alone ;  i.e.  so  far  as  these  accusers
were  concerned.    The  multitudes  who  had
gathered  round  him  were  still  waiting  for
his  words  (see  ver.  2).    This  fact  is  involved
in  the  substance  of  the  narrative,  whether
the  pericope  belongs  to  the  Gospel  of  John
or  not.    And  the  woman  where  she  was,'  in
the  midst  of  the  assembly  that  remained,
more  likely  cowering  in  shame  and  mortal
fear  than  "  standing  "  brazen-faced  or  daring
before   that   awful  Presence.     Tliese  two
("  Miseria  et  Misericordia,"  as  said  Augus-
tine), "  Misery  and  Pity,"  face  one  another,
and  in  the  presence  of  a  multitude  of  dis-
ciples and  other  listeners.  Misery  waits  for
Pity  to  speak — for  perfect  holiness  and  per-
fect mercy  to  do  its  will.    There  is  One
seated  there  who  is  without  sin.     He  is  at
liberty,  on  his  own  showing,  to  condemn,  and

'  D  has  here  a  shortened  text :  'EKitrros  Si
Tuv  'lovSalciiv  k^'fipx^'^'^f  otp^fijuej/oi  awh  t&v
Trpe(r$VTepa)v  iiffre  ndinas  i^i\9e7y,  "  Each  of
tlie  Jews  went  out,  beginning  from  the
elders,  so  that  all  went  out."  T.B.  has
admitted  the  clause,  kuI  tiirh  ttjs  avvetSiiiTeiDs
dKeyx^iievoi,  which  is  found  in  E,  G,  H,  etc.,
but  omitted  by  D,  M,  U,  and  some  eighty-
three  cursives.  The  B.T.  treats  it  sa  a
gloss.

'  O,  with  ten  uncials  and  a  hundred  and
seventy  cursives,  reads  oSo-a,  in  lieu  of  the
iaraita  of  T.B.,  which  has  the  support  of
1  and  several  versions.


even  to  execute  his  fierce  displeasnre  against
a  sin  which  he  had,  in  his  great  inangural
discourse,  charged  upon  the  ill-regulated
desires  and  evil  glances  of  men.

Vers.  10, 1 1. — And  Jesus  lifted  up  himself,^
and  said  to  her,  Where  are  they  %  (these  th.%
accusers).'     The  question  (with  or  without
the  additions)  implied  that  our  Lord  had
not  seen  the  obvious  effect  of  his  words  upon
the  accusing  party.     There  was  no  triunjpli
in  his  eye,  no  flush  of  victory  over  his
enemies.     Hath  no  one  condemned  thee?
pronounced  upon  thee  the  sentence  of  con-
demnation?    Has    no    one  declared    that
thine  is  a  case  of  stoning  ? — No  one  1    Then
the  judgment  has  yet  to  be  uttered,  if  it  be
left  with  him.    Shall  he  cast  the  first  stom; ;
and    leave  the    multitude,  having    taste  d
blood,  to  complete  the  terrible  work  ?    She
said,  No  one,  Lord,     And  he  said  (to  her),
Neither  do  I  condemn  thee.     He  had  not
come  to  condemn,  but  to  save.     A  time  is
coming  when  the  Father  would  commit  all
judgment  into  his  hands — when  his  awful
word,  "  I  know  you  not,"  or  "  Depart  from
me,"  will  be  the  signal  of  doom.  But  now  his
mission  is  to  heal,  not  to  wound ;  to  comfort,
not  to  punish ;  to  reveal  the  heart  of  God,  not
to  execute  the  crude  judgments  of  men ;  to
soothe,  not  to  stone.     He  does  not  say,  "  Be
of  good  courage ;  thy  sins  are  forgiven."   He
does  not  say,  "  Her  sins,  which  are  many,
are  forgiven ; "  "  Her  faith  hath  saved  her ; "
but,  Oo,  and  henceforth  sin  no  more,'    lie
justifies  the  position  that  he  wUl  not  quench
the  smoking  flax  nor  break  the  bruised  reed.
He  condemns  the  sin,  but  for  a  while  spares
the  sinner.    He  refuses  to  set  up  his  judg-
ment against  Moses,  or  take  into  his  human
hands  the  administration  of  civil  or  political
law.    He  does  not  say,  "  Go  in  peace,"  or
"  Go  to  peace ; "  but  from  this  moment,  this
awful  "  now  "  (ojrb  toS  vvv),  "  sin  no  more."
The  reticence  and  abruptness  of  the  narrator
are  not  like  the  style  of  apocryphal  writers.
Such  a  narrative  could  not  have  been  in-
vented by  tlie  second-century  disciples,  by
docetio  Eliionites,  by  the  ordinary  fabricators

>  The  T.B.  adds  the  clause,  ical  /inSeva
Beaffdfi^vos  Tr\^i/  tt)s  7uj'atK<Js,  **  and  having
seen  no  one  save  the  woman,"  on  the  authority
of  E,  G.  H,  K,  and  some  cursives,  more  than
sixty;  but  it  is  omitted  by  D,  M,  S,  and
about  thirty  other  cuisives  and  versions,
and  by  E.T.  |

'  'EKciyoi  ol  Kttriiyopol  <rou;  of  the  T.B
is  defended  by  a  great  number  of  authorities ;
but  D,  M,  r,  A,  1,  and  about  thirty  cursives
and  some  versions  omit  the  words,  with  B.T.

'  D  reads  uiriiye ;  and  D,  with  a  large
following,  reads  (koI)  iirh  roS  vCv  /iriKtru
B.T.  reads,  nopeioy  airi  toS  vSv  /itj/ce'ti  oMif.


OH.  vni.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDlNG  TO  ST.  JOHN.


351


of  apocryphal  literature.  If  the  text  is  so
varied,  conflicting,  and  ill-sustained  as  to
envelop  it  in  doubt;  if  the  place  in  the
gospel  narrative  be  uncertain ;  if  the  use  of
a  few  words  suggests  a  non-Johannine
source ;  and  if  the  position  between  oh.  vii.
ft2  and  viii.  12  be  difficult  to  accept ; — there
is  yet  nothing  inconsistent  with  the  Johan-
nine  teaching,  or  the  sublime  and  unap-
proachable originality  of  the  character  of
the  Johannine  Christ.  The  narrative  will
remain  for  all  time  an  illustration  of  the
blending  of  judgment  with  mercy,  which
has  received  its  highest  expression  in  the
life-work  and  Person  of  the  Christ.

Ver.  12^-oh.ix.  41. — 4.  Christ  the  Light  of
the  world,  with  conneqveiit  discussions.

Ver,  12. — (1)  The  solemn  and  formal  neser-
tion.    If  the  passage  we  have  just  reviewed
were  an  integral  portion  of  the  Gospel,  and
in  its  right  place,  the  reference  to  the  break-
ing of  the  morning,  the  first  eye  of  the  sun
over  the  purple  hills  suddenly  transforming
their  dark  outline  into  the  aspect  of  semi-
transparent  jewellery,  and  their  misty  hol-
lows into  luminous  folds  of  light,  would  be
the  obvious  meaning  or  reason  of  the  new
imagery  which  he    adopted :  "  I  am    the
Light  of  the  world."  If,  however,  the  entire
pericope  is  not  in  its  correct  place,  we  must
link  vers.  12 — 20  with  the  discourses  of  the
previous  chapter.    On  the  gi'eat  day  of  the
feast,  in  obvious  allusion  to  the  mystic  draw-
ing of  water  in  Siloam,  and  transference  of
it  to  the  temple-court,  Jesus  had  said,  "  If
any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me,  and
drink."    Many  clitics  imagine  that  now  he
refers  to  the  habit,  on  the  first  evening  of
the  Feast  of   Tabernacles,  and   probably,
though  not  surely,  on  the  other  evenings,
of  kindling  the  golden  candelabra  in  the
court  of  the  women,  giving  the  signal  for  a
brilliant    illumination    which  was  visible
over  the  city  and  surrounding  hills.     As
the  water  was  a  symbolic  memorial  of  the
smiting  of  the  rock,  so  the  sudden  blaze  in
the  'temple-court  was  a  similar  reminder  of
the  fiery  pillar  in  the  wilderness,  an^  com-
mentatiirs  have  found  in  such  ceremonial
and  memories  an  occasion  for  our  Lord's
words.      Surely  they  go  much  deeper,  and
have  a  wider  signification.    The  creation  of
light  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  St.  John's
own  statement  in  the  prologue  that  in  the
Logos  was  life,  and  the  Life  was  the  liglit,
and  the  Light  shone  into  the  darkness  before'
the  Incarnation,  is  a  more  adequate  interpre-
tation.   "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,"  and
this  was  the  grand  occasion  for  the  revelation
of  the  glory  of  God.   "  We  beheld  his  glory,"
says  the  apostle,  "  that  of  an  only  begotten
Bon  of  the  Father."    The  gospel  narrative
supplies  the  material  which  inducer^  the
evange^t  to  preface  it  with  imposing  words.


The  life  of  men  produced  hj  him  who  ii

Life  lightens  the  world  with  its  glory.    He

is  the  Light  of  the  world,  because  he  is  the

Source  of  its  life.     This  inversion  of  the

sequences  belonging  to  modem  science  and

even   to  Mosaic  cosmogony,  partly  shows

what  is  meant  by  "  Light,"  and  the  Light

of  life.    Life  in  the  Johannine  thought  is

Divine   blessedness,   the    very   essence   of

Divine  activity  and  essential  being.     The

Father  hath  it  in  himself,  and  he  has  given

to  Ihe  Son  to  be  similarly  self-complete.  He

can  confer  this  life  on  others,  communicating

his  own  perfection  to  some  of  the  creatures

of  his  hand,  even  bestowing  upon  them  some

of  the  essential  elements  of  his  own  being.

There   are   varied    emanations  and   forth-

puttings    of   this   life — vegetable,   animal,

psychical,  spiritual — and  in  each  case  the

life  becomes  a  luminous  source  of  direction,

a  self-revelatory  force,  a  light     The  highest

Life  of  all  is  the  brightest  Light — the  true

Lamp  of  all  our  seeing  (see  ch.  1.  9  and

xi.  9,  10).    Jesus  said,  "  1  am  the  Light  of

the  world,"   illuminating  its  darkness  far

more  impressively  than  temple  fireworks,  or

even  pillars  of  radiant  cloud,  nay,  more  than

the  sunbeams  themselves ;  and  that  because

he  was  the  Holder  and  Giver  of  life.    Again

therefore  Jesns  spake  to  them,  saying,  I  am

the  Light  of  the  world.    The  "  again  "  may

point  back  to  the  discourses  of  the  previous

chapter,  or  to  the  disturbance  of  the  aBdience

and  the  teaching  of  that  early  morning.    If

it  were  the  morning  of  the  departure  of

thousands    from   the    holy    city,    peculiar

appropriateness  is  felt  in  the  continuation :

He   that  followeth  me   shall  not  (by  any

means)  walk  in  the  darkness— shall  not  start

off  along  the  defiles  of  his  pilgrimage  in  the

murk  of  the  night  and  the  heavy  hiding

mists,  but  he  shall,  in  my  companionship,

have  the  light  of  life.    My  follower  will  see

his  way.      Those  who  have  entered    into

living  fellowship  with  the  living  One  awake

from  all  death-slumber  and  darkness,  "  walk

in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  tlie  light ;  '  "  become

liglit  in  the  Lord;"  "being  made  manifest

are  light;"   being  with  the  Lord  become

ipuirriifes,  torch-bearers   to  the   rest;    and,

more  than  all  (Matt.  v.  14^are  themselves

"  the  light  of  the  world."    The  Messiah  had

been  anticipated  as  "  Light"  as  the  Light

of  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  (Isa.  xlii.  6;

xlix.  6;  Mai.  iv.  2;  of.  Luke  ii.  32,  where

Simeon  had  caught  the  spirit  of  the  ancient

prophets).     Edersheim  (quoting  '  Bemidb.

E.,'  3  and  15,  and  'Yalkut  on  Isa.  Ix.'):

'"The  rabbiB  speak  of  the  original  light

in  which  God  had  wrapped  himself  as  in

a  garment,  which  was  so  biilliant  that  it

could  not  shine  by  day  because  it  would

have  dimmed  the  light  of  the  sun.    From

this  light  that  of  nin,  moon,  and  stars  bad


353


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  JOfiN.    [ch.  viu.  1— 6S.


boeii  kindled.  It  was  now  reserved  under
the  throne  of  God  for  the  Messiah,  in  whose
days  it  wonld  shine  onee  more."  (The
Logos  was,  in  the  language  of  Philo,  the
Archetype  and  the  Outflow  of  the  light.)
But  the  entire  meaning  of  the  manifestation
of  the  Divine  life  in  the  Messiah  is  the
diffusion  of  it  in  others.  All  Christ's  teach-
ing ahout  himself  has  this  piaotical  and
ethical  bearing.  The  ?{« — "will  have,"
"  will  be  in  possession  of,"  light — harmonizes
with  all  the  wonderful  teaching  which  blends
the  Christ  and  his  followers  in  one  entity,
"  I  in  them,  they  in  me,"  of  ch.  xv.,  xvii. ;  and
Paul's  "  Christ  formed  in  you,"  "  Christ  li veth
in  me"  (Col.  i.  27;  Gal.  i.  20).  "Light,"
says  Augustine,  "reveals  other  things  and
its  own  very  self,  opens  healthy  eyea,  and  is
its  own  vritness."

Vers.  13— 19.— (2)  The  refusal  of  the
Pltarisees  to  accept  this  claim  on  Ms  unsup-
ported testimony,  and  Christ's  reply.

Ver.  13.— The  fact  that  the  Pharisees
respond  shows  that  the  circumstances  of  the
previous  day  are  changed.  They  have  been
tlie  secret  and  organized  opponents  of  Jesus
throughout.  The  synoptic  Gospels  show
with  what  perverse  ingenuity  and  dogged-
neSB  they  followed  him  from  place  to  place,
venturing  to  assail  him  through  his  dis-
ciples, through  his  omissions  of  ritual,  and
by  reason  of  his  Divine  freedom  in  inter-
preting the  sacred  Scripture ;  nor  did  they
refrain  from  attributing  his  miracles  to  the
power  of  the  evil  one  (Matt.  ix.).  They  were
the  nucleus  of  the  bitter  opposition  t»  him
current  among  the  rulers  in  Jerusalem,  and
they  reveal  here  a  reminiscence  of  the  dis-
cussion which  had  taken  place  in  the  temple
or  its  neighbourhood  after  the  healing  of  the
impotent  man  (ch.  v.  31,  etc.).  There  the
Lord  had  said  that  if  he  bore  witness  of  him-
self, without  any  corroboration,  his  witness,
thus  isolated  anddeprived  of  evidence,  would,
on  the  ordinary  grounds  of  a  prima  fade  tes-
timony, not  be  true ;  but  he  went  on  to  say,
further,  that  his  testimony  was  variously
corroborated  by  the  manifest  presence  and
co-operation  of  the  Father.  Forgetting  thus
his  own  vindication  of  himself — which  many
months  of  varied  proof  of  his  personality  had
confirmed  for  candid  minds — they  assail  his
comparison  of  himself  to  the  Light  of  the
world,  with :  Thou  bearest  witness  of  thyself ;
thy  witness — acoordin;;  to  the  canon  he  had
himself  admitted  and  supplemented ;  but  they
forgetting  the  supplement,  add— (thy  wit-
ness) is  not  true.  "If  th'ou  art  simply  making
such  exalted  claims  as  this,  in  forgetfulness
of  the  well-known  maxim  about  self-witness,
we  take  the  liberty  to  dispute  and  reject  it."

Ver.  14.— Jesns  answered  and  said  to
them.  Even  if  I  bear  witness  concerning
myBeU—in  oase  I  bear  testimony,  I,  being


who  and  what  I  am,  and  gurrounded  by
Divine  attestations,  charged  with  a  cod-
Bciousness  of  a  whole  army  and  legion  of
approving  witnesses,  and,  above  all,  with
the  Father's  own  testimony  to  me — my
witness  is  true — ^I  satisfy  in  superlative
fashion  your  own  demand  and  also  my  own
conceded  test— because  I  know — oTSo,  with
clear  undisturbed  self-consciuusness  I  know,
absolutely.  Invincibly,  with  perfect  posses-
sion of  the  past  and  future — whence  I  came,
and  whither  I  am  going.  The  whole  of  our
Christian  verities  turn  upon  the  conscious-
ness by  Jesus  of  that  which  lay  before  and
after  that  human  life  of  his.  He  embraced
the  two  eternities  in  his  inward  self-con-
sciousness. That  "  whence  "  and  that
"  whither,"  with  all  their  infinite  sublimity
and  solemnity,  give  adequate  evidence  and
sufficient  weight  to  his  personal  claim  to  be
the  Light  of  the  world,  because  he  is  the
temporary  Embodiment  of  the  eternal  life
which  was  with  the  Father,  but  ia  manifest
to  men  (cf.  1  John  i.  4).  But  ye  know  not
whence  I  come — am  ever  coming  forth  to
you  with  Divine  judgment  and  calls  of
mercy — ^nor '  whither  I  am  going.  "  Neitiier
the  one  nor  the  other ; "  not  that  Christ  had
not  repeatedly  tnld  them  in  various  and
most  expressive  form.  They  could  neither
grasp  the  origin  of  his  Personality,  nor  the
method  in  which,  as  Messiah,  through  suffer-
ing, through  an  equation  of  his  lot  with
man's  (through  the  form  of  a  slave  and  the
death  of  a  cross),  he  was  doing  the  Father's
will  (of.  notes,  ch.  vii.  27,  28 ;  ix.  29).

Ver.  15. — ^Yon  judge— t.e.  you  condemn
me,  you  repudiate  my  claim  to  be  the  "  Living
Water"  and  the  "Light  of  the  world  "—after
the  flesh  (/cori  tJic  aipxa),  according  to  the
outward  appearance  ;  you  look  at  my  mere
humanity.  Our  Lord  did  not  accuse  them
of  the  fleshly,  blinded,  unjust  judgments  of
unregenerate  men.  The  article  riiv,  and  not
the  well-known  formula  Kari  (rdpKa,  pre-
vents such  an  interpretation.  He  rather
reasons  and  pleads  witli  them.  He  suggests
that  they  might,  if  they  would,  look  below
the  surface  of  his  flesh.  The  evangelist,
who  reports  the  substance  of  this  discussion,
has  written.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh."
So  if  the  incarnate  Word  had  always  been
judged  "after  the  flesh,"  we  should  never
have  seen  his  glory,  nor  recognized  the

'  The  authorities  are  evenly  balanced  be-
tween ^  and  Kal.  Tregelles,  Tischendorf  (8th
edit.),  Alford,  B.T.,  and  Godet  accept  the
former,  with  B,  D,  K,  T,  U,  etc.,  1,  and  fifty
cursives,  numerous  versions  and  Fathers.
Kal  is  the  reading  of  T.B.,  Griesbach,  and
Lachmann,  with  N,  B,  F,  G,  H,  L.  The  dis-
junctive particle  {  is  here  stronger  and  more
emphatic  than  the  assertive  coigimotiTe  koL


OH.  vin.  1— 59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  JOHN.


S53


noblef  part  of  his  PerBonality.  I  jndge  no
man.  Numerous  efforts  hare  been  made  to
find  the  underlying  modification  of  this
assertion.  Augastine,  Chrysostom,  Cyril,
and  many  modems  add,  "after  the  flesh,"  or
"  as  you  do  "  (the  latter  is  the  suggestion  of
Liicke,  which,  as  Meyer  says,  comes  to  the
same  thing),  or  "  now,"  pointing  on  to  the
actual  aBsumption  of  his  judiciary  powers  at
the  consummation  of  all  things,  and  con-
trasting his  earthly  ministry  of  mercy  with
the  ultimate  majesty  of  his  judgment-throne
(Westcott).  Storr,  Moulton,  Godet,  suggest
"  I  by  myself" — I  alone,  independently  of
the  Father,  judge  no  man.  Meyer  rejects
all  these  attempts  to  add  to  the  text,  and
maintains  that  our  Lord  is  claiming  the
lofty  position  of  Saviour  rather  than  Judge.
He  came  with  that  aa  his  primary  aim,  pur-
pose, intent ;  to  heal,  not  to  wound ;  to  save,
not  to  destroy ;  to  give  time  for  repentance,
not  to  hurry  sinners  to  their  doom ;  to  illu-
mine, not  to  cover  with  darkness.  Yet  even
Meyer  admits  a  praAitlcal  exception  of  great
importance  to  be  involved  in  the  next  clause,
which  does  not  differ  from  Westcott's  inter-
pretation.

Yer.  16. — ^And  yet  (the  Kal  S4,  equivalent
to  atqu«  etiam — so  Meyer,  Luthardt,  etc. —
"This  is  the  condemnation,  that' light  is
come  into  the  world,  and  men  love  darkness
rather  than  light ; "  "  The  light  shineth,  and
tlie  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not."  The
prince  of  this  world  is  judged  by  the  simple
uplifting  of  the  Sou  of  God ;  and  so,  though
he  did  not  come  to  judge  or  condemn,  yet
judgments  did,  by  the  very  necessity  of  his
nature,  proceed  from  him)  even  if  I  judge —
if  by  the  mere  contact  of  his  purity  and  love
and  healing  power  with  those  who  will  not
come  to  him  for  life,  judgment  is  pronounced
— ^my  judgment  is  true ; '  i.e.  trustworthy.
The  reading  of  Tischendorf,  a\7)9i>^,  would
mean  that  it  "answers  to  the  fundamental
conception  of  a  judgment."  This  thought
would  make  the  apparent  paradox  of  the
sentence  more  difficult  to  resolve.  Because
I  am  not  alone,  but  (or,  because,  on  the  other
hand)  I  and  the  Father  who  sent  me,  to-
gether deliver  this  judgment;  i.«.  it  does
not  rest  on  my  mere  human  consciousness,
on  what  you  who  judge  after  the  flesh  might
suppose  it  would  rest,  but  on  the  eternal
decisions  of  him  who  gave  me  my  commis-
sion. The  Father  is  in  me  and  with  me.  I
think  tlie  Father's  thoughts  and  do  the
Father's  will.     Christ's  testimony  concem-

•  Tregelles,  Tisohendbrf  (8th  edit.),  West-
cott and  Hort,  and  Meyer  read  o\j)flii'4  with
B,  D,  L,  T,  X,  33,  etc. ;  but  T.E.  and  B.T.
read  iKtiSiis,  with  K,  r,  A,  A,  and  eight  other
uncials  and  some  Fathers,  etc.  Chrysostom
(once)  reads  SiKata.

JOHN.


ing  himself,  his  implicit  judgments  on
human  nature,  his  indirect  condemnation
of  the  whole  crowd,  by  his  gracious  refusal
to  condemn  the  sinful  woman  to  immediate
doom,  all  issue  forth  with  the  sign-manual
of  Almighty  God,  with  whom  and  in  whom
he  dwells  as  the  only  begotten  Son.

Ver.  17. — Having  laid  down  the  principle
on  which  he  was  justified  in  maintaining
the  truthfulness  of  the  assumption  which
the  Pharisees  impugned,  he  proceeded  to
vindicate,  for  these  Jewish  legalists,  its
agreement  with  the  very  letter  of  the  Law.
He  adopted  here  the  identical  ground  which
was  taken  by  him  when  first  of  all  he
claimed  this  fellowship  with  the  Father.
Yea,  and  in  your  Law  it  has  been  written,
that  the  witness  of  two  men  is  true.  Many
have  said  that  here  Jesus  puts  himself  on
one  side  as  in  hostility  to  the  Law;  Baur
and  some  others  plead,  from  the  very  phrase
"your  Law,"  that  Jesus  could  not  have  used
such  an  expression,  and  that  John  could  not
have  recorded  it ;  and  Beuss  urges  that  this
expression  agrees  with  the  "  standpoint  of  the
gospel,whioh  aims  at  lowering  and  degrading
the  old  dispensation."  Nothing  could  be  less
in  harmony  with  the  facts  (see  Introduction,
§  VIL  2).  Even  Meyer  says,  "  The  words  are
anti-Judaic  .  .  .  tliough  not  antiuomian."
Hurely  our  Lord  was  simply  appealing  to  his
bitter  enemies  to  recognize  the  application
of  the  principle  found  in  their  own  Law,  of
which  the  j  were  continually  making  a  proud
boast.  H)  simply  goes  to  common  ground
of  argume  at,  and  is  ready  to  show  that  even
the  letter  of  the  Lawsustains  his  claim,for  the
sufficient  reason  that  he  is  not  alone,  but  the
Father  is  manifestly  with  him.  Just  as  he
never  said  "our  Father"  when  addressing
his  disciples,  but  either  "my  Father"  or
"  your  Father  "  (ch.  xi.  17),  because  God  is
not  the  Father  of  men  in  the  full  sense  in
which  he  was  Father  to  the  only  begotten
Sou ;  so  he  could  not  say  "  our  Law "  or
"  Moses  gave  us  the  Law  "  without  derogat-
ing from  the  unique  relation  he  sustained
to  the  Law  (compare  Paul's  language,  Eom.
ii.  17,  21,  23).  The  quotation  from  Deute-
ronomy '  is  not  verbally  exact;  it  even  carries
the  statement  of  Scripture  to  a  broader  gene-
ralization, and  is  so  worded  that  it  applies
to  the  case  in  point,  by  carrying  the  position
to  a  legitimate  consequence — "  the  witness
of  two  men  is  true."  By  using  the  word
"  men,"  Christ  suggests  the  contrast  between
two  men  on  one  side  and  the  God-Man  and
the  Father  on  the  other.  Lightfoot('  Horn
Hebraicsa ')  quotes  '  Bosh-Shantdi,'  i.  2.  8,

"  In  the  LXX.  of  Dent.  xix.  15,  'Eirl
aripiaTos  Ho  napripav  Kal  iir\  o-TiijuaTOi  rpiwr
fiafnipar  rr^trrrai  ttav  irffta  (of.  Deut.  xvii.
6).

2a


354


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vm.  1—59.


"  that  two  persona  well  known  must  testify
to  the  supreme  court  that  they  had  seen  the
new  moon  I  If  these  were  unknown  persona,
they  must  bring  proof  that  they  were  credible
witnesses."  Upon  these  common  principles
of  jurisprudence  the  Lord  waa  willing,  in
purely  Jewish  fashion,  to  rest  his  claim.

Ver.  18. — ^I  am  the  (one)  that  bears  wit-
ness conoeruing  myself — I  have  said  it,  and
abide  by  it,  and  I  Imow  what  I  say  and  how
fully  I  am  fulfilling  these  words — and  the
Father  that  sent  me  beareth  witness  con-
cerning me.  His  words  reflected  his  own
Divine  self-consciousness.  They  bore  one
witness  to  his  unique  position.  They  brought
out  the  inner  thoughts  of  Ohrist,  and  re-
vealed the  life  that  was  light.  The  word,
the  speech,  of  Christ  was  a  fire  kindled
which  would  never  be  extinguished — it  was
the  formal  utterance  of  the  eternal  reality ;
but  it  did  not  stand  alone.  The  -  Father
that  sent  him,  by  a  long  chain  of  events
and  revelations,  by  miracles  and  mighty
energies,  by  the  conference  of  the  spirit  of
conviction  upon  the  minds  that  gave  candid
attention  to  his  verbal  testimony,  by  the
providential  concurrence  of  facts  with  pro-
phetic anticipation,  was  bearing  witness
concerning  him.  The  argument  is  sufficient,
so  soon  as  we  admit  the  terms  used  by
Jesus,  BO  soon  as  we  recognize  the  ideas  of
the  Son  of  God  and  of  the  Father,  both
alike  revealed  in  the  Person  of  Christ.
We  can  understand,  and  to  some  extent
sympathize  with,  the  perplexity  of  the
Pliarisees.  Later  experiences  have  made
it  easier  for  us  to  understand  the  testimony
of  the  Father,  the  presence  and  witness  of
God  over  and  above  the  testimony  of  men
and  coincident  with  it  (cf.  ch.  xv.  27 ;  Heb.
ii.  4).  All  great  spiritual  revivals  have
given  ample  proof  of  the  twofold  testimony
(see  1  Thess.  ii.  13;  Eom.  viii.  17,  where
Paul,  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  shows  himself
familiar  with  this  "Johannine"  thought;
ef.  Heb.  ii.  4).

Ver.  19. — They  said  to  him,  in  angry,
wilful  irony.  Where  is  thy  Father  ? — that  he
may  bear  to  thee  the  witness  which  tliou
art  appropriating.  "  Thou  hast  freed  thyself
from  the  charge  of  bearing  unsupported
testimony  to  thyself,  by  assuming  tie  co-
ordinate testimony  of  thy  Father  ?  Let  thy
Father  manifest  himself  1"  There  is  nc
need  to  e.xplain  this  of  the  absence  or  insig-
nificance of  the  earthly  father  of  Jesus,  or
to  suppose  that  they  looked  for  some  human
ettestationof  such  a  klnd(  A.ugustine,Lange).
They  rather  scoffed  at  his  claim  of  unique
relation  to  the  Father,  and  asked  with
mockery, "  Where  is  he  ?  "  not  "  Who  or  what
is  he  ?  "  What  proof  has  he  given  of  any
special  relation  to  thee?  Jesns  answered
this  taunt  with  sublime  patience  and  pay,


with  distress  at  the  resolute  and  judicial
blindness  they  were  fastening  upon  them>
selves :  Ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father
if  ye  knew  me,  ye  would  know  my  Father
also.  Another  stupendous  utterance,  im-
plying the  most  intimate  relation  between
his  own  personality  and  the  Father's.  Any
fair  or  adequate  knowledge  of  himself  must
reveal  to  them  that  he  is  in  the  Father  and
the  Father  in  him ;  must  bring  forth  to  their
consciences  the  overshadowing  presence,  the
Divine  glory.  "  You  are  wrapping  yourself
in  impenetrable  mists ;  you  are  refusing  the
light  of  life,  and  all  the  evidence  given  to
you  that  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world.  You
do  not  see  less  recondite  truths,  nor  perceivu
ideas  far  more  elementary  still ;  you  can-
not, in  your  spiritual  blindness,  apprehend
the  outline  of  my  human  character.  If  you
had  done  this,  you  would  have  known  my
Father  at  least  enough  to  prevent  the  utter-
ance of  so  crude  and  disheartening  a  query.
You  know  me  not :  why  should  I  talk  to
you?  All  this  ministry  of  mine  has  left
me,  so  far  as  you  Pharisees  are  concerned,
perfectly  unknown."  There  is  awful  severity
and  unutterable  pathos  in  these  closing
words  of  the  discourse.

Vers.  20 — 30. — (3)  Further  controverty  with
different  groups,  ending  in  partial  admission
of  his  claims  by  some.

Ver.  20. — These  words — an  expression
which  emphasized  the  foregoing  interview,
and  shut  it  off  from  the  following  context —
spake  he  (Jesns*)  in  the  treasury,  as  he
taught  in  the  temple-courts.  The  yaCo<pv-
Kaxiov  (Mark  xii.  41 ;  Luke  xx.  1)  may  be
the  chamber  in  which  the  thirteen  chests,
with  trumpet-like  orifices  for  the  reception
of  alms,  were  erected.  If  so,  it  was  in  the
"court  of  the  women,"  or  the  place  of
public  assembly  most  abundantly  frequented
by  the  multitude,  and  beyond  which  the
women  could  not  penetrate  into  the  "court
of  the  priests."  Edersheim  disputes  West-
cott's  suggestion,  that  the  gazith,  or  session -
house  of  the  Sanhedrin,  was  close  by,  and
that  the  language  of  Jesus  was  within
earshot  of  them.  This  chamber,  gazith,  was
in  the  south-east  comer  of  the  "court  of
the  priests,"  and  therefore  far  away  from
the  treasure-chamber.  Supposing  that  the
word  ya(o<pti\aKiov  was  the  treasury  itself,
the  4v  rtf  may  point  to  the  neighbourhood
of  the  sacred  enclosure.  The  reference
shows  that  the  locality  even  of  the  discourse
had  made  profound  impression  on  one  of
the  disciples,  and  implies  great  publicity

'  There  is  very  strong  authority  for  tb«
omission  of  d  'Iriaovs,  with  N,  B,  D,  K,  L,
other  ten  uncials,  and  numerous  versions
Tiscnendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and  Horti
and  B.T,  omit  it


OH.  vni.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING   TO  ST.  JOHN.


355


and  imminent  peril  from  these  bold  avowals.
The  clause  added  by  the  evangelist,  And  no
man  seized  him,  because  his  hour  was  not
yet  come,  is  a  phrase  repeated  frequently,  and
one  which  delays,  by  a  strange  refrain,  the
tragic  consummation  (see  Introduction,  §  VII.
5  (4)).  Here  it  shows  that  some  further
attempt  was  made  to  lay  violent  hands  on  him,
which  for  the  moment  failed.  Seeing  that
avowals  of  his  Divine  nature  wrought  to  a
frenzy  the  passions  of  some  of  his  hearers,
and  finally  led  to  his  condemnation  for  a
cupital  offence,  the  evangelist  again  and
again  shows  that  the  Lord— who  made  these
claims  on  his  trial,  as  given  in  the  synop-
tists — ^had  frequently  reiterated  them  at  peril
of  his  life.  The  language  of  the  high  priest
shows  how  bitterly  the  ecclesiastical  autho-
rities resented  this  assumption.  The  Fourth
Gospel  mates  the  synoptic -account  of  this
matter  more  intelligible  by  showing  us  that
it  was  not  an  isolated  occurrence.

Ver.  21. — This  verse  introduces  a  new
scene  and  place,  and  perhaps  a  new  day.
The  audience  may  havs  greatly  changed,
even  if  it  had  within  it  some  of  the  same
bewildered  and  exasperated  enemies.  Again
he  said,  therefore.  The  olv  refers  to  the  fact
that  his  liberty  had  not  been  infringed.
The  providence  of  God,  the  fear  of  the
people,  the  inadequacy  or  confusing  nature
of  tiie  reports  of  his  speech  which  had  been
t,aken  to  the  authorities,  had  for  a  while
arrested  the  tragedy.  "  No  one  laid  hands
on  him."  In  consequence  of  this  circum-
stance )ie  said  imto  them  again  (J,.e.  on  a
subsequent  occasion),  I  go  away,  and  ye  shall
seek  me.  So  much  he  had  said  before  to
"  the  Jews,"  adding,  "  Ye  shall  not  find
me"  (ch.  vii.  34).  Thus  also  he  spake,
later  on,  to  the  disciples,  adding,  "  Thither
ye  cannot  come"  (oh.  xiii.  33).  On  aU
three  occasions  he  was  misunderstood.
His  departure  was  a  mystery  to  the  Jews,
who  thought,  or  at  least  said,  that  he,  a
pseudo-Messiah,  might  be  contemplating  a
mission  to  the  Greeks  and  to  the  Dispersion.
His  departure  to  the  Father  by  a  blood-
stained pathway,  by  violent  death,  was  un-
speakably perplexing  to  his  most  intimate
friends.  The  bare  idea  utterly  conflicted
with  the  current  notion  of  the  Christ ;  but
it  was  in  the  last  case  (ch.  xiv.)  modified
by  the  promise  that,  though  he  was  about  to
leave  them  and  to  return  to  his  Father,  yet
he  would  come  again — they  should  once
more  behold  him,  and  he  would  provide  a
place  for  them.  Still,  they  would  not  be
able  for  a  while  to  follow  him,  even  though
willing  to  lay  down  their  life  for  his  sake
(ch.  xiii.  38,  etc.).  But  in  the  face  of  a  more
bitter  misunderstanding  and  an  utter  in.
ability  to  perceive  and  Isnow  either  him  or
the   Father,  Christ   said   not    only,  "  Ye


shall  seek  me,"  bnt  ye  shall  die  in  your  sin.
The  iv  here  indicates  rather  the  condition
in  which  they  should  die  than  the  cause  of
their  death.  "  In,"  not  "  of"  (so  Hengsten-
berg,  Meyer,  and  Luthardt).  He  did  not  say,
•  perish  by  reason  of  this  sin,"  but  "  die  in
this  sin."  They  will  die  looking  vaguely,
hopelessly,  for  the  Saviour  whom  they  have,
in  such  an  hyperbole  of  spiritual  dulness
and  of  hitter  malice  alike,  misunderstood
and  rejected.  They  will  pass  through  the
gate  of  death  with  no  deliverance  from  sin
secured.  Knowing  neither  the  Father  nor
the  eternal  life  and  light  manifested  in
himself,  they  will  seek  and  not  find,  they
will  die  unsanctified,  unatoned,  unreconciled.
No  gleam  of  light  will  play  over  the  dark-
ness of  the  grave.  "Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot
come.  The  eternal  home  of  the  Father's  love
will  not  open  to  such  angry  search.  Such
utter  misunderstanding  as  they  had  evinced,
such  point-blank  refusal  to  walk  in  his
light,  will  impede  and  block  the  way  to
the  heart  of  the  Father,  whose  perfect  reve-
lation and  sufiicient  pleading  they  steadily
resist.  The  language  of  this  verse  is  pro-
bably the  condensation  and  conclusion  of  a
much  longer  debate.

Ver.  22. — The  Jews  therefore  said  (were
saying  one  to  the  other).  Will  he  kill  him-
self, that  (because)  he  saith,  Whither  I  go,
thither  ye  eannot  come  1  This  query  was
one  uf  harsh  mockery,  and  can  hardly  be
exaggerated  in  malign  intent.  The  suicide
was  supposed  to  have  his  place  in  Gehenna.
According  to  JosephuB  ('Bell.  Jud.,'  iii.
8.  5),  "the  darkest  regions  of  Hades  would
receive  the  souls  of  such."  The  Jews  then
scoff  at  his  departure  as  a  spontaneous  resort
to  a  fate  towards  which  they  did  not  care  or
mean  to  follow  him.  Edersheim  declares
this  passage  of  Josephus  not  to  be  sustained
by  rabbinical  authority,  and  he  doubts  this
aspect  of  their  scorn.  He  limits  it  to  the
Jewish  guess  that  Jesus  must  be  contem-
plating self  murder,  and  as  putting  delibe-
rately such  a  distance  between  them  and
him  that  they  could  not  traverse  it.  The
very  fact  that  they  had  it  in  their  hearts  to
destroy  him  makes  it  probable  that  they
were  looking  beyond  the  act  of  suicide,  either
to  the  hell  of  popular  belief  or  the  hatred
of  contemporaries.  They  obviously  thought
that  none  but  a  suicide  can  determine  the
time  of  his  departure.  Christ  proceeded  to
show  them  that  the  reason  why  his  death
would  separate  them  from  him  was  a  funda-
mental difference  of  nature.

Ver.  23. — Yet  this  essential  divergence
is  not  based  on  fatalistic  grounds,  but  on
moral  ones.  The  argument  of  the  twtnty-
fourth  verse  explains  the  description  of  ver.
23.  The  ground  of  this  utter  alienation  is
the  lack  of  belief,  which  will  leave  them  in


sse


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vm.  1—69.


their  sins  to  die.  He  said  to  them,  Ye  are
from  beneath;  I  am  from  above.  Yon
Bpring  from  the  lower  as  opposed  to  the
higher  world;  you  are  influenced  by  oon-
Biderations  drawn  £rom  the  earthly,  sensual,
snpeifloial,  and  transitory.  It  is  not  neces-
sary to  suppose  that  our  Lord  id  clenching
the  Jews'  harsh  speech  about  the  under-
world with  a  tu-quoque,  as  though  they
verily  belonged  to  the  Gehenna  to  which
they  were  consigning  him;  for  the  next
pair  of  clauses  are  in  parallel  apposition
with  the  former.  In  the  words,  Ye  are  of
this  world ;  I  am  not  of  this  world,  "  This
world  "  corresponds  with  the  t£v  xdra  of  the
previous  clause,  and  the  "  not  of  this  world  "
corresponds  with  the  ri  &vm,  the  heavenly
regions  from  which  he  has  continually
declared,  in  many  varieties  of  phrase,  that
he  had  come,  or  descended,  or  been  sent.
Certainly  and  broadly  speaking,  this  is
true,  as  a  contrast  between  Christ  and  all
other  men  before  their  regeneration.  Our
Lord  especially  charges  home  upon  these
earth-bound  souls,  on  these  purely  human,
selfish,  unspiritual,  unrenewed,  unbelieving
men,  this  antagonism  to  himself,  this  refusal
to  walk  in  his  light  or  receive  his  life.
"  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh  "
(ch,  iii.  6).  They  are  flesh.  He  does  not  ex-
clude them  for  ever  from  such  participation
in  his  own  heavenly  life  as  would  reverse
the  descriptive  and  characteristic  features  of
their  being.  The  reason  why  they  have
not  seen  the  kingdom  or  the  King  is  that
they  are  not  born  of  the  Spirit.

Yer.  24. — Therefore  I  said  unto  yon,  Ye
shall  die  in  your  sins :  for  if  ye  shall  not  have
believed  that  I  am  (he),  ye  will  die  in  your
sins.  This  last  clause,  "  for,"  etc.,  gives  oui
Lord's  reason  in  full  for  the  terrific  fact.
It  is  a  virtual  reference  of  the  unregenerate,
earthly,  low-bom  condition  of  his  hearers
to  the  fact  of  their  unbelief  in  him.  This
fieshly,  worldly  state  may  be,  might  be,
reversed  by  their  faith  in  his  essential
character,  an  adequate  moral  surrender  to
his  claims.  Let  tliem  believe  him  to  be  that
which  he  really  is,  the  separation  would  then
cease,  and,  like  himself,  they  too  might  be
"  called  out  of  the  world."  They  might  be
"  born  of  the  Spirit,"  enter  into  the  fellow-
ship of  the  Son  of  God,  become  "not  of  this
world,"  "  even  as  he  is  not  of  this  world."
They  might  "  arise,  and  go  to  their  Father."
There  is  no  impassable  chasm  between  them,
though  it  is  an  appalling  one  to  be  crossed
only  by  a  faith  which  is  itself  the  form  and
essence  of  regeneration.  The  faith  is  espe-
cially defined.  Three  times  in  this  chapter
our  Lord  represents  the  object  of  faith,  the
central  focus  of  the  Divine  revelation,  to  be
"I  AM."  The  predicate  is  unexpressed
bere,  and  the  same  may  be  said  in  ver.  28


and  ver.  58.  Elsewhere  the  predicate  may
easily  be  gathered  from  the  context  (ch.  ix.
9 ;  xviii  5,  6,  8 ;  Mark  ziiL  6 ;  Luke  xxi.
8).  Meyer  and  many  others  have  said, "  The
true  predicate  here  is  'the  Christ; '  'I  am
the  coming  One,' '  the  promised  One,' '  the
Sent  of  God.' "  It  is  a  somewhat  dubious
proceeding  to  draw  the  central  idea  of  this
chapter  from  an  unexpressed  eUipsia.  The
"J  am"  of  these  passages  cannot  be  re-
garded as  equivalent  to  the  "  I  am  that  I
am  "  of  Exodus,  or  to  the  incommunicable
name  of  the  eternal  One,  but  it  is  analogous
to  it.  Throughout  the  prophets  the  unique
and  solitary  grandeur  of  the  Divine  nature
in  its  special  covenant  relations  with  Israel
is  expressed  by  the  phrase,  "I  am  hb."  This
was  the  sum  of  the  object  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment faith  (Dent,  xxxii.  39;  Isa.  xli.  13;
xliii.  10,  eto.).  -  In  like  manner,  the  fulness
of  the  Divine  Ego  in  the  incarnate  Word  is
inexpressible  by  any  one  predicate.  His
entire  revelation  of  hinaseif  had  given  this
amplitude  and  Indefinable  breadth  to  his
Personality.  He  had  called  himself  the  Son
of  God,  the  living  Water,  the  veritable  Bread,
the  Bread  of  God  and  of  heaven,  the  Light
of  the  world.  He  was  indefinitely  more  than
the  current,  popular  idea  of  the  Christ,  im-
measurably different  from  that  which  they
persisted  in  expecting.  Faith  in  that  he  is,
in  what  he  is,  and  in  what  he  has  revealed
to  them,  is  the  germ  of  the  life  eternal.  To
refuse  this  faith  is  to  refuse  the  hope  that
breaks  over  the  gloom  of  8he6l,  and  to  leave
the  full  burden  of  sin  upon  the  conscience.
Compare  St  Paul's  words  (I  Cot.  xv.  17,
18),  "  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  ...  ye  are  yet
in  your  sins."

Ver.  25. — Then  said  they  to  him — ^the  hos-
tile Jerusalem  partv — in  scornful  mockery,
2i.  tIs  il;  Who  art 'thou?  "Define  thyself
more  closely;  make  thy  claims  olear  and
categorical.  Give  now  a  direct  answer  to
a  plain  question."  It  is  very  remarkable
that  the  Lord  often  refuses  to  respond  in
the  precise  form  in  which  his  interlocutors
demand  an  answer.  He  sees  the  multitudi-
nous sides  of  every  truth,  and  frequently
gives  to  his  questioners  the  means  of
answering  their  question  from  the  ground
of  deep  spiritual  conviction,  rather  than
furnishes  them  with  a  formula  which  might
easily  be  abused.     Who  art  tAout    How

Erofoundly  pathetic  !  How  confirmatory  of
is  own  words,  "  Ye  have  not  known  me,
nor  my  Father "  I  The  reply  which  our
Lord  gave  to  the  question  has  occasioned
greater  variety  of  interpretation  than,  per-
haps, any  other  sentence  in  the  Gospel .  T^v
apxh"  8ti  {or  8  Ti)  Kol  KaXappSv.  The  meaning
of  the  words  taken  separately  is  disputable ;
the  relation  to  the  context  has  been  very
variously  understood.     (1)  The   sentence


CH.  vni.  1— 59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOllDlNa  TO  ST.  JOHiT.


35?


may  be  taken  interrogatively:  •nji'  ipx'^"
regarded  adverbially  in  the  sense  of  "at  all,"
and  in  in  the  sense  of  "why?"  which  is
perhaps  justified  by  Mark  Iz.  11,  28.    Bo
that  it  might  mean,  Why  do  I  even  tpedk
with  you  at  aUI    This  is  the  interpreta-
tion of  the  ancient  Greek  Fathers,  Cyril
and   Chvysostom ;   is   preferred   by   Liicke
(' Coram.,'   ii.  301—313);  and  with   slight
modifications  is  adopted  by  Ewald  (who
gives  it  more  the  form  of  an  exclamation,
"  How  is  it  that  I  should  have  to  speak
to  you  at  all ! "  [this  rendering  is  put  in
the  margin  of  E.T.]),  Westcott  and  Moulton
(see  note  to  Winer, '  Grammar  of  New  Testa-
ment,' pp.  581,  582),  Matthai,  and  others,
Meyer  has  differed  somewhat  in  Buocessive
editions,  but  (4tli  edit.)  translates,  "  What  I
from  the  beginning  am  also  speaking  to  you
(do  ye  ask)?"     Can  you  still  be  asking
concerning  that  wliioh  I  have  been  from  the
beginning  saying  to  you,  viz.  "  Who  I  am  "  ?
This   interpretation  is  singularly  obscure.
It  turns  on  the  fact  that,  except  in  some
virtually  negative  sentences,  apxrl"  cannot
have  the  force  of  "  at  all,"  and  falls  back
on  the  conclusion  that  it  must,  when  used
adverbially,  have  the  force  of  "from  the
first."     Liicke  devotes  great  space  to  the
proof  from  classical  Greek  that  dpxn"  never
means  '6\ujs,  or  omnino^  except  in  association
with  a  negative  sentence,  and  he  discusses
the  four  exceptions  to  this  supposed  rule
which  some  grammarians  have  discovered
in  secular  Greek  (Lennep, '  Ap.  Phalarid.,'
pp.  82,  55,  and  92),  and  thereupon,  in  a
different  way  from  Meyer,  endeavours  to
supply  the  negative  conception.    In  reply
to  Meyer,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  Christ  had
not  been  constantly  announcing   in  cate-
gorical terms  who  he  was  and  is ;  and  further,
that  the  rendering  practically  introduces  a
clause,  "do  ye  ask,"  which  is  not  in  the  text ;
moreover,  its  rendering  transforms  \d\Si  into
A(\a\^Ka.     (2)  Many  have  advocated  an
affirmative    rendering.      Augustine    (with
Lampe  and  Fritzsohe)  takes  rrlv  apxh"  as
the  'Apx<i  of  the  universe,  the  principium
(as  Kev.  xxi.  6),  and  translates, "  Believe  that
I  am  the  Principium  (the  Logos),  because
I   am    also   speaking  with    you  (because,
humbled  on  your  account,  I  have  descended
to  such  words  as  these)."     Chrysostom  and
Nonnus  (who  turned  the  Gospel  into  Greek
hexameters)   associate   the    sentence   with
what  follows ;  thus :  "  I,  the  'Apxli,  who  also
speak  to  you,  have  many  things  to  say  and
judge  of  you."    The  accusative  form  is  thus
set  at  nought.     Calvin  takes  rriv  dpxv"  as
equal  to  e^  dpx^r,  "  from  the  beginning  "  (so
that  the  meaning  would  be,  "  I  did  not  arise
suddenly,  but  as  I  was  formerly  promised,
so  now  I  eome  forth  publicly"),  ^'because
I  alio  tpeak  with  you."    In  other  worcui


"  What  I  now  speak  is  in  accordance  with
the  conditions  made  in  all  ages '  from  the  be-
ginning.' "  So  Delitzsch,  Hebrew  version  of
NewTestament.  Luthardt  seems  to  approach
this  view,  which  he  makes  more  difScult  by
insisting  that  ttji'  ipx'/l"  does  not  mean
"  from  "  but  "  at  the  beginning."  The  view
of  Winer,  Grimm,  Alford,  Stier,  Godet,
Thoma,  and  Plummer,  is  substantially  the
same,  giving  to  rriv  dpx^^  the  sense  ofomnino.
Essentially,  wholly,  altogether  (I  am)  that
which  even  I  am  saying  to  you.  The  gram-
matical objection  that  this  use  of  tV  dpxfiv
demands  a  negative  sentence  in  classic  Greek,
is  not  conclusive.  This  is  the  only  place  in
the  New  Testament  where  the  word  is  used
adverbially,  and  it  is  in  reply  to  a  mocking
question  which  has  much  virtual  negative
in  it.  Green  ('  Critical  Notes ')  urges  that
the'sense  of  "altogether"  (omninn)  was  pre-
served in  all  kinds  of  sentences  without
distinction.  He  does  not  prove  it,  but  it  is
entirely  probable  that  it  might  have  this
force  in  New  Testament  Greek.  The  great
advantage  of  the  rendering  is  that  it  brings
the  answer  into  relation  with  the  entire
previous  discourse,  in  which  Christ's  testi-
mony to  himself  had  been  disputed  because
(in  tlie  opinion  of  those  who  were  debating
with  him)  that  testimony  had  not  been
adequately  supported.  "  I  am  the  Revelation
of  the  Father,  the  Messenger  from  heaven,
the  Bread  of  God,  the  Light  of  the_  world
— essentially  that  which  I  am  saying  to
youi"  Believe  my  own  testimony  thus  far,
and  that  will  answer  the  query,  "  Who  art
thou?"  There  is  no  great  distinction
between  this  view  and  that  of  De  Wette  :
"  Von  vorne  herein  (vor  alien  Dingen)
bin  ich  was  ich  auch  za  euch  rede,"  as
Briickner  put  it — "From  the  beginning,
from  the  first,  (I  am)  what  I  am  also  saying
to  you."  Winer's  Tiew  seems  to  me  th»  best.
Grimm  thus  translates :  "  Omnino,  hoc  est
sine  uUa  exceptione  sum,  quod  etiam  vobis
eloquor,  non  solum  sum,  sed  etiam  vobis,
prssdico  id  quod  sum."

Ver.  26. — I  have  many  things  to  speak
and  to  judge  concerning  yon.  Hitherto,
when  the  Lord  uttered  his  great  words  of
self-revelation,  which  always  had  an  ethical
end  and  were  meant  for  the  advantage  of
his  hearers,  they  interrupted  his  speech  and
disputed  liis  claims.  They  refused  those
testimonies  to  himself  which,  if  true,  would
necessitate  their  instantaneous  submission.
He  seems  to  have  gathered  all  his  self-wit-
ness together  in  the  word,  "  I  aai^'  verily
altogether,  absolutely,  from  the  beginning
onwards,  just  what  my  words  convey  j  but  I
have  much  more  to  say  concerning  you,  even
if  I  should  have  nothing  more  to  say  con-
cerning myself.  The  testimonies  and  the
judgments  may  be  profoundly  distasteful  to


So8


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [on.  vra.  1—69.


you,  hut  I  dare  not  therefore  withhold  them.
I  am  come  to  deliver  them  it  any  cost  to
myself  or  you.  But  he  that  sent  me  is  true,
whether  you  hear  or  forhear ;  and  I  am  his
Mouthpiece,  so  the  truth  has  to  be  told.
The  thouglit  of  God,  if  we  can  only  approach
it,  is  the  absolute  truth  about  every  thing
and  about  every  man.  Jesus  is  the  Word  of
God  incarnate,  and  the  Utterer  of  irrever-
sible judgment.  The  things  which  I  heard
from  him,  these  speak  I  into  the  world.
Els  Tor  Kiiaixov  is  a  remarkable  expression.
"Speak  into,  so  that  the  words  may  reach  as
far  as  and  spread  through  the  world  "  (West-
cott).  The  expression  seems  to  have  left
him  above  or  outside  the  world,  so  that  he  ap-
pears as  "  the  Mediator  between  two  worlds."
Ver.  27. — They  understood  (perceived)  not
that  he  spake  to  them  of  the  Father.  This
difficult  parenthesis  of  the  evangelist-calls
attention  to  the  fact  that,  during  the  imme-
diately preceding  discourse  and  controversy,
Jesus  had  dropped  his  references  to  the
Father,  and  liad  used  the  periphrasis,  "  he
that  sent  me,"  probably  suggesting  to  this
strangely  excited  populace,  fed  with  weird
fancies  and  wild  expectations,  that  the
mysterious  Being  with  whom  they  were
conversing  was  but  the  Delegate  of  One
mightier  than  he,  who  was  hidden  in  the
secret  place  of  God's  providence  until  the
hour  of  his  own  manifestation  should  appear
to  have  struck.  They  might  liave  remem-
bered the  utter  deferenci?  which  the  great
prophet  John  had  display(.d  before  a  Messiah
whom  as  yet  they  knew  not.  They  may
have  heard  that  even  John  himself,  at  a  later
date,  sent  from  the  prison  two  of  his  dis-
ciples to  propound  the  query,  "  Art  thou  he
that  should  come,  or  do  we  look  for  an-
other?" in  other  words,  "  Art  thou  the  final
Manifestation  of  all  that  I  have  predicted
and  believed  ?  or  is  another  to  make  his  ap-
pearance with  fire  and  axe  and  available
force  to  compel  obedience  and  to  secure  uni-
versal homage  ?  "  It  is  more  than  probable
that  the  evangelist,  being  personally  alive
to  the  cross-currents  of  passion,  enthusiasm,
and  hostility  which  were  at  work  in  the
I. carts  of  the  populace,  saw  by  the  very
blankness  and  confusion  on  their  faces,  and
the  "asides"  of  the  multitude,  that  they
had  not  perceived  that  Josus  was  throughout
in  these  references  speaking  of  the  FaVier  of
all — the  supreme  Source  of  all  power,  the
Lord  of  hosts.  Even  when  he  had  said-,"  Ye
have  not  known  me,nor  my  Father,"  they  had
not  risen  to  such  a  conception  of  the  Lord's
meaning  as  to  suppose  that  the  supreme
Father  himself  was  being  suggested  to  them
and  cited  as  the  corroborative  Witness,  as
the  supernatural  Aid  and  Divine  Presence
which  was  giving  validity  to  all  that  Christ
has  said  about  himself.     Their  ignorance


and  lack  of  perception  need  not  astonish  us
when  we  reflect  upon  the  obscurity  and  non-
receptivity  of  the  apostles  themselves,  and
the  like  obtuseuess  of  theologians  and  cul-
tivated men  of  the  world  in  every  age  from
that  day  to  this.  The  remark  is,  moreover,
added  doubtless  to  interpret  the  following
verses,  in  which  the  ideas  of  ver.  26  are
repeated,  with  the  difference  that,  whereas
he  had  already  spoken  of  him  that  sent  him,
and  who  had  authorized  his  words  and  judg-
ments, Jesus  now  gives  to  him  the  beloved
name  of  "  the  Father."

Ver.  28. — But  when  Jesus  turns  to  them
again  he  calls  special  attention  to  the  main
source  of  their  continuous  misconception
and  rejection.  Not  only  is  he  "the  Son,"
and  "  the  Son  of  God,"  but  indubitably  he
is  also  "  the  Son  of  man."  He  has  come
down  from  heaven  and  is  before  them  as  a
Man  among  men — "one  Jesus."  He  has
taken  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  slave,  the
fashion  of  man.  That  the  manifestation  of
the  Divine  should  be  perfectly  realized  in
the  human,  though  a  fundamental  truth
lying  at  the  heart  of  all  revelation,  is  never-
theless nol  the  alphabet  of  Divine  tea<ihing;
nay,  it  is  the  very  highest  and  most  recon-
dite of  all  truths.  This  humbled  humanity
of  the  incarnate  Logos  led  on  to  other
issues  of  enormous  significance.  The  eternal
Son  in  the  form  of  God  wonld  become,  as
"Son  of  man,"  obedient  unto  death.  The
highest  revelation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and
therefore  of  the  Father,  would  be  effected
by  the  surrender  of  that  mysterious  life  of
his  for  the  world's  behoof.  The  previous
announcements  of  this  truth,  which  we  now
see  to  be  the  very  crown  and  culmination  of
the  gospel,  had  greatly  offended  his  hearers
of  all  kinds,  and  on  distinct  grounds.  In
the  words  that  follow  a  touch  of  deeper
meaning  than  any  which  had  preceded  is
supplied  when  he  proceeds  to  associate  this
death  of  the  Son  of  man  with  the  wilful  act
of  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  in  Jerusalem.
Jesus  therefore  said  (unto  them  •),  When  ye
shall  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  man  (com-
pare here  notes  on  ch.  iii.  14;  vi.  62;
xii.  32).  The  word  v\f/6a>  is  i;sed  with  the
twofold  sense  of  exaltation  on  the  cross —
"  signifying  by  what  death  he  should  glorify
God" — and  also  of  the  issues  of  that  lifting
up  by  means  of  the  tree  of  ignoble  torment
and  mortal  agony  to  the  throne  of  glory.
The  twofold  meaning  of  the  word  cannot
be  excluded  here.'    Then  ye  shall  come  to

'  Tisehendorf  and  R.T.  omit  avroir,  with
B,  L,  T,  on  the  ground  that  k>  and  D  have
other  and  different  additions.

'  Edersheim  cites,  from  '  Peslkta  R.,'  10,
proof  that  the  Hebrew  word  iwy  occurs  (as
in  Gen.  xl.  19,  13)  in  the  same  twofold


OH.  vm.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  -ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


359


know — then  the  process  of  pr^jf  will  be  com-
pleted— that  I  am  (he) — that  I  am  that
which  fundamentally  I  am  declaring  to  you,
that  my  testimonies  have  unique  but  tren-
chant confirmation ' — and  that  I  am  doing
nothing  from  myself,  but  that  even  as  the
Father  tanght  me,  (so)  these  things  I  speak.
The  "he  that  sent  me"  (ver.  26),  is  hero
replaced  by  "the  Father."  "The  things
which  I  heard  from  (Trapi.)  him  "  is  replaced
by  "even  as  the  Father  taught  me,"  and
the  ToSra  Ka\a  are  repeated.  "The  cross
and  the  oiown"  will  be  the  proof  to  the
most  obtuse  and  bigoted  "that  lam  that
which  I  say  I  am."  The  forecast  is  here
given  of  the  conversion  of  his  murderers,
the  overwhelming  effocts  produced  by  the
resurrection  and  the  ascension  of  Jesus,  and
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  ii.  36 ;  iv.
4;  vi.  7;  Eom.  xi.  11).  Bengel:  "Oogno-
scetis  ex  re,  quod  nunc  ex  verbo  non  cre-
ditia."

Ver.  29. — And  he  that  sent  me — of  whom
I  now  plainly  speak  to  you  as  "  the  Father  "
— is  with  me.  He  is  not  in  some  inacces-
sible region  of  indifference  to  my  mission
or  my  word,  but  with  me.  He  encompasses
the  Son  of  man,  finds  willing,  unswerving
response  to  his  will  in  my  words.  He  sent
me,  and  commissioned  me  to  undertake  this
work.  He  is  aflSrming  in  his  own  way  all
my  miBsage,  and  coiToborating  my  testi-
mony. You  have  asked,  "Where  is  thy
Father  ?  "  and  I  now  tell  you,  "  He  is  with
me."  He  (the  Father «)  hath  not  left  me  at
any  moment  of  my  career  alone.  He  has
confirmed  and  sustained  my  word,  and  upheld
my  life ;  and  you  can  see  the  signs  of  this
abiding  communion :  Because  (i.e.  Christ
does  not  account  for  the  abiding  companion-
ship by  the  fact  of  his  own  obedience,  but
refers  to  the  reasons  which  his  hearers
might  find  for  his  great  assertion ;  cf.  Luke
vii.  47)  I  do  always  the  things  that  are
pleasing  to  him.  I  do  this  because  he  has
never  left  me  to  my  mere  human  nature.
This  self-consciousness  of  Christ  is  one  of

sense  of  "exalting"  and  "executing."
Moreover,  he  remarks  that  Tala  (N^n)  means
also  to  "lift  up"  and  to  "crucify."  The
Jewish  expression  Taluj,  for  Clirist,  would
confirm  this  usage  (cf.  Bleek,  '  Beitrage  zur
Evangelieukritik,*  p.  231  ;  Grimm,  «.».,  etc.

'  The  "  comma  "  here  is  preferred  by  the
R.T.  to  the  "  period,"  and  the  second  clause
made  also  the  object  of  the  verb  ■yvdiamie
after  8ti  :  so  Meyer.

'  'O  Uarhp  is  omitted  by  Griesbach,  Tre-
gelles,  Tisehendorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott  and
Hort,  and  K.T.,  on  the  authority  K",  B,  D,
Ij,  T,  X,  and  important  cursives,  versions,
Vulgate  and  Coptic,  and  quotations.


the  loftiest  and  most  entirely  nniqae  phe-
nomena recorded  in  history.  This  absolute
confidence  with  reference  to  his  whole  course
lifts  our  Lord  to  a  pinnacle  of  the  loftiest
elevation.  He  declares  himself  absolutely
free  Irom  sin,  and  even  in  thought  or  deed  to
have  left  undone  nothing  that  seemed  good  tc
the  Father.  If  such  an  utterance  had  not
flashed  the  conviction  of  his  Divine  nature
upon  some  of  his  hearers,  it  is  impossible
to  conceive  what  would  or  could  have  done  so.
Ver.  30. — As  he  spake  these  words,  many
believed  on  him.     This  is  another  inter-

i'ected  comment  or  connecting  link  supplied
\y  the  evangelist,  revealing  intimate  mow-
ledge  of  the  state  of  feeling  and  changeful
emotions  of  the  people.  Another  hint  of
the  eye-witness  and  ear-witness  of  this
memorable  scene;  and,  supposing  that  we
read  here  a  correct  transcript  of  words  that
proceeded  from  his  lips,  we  can  do  no  other
than  cry  with  Thomas,  "My  Lord,  and
my  God  1 "  The  remark  is  intercalated,
as  though  St.  John  wished  to  emphasize
the  accuracy  with  which  he  had  reported,
on  this  occasion,  the  very  words  of  his
Lord,  conveying  their  ambiguous  phrase,
and  asserting  in  fresh  form  what  bad
convinced  St.  John,  on  subsequent  reflec-
tion, that  ho  was  what  he  said.  The
phrase,  TtttmietD  eh,  to  believe  in  or  on  a
person,  is  to  close  with  him,  to  accept  all
the  collateral  consequences  of  such  trust,
to  be  content  to  wait  for  fuller  explana-
tion, to  cast  self  upon  the  object  of  faith,
and  allow  the  object  of  such  trust  to  bear
all  the  responsibility  of  the  act.  It  is  the
form  most  frequently  adopted  by  St.  John
(ch.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  16, 18,  36;  iv.  39,  and  many
other  places ;  cf.  ch.  xiv.  1,  12 ;  xvii.  20) ;
only  once  in  the  synoptic  narrative  (Matt,
xviii.  6  with  Mark  ix.  42).  The  form  tti-
imiiiv  eVi  occurs  occasionally  with  the  ac-
cusative (1  John  iii.  23,  and  frequently  in  the
Acts) ;  and  -nuneiiiv  ivi  with  the  dative,  also
TTHTTeiJei)'  iv,  are  used,  implying  even  a  closer
and  more  intin^ate  communion  still  with  the
Object  of  faith  (see  ch.  xvi.  30).  With  these
forms  must  be  compared  the  more  common
one  with  the  simple  dative,  irurTd^iv  nvi,
which  occurs  in  vers.  31, 45,  and  oh.  xiv.  11,
etc.,  which  implies  acceptance  of  the  say-
ing, promise,  or  fact  there  propounded,  and
falls  short  of  the  moral  surrender  involved
in  the  fuller  form.  John  here  asserts  that
many  of  his  hearers,  those  who  had  hitherto
refrained  from  full  acceptance  of  Jesus  as
the  Son  of  God,  yielded  to  his  claims  there
and  then.  This  faith  on  the  part  of  "some  "
is  almost  more  wonderful  than  the  unbelief
of  others.  The  difficulties  in  their  way  were
appalling  in  comparison  with  the  perplexi-
ties which  beset  our  minds.  The  Lord
appealed  to  hii  own  inner  consciousness,  to


360


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [on.  Tin.  1—69.


hie  supernatnTftl  aid  in  speech,  to  the  spot-
less, sinless  character  of  his  hidden  life.  It
was  remarkable  that  any  strangers  or  ene-
mies should  have  surrendered  (iemselves  to
them.  The  event  shows  that  the  surrender
could  not  stand  the  test.

Vers.  31 — 59  describe  a  further  convor-
satiou,  not  with  the  same  audience.  The
words  record  a  vivid  conflict  between  the
Lord  and  the  Jews  who  believed  him,  who
accepted  tbe  Messianic  claims,  but  persisted
ill  interpreting  them,  not  by  his  word,  but
by  their  own  ideas  of  the  theocratic  king-
dom, by  their  privileges  as  children  of
Abraham,  by  their  national  animosity  to
thoii  nearest  neighbours  the  Samaritans,  by
their  inability  to  press  behind  the  veil  of
his  humanity  to  his  Divine  nature.  Their
faith  was  of  the  most  imperfect  kind ;  but
such  as  it  was,  it  was  made  manifest  to  the
observation  of  the  apostle,  and  tliis  throws
light  upon  the  fact  that,  among  the  many
who  believed  on  him,  or  rather  alongside  of
these,  there  was  a  certain  section  of  "the
Jews,"  of  the  chief  mlera  and  rabbis,  who
made  a  definite  movement  towards  him.
This  doubtless  excited  the  intense  enthu-
siasm of  the  disciples,  who  might  at  once
hope  and  almost  expect  that  Jesus  would
with  open  arms  accept  their  homage.  But
he  at  once  puts  this  faith  of  theirs— perhaps
ignorantly  expressed — to  a  proof  absolutely
necessary  for  the  salvation  of  his  hearers.

Vers.  31,  32.— (4)  The  test  Christ  supplied
to  those  who  admitted  his  testimony — true  dis-
eipUship  and  freedom.  Jesus  therefore  said
to  the  Jews  who  had  believed  him — or,  had
become  believing,  and  were  now  waiting  for
some  special  sign  that  their  belief  of  his
words  was  to  be  immediately  rewarded  by
gome  closer  conformity  between  his  next  step
and  their  own  prepossessions — If  ye  abide
in  my  word,  then  are  ye  truly  my  disciples.
Short  of  making  the  word  of  Jesus  the
resting-place  for  both  heart  and  intellect,
full  discipleship  would  be  impossible.  The
true  disciple  receives  and  continues  in
the  word  of  his  Master.  The  expression
expands  and  illustrates  the  difference  be-
tween believing  Christ  to  speak  the  truth,
and  believing  in  him.  Many  ancient  Jews
and  modem  Christians  believe  so  much  of
Christ's  word  as  is  verified  by  their  moral
consciousness,  and  dispute  or  dispose  of  the
rest  as  Aberglaube.  The  genuine  disciple
continues,  abides,  in  the  word  of  him  who
is  the  incarnate  Word,  yielding  to  it  entire
acquiescence,  as    the   absolute   reality   of


things,  as  the  truth  about  Ood  and  man.
He  adds,  And  ye  shall  come  fully  to  know
the  truth ;  i,e.  to  realize  in  the  very  depths
of  your  being  the  trustworthy  character  of
my  word.  "  The  Truth  "  (see  ch.  xiv.  6)  is
one  of  the  distinguishing  names  which  Jesus
takes  to  himself.  He  is  the  Truth,  and  "  full
of  grace  and  truth."  So  far  this  statement
corresponds  with  ch.'  vii.  16,  17.  The
"Jews"  who  had  believed  him  would  not
feel  the  fiery  ordeal  and  touch  of  flame  ap-
plied to  the  sensitive  skin  of  their  pride  and
self-importance;  but  when  he  added,  And
the  truth  shall  emancipate  you,  the  case
was  altered.  Truth  only  can  set  the  mind
free  from  its  bondage  under  ignorance  anl
prejudice  and  evil  habit.  If  the  Light  of
the  world  shines  into  the  dark  places  of  tho
heart,  the  chains  erewhile  misunderstood  will
not  only  become  visible,  but  will  be  broken.
Godet  beautifully  says  that  "  the  empire  of
sin  in  a  human  heart  is  based  upon  an  illu-
sion, a  fascination.  Let  truth  shine,  and  the
spell  is  broken,  the  will  is  disg^ted  with  that
which  seduced  it — 'the  bird  escapes  from
the  net  of  the  fowler.'"  But  this  proffer  of
freedom  to  his  disciples  by  contianlng  in  his
word  was  too  startling  a  suggestion  for  their
nascent  and  imperfect  faith.  He  had  told
them  that  without  faith  in  liim  they  would
die  in  their  sins  (ver.  24) ;  now  he  assures
them  that,  unless  they  abide  steadfastly  in
his  word,  they  will  not  escape  from  a  bond-
age manifest  enough  to  his  eye,  if  not  to
tlieirs.  This  brings  from  them  an  angry
response.

Vers.  33— 46.— (5)  The  offer  of  spiritual
freedom  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  provoked
bitter  hostility  and  misapprehension.

Ver.  33. — They  answered  him.  Wo  be
Abraham's  se^d — taking  the  highest  position
of  national  grandeur  and  racial  pride.  Vast
were  the  pretensions  which  the  Jews  often
assumed  from  this  lofty  ancestry.  "Tiiey
were  all  children  of  kiugs;"  "SolomoTi's
feast  was  not  too  good  for  them ; "  "  He
was  heir  of  the  world ; "  "  They  were  the.in-
heritors  in  him  of  all  the  nations."  They
had  rung  this  cry  into  the  ears  of  John  the
Baptist,  when  this  last  prophet  had  called
upon  them  for  repentance.  Their  following
boast  is  difScult  to  understand:  We  have
never  yet  been  enslaved  to  any  one;  and
great  difference  of  opinion  has  prevailed
over  the  meaning  of  these  words.  It  is
incredible  that  John  should  represent  the
Jews  as  ignorant  of  their  national  political
history.  The  first  word  of  theur  Decalogue
included  a  reference  to  the  "  house  of  bond-
age "  from  which  Jehovah  had  delivered
the  seed  of  Abraham.  Moreover,  their  poli-
tical humiliation  at  the  hand  of  the  border
kingdoms  of  Assyria,  Babylon,  and  Syria  was
the  perpetual  theme  of  prophet  and  psalmist.


OH.  vm.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


861


The  leriible  reverses  that  they  had  aubse-
quently  experienced  at  the  hand  of  Antio-
chus  and  of  the  Boman  power.and  the  galling
submission  to  Borne  which  at  the  moment
was  ronsing  their  fiercest  passion,  would
render  any  such  boast  simply  preposterous.
Grodet's  Buggestion,  that  they  were  making
a  boast  of  their  personal  ciTil  freedom,  that
Abraham's  seed  were  not  gold  into  positive
slavery,  however  mortifying  their  political
servitude  had  proved,  is  far-fetched  and  too
far  away  from  the  facts  of  the  case ;  neither
does  it  harmonize  with  the  character  of  this
angry  retort.  Probably  a  reference  is  made
to  the  ideal  freedom  firom  slavery  and  from
dependence  which  they  had,  in  their  hour
of  deepest  deprRSsion  from  all  and  every
form  of  tyranny  whatsoever,  religiously
maintained.  They  did,  as  their  wonderful
psalter  shows,  cherish  a  conviction  that
David'B  throne  and  Abraham's  inheritance
ideally  stood  tbrougli  all  the  ages,  lustrous
and  magnificent  to  the  eye  of  faith.  When
the  holy  and  beautiful  house  was  burned
with  fire,  when  tlieir  exile  was  complete,  they
still  saw  all  visible  things,  even  "heaven
and  earth,"  departing  or  rolled  up  like  a
scroll,  while  their  Creator  and  redeeming
King  was  seated  still  on  his  eternal  throne.
From  St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Eomans,  they
clearly  held  that  the  mere  possession  of  the
Law,  whether  they  kept  it  or  not,  was  their
much-prized  pledge  of  independence  from
all  other  authority  or  servitude.  If  so,  they
may  have  been  on  this  occasion  boasting  of
their  ideal  freedom  in  virtue  of  their  he-
reditary privileges,  and  forgetful  of  the  les-
sons even  of  the  agelong  story  of  Ishmael
and  Esau,  and  the  deportation  and  abolition
of  Israel  as  a  nation.  One  can  scarcely
refrain  a  momentary  thrill  of  admiration
at  the  hardihood  of  their  eager  faith,  and  the
overwhelming  strength  of  confidence  they
manifested  in  their  destiny  as  a  people.
All  the  spiritual  salvation  and  ideal  free-
dom which  they  desired  they  possessed  as
cliildren  of  Abraham.  How  sayest  thon —
"  Upon  what  possible  principle  dost  thou
promise  to  us  that  which  we  already  are
proud  of  possessing,  viz.  glorious  liberty?"
Is  it  from  the  emancipating  power  of  truth  ?
We  have  the  truth ;  we  are  the  depositaries
of  infallible  truth.  We  already  possess  as
our  birthright  what  thou  art  offering  to  us
as  the  full  result  of  discipleship.  How
sayest  thou,  Te  shall  be  made  free )
Ver.    34. — Jesus  answered  them ;  '    i.e.

'  Thoma  sees  here  the  doctrine  of  Paul
on  spiritual  freedom,  and  his  allegorical  use
of  the  story  of  Sarah  and  Hagar  in  the
Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  He  finds  a  re-
flection of  the  controversy  between  Jewish
Christians  an^  Gentile  Christians.     It  is


those  "  Jews  who  believed  him,"  but  whose
retort  showed  their  faith  to  be  of  the  most
feeble  and  imperfect  kind,  and  which,  if  it
were  momentarily  assumed,  was  ready  to  dis-
appear at  tlie  first  touch  of  trial.  A  promise
of  Divine  love  had  been  treated  by  them  as  an
insult,  not  so  much  to  their  national  history,
as  to  their  religious  triumph  over  their  civil
and  political  disasters.  There  is  no  reason
to  believe  that  in  these,  or  in  the  following
words,  the  unbelieving  Jews  had  once  more
become  the  interlocutors,  as  Tholuck  and
Hengstenberg  have  doneon  different  grounds.
Meyer,  Ellicott,  Lange,  and  many  others
agree  with  the  view  here  advanced.  The
answer  to  them  (airoTt,  those  who  were  the
subjects  of  aireKptSiia-av)  is  introduced  with
peculiar  solemnity :  Verily,  verily  I  say
unto  you,  every  one  (irSj)  that  doeth  sin
— S  TToi&v  afiajyrlav  is  different  from  Trpiaauv
ipavKa  of  ch.  iii.  20 ;  it  is  the  precise  oppo-
site of  iroi&v  a\i)6eiav  of  ch.  iii.  21,  and  does
not  mean  "  every  one  who  committeth
separate  acts  of  transgression,"  but  it  means
"  every  one  who  is  living  a  life  of  sin  " — is
the  bond-slave  (of  sin).  Godet  is  strongly
disposed,  on  the  ground  of  the  exceedingly
small  authority  of  D  and  h  alone  (and  certain
quotations  of  Origen),  to  believe  that  the  ttjs
aimprias  is  a  gloss.  Certainly  the  whole
passage  would  be  easier  to  interpret  if  our
Lord  had  simply  said  that  the  man  under
the  habitual  power  of  sin  is  a  slave,  and  had
then,  in- vers.  35  and  36,  advanced  to  the
contrast  between  the  slave  and  the  Son.
But  there  is  great  unanimity  among  all  the
authorities  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  Eeceived
and  Revised  Texts,  though  Westcott  and
Hort  place  it  in  brackets.  The  .interpreta-
tion, consequently,  is  simply  this,  that  Christ
did  "  pass  from  the  idea  of  bondage  under
sin  to  that  of  bondage  generally,  and  from
the  idea  of  sonship  to  the  Son  "  (Westcott).
The  notion  of  personal  transgression  produc-
ing a  bondage,  and  enfettering  the  soul  and
the  will,  and  separating  it  from  the  glorious
liberty  of  true  sonship,  lay  outside  of  their
notion  of  discipleship.  They  were  not  re-
quiring deliverance  from  sin  or  its  bondage ;
what  they  wanted  was  the  full  realization
of  the  national  hope.  The  language  of  this
verse  can  be  paralleled  from  the  vmtings  of
the    classics  and    rabbis,'    and  is   largely

astonishing  that  so  acute  a  critic  does  not
see  that  we  have  here  the  original  principle,
which  was  variously  developed  by  St.  Paul
in  his  lifelong  controversy.

'  Wiinsche  quotes  '  Sucoa,'  fol.  52j  a :
"  Babbi  Asi  said  that  evil  conduct  is  t>om-
pared  at  its  beginning  to  a  spider's  web,  and
afterwards  to  a  cart-rope  (Isa.  t.  18) ;  and
shows  that  seven  names  given  to  the  sinner
by  the  Old  Testament  writers,  reach  their


362


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [cu.  vui.  1—59.


handled  by  St  Paul  (Rom.  tI.  and  vii.).  Tlie
relation  between  gin  as  a  principle  and  eins
as  acts  of  the  wUl  is  a  great  New  Testament
revelation.  The  personal  commission  of  sin
augments  the  force  of  the  corrupt  tendency
which  leads  to  and  facilitates  fresh  trans-
gression. Every  compliance  with  evil  forges
a  new  fetter,  and  imposes  it  on  the  will  of
the  transgressor.  "  The  strong  man  guards
his  honse,  aud  his  goods  are  in  peace  "  (Luke
xi.  21).

Yer.  85. — Tliis  being  the  fact  as  to  sin  and
its  servitude,  the  Lord  proceeds  to  deal
with  servitude  in  God's  house.  Servitude
and  its  spirit  are  manifested  in  the  house  of
the  Father.  The  bond-slave  abideth  not  in
the  honse  for  ever.  So  long  as  he  is  a
bond-slave  and  not  emancipated  from  the
fetters  of  mere  race,  so  long  as  he  is  ruled
by  the  servile  spirit,  there  is  no  perpetuity
about  his  relation  to  the  Father.  He  can
be  sold  away  (Gen.  xxi.  10;  Gal.  iv.  30).
An  involuntary  subject  of  the  Law,  who
belongs  to  the  theocracy  as  a  slave  merely,
and  because  he  cannot  help  himself,  and
occupies  a  position  which  a  slave  does  in  the
family  of  sin,  has  lost  aU  freedom  and  spon-
taneity in  his  service,  and  will  find  himself
cast  out  at  last.  But  the  son  abideth  for  ever.
Sonship  is  the  only  principle  on  which  con-
tinuance in  the  house  can  be  secured.  It
has  been  much  debated  whether  the  i  vl6s
of  the  thirty-fifth  verse  goes  beyond  the  idea
of  sonship,  the  generic  antithesis  to  the  idea
of  slave.  Certainly  this  seems  the  primary
reference.  In  the  following  verse,  the  Son,
in  his  loftiest  functions,  and  as  identifying
himself  with  "  the  truth  "  of  ver.  32,  entirely
fulfils  the  conception  of  "  Sonship "  and
eternal  abiding  in  the  Father's  house,  and
therefore  Is  entrusted  with  the  power  of
emancipating  aU  slaves,  of  adopting  sons
into  the  Father's  royal  house.  Thus  we
miiy  suppose  that  the  first  use  of  the  term
"son,"  though  laying  special  emphasis  on
the  spirit  and  conditions  of  sonship,  yet
points  to  him  who  entirely  embodies,  en-
shrines, and  has  from  before  all  worlds
realized  the  Divine  idea  of  Son — the  only
begotten  Son — in  the  bosom  of  tlie  Fatlier.

Ver.  36. — Therefore  if  the  Son  —  who
abideth  ever  in  the  Father's  bosom,  and  fills
the  house  with  his  glory,  and  is  the  Heir  of
all  things — make  yon  free,  ye  shall  be  free
indeed  {&vTas,  "  essentially,"  only  here  used
by  St.  John,  who  elsewhere  uses  the  word
aMiBus,  ver.  31 ;  ch.  i.  48 ;  iv.  42 ;  vii.  40 ;
vi.  14).  The  Son  is  he  who  gives  power  to
become  the  sons  of  God.  "  The  law  of  the
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  frees  from  the
law  of  sin  and  death  "  (Rom.  viii.  2).    Only


strong  expression  in  that  of  a  slave  (Frov.
xxlx.21)."


by  acquiring  the  true  spirit  and  regenerated
life  of  a  son  can  any  man  be  delivered  from
the  bondage  induced  by  ignorance  of  the
actual  truth  about  God,  about  man,  and  about
the  relation  between  God  and  man.  This
knowledge  is  produced  by  the  Son  of  Gnd,
who  is  the  Truth.  A  full  and  believing
apprehension  of  the  Son  of  God,  »  realiza-
tion of  what  he  is,  confers  a  new  life  and
reveals  the  wonderful  possibilities  and  re-
lations of  human  nature.  The  incarnation
of  the  Son  of  God  as  a  veritable  Son  of  man
emancipates  the  soul  fettered  by  the  tyranny
of  nature  and  baffled  by  the  mastery  of  time
and  sense,  inasmuch  as  it  discloses  the
august  majesty  of  its  own  origin.  Essential
freedom  accrues  to  him  who  knows  that  sin  is
pardoned,  that  death  is  vanquished,  that  the
prince  of  this  world  is  cast  out.  The  eager
Jew  might  look  through  the  battered  walls  of
Zion  and  the  charred  fragments  of  its  gorgeous
temple,  and  still  see  the  adamantine  structure
and  its  agelong  triumph.  But  the  disciples  of
Jesus,  with  John  as  their  leader,  when  these
words  were  recorded  by  him  as  they  fell
from  the  Lord  in  their  true  connection,  saw
the  new  Jerusalem  coming  down  out  of
heaven  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband,
with  its  open  gates,  its  crystal  stream,  and
the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  as
the  Light  of  it.  The  freedom  of  a  perfect
service  and  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons
of  God  was  theirs,  in  proportion  as  they
accepted  their  emancipation  from  the  Son
himself  (1  Cor.  vii.  22 ;  Kom.  viii.  35,  36 ;
2  Cor.  iii.  18).  The  sons  are  "  free  indeed,"
whatever  the  world,  or  the  Hebrew  Chris-
tians, or  the  philosophers  might  think  or  say
Ver.  37. — I  know  (oJ5a,  I  know  absolutely,
I  do  not  come  to  know  it  from  your  retort)
that  ye  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  They
belonged  to  the  noble  race,  "  whose  are  the
fathers ; "  they  were  the  avipua  of  him  who
received  the  promises.  Christ  admitted  the
pedigree,  but  he  proceeds  to  show  that  mere
hereditary  descent  would  be  of  no  avail
to  them  apart  from  mural  considerations.
These  ideas,  these  revolutionary  conceptions,
so  far  as  Judaism  was  concerned,  were  not
the  evolution  of  Christian  ideas  in  the  second
century.  It  is  most  instructive  to  see  how
clearly  St.  Paul  had  already  grasped  them,
and  woven  them  into  a  powerful  argument
when  dealing  with  the  Judaizers  in  Galatia,
many  years  before  this  Gospel  was  written
(see  the  entire  argument  of  Gal.  iii.,  which
thus  rests  on  the  teaching  of  the  Christ  him-
self). But  ye  seek  to  kiU  me.  Tliis  charge  is
certainly  difficult  to  suppose  applicable  to
those  who  "  had  come  to  believe  in  him "
(ver.  31).  One  of  three  suppositions  must
be  made — either  (1)  the  believing  Jews  were
surrounded  by  angry  groups  of  his  bitter
enemies,  to  whom  he  here  addressed  himself;


CH.  VIII.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


363


or  (2)  the  Lord  spoke  here  to  them  as  re-
preseating  the  large  company  of  Jerusalem
opponents,  whom  he  knew  at  that  moment
to  be  planning  his  death,  and  as  all  orators
and  debaters  are  in  the  habit  of  dealing
with  opposing  arguments  by  showing  the
character  they  assume  in  others,  who  make
them  their  boast ;  or  (3)  those  who  had  come
to  believe  him  up  to  a  certain  point  had  as
rapidly  relapsed,  at  the  first  touch  of  spiri-
tual proof,  into  disbelief  and  cruel  hostility.
This  seems  the  more  natural  interpretation
of  the  fact,  which  may,  at  the  same  time,
have  become  patent  from  some  angry  mani-
festation of  his  implacable  foes.  There  is
much  to  be  found  in  the  background  and
scenery  of  this  dramatic  colloquy,  reported
with  such  extreme  brevity,  which  would,
if  we  exactly  knew  how  to  paint  it,  solve
its  difSculties.  Ye  seek  to  slay  me,  because
my  word — the  word  which  is  mine— makes
no  progress — or,  adoance — in  you.  Xwp4a
has  both  transitive  and  intransitive  mean-
ings; thus  it  means  "leave,"  "depart,"
"  turn,"  or  "  come  to,"  with  els  (2  Pet.  iii.  9,
"  contain ; "  oh.  ii.  6 ;  xxi.  25 ;  Mark  ii.  2) ;
but  it  has  the  for  je  frequently  in  Plato  "  to
make  progress  or  advance,"  and  it  has  this
force  here.  So  Meyer,  Westcott,  E.T.,  etc.
(Luthardt  and  Tholuck  suggest  "find  en-
hance," which  would  require  els  rather  than
£>).  Not  only  did  they  not  continue  in
Christ's  word  (ver.  31),  but  the  word  itself
made  no  way  in  their  minds ;  it  was  barred
out  by  prejudices,  and  thus  choked  at  its
very  first  working.  Christ  thus  represents
his  word  first  as  the  very  atmosphere  and
home  in  which  his  true  disciples  abide,  and
then  as  a  powerful  influence  which  grows
evermore  in  power  and  command  as  it  is
pondered.  It  means  more  and  more  to  those
who  abide  in  it;  it  implicitly  contains  a
whole  universe  of  truth  and  reality,  of  im-
pulse and  motive,  for  those  who  allow  to  it
"free  course" — who  are  of  the  truth,  and
hear  his  voice.

Ver.  38. — I  speak  the  things^  which  I
have  seen  with  the  (my)  Father : '  and  do  you

•  The  authorities  are  balanced  between  &
iyii  and  iyii  '6.  The  former  is  read  by  K,
B,  0,  D,  L,  X ;  by  important  cursives,  69,
131,  and  quotations  irom  Origen,  Chryeos-
tom,  and  Cyril ;  and  adopted  by  Tregelles,
Alford,  Tiboheiidorf  (8th  edit.),  Westcott
and  Hort,  E.T.,  Lachmann,  and  Meyer.  The
'6  is  read  by  E,  F,  G,  K,  and  others,  by
Gudet,  Lange,  etc.

'  The  fwS  is  omitted  by  B,  O,  L,  T,  X,  by
some  versions,  by  Tisohendorf  (8th  edit.),
Meyer,  Lachmann,  R.T.,  Westcott  and  Hort,
and  Godet,  though  sustained  by  K,  D,  r,  A,
A,  and  other  uncials  and  versions.  Both
the  /tail  and  inuv  seem  as  though  tliey  were


therefore  the  things  which  ye  heard  ■  from
the  '  (yoar)  father ;  or,  and  you  therefore  do
the  things  which  ye  heard  from  your  father.
We  need  not,  with  Meyer,  limit  the  Lord's
vision  of  the  Divine  things  which  he  saw
with  the  Father  to  his  premundane  Per-
sonality, He  describes  himself  in  constant
communion  with  the  Father.  The  Father
is  with  him.  He  knows  the  mind  and  will
and  good  pleasure  of  the  Father.  His  is
the  perfectly  pure  heart,  which  is  as  an  eye
for  evermore  beholding  the  Father.  That
the  Only  Begotten  sees  and  knows  what  no
other  sees,  is  constantly  taught  in  this  Gos-
pel (see  ch.  iii.  32 ;  vi.  46).  In  Christ,  more-
over, the  disciple  may  verily  see  the  Father
(ch.  xiv.  7,  9 ;  1  John  ii.  23).  The  probable
textual  reading  given  above  would  draw  a
speoies  of  contrast  between  Christ's  "  seeing  "
(irapcb  T^)  with  the  Father,  and  the  Jews'
"hearing"  (iropa  rov)  from  the  Father,  as
though  such  communication  were  less  inti-
mate than  "seeing."  This  mustnotbepressed
(see  ver.  40).  If  the  iroteiTe  be  imperative,
the  language  would  be  an  appeal  to  the  Jews
to  act  out  that  which,  from  prophets  and
teachers  and  interpreters  of  the  Divine  will,
they  had  heard.  Moulton  treats  the  clause
as  one  more,  one  last,  exhortation.  The
word  of  Christ  had  not  advanced  within
them — it  remained  as  a  barren  formula ;  let
them  give  it  free  com-.se  now.  Their  oppo-
sition had  not  as  yet  been  malignant  or
hopeless ;  one  more  chance  is  given  them.
The  more  ordinary  interpretation  is  to  make
the  ToieiTc  indicative.  If  it  be  so,  and  still
more  if  the  i/iav  (omitted  by  B,  L,  P)  be
genuine,  "the  father"  to  whom  reference
is  mrade  as  theirs,  is  in  contrast  with  the
Father  of  Christ,  and,  without  pointedly
saying  so,  Jesus  implies  that  it  is  another
father  altogether.  In  ver.  44  Christ  does
indeed  declare  that  the  father  with  whom
they  are  in  ethical  relation  and  sympathy
is  not  God,  but  the  devil — the  very  opposite
of  the  God  of  Abraliam,  the  very  antithesis
of  the  Father  of  infinite  love.    At  this  point

introduced  to  emphasize  the  contrast,  and
are  omitted  together  by  modern  editors.  B.T.
has  introduced  tlie  words  in  italics.

'  "HKoiJo-oTe  rests  on  N",  B,  0,  K,  L,  X,  1,
13,  33,  69,  and  others,  and  a  comment  of
Origen,  which  discusses  the  contrast  between
ijKoiiraTe  and  ddpaxa.  It  is  adopted  by
Lachmann,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Meyer,
Godet,  R.T.,  and  Westcott  and  Hort.  The
T  R.  reads  iapdKare,  with  H*,  E,  F,  G,  H,
M,  and  many  other  uncials ;  and  Lange
and  others  see  no  reason  to  change  it  from
the  nature  of  the  case,  for  "  hearing  "  and
"  seeing  "  are  subsequently  interchanged  in
their  application.

'  See  note  8  in  preceding  column.


364


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vni.  1—59.


he  limply  BUggests,  "Therefore  the  things
which  ye  heard  from  your  father  ye  do,"  ye
habitually  do,  ye  are  now  doing  in  your
hatred  and  murderous  sentiments  towards
myself.  Surely  this  implies  a  severity
which  is  hardly  compatible  with  an  address
to  JewB  who  believed  him.  The  interpre-
tation of  the  following  verse  is  governed  by
that  of  this.

Yei.  89. — They  answered  and  said.  If
the  second  interpretation  be  accepted,  then,
irritated  by  the  suggestion  that "  the  Father"
whose  properties  and  claims  he  saw  aud
revealed  to  them  was  different  from  "the
father "  whose  nature  and  ways  they
"  heard  "  and  practised,  and  counting,  more-
over, on  the  concession  of  the  fact  that  they
were  Abraham's  "  seed,"  they  cried.  Our
father  is  Abraham ;  we  are  spiritually,  ethi-
cally, related  to  him,  and  if  we  are  doing
that  which  we  have  heard  from  our  father,
then  we  can  claim  that  all  we  are  doing  is
along  the  lines  of  our  Abrahamic  dignity.
But  if  ver.  38  be  regarded  as  a  final  ex-
postulation, aooording  to  the  first  of  the
interpretations  of  iroifiTe,  then  the  Jews
merely  disclosed  their  determination  to  mis-
apprehend the  plain  words  of  the  Divine
Lord,  and  when  he  was  reminding  them  of
the  Father,  of  their  Father,  they  at  once
stood  back  upon  their  hereditary  pride,  and
declared  that  they  were  doing  tiie  works,  of
their  great  ancestor.  Jesus  saith  to  them,
H  ye  are '  Abraham's  children,  as  you  say —
for  the  position  of  "children  "  is  involved  in
the  idea  and  claim  of  spiritual  Fatherhood
which  ye  boast — then,  with  such  spiritual
and  ethical  relations  as  these,  ye  would  do
the  works  of  Abraham — works  of  faith ;  you
would  be  open  to  the  access  of  spiritual
revelations  with  childlike  simplicity ;  you
would  have  accepted  the  heavenly,  voice ;
you  would  have  known  whence  it  came ;  yon
would  have  resembled  him  in  his  moral  sen-
sitiveness, in  his  gentle  loving-kindness,  in
his  victorious  faith ;  but —

Ver.  40. — But  now,  as  things  are,  ye  are
seeking — plotting,  contriving,  in  subtle  ways
and  by  false  charges — ^to  kUl  me.  The
entire  discourse  is  made  more  obvious  by
our  Lord's  discovery  of  the  plot  of  the  last
few  days,  and  by  his  allovring  his  friends
and  opponents  to  know  that  he  had  pene-
trated the  thin,  subtle  disguise  under  which
this  murderous  plan  was  veiled.    The  ex-

'  a,  B,  D,  L,  T,  Origen  (ten  times),  and
Augustine  justify  the  more  difficult  reading
^iTTc  instead  of  ^re  of  T.E.  and  the  other
authorities.  So  Tregelles,  Wcstcott  and
Hort,  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  E.T.,  and
Meyer.  'Eitoieitc  stands  without  ay,  on  still
stronger  authority,  though  transferred  to  the
ijiargin  by  Westcott  and  Hort,


oitement  prodneed  by  this  bold  charge
among  his  own  true  disciples,  and  those
who  now  for  the  first  time  heard  of  it,  by  our
Lord's  then  and  there  lifting  the  veil  from
many  a  speeloni  question ;  the  look  of  guilt
on  the  countenances  of  some,  of  truculent
admission  of  the  charge  in  the  gesture  of
others ;  the  loud  murmurs  and  confused  cries
of  the  crowd, — must  all  be  realized  to  appre-
hend the  tremendous  crisis  which  had  now
arrived.  He  aggravated  the  charge  by  de-
scribing himself  as  a  man  who  hath  declared
to  yon  the  truth  whioh  I  heard  from  God.
This  is  the  only  place  where  the  Lord
speaks  of  himself  as  "  a  man"  (cf.  Acts  ivii.
31 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5).  He  here  describes  hina-
self  as  One  who  is  subject  and  liable  to  their
murderous  passion — a  man,  seeing  that  his
eternal  Personality  has  been  presented  to  his
antagonists  in  the  form  of  man.  His  man-
hood was  the  link  of  relation  between  the
God  who  sent  him,  taught  him,  surrounded
and  enveloped  him,  and  the  conscious-
ness of  his  bearers.  This  is  the  highest
representation  of  the  very  conception  of  a
Divine  commission  and  a  Divine  message.
They  were  seeking  to  stamp  out  a  Divine
fire,  to  drown  a  heavenly  voice,  to  refuse  and
trample  upon  a  sacred  Messenger.  This  did
not  Abraham.  The  father  of  the  faithful
was  susceptible  to  the  heavenly  voice.  He
heard  and  obeyed  the  voice  of  Jehovah  with
childlike  docility  (Gen.  xii.,  xiv.,  xviii,
xxii.).  The  visions,  the  commands,  the
messengers,  the  manifestations,  of  God  to
Abraham  were  so  readily  accepted  that  his
faith  is  a  proverb,  and  Ms  greatest  name  is
"friend  of  God."  The  wilful,  hurried,  ma-
licious treatment  of  both  the  Divine  Mes-
senger and  the  sacred  message,  both  of  which
Jesus  declared  to  have  come  directly  from
God,  proves  the  lack  of  relation  with  the  Life
of  Abraham.  They  might  be  Abraham's
"seed"  (crircp/ua)  but  not  his  (reieva)  chil-
dren, and  he  in  this  sense  could  not  be  their
"father."

Ver.  41. — Instead  of  doing  the  works  of
Abraham,  you  are  doing  the  works  of  your
father.  That  is,  you  have  a  father  with
whom  yon  are,  nevertheless,  in  living,  ethical
relation.  If  you  persist  in  boasting  of  your
father,  who  is  neither  "the  Father"  nor
Abraham,  I  must  soon  tell  you  who  that
father  is.  Loud  interruption  followed.
Abrupt  and  startling  was  the  retort:  "We
are  •  [were]  not  bom  of  fornication ;  we  hav«
one  Father,  God,     Many  expositors  think

'  Ou  y^yevi^neSa  is  accepted,  with  T.E.,
by  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.)  and  Luthardt,  on
the  authority  of  K°,  0,  D,  X,  r.  A,  and  other
uncials  and  all  the  cursives ;  o6k  iyevvfiBTi-
fiep  is  preferred  by  Lachmann,  Tregelles,
Westcott  and  Hort,  and  K.T.,  with  B,  D.


CH.  VIII.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


365


that  these  Jews  began  to  babble  against  the
possibility  of  their  being  bastard  children
of  Sarah,  or  to  protest  that  they  were  not
Ishmaelites  or  any  collateral  branoli  of  the
seed  of  Abraham,  like  the  Idumsaans  or  the
eons  of  Eeturah.  This  is  far  away  from
the  context,  and  unworthy  of  the  contro-
versy. The  idea  is  suificiently  explained
by  the  second  clause.  The  covenant  rela-
tion between  Jehorah  and  Israel  is  so  con-
stantly referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament
(Hos.  i.  2 ;  ii.  4 ;  Isa.  i.  21 ;  Jer.  ii.  20)  under
the  image  of  marriage  and  the  unfaithful-
ness of  particular  generations  to  Jehovah  ;
and  their  false  worship  and  Idolatry  are
so  often  regarded  aa  "fornication"  and
"  adultery  "  from  God,  the  Husband  of  the
deilicated  spouse,  so  that  nothing  is  more  pro-
bable, when  Jesus  charged  them  with  doing
the  works  of  their  father,  that  they  should
have  exclaimed,  "  Surely  we  have  no  idola-
trous sympathies.  None  but  Jehovah  is  our
God.  Thou  must  not  charge  us  with  any
compromise  with  the  accursed  thing. "  The
wild  rage  which  the  Jews  had  shown  to
Pilate  in  the  matter  of  the  shields,  their
abhorrence  of  the  defilement  of  idols  in  the
matter  of  food,  their  avoidance  even  of  the
supreme  court  of  Roman  justice  under  fear
of  idolatrous  contamination,  explain  the
outflash  of  this  indignant  rejoinder.  This
view  is,  in  the  main,  advocated  by  De  Wette,
,  Lampe,  Liicke,  Lange,  and  Hengstenberg ;
but  opposed  by  Meyer.  Westcott :  "  We  do
not  owe  our  position  to  idolatrous  desertion
of  Jehovah.  We  are  the  offspring  of  the
union  of  God  with  his  chosen  people.  Our
spiritual  descent  is  as  pure  as  our  historical
descent."  Godet  modifies  it :  "  We  have  no
idolatrous  hlood  in  our  veins;  we  are  Hebrews
of  the  Hebrews."  They  claim  to  be  the
children  of  God,  as  well  as  children  of
Abraham  (Deut.  xxxii  6;  Isa.  Ixiii.  16;
Mai.  ii.  10).

Ver.  42. — But  Jesns  will  not  allow  them
to  claim  the  full  privilege  of  sons  of  God.
Said  unto  them,  If  God  were  your  father,  ye
would  be  loving  me,  not  seeking  to  slay  me.
Seeing  that  you  do  not  love  me,  God  is  not
your  Patlier  in  the  sense  in  which  you  are
boasting  such  relation  to  him.  The  reason
is  :  For  I  came  forth  out  (Ik)  of  God.  This
expression  only  occurs  in  one  other  passage
(ch.  xvi.  28),  and  there  the  texts  vary  be-
tween iK,  atrbf  and  vap^.  It  points  to  the
momentous  and  unique  fact  of  his  incarna-
tion, as  the  projection  from  the  very  essence
of  God  involved  in  the  essence  of  his  being.
The  Father  is  the  eternal  Source  of  Christ's
Divine  nature.  There  are  two  other  forms  of
expression  used  by  our  Lord.  In  ch.  xiii.  3
and  xvi.  30  i(e\6eTv  air6  is  adopted,  which  de-
scribes rather  the  act  of  the  incarnated  One;
and  in  ch.  xvi.  27  and  xvii.  8  4^€\de7y  irapd.


whereby  is  suggested  the  procession  of  Christ
into  the  condition  of  fellowship  with  the
eternal  Father  or  that  of  being  wphs  rhv  &i6i'
or  £»t  rdy  ic6Kttov.  By  i^iXBtiv  in  he  implies
an  even  sublimer  conception  of  the  pre-natal
glory,  and  that,  as  the  author  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  puts  it,  "  he  was  the  Efful-
gence of  his  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of
his  substance."  And  I  am  come.  I  am  here
face  to  face  with  you.  Meyer  and  others
would  make  both  verbs  depend  on  ex  toC
0eoS:  but  if  we  are  right  in  the  special
meaning  of  the  preposition,  the  force  of  it
would  be  lost  in  the  second  clause.  The
6|5\9oi'  refers  to  his  eternal  procession  from
the  very  nature  of  God,  and  special  indica-
tion of  it  when  he  took  our  human  nature  up
into  his  own ;  and  the  ^ku  refers  to  his  pre-
sence and  appearance  in  theirmidst  as  a  "Man
who  told  them  the  truth."  For  neither  have
I  oome.  The  perfect  tense  here  is  used  in
contrast  to  the  present  tjku,  to  show  that  he
has  the  whole  past  of  his  career  as  a  divinely
sent  Messenger  present  io  his  consciousness.
And  he  establishes  the  fact  tliat  he  has
proceeded  from  God  by  the  dismission  of
every  other  alternative.  I  have  not  come
bom  myself,  as  an  act  of  self-determination';
I  have  not  come  to  do  my  own  will,  but  the
Father's.  I  have  not  come  on  any  self-
chosen,  self-honouring  path,  with  motives
of  self-interest ;  but  in  strict  obedience  to
the  Father's  irijunction — ^he  sent  me.  You
would  have  loved  me,  not  hated  me,  you
would  have  trusted  me  and  rejoiced  in  me,
and  not  sought  to  kill  me,  if  God  were  your
Father;  for  you  would  then  have  felt  all
through  my  career  that  that  One  Father,  of
whom  you  boast  an  intimate  knowledge,  was
revealing  himself  as  One  near  to  you,  close  to
you,  in  the  bare  fact  of  my  presence  among
you.

Ver.  43. — ^Why  do  ye  not  understand —
come  to  appreciate  and  penetrate  the  signi-
ficance ot^ — my  speech?  There  is  delicate
subtle  distinction  between  AoAi^  and  Kiyos,
corresponding  to  that  between  \aK4a  and
Ae'-ynj.  The  former  word  connotes  the  form,
manner,  and  tone  of  utterance,  and  the  latter
its  inner  substance  and  power.  AaKid  is  a
word  used  for  any  manifestation  of  sound,  a
voice,  the  babble  of  children,  the  cries  and
songs  of  beasts  or  birds,  for  which  purpose
\4y(i)  and  \iyos  are  not  used  (Trench,  '  Syn.
of  N.  T.').  Peter's  ha\td  betrayed  him  to
the  Jerusalem  crowd  (Matt.  xxvi.  73).
A6yos  is  the  substance  of  the  message,  the
burden  of  the  revelatiod.  The  speech  (\a\(c()
of  Christ  refers  to  the  appropriate  and  signi-
ficant clothing  which  he  gave  to  his  word
(,\6yos).  He  mournfully  asks  why  they  had
failed  to  get  to  understand  the  method  of
his  converse;  why  they  perpetually  failed
to    appreciate    bis    discourse  ;    why    they


366


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  vm.  1—59


peniBtently  put  wrong  constructions  upon
his  phrase,  and  imagined  him  to  be  speaking
of  earthly  things  when  he  was  discoursing  to
them  of  heavenly  ones.  Why?  Because
ye  cannot  hear  my  word — the  Divine  com-
munication I  have  made  to  you.  They  were
morally  so  far  from  him  that  they  could
not  listen  bo  as  to  receive  his  revelation.
The  inward  organ  of  receptivity  was  lacking,
and  "so  the  spiritual  idiom  in  which  be  spake
was  not  spiritually  understood"  (Alford).
The  Divine  significance  of  the  whole  word
of  Christ,  the  new  and  strange  doctrines  of
Messiah,  of  redemption,  of  the  Father,  of  a
sacrifice  and  death  on  the  part  of  the  8on  of
man  for  the  salvation  of  the  world  excited
their  animosity  and  bitter  antipathies.  They
were  not  conscious  of  any  of  the  need  he
came  to  satisfy,  and  so  they  failed  to  appre-
hend the  entire  manner  of  his  revelation.
They  were  from  beneath  (ver.  23).  He  is
disclosing  heavenly  things.  "  Their  ears
have  they  closed,  lest  they  should  bear."

Ver.  44. — Ye  are  of  the  father  who  is  the
devil.  In  this  way  the  great  bulk  of  the
best  commentators  translate  this  difficult
clause.  HUgenfeld,  Volkmar,  and  Davidson
translate,  "  You  are  of  the  father  of  the
devil;"  and  suggest  that  here  the  evangelist
betrayshis  fierce  Grno8tic(Ophite)antagonism
to  the  Jews,  and  adopts  the  view  that  the
God  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  "  Creator,"
was  the  Father  of  the  serpent.  This  is
surely  untenable.  The  Creator  of  all  things,
in  the  prologue,  is  none  other  than  the
Father  acting  through  the  Logos.  In  the
third,  fourth,  and  fifth  chapters,  the  greatest
honours  are  ascribed  to  the  God  of  the  Jewish
people,  and  not  the  faintest  hint  given  of
such  radical  divergence  from  the  stand-
point of  Judaism.  In  this  very  passage  the
father  of  the  faithful  Jews  is  spoken  of  with
profound  reverence.  "  The  second-century
Gnostic  "  must  have  so  cleverly  concealed  his
sentiments,  and  have  refuted  his  position  so
frequently,  that  it  is  inexcusably  inept  for
him  to  have  shown  his  cloven  foot  on  this
occasion.  'I'honia  ignores  the  wild  conjec-
ture of  Hilgenfeld.  Qui  Lord  was  not
dealing  with  the  parentage  of  the  devil,  but
with  the  moral  and  religious  parentage  of
those  Jews  who  were  manifesting  the  most
bitter  antagonism  to  himself  and  plotting
his  destruction.  For  them  to  claim  spiritual
kinship  and  childlike  feeling  to  the  Father
whose  holy  nature  and  whose  love  to  them
he  was  revealing,  was  a  strange  contradic-
tion in  terms.  Our  Lord  repudiated  it  in
(his  terrible  language.  He  had  worsted  the
seductive  suggestions  of  the  devil,  and  when
ke  saw  and  heard  them  repeated  and  set
forth  as  Divine  proposals,  he  gave  them  their
true  name.  "  You  disclaim  the  faintest
iympathy  with  other  gods ;  you  resunt  th»


bar  sinister  on  your  escutcheon;  yon  aay
that  religiously  as  well  as  historically  yon
are  not  bom  of  any  fornication — there  is
no  taint  in  your  theological  position ;  but
I  tell  you  plainly  that  you  are  from,  you
are  manifesting  Uie  very  essence  and  sub-
stance of,  the  father  who  is  the  prime  enemy
of  God  and  man.  The  phrase  is  in  perfect
keeping  with  many  synoptic  phrases  (Matt.
xili.  38;  zxiiL  15;  of.  John  the  Baptist's
language,  Matt.  iii.  7).  And  the  lusts  of  your
father — ^those  of  falsehood  and  murder,  lying
and  slaughter,  being  the  top  and  chief  of  all
his  evil  passions — ^ye  are  willing,  desirous  to
do,  He  has  engendered  these  very  lusts
within  you.  The  paternity  of  your  angry
passions,  your  incapacity  to  see  and  accept
my  word,  are  both  alike  explained.  There  is
no  more  terrible  rebuke  in  the  whole  oompass
of  revelation,  'i'he  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,
in  preserving  these  words,  shows  very  de-
cidedly that  he  was  a  "Son  of  Thunder,"  and
calls  down  fire  from  heaven  (a  very  ertorm)
which  has  been  ever  since  descending  upon
the  heads  of  tliese  and  all  other  bitter
antagonists  of  the  Son  of  man.  He  was  a
murderer  (literally,  a  manslayer)  from  the
beginning.  This  has  often  been  referred  to
the  spirit  which  animated  Cain  in  the
slaughter  of  his  brother  AbeL  There  is
some  corroboration  of  such  a  reference  in
1  John  iii.  12,  "  Cain  was  ek  tov  vomjpov  of
that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother ; "  and
in  the  language  of  1  John  ilL  15,  "Whoso
hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."  (So
Lucke,  Beuss,  De  Wette,  and  others.)  But
the  narrative  of  the  death  of  Abel  makes  no
reference  to  the  agency  of  the  devil,  but
rather  indicates  that  the  sin  of  Cain  was  ori-
ginated by  his  having  been  begotten  in  the
image  of  the  fallen  Adam.  The  better  in-
terpretation and  reference  of  the  words  may
be  seen  in  1  John  iii.  8,  "  He  that  doeth  sin
is  from  the  devil  (ia  toS  Sm06\ov),  for  the
devil  sinnethfrom  the  beginning  (air"  Stpxvs)"
And  sin  entered  into  the  world  through  the
seduction  and  false  statements  of  the  devil,
by  which  the  first  man  was  veritably  slain,
his  moral  nature  killed  outright.  Grace  was
not  shut  out,  but  Adam  died.  In  rhe  day
that  he  ate  of  the  forbidden  tree,  man  most
surely  and  in  the  deepest  sense  died.  "  God
created  man  to  be  immortal,  and  made  him  to
be  an  image  of  his  own  eternity.  Nevertheless,
through  envy  of  the  devil  came  death  into
the  world :  and  they  that  do  hold  of  its  side
do  find  it "  (Wisd.  ii.  23,  24  ;  Eev.  xii.  9);
"  Sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by
sin  "  (Kom.  v.  12).  The  work  of  destruction
at  the  beginning  of  humanity  upon  earth
has  never  been  exhausted.  In  murderous
propensity,  in  lying  and  seductive  words
and  ways,  the  children  of  wrath  are  ever
shosviug  their  parentage.    To  this  statement


CH.  Tin.  1—69,]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


887


our  Lord  added  what  has  by  many  been
regarded  as  a  distinct  revelation  of  the  fall  of
Satan  himself  from  the  condition  of  recti-
tude (cf.  Jude  6 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  4).  He  stands  not ;
ooutinuea  not — ^in  the  trnth  (co-ttikck  in  the
perfect  is  the  better  reading.anddemandsthia
translation ;  the  rendering  of  the  Vulgate,
itetit,  favoured  by  Augustine,  and  involving
a  reference  to  the  fall  of  the  devil,  would
bave  required  ela-riiieei,  pluperfect ').  Jeans
did  not,  therefore,  explicitly  assert  anything
with  reference  to  the  act  of  original  revolt
of  the  devil,  but  declared  that  the  devil  has
no  place  in  truth;  he  restlessly  resists,  throw-
ing a  hopeless,  perilous  glamour  of  falsehood
round  all  he  touches.  ,  Schaff  suggests,
rightly,  that  the  combination  of  this  state-
ment with  that  of  the  prologue  (oh.  i.  3)
presupposes  the  fall  of  this  mighty  and
murderous  spirit  from  a  previous  condition
of  rectitude,  and  the  dictum  of  our  Lord
ought  never  to  have  been  charged  with  the
admission  of  an  eternal  principle  of  evil.
The  fall  of  the  lost  angels  is  not  explicitly
stated.  Because  there  is  no  truth  in  him,
The  absence  of  the  article  before  "truth"
shows  that  in  the  previous  clause  the  objec-
tive truth  is  meant,  that  the  reality  of  things  '
as  known  by  him  is  referred  to.  The  truth
was  that  region  or  sphere  of  action  in  which
he  elected  not  to  stand,  and,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  does  not  stand  nor  find  place.  By
"  truth "  is  meant  subjective  truth  or
"  truthfulness,"  the  spirit  which  repudiates
falsehood  in  all  its  forms  and  manifestations.
There  is  no  consistency  with  himself,  no
inward  harmony  with  reality.  This  is  given
as  reason  why  the  devil  stands  not  in  the
truth.  Whensoever^  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he
speaketh  (X(i\ei)  from  (^/c,  out  of)  his  own
resources — from  wUat  is  most  entirely  bis
own,  revealing  the  depth  of  his  truthless,
loveless,  fatal,  godless  nature.  Schaff  quotes
from  Gothe's  'Faust'  the  account  which
Mephistiipheles  gives  of  his  own  beiug.  Here
it  is  in  Eegan  Paul's  translation —

"  I  am  the  spirit,  who  aye  deny  I
And  rightly  so ;  for  everything
Is  only  good  for  perishing ;
So  better  'twere  that  nought  had  been.
And,  tberefore,  all  that  you  call  sin
Buin,  whate'er  with  evil's  rife
Is  my  true  element  of  life."

'  Westcott  says,  on  the  authority  of  N,
B*,  D,  L,  X,  the  true  reading  is  ouk  (not  oux)
eaTTjicev,  the  imperfect  of  /rr^iKa  (oh.  i.  26  ;
Bom.  xiv.  4),  and  means  "  stood  not."  Oux
'diTTnieei'  is  found  in  B',  0,  r,  etc.,  in  T.B.,
and  margin  of  E.T.

*  The  reading  Us  av,  "  whosoever,"  instead
of  Htcw,  is  allowed  by  Lachmann  on  very  is-
■ufGoient  grounds.  /


Qothe  exactly  expressed  the  Ik  rSiv  itiar
by  "mein  eigentliches  element."  Because
he  is  a  Uar,  and  the  father  of  the  liar.  Th'j
translation  makes  the  auroS  refer  to  ijieiaTiis,
which  is  the  most  natural  antecedent  (so
Bengel,  Meyer,  Lange,  Godet,  etc.),  not-
withstanding the  difficulty  of  the  construc-
tion. This  language  asserts  not  only  the
agelong  proof  which  history  gives  of  the
falsehood  of  this  terrible  personality,  but
declares  that  he  exerts  an  evil  paternity  in
the  life  of  every  liar.  "  Brood  of  vipers  "  is
a  phrase  used  by  John  Baptist  and  Christ
himself  when  addressing  Pharisees.  The
well-known  imagery  of  the  first  promise,
"  I  will  put  enmity  between  her  seed  and
thy  seed,"  etc.,  suggests  the  same  thought.
There  is  an  awful  significance  in  this  power
of  the  devil  to  sow  his  deadly  seed  in  liuman
life,  and  to  produce  thus,  on  the  soil  of
human  nature,  "children  of  tbe  wicked
one"  (cf.  Paul's  language,  Acts  xiii.  10,
addressed  to  Elymas,  vie  Sia^oAou,  "  son  of
the  devil ").  Another  translation  makes
avTov  refer  to  ^evSos:  He  is  a  liar,  and  the
father  of  falsehood,  or  thereof  (Eevised
Version) ;  tlius  drawing  an  abstract  out  of
the  concrete  i^etio-TTis,  or  possibly  referring
to  the  first  lie  which  slew  the  spiritual  life
of  men — to  the  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die "
of  Gen.  ill.  4.  It  is  against  this  view  that
our  Lord  is  here  dealing  with  persons  rather
than  with  abstractions.  Westcott  anil  Moulton
and  Bevised  Version  in  margin  have  given
indefinitenoss  to  the  subject  of  the  verb
Aa\9),  and  translate,  "  Whensoever  one  [or,
'a  man']  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  liis
own ;  for  his  father  also  is  a  liar ; "  the  idea
beiug  that  the  evil  inheritance  from  the
father  of  lies  has  even  made  falsehood  the
essential  element,  the  proprium,  of  the  liar.
This,  however,  appears  to  involve  a  very
complicated  thought.  The  dx  tS>v  ISiav,  if
strictly  spoken,  contradicts  the  idea  of  the
liar's  peculiarities  being  the  result  of  in-
heritance. Still  less  satisfactory  is  tlie  vain
endeavour  of  the  Gnostics,  who  found  here  a
second  reference  to  the  father  of  the  devil.
They  discovered  in  some  Italic  Versions,
and  in  the  usage  of  some  of  the  Fathers,
Kofliis  Kal,  in  place  of  koI,  and  so  took  it  to
mean,  "  he  is  a  liar,  as  also  his  father."  Hil-
genfeld  and  Volkmar  have  fastened  uptiQ
this  text  also,  and  thus  found  further  proof
of  Gnostic  (Opiiite)  heresy  in  the  Gospel.
Eiggenbach  and  Godet  have  remarked  that,
if  tlie  father  of  the  devil  was  spoken  of  in
the  previous  clause,  "his  father"  would
mean  "the  father  of  the  father  of  the
devil " !  We  have  already  seen  how  ground*
less  such  a  charge  against  the  Gospel  is,
and  how  such  a  rendering  would  throw  the
entire  context  into  confusion.  If  we  accept
&e  first  translation,  we  find  that  our  Lord


368


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  viti.  1—59.


announces  a  doctrine  concerning  the  devil,
and  conveys  more  information  than  can  be
obtained  from  any  other  source.  This  ii
not  mere  accommodation  to  the  conscious-
ness of  a  dssmoniao  or  the  prejudices  of  the
Jews,  as  some  have  interpreted  Christ's
language  in  the  synoptic  Gospels,  hut  it
is  distinct  dogmatic  teaching  about  the
personality,  character,  and  method  of  the
devil.

Ver.  45. — ^Then,  turning  to  these  children
of  the  wicked  one,  Christ  delivered  a  tre-
mendous denunciation :  Bnt  because  I  say
the  truth — because  I  am  the  Organ,  Utterance,
and  Incamation  of  the  truth — ye  believe  me
not.  If  he  spake  lies  to  them,  they  would
greedily  receive  them.  The  very  cause  of
their  lack  of  credence  is  the  utterance  of
truth.  The  "  I "  is  emphatic,  and  set  over
against  the  "yon"  of  the  second  clause.
There  is  a  tragic  force  about  this  charge
almost  unparalleled,  implying  the  most  wil-
ful estrangement  from  God,  a  rejection  of
known  truth  because  it  was  truth,  a  love  of
darkness  because  it  was  darkness,  a  moral
obtuseness  which  answers  to  the  terrible
language,  "  Lest  they  should  see  with  their
eyes,"  etc

Ver  46. — ^Which  of  you  oonvicteth  me  of
sin  1  "E,\4yx<i>  is  used  in  the  sense  of  ch.
xvi.  6 — 8  (see  note) — ^Whioh  of  you  can
justify  a  charge  of  siu  against  me  ?  can  bring
it  home  to  me  or  others  f  Sin  {anaprla)  is
not  mere  "error,"  as  Erasmus  and  some  others
have  urged,  because  the  word  throughout
the  New  Testament  (and  in  the  classics
when  not  accompanied  by  some  explanatory
term) always  means  "contrariety  to  the  will
of  God,"  moral  offence  not  intellectual  defect
(so  Meyer,  Luthardt,  Godet,  Westcott).  Nor
is  it  sound  exegesis  to  limit  aiioprla  to  one
particular  form  of  sin  (such  as  "  false
doctrine,"  Calvin,  Melancthon,  Tholuck).
There  is  no  need  to  limit  its  reference ;  and
in  the  unanswered  query,  while  we  cannot
say  that  by  itself  this  passage  is  sufficient
to  demonstrate  the  sinlessness  of  Christ,  it
reveals  a  sublime  depth  in  his  translucent
consciousness  that  places  him — unless  he
were  the  most  deluded  or  self-sufficient  of
human  teachers — on  a  different  position  from
all  other  Divine  messengers.  In  proportion
as  other  great  moral  prophets  have  set  their
own  standard  high,  they  have  become  con-
scious of  their  own  defects;  and  from
Moses  to  St.  Paul,  &om  Augustine  to  St.
Francis,  the  saintliest  men  have  been  the
most  alive  to  their  own  departures  from
their  ideas  of  right.  The  standard  of  Jesus
is  higher  than  that  of  any  other,  and  he
appears  nevertheless  absolutely  without  need
of  repentance,  above  the  power  of  tempta-
tion, beyond  the  range  of  conviction.  True,  I
the  Jewi  brought  a  charge  of  madness  and  |


folly  upon  him  immediately ;  bnt,  so  far  from
convincing  him  or  mankind,  they  stand  for
ever  covered  with  the  shame  of  their  own
incompetence  to  apprehend  his  message  sr
himself.    He  being,  then,  without  sin,  and
assuming  that  he  stands  ix>  the  eternal  truth,
and  is  the  absolute  Truth  of  things,  and  that
he  cannot  from  his  moral  purity  deceive  or
misinform  them,  and  that-  his  testimony  to
himself  is  final,  sufficient,  and  trustworthy,
askg.   If  I   say  the   truth — without   your
having  convicted  me  of  sin  or  brought  any
moral  obliquity  or  offence  against  me — ^if  I
say  (the)  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  me  1
The  reason  is  in  them  rather  than  in  him.
Their  non-belief  discloses  no  flaw  in  his
revelation,  but  makes  it  evident  that  they
and  he  are  on  different  planes  of  being,
with  a  discrepant,  opposed,  moral  paternity.
"Why  do  ye  not  believe  me?"    He  mar-
velled at  their  unbelief  I    He  is  from  God ;
they  are  from  God's  great  enemy.     The
moral  perfection  of  Jesus  as  the  God-Man
is  absolutely  necessary  to  his  character  as
"God's  Lamb,"  as  "the  Only  Begotten,"  "the
Son,"  and  as  "  the  Judge,"  of  the  human
race.   As  he  subsequently  said,  "  The  prince
of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in
me."    To  account  for  this  sinless,  perfect
humanity,  the    entire   conception    of   the
Divine  nature  blended  in  indissoluble  union
with  his  own  is  found  imperative  at  every
epoch  of  Christ's  life.  At  every  development
of  his  official  character,  in  every  new  com-
bination of  circumstance,  in   conflict  and
sorrow,  when  smarting  from  treachery  and
dying  alone  upon  the  cross,  he  is  "  perfect,"
he  fulfils  the  perfect  norm,  he  reaches  the
standard  of  Divine  humanity.    There  is  no
discrepance  here  with  even  Mark's  account
of  his  language  to  the  young  ruler  (Mark
X.  18),  for  he  does  not  there  say  that  he  is
not  good,  nor  does  he  do  other  than  suggest
that  he  is  identified  with  the  One  who  is
good.

Vers.  47— 58.— (6)  The  I  am.  The  elaira
to  be  the  Source  of  liberty  and  life,  in  reply
to  thote  who  appealed  to  their  Father  God
and  their  father  Abraham,  led  Jeew  to  at$ert
hit  anteriority  to  Abraliam,

Ver.  47. — There  was  some  pause  after
this  searching  inquiry.  Silence  showed
that,  if  they  could  not  convince  him  of  sin,
they  were  ready  with  no  answer  to  his
question.  He  assumes  that  his  word  is
unanswerable ;  he  is  what  he  says  he  is,  and
is  able  to  set  men  free  from  sin  and  to  give
them  eternal  life.  Their  position  is  still
further  explained  by  a  distinct  syllogism,  ot
which  the  major  premiss  is :  He  that  is  of
God  heareth  the  words  of  Ood ;  words  which
it  is  obviously  taken  for  granted  he  is
freely,  surely  uttering.  Who  are  the  persons
referred  to?    Some,  like  Hilgenfeld,  dii-


OH.  irni.  1— 69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  BT.  JOHN.


86f


coTsr  here  a  Manlchffian,  Gnostic  Benee —
"those  who  are  essentially  of  a  Divine
origin  and  spiritual  nature,  are  absolutely
different  from  those  who  are  of  the  psychio
or  hylic  nature.  Thus  they  out  away  all
force  from  the  moral  reproof  which  follows.
Others  insist  that  here  Jesus  speaks  of  the
regenerated  man,  the  true  child  of  God,  who
has  power  to  belioTe,  who  has  come  to  the
Father,  being  predestinated  unto  eternal  life.
Even  this  interpretation  does  not  leave  su£S-
ciently  ample  play  to  the  human  freedom,  and
the  personal  self -responsibility,  which  per-
vades th«  toSMl^lag  oi  Hb  gospel.  Elsewhere
ha  jipeaks  of  those  who  are  "  of  the  truth  "
and  "  hear  his  voice,"  of  "  those  whom  the
Father  draws"  to  him  by  the  very  love
and  grace  which  he,  the  Son,  lavishes  upon
tbem  (see  notes,' ch.  vi.  37,  44;  xviii.  37;
xvii.  6,  9, 11).  He  also  speaks  of  those  who
come  to  him  being  given  to  him.  He  is
here  contemplating  this  wide  class,  who  are
scattered  through  all  time  and  places,  with
susceptible  minds  capable  of  hearing  freely,
and  believing  when  they  hear,  the  words  of
God.  For  this  cause  ye  hear  them  not,
because  ye  are  not  of  Ood ;  i.e.  seeing  that  ye
do  not  hear  the  words  of  God,  it  is  evident
that  ye  are  not  of  God.  They  are  not  ex-
cluded from  becoming  so  by  any  irrevereiblo
fate,  but  their  present  obtuseness  of  spiritual
perception,  their  refusal  to  accept  truth  on
its  clearest  exposition,  shows  that  tliey  are
not  bom  of  God ;  they  are  not  being
drawn  to  him  by  inworking  of  the  Father's
grace.  The  very  form  of  the  expression
was  once  more  meant  to  touch  their  con-
science.

Ver.  48. — But  it  brought  from  them  a
shout  of  derision  and  a  burst  of  scornful
mockery.  The  Jews  answered  and  said  nnto
him.  Say  we  not  well  that  thou  art  a  Sa-
maritan, Elnd  hast  a  dmraon  t  They  imagine
that  the  bare  charge  that  they,  the  leaders
of  Israel,  are  "  not  of  God,"  and  that  they
reveal  the  fact  by  their  inability  to  hear  the
words  of  God  then  sounding  in  their  ears,
was  flat  heresy,  a  gross  lack  of  patriotism,
and  proved  that,  in  his  lofty  self-assertion,
he  was  no  better  than  a  Samaritan — ^the
most  hated  of  their  neighbours.  They  re-
turn a  harsh  tti-quoque  to  our  Lord's  refusal
to  admit  their  Abrahamio  descent,  and  his
(Condemnation  of  their  utter  moral  dissimi-
larity from  their  putative  father.  The  sen-
tence, "a  Samaritan  art  thoul"  is  singu-
larly insulting  in  its  tone  and  form.  We
cannot  measure  the  exact  amount  of  insult
they  condensed  into  this  word,  whether  it  be
of  heresy,  or  alienation  from  Israel,  or  accu-
sation of  impure  descent.  It  is  remarkable
that  our  Lord  had  shown  special  kindness
to  Samaritans  (ch.  iv.),  and  had  made  in  his
parable  "  the  good  Samaritan "  the  type  oC
JOHN.


neighbourly  love ;  but  these  very  Jews  had,
in  the  height  of  this  controversy,  accused
him  of  being  a  "  Galilcsan,"  and  it  is  not
probable  that  they  used  the  term  otherwise
than  as  a  soubriquet  of  scorn.  Edersheim
(loo.  cit,  ii.  174, 175)  would  translate  into
Aramaic  the  language  here  cited,  and  finds
in  its  form  Shomroni  the  real  interpretation  of
its  meaning.  Shomron  is,  according  to  him,
used  in  rabbinical  writing  for  Athmedai,  and
in  the  cabbalists  is  used  for  Sammael  or
Satan.  Arabian  traditions  are  brought  in
to  confirm  this  interpretation  of  the  speech,
which  he  regards  as  equivalent  to  "  Thou  art
a  child  of  the  devil,"  thus  retorting  upon
Jesus  the  charge  that  they  were  doing  the
works  of  their  father,  the  deviL  The  one
expression  is  thought  by  Edersheim  equiva-
lent to  that  which  foUows,  thou  haet  a  dsemon;
and  his  explanation  is  thought  to  cover  our
Lord's  silence  respecting  it.  In  our  opinion
this  is  far-fetched  and  unnatural.  Christ's
silence  is  better  justified  by  his  refusal  to
regard  such  a  term  as  conveying  oppro-
brium. He  had  risen  above  the  distinction
of  race,  and  could  afford  to  despise  the
taunt.  In  ch.  vii.  20  (see  note)  a  similar
charge  had  been  made  by  the  angry  Jews.
TheliOrd  is  accused  of  being  mastered  by
some  dtemon,  who  is  perverting  his  mind
and  confusing  his  speech.  Some  further
force  is  added  to  the  charge  from  the  lan-
guage of  the  Talmud, '  Jebamoth,'  fol.  47,  a :
"  B.  Nachman,  son  of  IsEtac,  said  to  a  Sa-
maritan, '  Thou  art  a  Cuthite,  and  testimony
from  thy  mouth  has  no  validity.' "

Ver.  49. — To  this  Jesus  answered,  (n  calm
and  patient  remonstrance,  I  han  not  a
dssmon.  No  strange  or  evil  power  haunts
me ;  I  am  perfectly  clear  in  my  conscious-
ness. Once  before,  when  accused  of  com-
plicity with  Beelzebub,  he  had  retorted
with  awful  solemnity,  and  an  appeal  to  the
conscience  of  his  enemies  and  to  tlie  patent
facts  of  his  own  warfare  with  all  the  king-
dom of  Satan,  It  is  interesting  to  observe
that  he  takes  no  notice  of  the  charge,  "  Thou
art  a  Samaritan."  If  the  above  suggestion
of  Edersheim  were  accepted,  the  silence
would  be  explained ;  but  it  was  more  pro-
bably occasioned  by  Christ's  unwillingness
to  repudiate  fellowship  with  this  persecuted
nationality.  The  parable  of  the  good  Sa-
maritan was  probably  delivered  about  tliia
time.  Here  he  simply  repudiated  the  second
charge,  and  added.  Bat  I  honour  my  Father,
in  declaring  that  these  words  of  his  would
be  acceptable  to  you  if  you  were  of  God  (ver.
47),  and  (the  xal  strengthens  the  contrast
between  the  two  clauses  rather  than  between
the  "  I "  and  "  you") — and,  while  I  am  doing
honour  to  my  Father,  ye  are  dishonouring
me ;  for  you  are  casting  these  reproaches
upon  me,  refusing  my  oneri  of  mercy,  free-

2b


370


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  viii.  1—59.


dom,  Emd  life,  veritable  Tevelations  though
they  be  of  the  heart  of  the  Father.

Vei.  50. — But,  in  honouring  my  Father,
and  in  quietly  bearing  your  unjustifiable
reproaches,  I  am  not  seeking  my  glory  (cf.
vers.  28,  42;  eh.  vii.  18).  The  claim  of
Christ  to  be  and  do  so  much  is  made  be-
cause he  has  the  happiness  of  the  world,
the  salvation  and  life  of  men,  and  the  glory
of  the  Father  as  his  consuming  passion.  He
is  not  seeking  his  own  glory;  he  is  only
crowning  himself  with  the  crown  of  utter
self-abnegation.  But,  while  he  repudiates
all  care  for  his  own  glory,  he  knows  that
there  is  One  to  whom  that  glory  is  dear,  who
seeketh  his  glory,  and  with  whom  it  is  per-
fectly safe,  and  who  jndgeth  with  absolute
injpartiality  and  infinite  knowledge.  West-
cott  quotes  in  illustration  of  &  (vTav,  Philo
on  Gen.  zlii.  22,  "  He  that  seeketh  [maketh
inquisition  for  blood]  is  not  man,  but  God,
or  the  Logos,  or  the  Divine  Law "  ('  De
Jos.,'  29).

Ver.  51. — Verily,  verily.  This  impressive
recommencement  of  discourse  implies  that
a  new  turn  is  given  to  tlie  conversation,
and  that  the  gravest  solemnity  and  impor-
tance is  attached  to  th@  utterance.  It  is  im-
possible that  the  Jews  sliould  have  listened
unmoved  to  Christ's  rejoinder  on  their  rude
taunt,  or  been  unimpressed  by  the  self-com-
posed and  lofty  way  in  which  the  honour  of
our  Lord  was  calmly  entrusted  by  him  to
the  Father.  The  Jews  may  say  what  they
please,  call  him  by  any  opprobrious  name
they  choose;  ''there  is  One  that  seeketh"
his  glory,  and  he  is  content.  He  has,  in
earlier  pojtions  of  this  discourse,  promised
freedom  and  sonship  to  those  who  abide  in
his  word;  and  now  to  those  who  believed
on  him  he  says,  with  extraordinary  empha-
sis, If  a  man  (any  one)  have  kept  my  word,
he  shall  never  behold  death.  This  "  keep-
ing "  is  more  than  "  abiding "  in  the  word.
There  is  the  additional  notion  of  intently
watching  the  "keeping,"  which  issues  in
"  fulfilling  "  and  "  obeying "  (Meyer  and
Tholuck);  see  ver.  55;  eh.  xiv.  15,  21,  23;
XV.  20;  xvii.  6.  The  opposite  of  rnpeiv  would
be  "  to  disregard ; "  the  opposite  of  (puXdtr-
<rui>  would  be  "  to  let  slip  "  (Westcott).  The
promise  is  dazzling :  "  He  shall  never  be-
hold," i.e.  steadily  or  exhaustively  know  by
experience,  what  death  means  and  is.  He
may  pass  through  physical  death,  he  may
(7ei!(rijToi)  taste  of  dissolution,  he  may  come
before  the  judgment-seat,  he  may  see  cor-
ruption (I'Scic  Siaf6opav);  but  he  will  not
behold  {eeapi7v)  death.  He  will  never
know  what  death  is  (of.  here ;  ch.  iv.  14  ;  v.
24 ;  vi.  61,  where  the  Saviour  speaks  of  the
"living  water,"  and  "life  eternal,"  and
"  living  bread,"  which  whoso  partaketh  shall
never  die.   See  also  ch.  xi.  2tj).    He  does  not


tell  his  disciples  that  they  shall  not  see  the
grave,  but  that  in  the  deepest  sense  they
shall  never  die.  "  Death  "  and  "  life  "  are
words  that  are  lifted  into  a  higher  conno-
tation. Death  is  a  moral  state,  not  an  event
in  their  physical  existence.

Ver.  52. — The  Jews — the  adverse  domi-
nant party,  ready  always  to  misunderstand
his  words---(then ')  said  to  him,  Now — in
reference  to  their  own  charge  (ver.  4s),
which  he  had  solemnly  disclaimed—  we  know
(we  have  come  to  Imow,  eyv^Kafiev)  that  thou
hast  a  dsemon.  They  imply  that  he  must
be  under  some  most  bewildering  halluci-
nation. These  words  have  scattered  their
momentary  hesitation.  They  must  have
reasoned  thus :  "  He  who  claims  such  power
for  his  own  words  must  have  personal  im-
munity from  death.  This  is  a  dsemoniacal
folly  and  delusion.  There  have  been  greater
than  he  who  heard  and  kept  the  words  of
God,  and  who,  nevertheless,  did  not  escape
death."  Abraham  died,  and  the  prophets
(died);  and  thou  sayest.  If  a  man  keep  my
word,  he  shall  never  taste  of  death.  Here
observe  the  wilful  alteration  of  the  Saviour's
words.  In  place  of  t6v  Kiyov  riv  i/iSy,  "  the
word  that  is  mine,"  they  quote  him  as  say-
ing,- riv  \iyov  /lou,  "  my  word,"  "  the  word
of  me"  which  conveys  a  more  personal
claim ;  and  again,  in  lieu  of  the  remarkable
phrase,  ow  Oeapijirriy  they  say,  ov  fi^  yeiffTj-
Toi,  equivalent  to  "shall  not  in  any  way
experience  death  " — a  form  of  expression  in-
compatible with  the  fact  of  the  physical
death  of  his  followers  and  a  fortiori  of  him-
self. The  believer,  even  like  the  Lord,  does
latte  of  death  (Heb.  ii.  9),  but  he  does  not
tee  it.  The  pluase,  yeiatrai  Savirov,  is  a
rabbinical  one  for  "drinking  the  cup  of
death  "  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  H ;  Rev.  xviii  6).

Ver.  53. — Art  thou  greater  than  our  father
Abraham,  who  is  deadi  and  the  prophets
are  dead :  whom  makest  thou  '  thyself  t  This
use  of  iroieiv  is  not  uncommon.  "By  thy  own
statements,  whom  wouldst  thou  have  us  be-
lieve that  thou  art?"  (cf.  ch.  v.  18;  x.  33;
lix.  7,  12).  This  claim  to  be  Giver  of  im-
munity from  death,  and  the  further  assump-
tion that  the  belief  of  and  continuance  in
his  word  would  metamorphose  and  trans-
figure death  itself,  implied  functions  which
"  made  "  Jesus  mightier,  more  august,  than
either  Moses  or   Elijah,  Abraham  or  the

•  N,  B,  and  0  omit  the  oJv ;  and  so  B.T.,
Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  and  Tregelles,  but
not  Lachmann,  or  T.B.,  or  Godet.

»  The  <rv  is  omitted  by  K.T.,  with  Ti-
schendorf (8th  edit.),  on  the  authority  of  N,
A,  B,  0,  D,  and  many  other  manuscripts
and  versions  and  Fathers.  The  omission
does  not  convey  the  same  angry  scorn  that
is  involved  in  its  presence.


OH.  vm.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.


871


prophets,  who  were  dead.    "  These  all  died  :
who  art  thou  ?  "

Ver.  54. — Our  Lord  does  not  immediately
or  directly  reply  to  their  question.  He  was
not  making  himself  to  be  anything.  He
was  simply  declaring  the  fact.  He  does
not  return  on  the  astounding  assertion  of
ver.  51,  but  confirms  it  by  reatiirming  his
own  relation  to  the  Father,  and  that  sense
of  absolute  and  perfect  union  with  the
Father  on  which  his  entire  ministry  was
based.  Tesns  answered,  If  I  glorify  myself
— if  I,  from  the  ground  of  my  own  human
consciousness,  and  apart  from  the  Father
who  is  with  me  and  in  me,  and  who
"  seeketh  my  glory  "  (ver.  50),  if  I  have  no
unique  relation  and  access  to  the  Father,  as
you  Jews  seem  to  imply — then  my  glory —
the  glory  of  giving  eternal  life,  of  conferring
perfect  freedom  and  sonship  upon  those  who
rontinne  in  and  keep  my  word ;  then  all  this
glory  which  I  claim — is  nothing.  But  neither
is  tlie  hypothesis  one  of  fact,  nor  is  the  con-
clusion (fair  enough  on  that  hypothesis)  a
truth.  "  I  am  not  glorifying  myself,  making
myself  anything  other  than  I  am."  It  ia
my  Father  who  is  glorifying  me  (cf.  ver.  50,
both  for  construction  and  sense);  of  whom
ye  say,  that  he  is  our  [your']  God.  They
claimed  for  themselves  that  they  were  "  of
God,"  and  that  the  Father  of  whom  he
spake  was  no  other  than  their  God  and
Father  as  well  as  his.  But  they  have  not
comprehended  their  own  Scriptures  nor
God's  providence,  nor  all  the  revelation
vhich  the  Father  was  making  of  himself  in
the  Son ;  while  their  special  and  monopo-
lizing claim  concealed  from  them  the  face
of  the  Father.

Ver.  55. — ^And  (i.e.  while  you  thus  speak,
and  though  you  call  him  your  God ;  cf.  a
similar  use  of  xal,  very  nearly  expressed,  but
not  exactly,  by  the  "  yet "  of  the  Authorized
Version)  ye  have  not  come  to  know  him  by
all  tlie  experiences  through  which  you  have
passed  (of.  ch.  vii.  29 ;  xvii.  25 ;  and  ver.
19).  You  do  not  know  the  only  true  God,
you  have  not  the  knowledge  wliioli  is  life
eternal.  But  I  know  him,  absolutely,  in-
tuitively, by  the  open  eye  of  clearest  con-
sciouaness,  with  invincible  and  perfect
asssnt  The  use  and  contrast  of  the  two
verbs  iyvdKari  and  ofSo,  here  and  elsewhere,
is  very  striking  (see  ch.  iii.  10;  xxi.  17).
When  our  Lord,  however,  was  broadly  con-

'  Westoott  and  Hort,  Tregelles,  Tischen-
dorf  (8th  edit.),  and  Alford  read  rjfiiiv  rather
than  i/iSiv,  with  A,  B^"',  0,  L,  r,  A,  one
hundred  cursives,  and  numerous  Versions.
The  "  our  God  "  is  an  important  variation
firomthe  T.B.,  because  it  is  a  further  indica-
tion that  our  Lord  does  not  repudiate  the
God  of  those  whom  he  was  addressing.


trnsting  the  Jewish  knowledge  of  God  with
that  of  the  Samaritans,  and  identifying  him-
self with  the  Jews  (ch.  iv.  22),  he  uses
olSafiiy.  If  I  should  say  that  I  know  him
not — which  I  do  not  and  dare  not  say.
Christ  could  not  admit  that  his  absolute
knowledge  was  a  delusion.  The  reality  of
the  Father  in  his  Divine-human  conscious-
ness, expressing  itself  through  his  human
thought  and  word,  was  supreme,  overmas-
tering, sublime — I  shall  be,  like  you,  a
liar ;  I  should  deceive  you  wilfully,  as  you
are  deceiving  yourselves.  We  cannot  fail
here  again  to  observe  the  severity  of  Jesus
as  portrayed  in  this  Gospel.  (There  is
nothing  surely  here,  or  in  other  numerous
utterances  in  this  discourse,  inconsistent
with  the  Sou  of  Thunder.)  No  cowardly
modesty  (Lange)  is  possible  to  him.  He
knows,  and  must  speak.  He  cannot,  dare
not,  be  silent,  or  allow  these  bitter  enemies,
with  their  ready  malice  and  perverse  and
continuous  misinterpretation  of  his  words,
to  be  ignorant,  either  of  the  ground  of  his
self-consciousuess  or  his  penetration  of  their
flimsy  excuses.  So  once  more  he  adds,  But
I  know  him,  and  keep  (rripSi')  his  word.  He
will  not  allow  this  Divine  consciousness  to
be  taken  from  him,  even  by  the  shame  and
agony  of  theoross  (Lange).

Ver.  56. — Chiist  then  proceeds  to  the
allegation  that  he  was  greater  than  Abra-
ham, and  exclaims,  Abraham,  your  father,
exulted  (a  word  is  used  of  tumultuous  joy,
Luke  i.  47) — triumphantly  rejoiced  that  he
should  see  my  day  (so  Revised  Version,
margin).  Winer  translates  the  Jya  %  in
the  same  way,  though  that  translation  really
means  "exulted  in  the  knowledge  that  lie
should  see."  The  "  rejoiced  to  see,"  of  the
Authorized  Version  and  Revised  Version,
implies  that,  when  he  thus  exulted,  he  had
seen,  which  is  not  exactly  compatible  or
consistent  with  the  following  clause.  If
Canon  Evans's  theory  of  the  use  of  ii/a  in
the  New  Testament  in  the  sense  of  "the
contemplated  result"  be  sound,  we  have  a
BufScient  translation  in  "exulted  that  he
would  or  should  gee"  my  day.  In  Luke
xvii.  22  we  hear  of  "  one  of  the  days  of  the
Son  of  man."  All  those  days  seem  gathered
together  in  the  expression,  "  my  day,"  and
can  only  mean  the  whole  day  of  his  mani-
festation as  the  incarnate  Word — the  day  in
which,  through  himself,  God  had  visited
his  people.  When  did  Abraham  exult  with
so  lofty  an  expectation  and  desire  ?  Many
times  in  solemn  vision  and  by  heavenly
voice  and  holy  promise  Abraham  was  led
to  believe  that  in  himself  and  in  his  seed
all  the  nations  of  the  world  would  be  blessed
(Gen.  XV.  4;  xvii.  17;  xviii.  10;  xxii.  18).
This  promise  made  him  young  again.  He
staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God.    His


S72


THE   GOSPEL  ACCOUDIKG  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ck.  vui.  1— 5&,


faith  was  counted  for  righteousness.  He
believed  that  God  could  and  would  do  what
seemed  impossible.  That  which  he  rejoiced
that  he  should  see  was  the  day  of  Christ,  the
revelation  of  the  Father,  and  the  way  of  life
proffered  to  all  nations.  He  anticipated  a
fulfilment  of  the  promises  to  such  an  extent
that  he  rejoiced  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.
So  far  there  is  little  difficulty.  Our  imagi-
nation easily  pictures  Abraham  in  the  sacred
tumult  of  a  blessed  hope  concerning  that
which  was  eventually  realized  in  the  Mes-
sianic glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  our
Lord  added,  He  saw  it,  and  was  glad.  And
the  interpretations  of  this  clause  are  very
conflicting.  Calvin  asks  whether  this  does
not  contradict  Luke  x.  24, "  Many  kings  and
prophets  desired  to  see  the  things  which  ye
see,  and  yet  did  not  see  them."  And  he
adds,  "Faith  has  its  degrees  in  beholil-
ing  Christ.  The  ancient  prophets  beheld
Christ  at  a  distance,  but  not  as  present
with  them."  We  are  reminded  by  others  of
Heb.  xl.  13,  "  These  all  died  in  faith,  not
having  received  the  promises,  but  having
seen  and  greeted  them  from  afar."  Conse-
quently, the  only  vision  of  the  day  of  Christ
vouchsafed  to  Abraham  was  the  far-off  pro-
phetic glance.  This  interpretation  ignores
the  difiference  of  two  clauses, "  exulted  that
he  would  see,"  and  "  saw  it,  and  was  glad."
This  second  clause  is  supposed  by  Heng-
stenberg  and  others  to  refer  to  the  vision
of  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  the  Logos  (Gen.
xviii.),  or  to  the  revelation  of  the  vicarious
death  and  resurrection  of  Messiah  in  the
sacrifice  of  Isaac  (so  Chrysostom  and  Eras-
mus). Others,  again,  have  laid  emphasis  on
the  "birth  of  Isaac"  as  the  fulfilment  of
promises  previously  made  to  his  faith.  Isaac
was  regarded  as  "  heir  of  the  world,"  and
the  embodiment  of  the  Messianic  hope.  He
was  the  child  of  promise,  of  the  Spirit  rather
than  of  the  flesh.  This  view  has  been  urged
by  Hofmann,  Wordsworth,  Westoott.  The
proper  sense  was,  doubtless,  that,  since  the
Lord  became  incarnate,  Abraham's  exulting
hope  has  been  realized ;  that  which  he
desired  and  rejoiced  in  anticipation  to  see
has  now  dawned  upon  him.  This  becomes
tin  emphatic  revelation  by  our  Lord  in  one
palmary  case,  and  therefore  presumably  in
other  instances  as  well,  of  the  relation  and
communion  between  the  glorified  life  of  the
saints,  and  the  events  and  progress  of  the
kingdom  of  God  upon  earth.  A  great  con-
sensus of  commentators  confirms  this  in-
terpretation— Origen,  Lampe,  Lucke,  De
Wette,  Godet,  Meyer,  Stier,  Alford,  Lange,
Watkins,  Thoma.  It  is  objected  that  this
kind  of  information  about  the  invisible
world  is  contrary  to  the  manner  of  Christ,
and  would  stand  alone.  This  objection,
however,  ignores,  and  especially  in  the  case


of  Abraham,  other  references  by  oui  Lord,
to  the  same  idea  and  fact.  The  parable,  so
called,  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  intro-
duces Abraham  as  having  been  acquainted,
during  their  lifetime,  witii  the  condition  of
the  two  dead  men  (see  Luke  xvi.  22 — 25).
And  when  our  Lord,  in  conflict  with  the
Sadducees,  would  prove  from  Scripture  and
the  language  of  Jehovah  in  the  "passage
concerning  the  bush"  that  the  dead  rise,
he  said,  "  Since  God  called  himself  the
God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  he  was
not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living ; "
therefore  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  were
living,  and  not  dead  (Luke  xx.  36 — 38).
In  like  manner,  Moses  and  Elijah  are  re-
presented as  conversing  with  Jesus  concern-
ing the  decease  (^loSoc)  he  was  about  to
accomplish  (Luke  iz.  30,  31).  St.  Peter
(I  Epist.  1.  12)  declares  that  the  angels
desire  to  look  into  the  mysteries  of  human
redemption.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  the
principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places
receive  fresh  illustration  of  the  manifold
wisdom  of  God  by  and  from  the  Church
on  earth  (Eph.  iii.  10).  So  that  the  idea  is
one  in  harmony  with  many  other  linos  >f
Divine  revelation.  Abraham  rejoiced  ut
the  advent  of  Christ.  He  has  seen  it,  and
been  gladdened.  The  angels  sang  their
praises  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  rejoiced
over  one  penitent  sinner  (Luke  xv.).  The
patriarchs  also  rejoice  that  the  promises
which  they  handed  down  to  the  generations
that  would  follow  them  have  been  fulfilled.
The '  Midrash '  declares,  says  Wunsche,  that
Abraham  saw  the  Law-giving  on  Sinai,  and
rejoiced  at  it.  Westcott  says  the  "tense"
is  decisive  against  this  joy  of  Abraham  in
Paradise.  Bnt  the  aorist  simply  calls  atten-
tion to  the  effect  at  once  produced  upon  the
consciousness  of  Abraham  as  soon  as  he  be-
came aware  of  the  day  of  the  Son  of  man.
Babbinical  ideas  of  the  knowledge  commu-
nicated to  Abraham  concerning  the  career
of  his  descendants,  conflrm  and  illustrate
this  interpretation ;  while  the  light  thus
cast  upon  the  darkness  of  the  grave  ex-
pounds the  great  statement,  "  He  that  con-
tinueth  in  [keepeth]  my  word  shall  not  see
death."

Yer.  57. — ^The  Jews,  therefore,  said  unto
him — once  more  misinterpreting  his  words,
and  giving  a  materialistic  tone  to  his  Divine
hint — ^Thou  hast  not  yet  fifty  years — "  Thou
art  not  fifty  years  old  " — and  hast  thou  seen
Abraham  t  Christ  did  not  say  that  he  had
seen  Abraham,  but  that  Abraham  had  seen
and  rejoiced  in  his  day.  The  Jews  chose
to  regard  the  language  of  Jesus  as  adding
another  immense  improbability,  if  not  false-
hood,  to  his  previous  claims,  viz.  that  he  had
actually  lived  to  twice  the  age  of  Methu-
selah already.    The  "  fifty  years  old"  may


OH.  vni.  1^59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDINO  TO  ST.  JOHN.


8?3


have  been  limply  nsed  in  ronnd  numbera
for  the  age  of  man's  prime  and  completed
life  (Numb.  iv.  8,  39 ;  viii.  24).  There  may
have  been,  even  if  our  .Lord  was  only  thirty-
three  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  PaBsion,
that  which  apparently  added  to  his  years.
A.  tradition  is  mentioned  (Irenteus,  o.  ii.
22.  5)  of  the  more  advanced  age  of  Jesus
which  the  Ephesian  presbyters  preserved,
and  which  Irenseus  regards  as  between  the
forty-fifth  and  fiftieth  years.  Ernest  de
Bunsen  vainly  finds  a  reference  to  Christ's
age  (ch.  ii.  20)  in  the  forty-six  years  of  the
temple ;  but  it  is  strange  that,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  statement  in  Luke  iii.  23,  there
is  nothing  in  the  extraneous  chronological
data,  e.g.  the  death  of  Herod  and  recall  of
Pontius  Pilate,  which  need  positively  com-
press our  Lord's  life  within  fifty  years
(Westcott).  And  Keim  has  made  the  sug-
gestion that  our  Lord  did  carry  on  his
ministry  for  a  much  longer  period  than  is
commonly  supposed.  It  is  far  more  pro-
bable, however,  that  the  Jews  were  using  an
expression  for  the  term  of  a  completed  life,
and  were  supplying  no  chronological  data
vfhatever.

Ver.  58. — The  reply  of  Jesns  to  this  taunt
is  one  of  the  most  surprising  and  baffling
kind  on  aay  hypothesis  of  our  Lord's  con-
sciousness being  limited  as  thg,t  of  all  other
of  the  sons  of  men.  He  gives  the  solemn
emphasis  cf  the  A/iiiv,  diiiir  once  more —
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Before  Abrar
ham  was  bom  (came  into  being),  I  am.
Abraham  came  into  existence  by  birth
(the  Vulgate  translates,  Antequam  fierat
Abraham :  Ego  eum) :  I  am.  Numerous
attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  this
climacteric  utterance  oh  some  humanistic
theory.  The  contrast  is  very  remarkable
between  yeveaBai  and  el/ii.  Jesus  Christ
declared  his  own  timeless  existence  to  have
been  in  his  consciousness  before  Abraham
came  into  being  at  all.  The  "  I  am "  re-
minds us  repeatedly,  when  used  by  Jesus,  of
the  "  I  AM  TiiAT  I  AU  "  of  Exod.  iii.  14,  and
the  "  tliou  art "  of  Ps.  xc.  (Ixxxlx.  2,  LXX.) ;
cii.  28.  His  human  consciousness  gave  ut-
terance to  the  awful  depths  of  the  eternal
Ego.  Now,  some  critics  have  limited  it  in
its  meaning  to  "  I  existed  in  the  counsel  of
God."  But  there  are  three  objections  to
this  interpretation  :  one  is  (1)  that  the  pre-
sent tense,  ei/ii,  and  not  the  past,  ^y,  was
used  by  our  Lord ;  and  (2)  on  this  inter-
pretation Abraham  must  have  also  equally
pre-existed  in  the  counsel  of  God ;  and  (3)
such  a  statement  would  throw  no  light  on
the  previous  discourse.  The  Baeovian
Confession  of  Faith,  based  on  the  view  of
Sooinus,  explains,  "Before  Abram  becomes
Abraham,  t.e.  the  father  of  many  nalioiis,
I  am  it,  the  Heueia.':,  the   Light  of   the


world."  Not  until  my  Mcssianio  claims
are  acknowledged,  and  the  many  nations
become  children  of  Abraham,  does  Abra-
ham really  become  Abraham,  does  his  name
derive  its  full  meaning.  This  would  be
rabbinical  trifling  (J.  P.  Smith,  'Script.
Test,  to  Messiah,'  vol.  ii.).  Beyschlag  thiidis
that  our  Lord  realized  in  his  Person  not  a
conscious  pre-existence  before  Abraham,
or  before  all  worlds,  but  an  impersonal
principle,  the  image  of  God,  which  could
only  "be"  in  the  eternal  mind  of  God.
There  is  a  sense  in  which  every  man  may
realize  such  pre-existence  as  this,  not  merely
"  the  Son  of  God,"  nor  the  new  man  in
Christ,  but  every  man  whatsoever ;  but  such
a  statement  is  entirely  out  of  harmony  with
the  whole  passage  that  precedes.  If  the
Jews  had  understood  it  in  this  sense,  they
would  not  have  taken  up  stones  to  stone
him,  but,  after  their  wont,  would  have  said,
"  So  also  were  we."  "  Ideas  do  not  see  one
another."  The  first  iyii  eini  (ver.  12)  brought
out  their  angry  unbelief,  but  this  excites
their  murderous  assault.  We  have  to  ob-
serve that  this  remarkable  expression  does
not  stand  alone.  St.  John  had  reasons  for
saying  "  that  the  Word  was  with  God,  and
was  God,  and  waa  made  flesh  "  (ch.  i.  1, 3, 14).
If  Jesus,  in  his  Divine  consciousness,  had
never  elsewhere  spoken  of  having  had  a
being  before  his  manifestation  (ch.  vi.  46,
62 ;  xvii.  5),  of  having  taken  part  with  the
Father  from  the  beginning  (ch.  v.  17),  of
being  •'  one  with  the  Father  "  (ch.  x.  30, 33),
of  being  greater  than  the  temple  or  the
sabbath,  as  being  the  Object  of  the  eternal
love  in  coming  down  from  heaven,  in  laying
down  his  life  that  he  might  take  it  again
(ch.  X.  17,  18) ;  and  if  the  language  of  the
apostles  (Heb.  1.  1,  2;  Col.  i.  17;  Bev.  i.
18)  had  not  entirely  prepared  our  mind  for
the  data  on  which  such  conclusions  rested,
a  generation  before  this  Gospel  was  reduced
to  form,  we  might  join  the  effort  to  resist
such  a  claim  as  that  of  eternal  pre-exist-
ence. But  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Gospel
and  the  entire  New  Testament  teaching  are
seen,  more  and  more,  to  turn  upon  this
fundamental  position — that  in  Christ  dwells
all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  that  he  had
life  in  himself,  and  eternity,  and  that  the
manhood  has  not  only  been  lifted  to  the
highest  place  in  human  remembrance,  but
to  the  midst  of  the  throne.

Ver.  69.— (7)  The  confliet  and  tha  victory.
Therefore — because  he  said  this,  which  if  it
had  no  basis  in  fact  was  rank  blasphemy —
they  took  up  stones  of  the  temple-oomt  to
oast  at  (upon)  him,  "They  rushed  from  the
porch  into  the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  to  pick
up  stones  to  cast  them  at  him ;  but  onoe  more
'  his  hour  had  not  yet  come,'  and  their  fury
proved  impotent.     Hiding  himself  in  one


374


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  viii.  1—59


of  the  many  passages  or  gateways  of  the
temple,  be  presently  passed  out"  (£dm-
sheim).  But  Jesns  liid  himself,  and  went
forth  from  the  temple  ['  going  through  the

'  This  clause  of  T.B.  is  not  in  K,  B,  D,  a,

6,  c,  or  Vulgate,  and  appears  differently
worded  in  the  manuscripts  which  contain  it.
The  later  corrections  of  K  with  C,  L,  X,
numtrous  uncials  and  cursives,  contain  it ;
but  Tischendorf  (8th  edit.),  Meyer,  West-
ciitt  and  Uort,  B.T.,  and  Godet,  omit  it,  on
the  ground  that  it  is  a  marginal  gloss,  occa-
sioned by  the  opening  words  of  the  next
chapter,  and  a  reminiscenoe  of  Luke  iv.  30.


midst  of  them,  and  so  passed  by].  There  is
no  need  to  imagine  more  than  the  exercise  of
his  majestic  energy  before  which  dsemoniacs
quailed,  and  Pilate  (rembled,  and  the  guards
of  the  temple  fell  abashed.  The  crisis  of
his  ministry  in  Jerusalem  is  approaching.
How  often  would  he  liave  gathered  them,
and  given  to  them  eternal  life,  but  they
would  not  1

Baur  defends  them,  and  finds  in  them  a
docetio  view  of  the  humanity  of  Jesus ;  but
the  docetio  view  would  have  demanded
S<l>a>>TOS  ifivtTOf  not  infifiji.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 11. — Ulie  woman  eaught  in  adultery.  This  narrative,  if  not  inspired  Scrip-
ture, bears  all  the  traces  of  a  genuine  tradition.

I.  Thk  plot  Of  the  bcbibes  and  Pharisees.  They  brought  to  Jesus  a  woman
caught  in  the  act  of  adultery,  and  demanded  his  judgment  concerning  her  act.  "  They
say  unto  him.  Master,  this  woman  was  taken  in  adultery,  in  the  very  act.  Now  Moses
in  the  Law  commanded  us,  that  such  should  be  stoned :  what  sayest  thou  ?  "  1.  Their
conduct  was  not  dictated  hy  their  abhorrence  of  this  sin  ;  for  all  evidence  goes  to  show
that  Eoman  looseness  had  penetrated  into  every  part  of  the  Jewish  community.
Besides,  if  they  had  been  sincere,  they  would  have  taken  her  to  the  lawful  judge.
2.  It  was  not  due  to  any  extreme  respect  they  entertained  for  the  Law  of  Moses ;  for
they  had  on  this  question  made  it  practically  void  by  their  traditions.  Instead  of
putting  the  adulteress  to  death,  they  deprived  her  of  her  dowry  and  divorced  her.  3.
Their  true  motive  was  "  that  they  might  have  to  accuse  him."  (1)  Moses'  Law  did
not  make  adultery  a  capital  offence  in  the  case  of  all  adulteresses,  but  attached  the
punishment  of  stoning  to  the  case  of  betrothed  virgins  (Deut.  xxii.  23).  (2)  The
scribes  and  Pharisees  presented  a  serious  dilemma  to  Jesus,  (a)  If  he  answered  that
the  woman  should  be  stoned,  he  brought  himself  into  collision  with  the  Boman  govern-
ment, which  retained  the  power  of  life  and  death  in  its  own  hands,  and  in  any  case  did
not  punish  adultery  with  death.  (6)  If  he  answered  that  she  should  not  be  stoned,
he  would  be  charged  with  opposing  the  Law  of  Moses,  and  would  thus  be  represented
by  the  Sanhedrin  as  a  false  Messiah ;  for  the  true  Messiah  was  to  establish  the  supre-
macy of  the  Law.  (3)  If  he  pronounced  a  severe  judgment,  he  would  lose  his  popularity
with  the  multitudes ;  for  he  had  the  reputation  of  showing  mercy  to  sinners.  He  ate
with  them  and  received  them,  and  declared  that  publicans  and  harlots  would  enter  the
kingdom  of  heaven.

II.  Mark  how  oub  Lord  baffled  his  wilt  questioners.  1.  He  appears  at  first
to  disregard  their  appeal  to  his  judgment ;  for  he  began  to  write  upon  the  ground,  and
appeared  to  be  absorbed  in  the  act.  His  silence  provokes  them  to  insist  upon  an
answer.  2.  The  answer  ii  at  once  definite  and  effective.  "  Let  him  that  is  without  sin
first  cast  a  stone  at  her."  (1)  He  does  not  say — Let  her  be  stoned.  That  might  present
him  as  harsh  and  unmerciful.  (2)  He  does  not  say — Let  her  not  be  stoned.  That  would
be  to  oppose  the  Law  of  Moses.  (3)  He  carries  the  question  out  of  the  judicial  sphere
altogether,  (a)  He  does  not  arrogate  the  right  of  a  civil  magistrate  either  to  decree  or
inflict  punishment.  He  once  before  declined  to  become  a  divider  between  two  brothers
in  the  matter  of  their  inheritance.  (6)  He  disarmed  the  8elf-con^tituted  judges  of  the
woman,  by  carrying  the  question  into  a  sphere  in  which  they  were  themselves  brought
into  judgment.  Accordingly,  they  shrank  in  his  presence  from  asserting  their  sinless-
ness ;  and  they  disappeared,  one  by  one,  from  the  scene,  leaving  the  woman  alone  with
Jesus.

III.  Our  Lord's  treatment  of  the  woman.  "Woman,  whene  are  those  thine
accusers  ?  hath  no  man  condemned  thee  ?     She  said,  No  man,  Lord.    And  Jesus  said


OH.  vui.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDIN&  TO  ST.  JOHN.  875

to  her,  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee :  go,  and  sin  no  more."  1.  Our  LwePs  question  does
not  excuse  her  sin,  nor  imply  any  connivance  at  it,  but  is  designed  to  lead  her  to
SBrious  thoughts  of  it.  2.  The  woman  does  not  deny  her  sin.  3.  Our  Lord^s  saying
does  not  imply  forgiveness.  "  It  is  a  declaration  of  sufferance,  not  of  justification,"  and
is  designed  to  lead  her  to  repentance  and  faith.

Ver.  12. — Jesus  the  Light  of  the  world.  As  ho  had  applied  to  himself  one  of  the
typical  miracles  of  the  wilderness,  so  here  he  represents  himself  as  the  antitype  of  the
fiery  pillar  that  led  the  Isiaelites  during  their  long  pilgrimage.

I.  Jesus  as  the  Lioht  op  .the  world.  " I  am  the  Light  of  the  woild :  he  that
followeth  me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  Light  of  life."  1.  Jesus
was  a  Light  to  the  Oentiles  as  well  as  the  Jews.  (Isa.  xlii.  6.)  Like  the  sun,  his  light
is  diffused  through  all  nations  of  the  earth.  2.  He  is  the  Light  of  truth  to  the  under-
standing. "  In  thy  light  shall  they  see  light "  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  The  Light  of  truth  to
the  understanding,  the  Light  of  love  to  the  heart,  the  Light  of  righteousness  to  the
conscience.  3.  He  is  the  Light  of  glory.  "  The  Lamb  is  the  Light  thereof"  (Rev.
xxi.  23).     Happy,  therefore,  are  they  who  are  his  followers  now  !

II.  The  blessing  of  those  who  follow  the  Light.  1,  It  is  a  blessing  for  those
who  are  moving  forward,  not  for  tho-ie  who  are  going  hachward  into  darkness.  (1)  The
illusion  is  to  the  Israelites  following  the  guidance  of  the  fiery  pillar  through  the  dark
night.  (2)  The  believer  follows,  not  precedes,  the  Light.  Jesus  goes  before  every
man  to  make  hia  way  plain.  Christian  life  is  a  following  Jesus  step  by  step.  2.  The
believer  will  not  walk  in  darkness.  (1)  Consiiier  the  significance  of  this  darkness,  (a)
There  is.  danger  in  darkness.  (6)  There  is  discomfort  in  darkness,  (c)  There  is  fear  in
darkness.  (2)  The  believer  is  delivered  from  the  darkness  (a)  of  ignorance,  for  once  he
knew  not  what  he  was,  where  he  was,  or  whither  he  was  going ;  (J)  of  error,  for  he  walks
in  the  truth  of  the  gospel ;  (c)  of  unbelief,  for  he  walks  by  faith  in  Christ ;  (d)  of  sin,
for  he  sees  Christ  and  enjoys  the  blessed  promise,  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for
the/  shall  see  God."  3.  The  believer  shall  have  the  Light  of  life.  (1)  This  is  the  Light
wliich  springs  from  life.  "  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  Light  of  men."  Just
as  the  light  that  is  abroad  over  the  world,  reflected  from  object  to  object,  streams  from
the  sun,  so  all  the  Light  that  streams  from  believers  downward  upon  a  dark  world
coiasB  from  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  (2)  It  is  the  Light  that  issues  in  life.
(3)  It  is  a  growing  Light ;  "  it  increases  to  the  perfect  day."  (4)  It  is  a  Light  that  can
never  be  extinguished.

Vers.  13 — 18. — Tlie  objection  of  the  Pharisees,  and  the  answer  of  our  Lord.  "  Thou
bearest  testimony  to  thyself;  thy  testimony  is  not  true."  1.  Superficially  regarded,
the  objection  was  one  of  which  Jesus  himself  had  admitted  the  force.  "  If  I  bear  witness
of  myself,  my  witness  is  not  true"  (ch.  v.  31).  In  that  case  he  had  spoken  of  himself
as  mere  man.  Now  he  speaks  of  himself  in  his  Divine  nature.  2.  But  the  essential
characteristic  of  Christ's  being  was  that  he  was,  as  the  Light,  self -manifesting.  He  was
himself  his  own  evidence.  The  Jews  were  standing  in  the  light  of  day ;  they  did  not
need  any  proof  that  the  sun  had  risen.  3.  Our  Lord's  answer  claims  his  true  position.
(1)  His  own  teaching  ii  sufiicient,  for  it  is  supported  by  sufficient  guarantees.  (2)
Christianity  is  based  on  the  testimony  which  Jesus  gives  of  himself.  "And  still  if  I
bear  testimony  of  myself,  my  testimony  is  true  :  because  I  know  whence  I  came,  and
whither  1  go."  (a)  He  knows  that  he  came  from  heaven — that  the  "  Son  of  man
descended  from  heaven  ;  "  (5)  that  he  is  "  to  go  away  "  to  heaven  as  his  home.  (3)
The  ignorance  of  these  Pharisees  on  these  facts  is  their  reproach.  "  But  you,  ye  do  not
know  whence  I  come,  nor  whither  I  go."  (a)  They  imagined  him  to  be  the  Son  of  Joseph
and  Mary.  (6)  They  interpreted  his  words  about  "  going  away  "  to  mean  his  departure
among  the  Gentiles,  or  to  mean  suicide  itself,  (c)  Their  judgment  was  based  upon
appearances.  "  You  judge  after  the  flesh."  They  deemed  him  to  be  no  more  than  an
ordinary  man,  a  sinner  like  themselves.  If  they  had  any  spiritual  discernment,  they
would  have  recognized  his  Divine  nature,  (d)  His  judgment  was  not  single  and  alone.
"  I  judge  no  one.  And  yet  if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  true  :  because  I  am  not  alone,
but  I  and  the  Father  that  sent  me."  The  Pharisees  formed  their  judgment  without
seeking  higher  guidance ;  byt  he  did  not  jurige  apart  from  his  Father.    He  but  delivers


376  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  vin.  1—69.

to  the  world  the  judgment  of  his  Father,  (e)  His  judgment  followed  the  full  prescrip-
tion of  the  Mosaic  Law.  "  And  it  is  moreover  written  in  your  Law,  that  the  testimony
of  two  men  is  true."  There  was  the  double  witness  of  himself  and  his  Father.  "I  am
One  that  hear  witness  concerning  myself,  and  the  Father  that  sent  me  beareth  witness
of  me."  (a)  His  miracles  and  his  words  were  his  own  witnesses.  (;9)  The  Father'i
witness  was  borne  in  prophecy,  in  the  voice  at  the  baptism  and  at  the  transfiguration,
as  well  as  in  all  the  miracles  of  his  personal  ministry.

Vers.  19,  20. — The  scornful  rejomder  of  the  Pharisees,    "  Where  is  thy  Father  ?  "
L  The  appeal  to  an  unseen  and  absent  witness  does  not  satisfy  the  enemies
OF  Jesus.     They  ask  not,  "  Who  is  thy  Father  ?  "  hut  "  Where  is  thy  Father  ?  "  that
he  may  be  produced  before  us  as  a  witness  to  thy  claims.

IL  OuB  Lord's  answeb.  "  Ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father :  if  yo  had  known
me,  ye  would  have  known  my  Father  also."  1.  Their  ignorance  of  Christ's  Divine
nature  was  patent  all  along.  2.  ITieir  ignorance  of  the  Father  was  necessitated  morally
by  their  ignorance  of  the  Son ;  for  it  is  he  who  reveals  the  Father.  "  He  that  hath  scon
we  hath  seen  the  Father;"  "No  man  can  know  the  Father,  but  he  to  whom  the  Son
reveals  him."    The  eye  of  faith  needed  to  supplement  the  eye  of  sense.

III.  The  publicity  and  boldness  of  our  Lord's  teachino.  "  These  words  spake
Jesus,  as  he  taught  near  the  treasury  in  the  temple."  1.  Therefwe  in  the  very  centre
of  Jewish  life,  under  the  very  eyes  of  the  Sanhedrin.  2.  The  Jews,  though  ready  to
destroy  him,  were  restrained  by  conscience  and  by  public  opinion  from  "  laying  tJieir
hands  upon  him."    3.  The  hour  of  our  Lord  was  not  yet  come.

Vers.  21 — 25. — A  warning  to  the  Jews  of  the  importance  of  the  present  hottr.  It
was,  probably,  in  the  last  day  of  the  feast  that  our  Lnrd  uttered  this  warning.

L  The  solemn  issues  that  huno  upon  his  continued  sojourn  with  the  Jews.
"I  go  my  way,  iind  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  ye  shall  die  in  your  sin  :  whither  I  go,  ye
cannot  come."  1.  7'heir  rejection  <f  him  would  close  heaven  against  them.  They  could
not  possibly  enter  into  that  "  rest "  on  account  of  their  unbelief.  2.  Sis  death  was  a
matter  fixed  hy  the  "determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  Ood."  Through  death
he  is  to  pass  upward  to  his  kingdom  and  glory.  3.  The  Jewish  search  after  him  would
be  in  the  day  of  their  overwhelming  despair,  and  would  be  fruitless  because  not  in  the
way  of  faith.  4.  The  separation  between  Jesus  and  the  Jews  would  be  made  perpetual
by  their  sin.  "  Ye  sliaU  die  in  your  sin."  The  sin  was  that  of  unbelief,  in  "departing
from  the  living  God."     "  If  ye  believe  not  that  I  am,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."

JI.  The  spirit  of  scoknful  levity  with  which  these  issues  are  treated  by
THE  Jews.  "  Will  he  kill  liimself?  for  he  saith.  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come?"  1.
There  is  an  evident  increase  in  Jewish  bitterness.  Lately  they  asked — Would  he  go  as
a  Messiah  to  the  Gentiles  ?  now  they  ask — WouW  he  go  to  the  deaii  ?  2.  They  insinuate
that  to  follow  him  to  the  grave  is  out  of  the  question.  If  he  killed  himself,  he  would
find  himself  in  hell ;  they,  on  the  ether  hand,  expected  to  find  themselves  at  death  in
Abrahnrn's  bosom.  3.  The  question  reveals  the  deepening  moral  separation  between
Jesus  and  his  enemies,

HI.  The  cause  of  their  inability  sithbb  to  follow  or  to  understand  kim.
"Ye  are  from  beneath;  1  am  from  above:  ye  are  of  thii  world;  I  am  not  of  fhis
world.  Therefore  said  I  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  1.  They  btlonged
to  a  different  sphere  from  himself.  His  origin  and  nature  were  from  heaven;  their
origin  and  nature  were  from  earth.  There  could,  therefore,  be  no  moral  understanding
between  them.  "  They  were  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that
was  in  them  "  (Eph.  iv.  23).  2.  Fatal  effect  of  this  worldly  nature.  "  For  if  ye  believe
not  that  I  am,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  As  following  the  course  of  this  world,  as
minding  wrthly  things,  but,  above  all,  as  refusing  to  recognize  his  essential  Divinity,
they  were  separated  from  him  who  was  the  true  Source  of  life,  and  were  doomed  to  die
in  their  sins.

IV.  The  renewal  of  theib  scornful  questionino.  "  Then  said  they  unto  him,
Who  art  thou  ?  Jesus  saith  to  them.  Even  the  same  that  I  said  unto  you  from  the
beginning."  1.  How  indurated  was  the  unhelief  of  the  Jews  I  They  had  received
"  lipe  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,"  and  yet  they  rejected  Chria^     2.  Sow  utterly


OH.  vin.  1— 59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN.  877

viithout  accuse  was  their  tmbelie/l  They  had  heard  but  one  consistent  declaration  of
truth,  ever  growing  in  clearness  and  fulness ;  yet  there  was  no  spiritual  or  intellectual
response  to  this  teaching.

Vers.  26 — 29. — A  still  dearer  revelation  in  store  for  them.    L  Jesus  hab  a  itill

FtTLLBB  BEVBLATION  TO  OIVB  THEM  OF  THKIB  MORAL  CONDITION.      "  I  have  many  things

to  say  and  to  judge  concerning  you."  1.  Sia  judgment  is  true.  "But  be  that  sent  me
is  true."  He  only  declares  the  judgment  of  his  Father  concerning  their  actions.  2.
The  Jews  ceuld  not  recognize  the  Divine  origin  of  this  judgment,  "  They  understood
not  that  he  spake  to  them  of  the  Father."

II.  His  CK0CIFIXION  would  make  many  things  clear  to  theib  minds.  "  When
ye  liave  lifted  up  the  Son  of  man,  then  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  he,  and  that  I  do
nothing  of  myself."  That  dreadful  event  would  reveal  the  secrets  of  many  hearts.  1.
He  recognizes  the  Jews  as  the  future  instruments  of  his  crucifixion.  Verily  it  was  "  with
wicked  hands"  they  slew  him  (Acts  ii.  23).  2.  Though  he  was  to  be  crucified  in  weak-
ness, yet  he  was  to  live  by  the  power  of  God.  3.  Bis  death  was  the  gateway  to  his
ascension-glory.  ,4.  His  death  would  establish  the  absolute  unity  of  purpose  and  action
that  existed  between  himself  and  his  Father,  5.  The  effect  of  the  Son's  obedience  to  his
Father's  will.  "  The  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone ;  for  I  do  always  those  things  that
please  him."  The  Father's  presence  is  not  accounted  for  merely  by  the  Son's  active
and  perfect  obedience,  but  is  the  spring  and  principle  of  it.

Vers,  30 — 32. — T%e  bondage  of  the  Jews,  and  the  source  of  true  liberty.  The  effect  of
the  previous  discourse  was  remarkable.

I.  The  intellectual  acceptance  of  Jesus  bt  the  Jews,  "As  he  spake  these
words,  many  believed  on  him."  They  accepted  his  statements,  and  believed  him  to  be
the  Messiah.  They  were  not,  however,  true  believers,  because  Jesus  afterwards  repre-
sents them  as  seeking  to  kill  him  (ver.  37).

II.  The  counsel  of  oub  Lord  to  the  new  converts.  "If  ye  continue  in  my
Word,  then  are  ye  my  disciples  indeed ;  and  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth
shall  make  you  free."  1.  The  necessity  of  steadfastness  in  the  truth.  (1)  It  is  implied
that  obstacles  would  have  to  be  overcome.  Satan  is  ever  at  hand  to  pluck  the  good
seed  of  the  Word  out  of  the  heart.  The  strength  of  Jewish  prejudice  would  mass
itself  against  the  truth.  (2)  Steadfastness  is  a  condition  of  discipleship.  The  words  of
Christ  imply  the  first  rude  beginnings  of  faith.  It  implies  that  Christ's  Word  has  come
with  power,  and  has  a  place  in  their  hearts.  2.  The  blessed  privilege  of  steadfast  dis-
(Aplis.  "And  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  (1)  The
truth  being  the  element  in  which  the  Christian  lives,  there  is  in  his  abiding  In  it
a  guarantee  for  fuller  knowledge.  "In  thy  light  shall  we  see  light."  While  others
should  be  ever  learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowleiige  of  the  truth,  the  Chris-
tian receives  a  larger  knowledge — ^is  led  into  all  truth,  and  sees  more  of  the  beauty  and
glory  of  Christ.  (2)  The  truth  gives  true  freedom,  (a)  This  was  more  than  freedom
from  Boman  rule,  which  was  expected  to  fall  with  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  (6)  As
evil  has  its  stronghold  in  darkness,  the  light  of  truth  destroys  it,  and  thus  the  Christian
is  freed  from  ignorance  and  error,  and  the  indisposition  to  all  good.

Vers.  33 — 36. — Misapprehension  of  the  disciples  corrected.  I.  Theib  strange  mis-
conception. "  They  answered  him.  We  be  Abraham's  seed,  and  were  never  in  bondage
to  any  man  :  how  sayest  thou,  Te  shall  be  made  free?"  1.  We  cannot  imagine  the
speakers  to  be  capable  of  the  absurdity  of  making  a  historical  misstatement.  The  facts
of  Jewish  history  were  universally  known  at  Jerucalem.  The  Jews  could  not  deny
the  Egyptian,  Babylonian,  Syrian,  and  Roman  conquests.  They  either  referred  to  the
civil  liberty  which  they  had  long  enjoyed,  or  they  meant  to  assert  that  they  had  never
recognized  their  conquerors  oracquiesced  in  their  dominion.  2.  Yet  there  was  a  serious
misunderstanding  springitig  from  their  prevailingly  carnal  tone.  They  seemed  as  yet
unable  to  recognize  the  inner  bondage  of  soul  which  is  dissolved  by  grace.

LL  Oub  Lord's  xluoidation  of  the  mystert.  "Whosoever  committed  tin  ia
the  Blave  of  sin."  1.  He  refers  to  the  habitual  sinner,  not  to  the  man  who  commits  an
individual  act  of  transgression.    Such  a  man  gives  himself  to  sin,  sells  himself  to  work


378  TIIR  GOSPEL  AOOOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  vul  1—59.

wickedness,  and  takes  pleasure  in  sin.  2.  Every  sinner  has  a  master,  Viho  has  dominion
over  him,  and  gives  wages  to  his  servants.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Bom.  vi.  22),
because  he  obeys  it  in  the  lusts  thereof.  3.  Perfect  freedom  is  only  to  he  enjoyed  in
perfect  harmony  with  the  Divine  will,  inasmuch  as  slavery  to  sin  implies  a  false
relationship  to  God.  4.  Mark  the  contrasted  situations  of  the  servant  and  the  Son.
"  And  the  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever :  the  Son  abideth  ever."  (1)  As
Abraham's  seed,  the  Jews  would  remember  how  Isaac,  the  son  of  the  free-woman,
remained  in  the  house  as  the  heir  of  promise,  while  Ishmael,  as  the  son  of  the  bond-
woman, was  cast  out.  Our  Lord  adheres  to  the  lines  of  ancient  history,  so  as  to  mark
the  distinction  between  Jews  who  failed  to  recognize  the  privilege  of  sons,  and  those
who  were  as  sons  introduced  into  the  true  spiritual  freedom  of  Abraham's  seed.  (2)
Yet  he  points  to  himself  as  the  true  Enfranchiser  of  the  slave.  "  If  the  Son  therefore
shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  He  only  could  place  the  slave  on  a  new
footing  in  the  household.  It  is  Christ  who  gives  us  true  freedom  (Gal.  v.  1).  It  is  true
freedom,  because  it  is  freedom  (a)  from  guilt  and  condemnation  ;  (6)  from  the  dominion
of  sin ;  (c)  from  the  accusing  voice  of  the  Law ;  (d)  from  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and
error ;  (e)  it  is  freedom  of  access  to  God  at  all  times  (Eph.  ii.  18) ;  (/)  it  holds  out  the
expectation  of  the  glorious  liberty  of  sons  of  God  hereafter  (Rom.  viii.  21).

Verg.  37 — 47. — The  spiritual  parentage  of  the  faithless  Jews.  Jesus  does  not  deny
their  legitimate  descent  from  Abraham.     Truth  must  be  conceded  to  an  adversary,

L  Their  moral  pabbntage  cannot  be  traced  to  Abraham.  "  But  ye  seek  to
kill  me,  because  my  Word  makes  no  progress  in  you."  1.  Our  Lord  concedes  that  his
Word  had  somehow  made  an  entrance,  but  national  prejudices  hindered  its  thorough
acceptance  in  heart  as  well  as  mind.  2.  The  explanation  of  the  resistance  given  to  the
full  power  of  the  truth.  "  As  for  me,  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  the  Father :
and  ye  do  the  things  which  ye  have  heard  from  your  father."  (1)  Chiist  reveals  the
Father's  mind  and  wUl,  as  he  is  the  Word,  coming  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  uncreated
Godhead.  The  Son's  knowledge  is  (o)  perfect  and  (6)  direct.  (2)  The  Jews  derived  their
knowledge,  as  well  as  evil  impulses,  from  the  devil,  (o)  The  devil  is  actively  engaged
in  misleading  those  who  have  accepted  the  truth  even  intellectually.  (6)  The  unstable
nature  is  very  open  to  evil  guidance.

n.  The  persistency  or  the  Jbwish  claim  to  a  pure  Abrahamio  descent.
"  Abraham  is  our  father."  1.  The  Jews  already  claimed  an  interest  in  the  Abrahamic
inheritance.  "  We  be  Abraham's  seed."  They  now  claimed  the  dignity  and  security
of  a  personal  relationship.  2.  We  are  all  too  prone  (a)  to  pride  oui  selves  on  our
external  privileges,  (6)  and  it  is  a  danger  to  souls  to  rely  upon  them.

III.  The  peaotical  test  applied  to  this  claim.  "  If  ye  were  Abraham's  children,
ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham."  1.  The  child  is  supposed  to  bear  the  ethical  stamp
of  the  father's  character.  Moral  descent  is  Inconsistent  with  contrariety  of  action.
Abraham  was  remarkable  (1)  for  his  docile  acceptance  of  Divine  command,  (2)  and  for
his  reverence  for  those  angelic  messengers  who  conveyed  it.  2.  The  Jews  practically
repudiated  their  Ahrahamic  relationship  hy  their  conduct.  "  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill
me,  a  Man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  from  God."  There  was  an
evU  gradation  in  their  conduct.  (1)  They  sought  to  kill  Jesus,  an  innocent  Man  ;  (2)
a  Man  divinely  commissioned  to  impart  the  truth  to  them ;  One  who  was  more  than
a  prophet.  (8)  The  truth  being  not  of  man,  but  of  God,  aud  therefore  challenging
universal  and  imquestioning  assent.

IV.  OcR  Lord  asserts  a  different  parentage  for  the  Jews.  "Ye  do  the
deeds  of  your  father."  The  Jews  begin  to  discern  that  a  spiritual  father  is  meant,  and
accordingly  shift  their  ground  to  meet  the  new  contention  of  our  Lord.  1.  The  Jews
claim  a  Divine  fatherhood.  "  We  are  not  born  of  fornication ;  we  have  but  one  Father,
God."  (1)  They  expressly  repudiate  any  implied  imputation  of  idolatry.  They  had
stood  apart  for  ages  from  the  polytheism  of  the  Gentiles.  (2)  There  is  a  touch  of
pride  in  the  assertion  of  their  relation  to  one  Father,  even  God.  Israel  was  called  God's
son,  his  firstborn.  To  Israel  belonged  "  the  adoption  "  (Kom.  iv.  2).  2.  Ottr  Lord
manifests  the  groundlessness  of  their  claim.  "  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would  love
me."  (1)  Spiritual  affinity  would  necessitate  this  love  to  the  Father's  Son  and  the
Father'*  Prophet.     Love  to  Christ  is  always  implanted  in  regeneration.     Love  is  one  of


CH.  vin.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  879

the  fruits  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  (2)  This  love  is  grounded  on  a  twofold  con-
sideration :  (a)  of  Christ's  Divine  Sonphip  and  his  incarnation — "  For  I  proceeded  forth
and  came  from  God ; "  and  (6)  of  his'  mission  as  Mediator — "  Neither  came  I  of  myself,
but  he  sent  me."  Had  the  Jews  loved  Christ,  they  would  have  recognized  the  Divine
character  of  his  Person  and  his  work.  3.  Our  Lord  explains  their  ignorance  of  his
language.  "  Why  do  ye  not  recognize  my  language  ?  Because  ye  cannot  imderstand
my  Word."  (1)  They  lacked  the  organ  of  spiritual  discernment.  (2)  They  were  under
an  influence  that  made  them  deaf  to  the  voice  of  truth.

V.   OdB   LoBD   ASSEKTS     the   TBnB     PARENTAGE    OP    THE     JeWS    WITHOUT    DISQTnSB.

"  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  desire  to  do."  1.  It
was  an  act  of  courage  as  well  as  faithfulness  to  make  such  an  assertion.  2.  It  was  an
assertion  founded  on  truth,  for  it  was  justified  by  a  right  interpretation  of  their  conduct.
The  Jews  manifested  the  two  traits  of  the  devil's  character — hatred  of  man  and  aversion
to  the  truth.  Let  men  pretend  what  they  will,  their  conduct  must  be  taken  as  the  test
of  their  character,  3.  The  character  here  assigned  to  the  Jews  is  not  due  to  the  parent,
hut  to  the  children ;  for  they  "  desired  to  do  the  lusts  of  their  father."

VL  The  poktkait  of  the  devil.  "  He  has  been  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,
and  stood  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in  him."  1.  The  words  imply
that  the  devil  is  an  evil  spirit,  and  not  a  mere  personification  of  evil.  2.  The  existence
of  the  devil  is  no  more  inconsistent  ivith  the  holiness  or  goodness  of  Qod  than  the  existence
of  evil  men  on  earth.  3.  There  are  two  characteristics  of  the  devil,  (1)  He  is  a  murderer,
(a)  He  brought  death  in,to  the  world  by  his  subtlety  and  falsehood  (2  Cor.  xi.  3).  (6)  He
has  had  a  long  history  as  a  murderer.  His  first  act  was  in  Paradise.  He  instigated
Cain's  murder  of  his  brother.  He  prompted  the  act  of  Judas  Iscariot  to  secure  the  death  of
Christ.  He  still  tempts  sinners  to  their  destruction.  (2)  He  is  an  enemy  to  the  truth,
(a)  Because  he  fell  from  the  truth  himself,  and  from  that  holiness  that  marks  the  realm
of  truth.  (6)  The  reason  of  his  fall  is  his  utter  falseness.  "  There  is  no  truth  in  him."
He  does  not  dwell  in  the  sphere  of  truth,  because  he  is  subjectively  out  of  all  sympathy
a:.d  relation  to  it.  (e)  The  effect  of  his  falseness.  "When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he
speaketh  from  his  own  resources :  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  the  liar."  (o)  The
devil,  in  contrast  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  speaketh  not  of  himself,  but  of  the  things
given  him  of  God,  elaborates  his  lies  out  of  the  immense  storehouse  of  his  own  creative
ingenuity.  ()3)  He  was  the  first  liar,  as  he  was  the  first  murderer ;  he  was  a  liar  first,
because  by  his  lies  he  deceived  our  first  parents  to  their  destruction.  He  was  the  first
author  of  a  lie.  The  first  lie,  "  Thou  shalt  not  surely  die,"  was  uttered  by  the  devil.
(7)  He  is  the  father  of  a  large  family — he  is  "  the  father  of  the  liar  " — ^a  character  (i.)
full  of  deceit,  (ii.)  odious  to  God  and  man,  (iii.)  doomed  to  feel  the  bitterness  of  distrust
in  this  life,  (iv.)  and  to  be  "  cast  into  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone  "
(Bev.  XX.  10).

VII.  The  proof  op  the  devil's  infldbnoe  over  the  Jewish  mind.  "And  as  for  me,
because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  ye  believe  me  not."  1.  As  the  opposition  between  Christ
and  the  devil  is  the  opposition  between  truth  and  falsehood,  it  manifests  itself  in  the
children  of  the  two  respectively.  2.  J^  Jesus  had  spoleen  falsehood,  the  Jews  would
have  believed  him.  3.  The  unbelief  of  the  Jens  had  a  moral  grotind.  It  is  true  psycho-
logically to  speak  of  "  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief."  4.  Christ's  moral  conduct  afforded
no  suggestion  unfavourable  to  the  truth  of  his  doctrine.  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  me
of  sin  ?"  (1)  This  was  a  bold  challenge  to  a  nation  of  fault-finders.  He  was  in  their
eyes  a  glutton  and  a  winebibber,  a  blasphemer  and  a  deceiver  of  the  people.  (2)  Had
Jesus  been  merely  a  pre-eminently  holy  man,  he  would  have  been  the  first  to  discov.  r
and  acknowledge  his  sin.  (3)  As  the  Son  of  God  he  was  essentially  sinless,  and  inca-
pable of  sinning.  5.  The  unreasonableness  of  continued  unbelief .  "And  if  I  say  the  truth,
why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ?  "  If  I  am  no  sinner,  and  nothing  in  my  conduct  injures
the  purity  of  my  testimony  to  the  truth,  you  are  still  more  obstinately  unreasonable  in
refusing  to  believe  me.  6.  The  final  explanation  of  Jewish  unbelief.  "He  that  is  of
God  heareth  God's  words :  ye  therefore  hear  them  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  God."
(1)  The  true  genesis  of  spiritual  docility.  The  child  of  God  listens  with  delight  to
his  Father's  voice ;  he  has  ears  to  hear  and  a  heart  to  understand.  (2)  The  true
genesis  of  obstinate  unbelief.  Those  who  refused  to  hear  Gkid  were  not  "  of  God  "^
not  his   children,  though  they  might  be  Abraham's  seed,  but  rather  cMdren  of  the


380  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN,    [oh.  vin.  1--59.

devil.    (3)  Oar  Lord's  words  imply  that  the  Jews  were  all  along  responsible  for  theii
inbelie£

Vers.  48 — 50. — Hie  indignant  retort  of  the  Jews.  Our  Lord's  last  words  inflamed
their  spirits  beyond  endurance.

L  Their  insolent  bbtobt.  "  Say  we  not  well  that  thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and  hast
a  devil?"  1.  The  words  suggest  that  they  regarded  Jesus  as  their  naUonal  enemy,
estranged  from  the  hopes  of  Israel,  and  withal  a  rejecter  of  the  full  revelation  made  bj.
God.  The  term  "  Samaritan  "  was  always  used  by  the  Jews  in  an  insulting  sense.  2.
The  imputation  that  he  had  a  devil  implied  that  he  was  a/anatie  and  misguided  enthu-
siast, influenced  by  essentially  evil  principles.

IL  O0B  Lord's  eeply  to  the  bbtoet.  "I  have  not  a  devil;  but  I  honour  my
Father,  and  ye  do  dishonour  me."  1.  Jesus  takes  no  notice  of  the  imputation  of  his
SamaHtanism.  That  was  pure  insult,  for  the  Jews  knew  that  he  was  a  Galilsaan.
"He,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again,  but  committed  himself  to  him  that
judgeth  righteously"  (1  Pet.  ii.  23).  He  teaches  soon  after  that  a  Samaritan  may  be
more  truly  a  child  of  God  than  either  priest  or  Levite.  He  thus  maljes  light  of  the
distinction  of  race  which  breathed  so  largely  in  Jewish  conceptions.  2.  He  denies  the
imputation  that  he  has  a  devil,  because  it  was  important  to  assure  them  that  his  words
were  those,  not  of  wild  or  dark  fanaticism,  but  of  truth  and  soberness.  3.  The  true
motive  of  his  mission  is  not  hatred  to  the  Jews,  hut  the  honour  due  to  his  Father.  4.
The  union  pf  Father  and  Son  involved,  through  their  faithless  attitude,  a  deep  dishonour
to  himself;  for  by  refusing  to  honour  the  Father,  they  withheld  the  honour  due  to  him,
who  is  the  Son  and  the  Sent  of  the  Father.  5.  Tet  the  insults  offered  to  himself  would
le  divinely  judged.  "And  I  seek  not  mine  own  glory  :  there  is  One  that  seeketh  and
judgeth."  (1)  The  affronts  were  of  no  accoimt  to  himself.  (2)  They  were  God's  con-
cern, who  would  in  due  time  pimish  the  calumniators  of  his  Son.  The  allusion  may  be
primarily  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  would  subvert  the  whole  external
framework  of  Judaism  and  inflict  unparalleled  sufferings  and  indignities  upon  the  Jews,
and,  ultimately,  to  the  day  of  final  judgment.

Vers.  51 — 59. — Deliverance  of  the  believer  from  death.  The  dialogue  now  takes  a
new  turn.

L  The  blessed  pbomisb  made  to  the  obedient  disciple.  "  If  a  man  keep  my
Word,  he  shall  never  see  death."  He  evidently  now  addresses  those  Jews  who  believe
in  him.  1.  The  character  of  discipleship.  It  (1)  receives  the  gospel  in  love,  (2)  obeys
it  frum  the  heart,  and  (3)  holds  it  fast  as  a  precious  treasure  of  cornfort.  2.  The  blessed
destiny  of  discipleship.  (1)  There  will  be  no  experience  of  spiritual  death,  (2)  or  of
eternal  death;  (3)  and  physical  death  will  be  no  penal  evil,  but  robbed  of  its  sting
through  him  who  has  given  us  the  victory  (1  Cor.  xv.  57).

II.  Fresh  misappebhension  op  the  Jews.  "  Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  devil.
Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets ;  and  thou  sayest,  If  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he
shall  never  taste  of  death.  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Abraham,  who  is  dead  ?
whom  makest  thou  thyself?"  1.  The  Jews  argued  that  Abraham  and  the  prophets  had
kept  Ood's  Word,  yet  were  not  exempted  from  the  bitter  experience  of  death.  There-
fore the  declaration  of  Jesus  seemed  to  prove  his  utter  self-delusion.  2.  I'heir  question
"Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Abraham?"  implies  that  they  refused  to  regard
Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  or  as  the  Son  of  God,  or  even  as  a  divinely  sent  Prophet.

III.  Jesus  declares  there  is  no  comparison  between  Abraham  and  himself.
"  If  I  honour  myself,  my  honour  is  nothing :  it  is  my  Father  that  honoureth  me ;  of
whom  ye  say,  that  he  is  your  God."  1.  The  question  of  the  relative  dignity  of  himself
and  Abraham  is  not  due  to  any  personal  ambition  on  his  part,  but  in  obedience  to  the
win  of  his  Father.  2.  His  higher  dignity  was  due  to  his  complete  knowledge  of  his
Father,  and  his  perfect  obedience  to  his  will.  3.  The  true  relation  of  Abraham  to
Christ.  "  Tour  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day :  and  he  saw  it,  and  was  glad."
(1)  Comparison  of  personal  dignity  was  therefore  out  of  the  question.  (2)  Abraham,
as  a  man  of  faith,  saw  the  historic  manifestation  of  Christ  through  the  vista  of  two
thousand  years.  Faith  was,  indeed,  to  him  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the
evidence  of  things  not  seen."     He  was  pre-eminently  "  strong  in  laiiU  "  (Rom-  iv.  20),


OH.  vm.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  881

(3)  The  right  of  Christ  inspired  him  with  holy  joy  for  the  blessings  the  Redeemer  was
to  bring  (o)  to  himself,  (6)  to  the  Jews,  (c)  to  the  world.  4,  The  Joy  of  Abraham
contrasts  strangely  with  the  hatred  and  malice  excited  by  the  visible  presence  of  the
same  Redeemer  among  Abraham's  descendants.

IV.  A  FBBSH  MISAPPREHENSION  OF  OUB  Lobd's  WORDS.  "  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years
old,  and  hast  thou  seen  Abraham?"  1.  The  Jews  did  not  believe  in  Christ's  pre-
existenee.  He  was  only  the  Son  of  Joseph  and  Mary.  2.  His  allusion  to  his  age
exaggerates  the  actual  years  of  his  life,  probably  because,  as  "  the  Man  of  sorrows,  and
acquainted  with  grief,"  he  had  aged  fast  in  the  hard  stress  of  daily  anxieties,  caused  by
the  increasing  signs  of  Jewish  hostility.  3.  Our  Lord's  answer  is  an  explicit  revelation
of  his  Divinity.  "  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am."  (1)  The  words  imply  that  there  was
a  time  when  Abraham  was  not,  but  there  never  was  a  time  when  the  Son  of  God  was
not.  (2)  They  imply  more  than  the  anteriority  of  Jesus  to  Abraham,  for  he  does  not
say,  " Before  Abraham  was,  I  was."'  (3)  They  imply  Christ's  timeless  existence — "I
am."  .  He  is  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  He  was,  and  is,  and  shall  be,  the  Life  of  man,
because  he  lives  with  an  absolute  life  (ch.  xiv.  19),  and  believers  may  therefore  rejoice
in  him  as  their  Life.     "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."

V.  Effect  op  this  declaration  upon  the  Jews.  "  Then  took  they  up  stones  to
cast  at  him :  but  Jesus  hid  himself,  and  went  out  of  the  temple."  1.  The  Jews  at  last
understood  the  meaning  of  our  Lord^s  words.  2.  Their  attempt  to  stone  him  implied
their  definite  rejection  of  him.  3.  Jesui  placed  himself  at  once  out  of  their  reach,  as  "  his
time  was  not  yet  come."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  accusers  condemned  and  the  accused  absolved.  Whatever  view  be
taken  of  the  genuineness  of  this  passage  of  the  Gospel,  there  can  be  little  doubt  as  to
the  authenticity  of  the  narrative,  and  no  doubt  as  to  the  justice  of  the  picture  it  presents
of  the  ministry  and  character  of  Jesus  Christ.

I.  Herb  is  a  representation  of  the  binfcl  society  in  which  the  Saviour
DEIGNED  TO  MIX.  The  sccue  was  the  temple ;  the  company  gathered  together  were
composed  of  those  who  wished  to  hear  Jesus  discourse,  the  motive  of  some  being  good,
and  that  of  others  evil;  the  centre  of  the  group  was  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  who
claimed  to  be  the  world's  Light  and  Salvation.  The  audience  and  the  Speaker  were
interrupted  by  an  incident  which,  however,  afforded  a  remarkable  opportunity  for  most
characteristic  and  memorable  teaching  on  the  part  of  our  Divine  Lord.  1.  We  see  a
picture  of  hmnaa  frailty.  As  the  poor,  trembling,  shame-stricken  woman  was  dragged
into  the  temple  precincts,  she  furnished  a  sad  instance  of  the  moral  weakness  of
humanity.  For  although  her  seducer  was  probably  a  hundredfold  guiltier  than  she,  it
cannot  be  questioned  that  the  adulteress  was  to  blame,  as  having  infringed  both  Divine
and  human  laws.  2.  We  see  a  picture  of  human  censoriousness.  Sinful  though  the
woman  was,  it  does  not  seem  that  those  who  were  so  anxious  to  overwhelm  her  with
disgrace  were  impelled  by  a  sense  of  duty.  They  seem  to  have  been  of  those  who
delight  in  another's  sin,  who,  instead  of  covering  a  fault,  love  to  drag  it  into  the  light.
3.  We  see  a  picture  of  human  malice.  They  sought  to  entrap  Jesus  into  some  utter-
ance which  might  serve  as  a  charge  against  him.  It  was  impelled  by  this  motive
that  they  referred  the  case  of  the  adulteress  to  him,  who  came  not  to  destroy  the  Law,
but  to  fulfil  it.  Their  concern  for  the  public  morals  was  trifling  when  compared  with
their  malignant  hatred  of  him  who  was  morality  incarnate.

II.  Herb  is  a  representation  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Saviour  dealt
WITH  HUiiAN  81N.  1.  He  Convinced  the  morally  hardened  and  insensible,  arousing  their
conscience,  and  compelling  them  to  admit  their  own  sinfulness.  If  the  cunning  of  the
Pharisees  was  great,  the  wisdom  of  the  Saviour  was  greater  still.  He  confounded  their
plot,  and  turned  their  weapons  against  themselves.  Their  own  consciences  witnessed
against  those  who  had  been  so  anxious  to  condemn  a  fellow-sinner.  2.  He  pardoned
the  penitent  offender.  The  woman  could  not  but  feel  how  heinous  had  been  her  trans-
gression, and  in  how  black  colours  it  appeared  to  all  who  considered  it  aright.  And  all
we  know  of  Jesus  assures  us  that  he  wotild  never  have  forgiven,  and  dismissed  in  peac^


383  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDINa  TO  ST.  JOHN,    [oh,  vra.  l-«9,

one  insensible  of  sin.  She  sorrowed  over  her  fault ;  the  presence  of  the  pure  and  perfect
Jesus  was  itself  a  rebuke  and  reproach  to  her,  while  his  demeanour  and  languago
awakened  her  gratitude  and  restored  her  hopes,  if  not  her  self-respect.  3.  He  con-
demned and  guarded  against  a  repetition  of  the  sin,  in  the  admonition  he  pointedly
addressed  to  her  as  she  left  him,  "  Sin  no  more." — T.

Ver.  12. — The  world's  true  Light.  Whether  this  figurative  language  was  suggested
by  the  morning  sun,  as  it  rose  in  the  east  over  the  crown  of  Olivet,  or  by  the  great
lamps  which  were,  daring  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  kindled  in  the  temple  court  at
evening,  in  either  case  its  appropriateness  and  beauty  are  manifest.

I.  This  similitude  exhibits  the  glokt  and  poweb  op  Cheist  in  his  own
NATUEB.  Light  is  a  form  of  universal  force,  proceeding  from  the  sun,  the  vast
resei-voir  of  power,  and  acting  by  the  motion  of  the  ethereal  medium  in  wave-like
vibrations.  Artificial  light  is  only  the  same  force  stored  up  in  the  earth,  and  liberated
for  purposes  of  illumination.  The  sun  may  therefore  be  regarded  as,  for  us,  the  centre
and  source  of  all  light.  I>y  its  rays  we  know  the  glories  and  beauties  of  earth  and  sea ;
and  to  them  we  are  indebted,  not  only  for  knowledge,  but  for  much  enjoyment  and  for
many  practical  advantages.  If,  then,  anything  created  and  material  can  serve  as  an
emblem  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  this  majestic  luminary  may  well  fulfil  this
purpose.  He  who  first  said,  "  Let  there  be  light  1 "  gave  to  mankind  the  great  Sun  of
Eighteousness  who  has  arisen  upon  the  world.  None  but  the  Divine  Lord  and  Saviour
of  mankind  could  justly  claim  to  be  "the  Light  of  the  world."

n.  This  similitudb  exhibits  the  blessinqs  which  Christ  brings  to  tee
WORLD.  1.  The  world  of  humanity  is  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  and  the  Lord
Jesus  brings  to  it  heavenly  knowledge.  Christ  is  the  true  Light,  instructing  men  who
are  very  ignorant  of  God,  of  his  designs  of  mercy,  of  the  prospects  of  the  future,  and
indeed  of  everything  that  is  most  important  for  man  as  a  spiritual  being  to  be
acquainted  with.  2.  The  world  of  humanity  is  in  the  darkness  of  sin,  and  the  Lord
Jesus  brings  to  it  the  light  of  forgiveness  and  holiness.  As  when  a  dark  dungeon  is
thrown  open,  so  that  the  sunlight  streams  into  it;  so  was  it  with  the  world  whan
Christ  came  to  the  dark  places  of  the  earth,  and  irradiated  them  with  his  holy
presence.  They  who  sometime  were  darkness  now  became  light  in  the  Lord.  3.  The
world  of  humanity  lay  in  the  darkness  of  death ;  the  Lord  Jesus  brought  to  it  the  light  of
life.  Vitality  is  hindered  by  darkness,  and  is  fostered  by  daylight ;  the  plant  which  is
pale  and  sickly  in  the  cellar  grows  green  and  healthy  when  exposed  to  the  sunshine.
Mankind  when  in  sin  are  liable  to  spiritual  death.  Christ  introduces  the  principle  of
spiritual  vitality,  and  they  who  partake  of  it,  and  pass  from  darkness  into  glorious
light,  bear  in  abundance  the  blossom  of  piety  and  the  fruit  of  obedience,  i.  The  world
of  humanity  is  in  darkness  and  danger ;  the  Lord  Jesus  brings  the  light  of  safety.  He
is  a  Lamp  to  guide  the  searchers,  a  Lantern  to  light  upon  the  path  of  safety,  a  Torch  to
those  who  explore  the  cavern,  a  Pharos  to  those  who  sail  the  stormy  seas,  a  Harbour-
light  to  guide  into  the  haven  of  peace,  a  Pole-star  to  direct  the  wanderer's  course,  a
Pillar  of  fire  to  light  the  nation's  desert  march.  So  our  Saviour  warns  men  of  spiritual
!  erils,  directs  their  steps  into  spiritual  safety,  directs  in  circumstances  of  difSculty  and
perplexity,  brings  to  eternal  peace.

IlL  The  similitude  reminds  us  op  our  duty  with  reference  to  Christ.
1.  To  admire  and  adore  the  light.  The  old  Persians  worshipped  the  rising  sun ;
Christians  may  well  worship  their  glorious  Lord.  2.  To  walk  in  the  light.  Let  it  be
remembered  that  the  sun  shines  in  vain  for  those  who  conceal  themselves  from  his
beams ;  and  that  even  to  admire  is  not  enough,  it'  we  fail  to  make  use  of  the  heavenly
shining  to  guide  our  steps  aright.

"  Thou  Sun  of  ovu:  day,  thou  Star  of  our  night,
We  walk  by  thy  ray,  we  live  in  thy  light ;
Oh  shine  on  us  ever,  kind,  gracious,  and  wise,
And  nowhere  and  never  be  hid  from  our  eyes."

T.

Ver.  25. — "  Who  art  thouf  The  startling  and  authoritative  language  in  which  the
Lord  Jesus,  in  conversation  and  discusbioii  with  the  unfriendly  Jews  of  Jerusalem,


OH.  vni.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOIIDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  383

spoke  both  of  himself  and  of  them,  not  unnaturally  prompted  this  blunt  yet  pertinent
inquiry.

I.  Thb  qdebtion.  The  spirit  in  which  this  inquiry  is  urged  makes  all  the
difference  as  to  the  light  in  which  it  must  be  regarded.  1.  It  may  be  a  spirit  of  mere
idle  curiosity.  2.  It  may  be  a  spirit  of  historical  inquiry,  such  as  on  the  part  of  one
for  the  first  time  brought  into  contact  with  Jesus  would  be  becoming.  3.  It  may  be
prompted  by  perplexity  and  doubt.  Many  in  our  own  day  have  listened  first  to  one
and  then  to  another  explanation  of  our  Lord's  nature  and  mission,  until  their  minds
have  been  utterly  bewildered,  and  they  know  not  what  to  think  of  him.  It  is  well
that  such  disturbed  souls  should  repair  to  the  Lord  himself,  and,  neglecting  all  that
men  say  of  him,  should  seriously  and  earnestly  put  to  him  the  question,  "  Who  art
thou?"  4.  Some  put  this  question  for  the  satisfaction  of  their  spiritual  needs.
Quickened  from  spiritual  deadness,  and  alive  to  their  own  inability  to  save  themselves,
such  earnest  inquirers  repair  to  Christ  in  the  hope  of  finding  in  him  a  Divine  Saviour
and  Friend.  From  their  burdened,  anxious  heart  comes  the  entreaty  for  a  gracious
revelation.  Not  so  much  to  solve  a  speculative  doubt,  as  to  satisfy  a  practical  necessity
and  inner  craving,  they  come  to  Jesus  with  the  imploring  cry,  "  Who  art  thou?"

II.  The  bbplt  of  the  bbflectino  obsebveb.  Inattention,  prejudice,  malice,
may  in  various  ways  answer  the  question  proposed ;  but  none  of  these  answers  can  be
deemed  worthy  of  our  consideration.  But  the  candid  student  of  Christ's  character  and
life  comes  to  conclusions  which,  though  in  themselves  incomplete  and  insufficient,  are,
as  far  as  they  go,  credible  and  reasonable.  1.  Jesus  is  the  faultless,  blameless  Man,  the
holiest  and  the  meekest  of  whom  human  history  bears  record.  He  alone  could  in
conscious  innocence  make  the  appeal,  "  Who  of  you  convicteth  me  of  sin?  "  2.  Jesus  ia
the  perfect  Model  of  benevolence  and  devotedness  to  the  welfare  of  others.  He  "  went
about  doing'  good  ;"  and  his  ministry  was  not  only  a  rebuke  to  human  selfishness,  it
was  an  inspiration  to  self-denying  beneficence.  Thus  much  even  the  student  of  Jesus'
character,  who  does  not  acknowledge  his  Divinity,  will  be  prepared  to  concede,  and  will
perhaps  be  forward  to  maintain.     But  the  Christian  goes  further  than  this.

III.  The  reply  of  the  BELiEviNa  disciple.  Such  a  one  takes  the  answers
which  Jesus  gave  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  as  they  are  recorded  by  the  evangelists,
and  deems  our  Lord's  witness  to  himself  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  Thus  his  reply  is
that  of  Christ  himself.  Proceeding  upon  this  principle,  the  Christian  believes  Jesus
to  be :  1,  The  Son  of  God,  who,  according  to  his  own  statements,  stood  in  a  relation
to  the  Father  altogether  unique.  2.  The  Saviour  and  Friend  of  man,  who  gave  his  life
a  ransom  for  many,  dying  that  men  might  live  in  God  for  ever.  3.  The  Lord  and  Judge
of  the  moral  universe,  empowered  and  commissioned  to  reign  until  all  foes  shall  be
beneath  hia  feet. — T.

Ver.  31. — "My  disciples."  Teaching  and  learning  are  the  condition  alike  of  the
intellectual  and  of  the  moral  life  of  humanity.  All  men  who  live  do  both,  and  good
men  do  both  well.  Of  the  scholar  of  Oxenford,  Chaucer  says,  "  And  gladly  would  he
learn,  and  gladly  teach."  Christianity,  being  a  Divine  religion,  accepts  and  adapts
itself  to  this  condition  of  our  existence.

'  I.  The  Mastbb.  Christ  was  acknowledged  to  be  a  Hebrew  Babbi,  even  a  Prophet.
But  the  enlightened  knew  him  to  be  the  Teacher  and  the  Master  of  mankind.  Witness
his  ministry,  his  sermons,  his  parables,  his  conversations  and  discourses.  As  a  Master,
he  was  wise,  winning,  patient.  His  vocation  of  teaching  he  continues  to  fulfil  through
human  history.  He  is  still  and  ever  teaching  men  who  are  prepared  to  learn  from  him.
And  those  who  know  him  first  as  Teacher,  come  to  know  him  afterwards  in  the  other
great  mediatorial  ofiSoes  he  sustains  to  man.

II.  The  scholabs.  As  the  Pharisees  had  their  disciples,  and  as  John  had  his,  so
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  gathered  around  him  those  who  were  docile  and  sympathetic,
and  communicated  to  them  his  truth,  and  bestowed  upon  them  his  spirit.  Thus  the
twelve,  the  seventy,  learned  of  him.  Wherever  Jesus  went,  he  made  disciples
women,  as  the  woman  of  Samaria  and  Mary  of  Bethany;  scholars,  as  Nicodemus
persons  counted  socially  inferior,  as  Zacchseus.  After  our  Lord's  ascension,  "  disciples  "
became  a  common  designation  of  Christian  people,  as  much  as  "  saints  "  or  "  brethren.*
It  justly  remains  such  throughout  this  spiritual  dispensation.


384  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.     [on.  vm.  1-5&.

III.  The  lessons.  Christ  himself  has  always  been  his  own  chief  Lesson,  far  greater
than  any  words  can  embody  and  convey.  This  appears  from  his  own  language,  "  Learn
of  me,"  and  from  the  apostolic  appeal,  "  Ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ."  His  character
and  his  Word  are  truth.  In  Christ  his  disciples  learn  (1)  to  believe  aright  regarding
God,  man,  eternity ;  and,  what  is  even  greater,  (2)  to  do,  viz.  to  acquire  the  practical
lessons  of  righteousness,  fortitude,  and  patience,  etc.  Who  has  mastered  Christ's
teaching?  Who  has  thoroughly  learned  his  lessons?  Who  has  completely  drunk  into
his  spirit?

IV.  The  spirit  of  Ohbistian  disoipleship.  1.  Lowly,  as  regards  ourselves,  the
learners.  2.  Reverent,  as  regards  him,  the  Teacher.  3.  Diligent  and  persistent,  as
regards  the  lessons  to  be  acquired.  4.  Interested  and  appreciative,  sympathetic  and
receptive.

V.  The  culture  op  Christian  disoipleship.  Learning  is  a  means  to  an  end.
To  what  end  is  Christian  disoipleship  the  means  ?  To  what  discipline  of  blessing  do
Christ's  pupils  attain  ?  1.  The  culture  of  knowledge — Divine  and  precious  knowledge.
2.  The  culture  of  character — Christ-likeness.  3.  The  culture  which  qualifies  for
usefulness.  As  school  and  college  fit  a  youth  for  business  or  professional  life,  so
Christ's  discipline  qualifies  for  Christian  service.  4.  The  culture  for  imTnortality.
This  is  Christ's  school;  above  is  Christ's  home,  the  scene  of  perfect  service  and  of
lasting  joy. — T.

Ver.  36. — Spiritual  freedom.  Our  Lord  Christ,  who  brings  truth  to  the  under-
>  landing  and  love  to  the  heart,  brings  also  the  highest  freedom  to  the  active  nature
and  life  of  man,  and  thus  secures  the  prevalence  of  holiness,  of  willing  and  cheerful
obedience  to  God.

I.  The  bondage  is  presumed  which  renders  nbcbssabt  the  advent  or  the
Divine  Liberator.  Man  is  by  nature,  whilst  in  this  fallen  state,  under  bondage  to
law,  to  sin,  to  condemnation.

II.  Pretended  freedom,  op  which  sinful  men  akb  found  to  boast,  is
exposed.  The  Jewish  leaders,  our  Lord's  conti-mporaries,  asserted  a  certain  liberty.
Relying  upon  their  descent  from  Abraham,  and  their  consequent  privileges  in
connection  with  the  old  covenant,  the  Jews  claimed  to  be  free  men.  The  worst  cases
of  bondage  are  those  where  there  is  the  pretence  of  liberty,  and  nothing  but  the
pretence.  Free-thinkers,  free-livers,  are  names  given  to  classes  who  are  utter  strangers
to  real  liberty,  v/ho  are  in  the  most  degrading  bondage  to  error  and  to  lust.

HI.  True  freedom  is  explained.  1.  It  is  deliverance  from  spiritual  chains  and
bondage.  2.  It  is  liberty  which  reveals  itself  in  the  willing  choice  of  the  highest  and
noblest  service.  They  are  spiritually  free  who  recognize  the  supreme  claims  of  the
Divine  Law,  who  evince  a  preference  for  the  will  of  God  above  their  own  pleasure  or  the
example  of  their  fellow-men.

IV.  The  Son  of  God  declares  himself  the  Divine  Libebatok.  As  sucli  he
has  all  the  requisite  authority,  and  all  the  requidte  wisdom  and  grace.  Political
freedom  may  be  secured  by  a  humati  deliverer ;  but  in  order  to  enfranchise  the  soul  a
Divine  interposition  is  necessary.  Christ  has  the  mastery  of  all  spiritual  forces,  and
can  accordingly  set  free  the  bound  and  trammelled  soul.  Ho  smites  the  tyrant  who
lords  it  over  the  spiritual  captives;  he  cancels  our  sentence  of  slavery ;  he  breaks  our
fetters ;  he  calls  us  freemen,  and  treats  us  as  such ;  he  animates  us  with  the  spirit  ol
liberty.

V.  The  blessed  results  of  freedom  are  promised.  The  enfranchised  from
Satan's  service  become  God's  willing  bondmen.  Then,  from  being  God's  servants,  they
become  his  sons.  As  his  sons,  they  are  his  heirs,  and  being  such,  they  in  due  time
enjoy  the  inheritance.  This  is  liberty  indeed — to  pass  from  thraldom  unto  Satan  into
the  "  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God." — T.

Ver.  46. — The  sinlessness  of  Christ.  Had  our  Lord  Jesus  been  guilty  of  sin  (thcTery
thought  is  to  a  Christian  mind  inexpressibly  shocking!),  he  could  not  have  been  all
that  he  actually  is  to  us.  As  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  as  the  ideal  Man,  as  the  all-
sufficient  Saviour,  Christ  must  needs  have  been  without  sin.

I.  Thb  witness  of  MEN  TO  OUR  Lobd'b   SINLESSNESS.    1.  That  of  his  friendt  ant"


OH.  VIII.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDING   TO  ST.  JOHN.  886

apostles.  Peter  designated  him  "  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just,"  "  who  did  no  sin ; "
John,  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous,"  of  whom  he  says,  "  In  him  was  ao  wn."  Paul,
writing  to  the  Corinthians,  speaks  of  Christ  as  of  him  "who  knew  no  sin;"  and
t'ae  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  refers  to  him  in  these  words,  "  Though  without
sin."  2.  That  of  others.  Thus  Judas,  his  betrayer,  spoke  of  the  "  innocent  blood "
he  had  been  the  means  of  shedding  ;  Pilate  found  "  no  feult  in  him; "  the  centurion
testifleri,  "  This  was  a  righteous  Man."

II.  OUB     LoBd's.   own    assertions     OLAIMnfa     THE      PREKOOATTVE     OF    8INLE8SNES8.

Jesus  said,  "  I  have  kept  my  Father's  commandments ; "  "  The  prince  of  this  world
cometh,  and  findeth  nothing  in  me ; "  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin  ?  "  If  he
were  not  sinless,  either  his  hypocrisy  must  have  been  frightful,  or  he  must  have  been
the  subject  of  the  most  monstrous  delusion  that  ever  possessed  an  egotistical  fanatic.

III.  As    A    MATTER    OF     FACT     AND    HI8T0BT,   ODB    LoBD's    LIFE     WAS    SINLESS.      1.

Regard  the  matter  negatively.  Was  there  one  of  the  ten  commandments  which  Jesus
broke?  From  his  temptation  in  the  wilderness  down  to  his  death  upon  the  cross,  he
eschewed  every  evil,  and  proved  himself  victorious  over  every  instigation  to  sin  to
which  others — even  good  men — would  probably  in  some  cases  have  yielded.  2,  Begard
the  matter  positively.  There  is  often  presented  to  men  an  alternative  between  vice  and
virtue,  disobedience  and  obedience  to  God.  Wherever  an  opportunity  occurred  for  our
Lord  to  do  tliat  which  was  best,  he  did  it.  There  was  unfailing  consistency  between
his  teaching  and  his  life ;  he  mixed  with  siimers,  unharmed  by  the  contact ;  he  exhibited
all  moral  excellences  in  his  own  character ;  in  holiness  he  stands  supreme  and  alone
among  the  sons  of  men.

Pbactioal  lessons.  1.  This  fact  points  to,  and  agrees  with,  a  belief  in  the  Divinity
of  Jfisus.  2.  Here  is  a  faultless,  perfect  Example  for  all  men  to  study  and  copy.  3.
Sere  is  evidence  of  our  Lord's  perfect  qualification  to  be  the  Saviour  and  the  Lord  of
man. — T.

Ver.  51. — Obedience  and  immortality.  The  phase  of  our  Lord's  ministry  brought
before  us  in  this  part  of  St.  John's  Gospel  is  a  combative,  a  controversial,  phase.  The
Jews  were  perpetually  opposing  Christ,  carping  and  cavilling  at  every  work  he  performed,
and  almost  at  every  word  he  uttered.  Jesus  took  up  the  challenge,  and  met  the  objec-
tions and  the  allegations  of  his  enemies.  He  defied  them ;  he  turned  upon  tViem  with  an
unanswerable  question  or  a  startling  paradox.  There  is  not  always  apparent  even  an
attempt  to  conciliate  his  adversaries — to  win  them  over.  He  did  not  even  stop  to
explain,  when  he  knew  perfectly  well  that  explanation  would  be  unavailing ;  he  left  his
words  to  be  instructive  to  the  enliglitened,  and  an  enigma  to  the  unspiritual.

I.  The  condition  here  propounded.  "  If  a  man  keep  my  word."  1.  This  implies
upon  Christ's  part  a  special  revelation  and  authority.  By  his  "  word  "  doubtless  Jesus
meant  the  whole  manifestation  of  his  character  and  will ;  his  doctrine  relating  to  the
Father  and  to  himself;  his  precepts  relating  to  his  disciples.  2.  It  implies  upon  the
part  of  his  followers  a  reverent,  loyal,  and  affectionate  obedience.  They  keep,  i.e.  they
retain  in  memory  and  observe  in  practice,  the  word  of  their  Master.  As  a  faithful
servant  keeps  the  word  of  his  lord,  as  a  diligent  scholar  keeps  the  word  of  his  teacher,
as  a  loyal  soldier  keeps  the  word  of  his  officer,  his  general,  as  a  reverent  son  keeps  the
word  of  his  father,  so  the  Christian  keeps  the  word  of  his  Saviour.

II.  The  promise  herb  recorded.  "  He  shall  never  see  death."  1.  The  death  from
which  Christ  promises  exemption  is  not  the  death  of  the  body,  as  wm  understood  by
the  Jews ;  it  is  the  spiritual  death  which  is  the  efiect  of  sin,  and  which  consists  in
insensibility  to  everything  Divine.  This  should  be  more  dreaded  than  physical  death.
2.  The  way  in  which  Christ  fulfils  this  promise.  He  died  in  the  body  that  those  who
believe  on  him  may  ilot  experience  spiritual  death.  The  redemption  of  our  Saviour  is
a  redemption  from  death  and  sin.  And  Christ  communicates  the  Spirit  of  life,  who
quickens  dead  souls,  imparting  to  them  the  newness  of  life  which  is  their  highest
privilege,  and  which  is  the  earnest  and  the  beginning  of  an  immortality  of  blessed-
ness.— T.

Ver.  53. — Christ's  swpertmrity  to  Alraham.    The  honour  in  which  Abraham  was
held  among  the  Jews  who  lived  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  is  unquestionable.     Their
JOBS.  2  a


38«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOllDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  viii.  1—59.

grounds  for  so  honourins;  him  may  not  be  satisfactory.  There  is  little  reason  for  sup-
posing that  they  appreciated  his  moral  grandeur.  Probably  there  was  more  of  national
pride  than  of  religious  feeling  in  their  reverence  for  their  great  progenitor.

L  Abbahau'b  asEATNESS.  That  the  great  sheikh  who  came  from  beyond  the
Euphrates,  and  who  traversed  the  soil  of  Palestine  with  his  retinue  of  dependents  and
of  cattle,  was  one  of  the  greatest  figures  in  human  history,  none  will  deny.  But  only
those  who  look  below  the  surface  can  discern  the  real  grounds  for  holding  this  patriarch
in  honour  so  high.  1.  We  know,  from  the  Scripture  record,  that  Abraham  was  the
friend  of  God.  Amidst  idolaters  he  was  a  worshipper  of  the  supreme  and  only  Deity,
and  was  upon  terms  of  peculiar  intimacy  with  Jehovah.  2.  He  was  also  the  father  of
the  faithful,  and  that  not  so  much  in  the  sense  that  he  was  the  ancestor  of  the  nation
who  wo^hipped  the  Eternal  alone,  but  in  this  sense,  viz.  that  his  character  and  life  were
in  many  re^jjiects  a  model  of  faith.  He  maintained,  on  the  whole,  his  confidence  in  the
righteous  and  faithful  Buler  of  the  universe.  3.  He  was  also  the  progenitor  of  many
nations,  and  especially  of  that  one  nation  whom  God  set  apart  to  preserve  the  knowledge
of  his  Name  and  his  Law,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.

II.  The  supbriobitt  of  Christ.  Our  Lord  did  not  question  Abraham's  greatness,
but,  upon  the  occasion  on  which  the  words  of  the  text  were  spoken,  he  both  implicitly
and  explicitly  claimed  to  be  greater  even  than  the  ancestor  of  the  chosen  people.  This
superiority  consists  in :  1.  His  nature  and  cliaracter.  Abraham  was  the  friend  of  Gud;
Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.  Abraham  was  great  as  a  man  ;  Christ  wag  dlbtinguished
by  superhuman  greatness.  2.  His  work  for  humanity.  Abraham  set  a  glorious
example  of  faith ;  but  Christ  came  to  be  the  Divine  Object  of  faith.  Abraham  was
an  intercessor,  e.g.  for  Sodom ;  Christ  was  the  Advocate  of  man.  Abraham  was  a  great
leader;  Christ  was  the  great  Saviour.  3.  In  the  commonwealth  and  kingdom  which
he  founded.  Abraham  was  the  father  of  many  nations,  and  is  to  this  day  thought  of
with  reverence  among  Eastern  peoples,  whilst  the  Jews,  in  the  time  of  Jesus,  and  even
now,  rejoice  in  tracing  their  descent  from  him.  But  Christ's  kingdom  is  a  universal
kingdom,  and  the  Israel  of  God  throughout  earth  and  heaven  are  called  after  him.  4.
In  the  perpetuity  of  his  dominion.  It  annoyed  and  angered  the  Jews  that  Jesus
claimed  immortality  for  himself  and  for  his  disciples,  whilst  they  were  constrained  to
admit  that  Abraham  was  dead.  They  could  not  imderstand  Christ's  claim,  and  the
time  had  not  come  for  him  to  make  that  claim  fully  intelligible.  But  we  can  see  that
Abraham  was  a-  pilgrim  and  a  stranger  upon  earth,  whilst  Christ  is  an  abiding  and
eternal  King ! — T.

Vers.  3 — 11. — A  miserahle  tinner  and  •  merdful  Saviour,  Kotice  on  ^his
occasion —

I.  The  conduct  or  his  enemies.  1.  It  was  brutally  gross.  (1)  It  was  so  to  the
woman.  She  was  disgraced,  and  had  exposed  her.self  to  the  odium  of  her  detectives.
But  this  was  not  enough ;  they  dragged  her  to  the  temple,  to  the  presence  of  a
popular  Prophet,  and  exposed  to  the  ridicule  of  the  crowd.  This,  to  any  woman,
although  a  sinner,  would  be  painful,  but  to  an  Eastern  woman  it  was  a  real  torture,  and
the  conduct  of  those  who  treated  her  thus  was  gross  and  unworthy  of  common  humanity.
(2)  It  was  so  to  our  Lord.  Whatever  they  might  think  of  him,  his  public  charaoier
was  blameless.  He  was  a  Teacher  held  in  high  repute  by  the  multitudes,  and  taking  no
higher  view  at  present  than  this,  to  take  this  poor  fallen  sinner  thus  publicly  before
him  was  grossly  indelicate.  But  think  what  he  really  was — the  immaculate,  purely
innocent,  and  incarnate  Son  of  God,  come  on  a  mission  of  love  and  mercy,  and  now
in  the  very  act  of  striving  to  benefit  a  multitude  of  the  human  family.  Such  a  case,
with  all  its  unholy  associations,  must  have  grated  harshly  upon  his  moral  sensibilities,
and  must  be  loathsome  to  his  moral  taste.  2.  Jt  was  utterly  hypocritiocd.  Hypocrisy
is  to  speak  or  do  one  thing  but  mean  another.  If  so,  the  conduct  of  these  men  was  utterly
hypocritical.  (1)  They  professed  great  reverence  for  the  Law — for  this  law  which  was
applicable  to  adultery.  This  was  only  an  empty  profession.  They  had  long  ago  ceased
to  execute  it ;  it  was  a  dead  letter  as  far  as  they  were  concerned.  (2)  They  professed
great  regard  for  public  and  private  morality.  This  also  was  a  miserable  sham.  As  the
sequel  amply  proves,  they  were  nios',  iaimoral  themselves.  (3)  On  this  occasion  they
professed  great  respect  for  Christ — addressed  him  as  "  Master,"  while  in  their  very  heart«


OB.  vni.  1— 59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  887

they  most  bitterly  hated  him,  and  this  case  was  a  plot  to  betray  him.  (4)  They  pro-
fessed to  he  in  a  difficulty,  and  anxious/or  light  and  help.  But  there  was  no  difficulty
whatever.  The  Law  of  Mosea  on  the  subject  was  quite  explicit,  and  the  woman  was
guilty  according  to  their  own  testimony.  What  more  light  could  they  desire  ?  3.  It  was
utterly  irreligious.  Religion,  if  it  means  anything,  means  true  respect  for  man  and
profound  reverence  for  God.  Their  conduct  manifested  neither,  but  the  very  reverse ;
they  made  light  of  an  erring  soul,  and  lighter  still  of  a  loving  Saviour.  If  they  had
any  reverence  for  God,  the  Creator  and  Father  of  all,  and  any  true  regard  for  their
fellow-creatures,  they  would  lovingly  hide  the  guilt  of  this  fallen  woman,  and  tenderly
try  to  heal  and  restore  her.  But  so  impious  and  light  was  their  conduct,  that  they
trifled  with  an  erring  sister  in  order  to  entrap  a  gracious  Saviour.  4.  Jt  was  cunningly
and  maliciously  cruel.  It  was  a  cunning  and  cruel  plot  to  bring  Jesus  into  trouble,
into  public  disrepute,  into  court,  punishment,  and  if  possible  into  death.  Knowing  his
reputation  for  forgiveness  and  tenderness  as  well  as  purity,  they  bring  the  case  of  this
erring  woman  before  him,  satisfied  in  themselves  that  it  would  of  necessity  bring  him  as
an  lieretic  before  the  Jewish  council,  or  as  a  seditionist  before  the  Roman  tribunal.  It
was  a  cunning  and  cruel  plot,  inspired  by  hatred  to  destroy  him.  What  they  could
not  do  openly  they  attempted  to  do  clandestinely.

II.  The  conduct  op  Jesus.  His  conduct  here  brings  forth  certain  features  of  his
character  into  bold  relief.  1.  His  perfect  knowledge,  /I)  His  knowledge  of  inward
molives  and  intentions.  He  knew  their  most  hidd  n  and  secret  thoughts,  which  could
only  be  known  to  omniscience.  He  knew  their  motives  in  spite  of  the  outward  plausi-
bility and  piety  of  their  conduct.  Everything  which  the  most  cunning  hypocrisy  could
do  to  hide  their  real  intentions  was  done ;  but,  in  spite  of  this,  all  was  clear  to  him.  In
fact,  a  great  deal  of  the  evangelist's  account  is  only  a  faithful  report  of  Jesus'  secret
thought  and  motive  reading.  There  never  was  and  never  will  be  such  a  thought-reader
as  Christ.  (2)  His  knowledge  of  real  character.  Through  the  woman's  foul  pollution
and  her  accusers'  professed  sanctity,  their  real  character  was  open  to  him.  Her  accusers
thought  that  they  could  stand  the  test  of  the  crowd,  but  little  thought  that  they  were
under  the  immediate  gaze  of  an  omniscient  eye.  He  could  see  something  worse  in  the
accusers  than  in  the  accused.  The  woman,  degraded  and  guilty  as  she  was,  appeared
almost  innocent  by  their  side.  Here  Jesus  could  see.  Here,  perhaps,  Jesus  saw  the
angel  of  light  in  the  mud  of  depravity,  and  certainly  the  angel  of  darkness  in  the  garb
of  light,  and  murder  accusing  adultery  in  court.  To  the  all-s?eing  eye  of  Jesus  what
a  scene  was  presented  here!  2.  Eis  consummate  wisdomt  This  is  seen:  (1)  In  his
refusal  to  act  as  a  legal  Judge  in  the  case.  There  was  a  strong  temptation  to  this.
The  case  was  so  stated  and  the  question  so  framed  that  escape  from  the  cunning
dilemma  seemed  almost  impossible.  Had  he  been  caught  bj'  it,  his  enemies  would
be  triumphant ;  but  his  unerring  wisdom  guided  his  conduct.  (2)  In  raising  the  case
into  a  higher  tribunal — that  of  conscience  and  reason.  Had  he  dismissed  the  case  vvith
a  flat  refusal,  which  he  justly  might  have  done,  his  foes  would  have  some  reason  to
complain  and  glory ;  but  from  a  court  in  which  he  had  no  jurisdiction  he  raised  it  at
once  to  that  of  conscience — "  the  King's  bench,"  where  he  ever  sits  and  has  a  right  to
judge.  And  this  had  a  crushing  effect  upon  his  foes,  and  his  superior  wisdom  shone
with  Divine  brilliancy.  3.  Eis  supreme  power  over  spiritual  forces  in  man.  (1)  His
power  over  conscience,  even  a  guilty  conscience.  He  proved  here  that  be  could  awake  it
from  the  sleep  of  years  by  the  word  of  his  mouth.  Although  lulled  and  even  seared,
yet  it  recognized  at  once  the  voice  of  its  Author  and  Lord — "  He  that  is  without  sin,"
etc.  Conscience  is  true  to  Christ;  the  heart  is  false.  (2)  The  power  of  a  guilty
conscience  over  its  possessor.  There  is  a  striking  instance  of  this  here.  No  sooner
conscience  awoke  than  it  spoke  in  thunders  and  made  cowards  of  them  all.  It  became
a  horrible  whip  to  lash  them,  and,  self-convicted,  they  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning
at  the  eldest,  and  when  the  veterans  retired  from  the  attack  the  younger  soon  followed.
(3)  The  power  of  a  guilty  conscience  over  its  possessor  reveals  the  power  of  Jesus  over
all  the  spiritual  forces  in  man.  He  is  the  supreme  and  lawful  King  of  the  spiritual
empire.  He  can  touch  every  spiritual  power  of  the  soul  and  rouse  it  into  action,  so
that  man  must  willingly  obey  his  rightful  King  or  ultimately  become  his  own
tormentor.  4.  Eis  pure  and  burning  holiness.  This  is  seen  r  (1)  In  the  attitude  he
assumed.    "  He  stooped,"  etc. — ^an  attitude  of  silent  contempt  and  of  inward  and  holy


38d  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vni.  1—69.

disgust.  Like  a  flower  from  a  cold  March  wind,  his  tenderly  holy  nature  naturally
shrank  from  the  foul  moral  atmosphere  around  him.  (2)  In  his  calm  demtcmmir.
Although  quite  cogoizant  of  the  cunning  plot,  its  malicious  design  and  inspiring  hatred,
yet  he  was  unruffled.  Why  was  he  so  calm  and  self-possessed  ?  Because  he  was  so
holy.  (3)  In  his  vindication  of  the  Law.  "  He  that  is  without  sin  of  you,"  etc.  The
claims  of  the  Law  were  admitted ;  it  suffered  no  loss  at  his  hands.  (4)  In  his  condemna-
tion of  sin.  That  of  the  woman,  and  not  less  that  of  her  accusers.  (5)  In  the  scathing
effect  of  his  words  on  his  foes.  Their  self-conviction  was  the  sympathy  of  conscience
with  the  holiness  of  its  Lord.  His  presence  and  words  became  to  them  unbearaUe.
Fearing  another  burning  sentence  or  a  piercing  look,  they  had  left  before  he  had  raised
himself  from  the  ground ;  they  fled  his  holy  presence  as  some  beasts  of  prey  flee  to  their
dens  before  the  rising  sun.  They  would  rather  meet  the  anger  of  a  storm  than  the  pure
gaze  of  that  eye.  5.  His  Divine  tenderness  and  mercy.  This  is  seen:  (1)  In  his
conduct  towards  his  enemies.  They  were  more  his  foes  than  those  of  the  woman.  They
were  really  the  friends  of  guilt,  but  foes  of  innocency.  Disgusted  as  he  must  have  been
with  them,  he  treated  them  very  tenderly.  He  took  no  advantage  of  his  great  superiority.
There  seems  to  be  a  technical  error  in  the  charge ;  this  he  passed  by.  Whatever  might
be  the  full  meaning  of  his  writing  on  the  ground,  it  certainly  meant  that  he  tried  to
avoid  public  exposure  of  their  guilt,  and  to  convict  them  by  private  correspondence  ;
and  failing  this,  he  exposed  them  in  the  mildest  manner.  (2)  In  his  conduct  towards
the  woman.  Most  teachers  would  be  to  her  harsh  and  censorious,  but  he  was  not.  Hit
holiness  seemed  to  have  burnt  from  its  very  centre  and  flowed  in  love  and  tenderness.
Whether  this  woman  was  a  confirmed  sinner  or  the  victim  of  a  stronger  and  a  more
sinful  nature,  it  is  evident  she  was  sinful  and  degraded  enough.  Still  he  treated  her
as  a  woman,  though  fallen,  and  respected  her  remaining  sensibilities.  His  conduct
glowed  with  more  than  human  tenderness,  and  breathed  more  than  human  mercy.
"  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee  " — words  which  probably  mean  more  than  a  simple  refusal
to  act  as  a  legal  judge  ;  but,  in  consequence  of  a  penitence  of  heart  which  no  eye  could
see  but  his  own,  they  were  meant  to  convey  the  acquittal  of  a  higher  court,  and  th«
blessing  of  Divine  pardon.  He  dismissed  her  with  an  honest  but  a  hcpeful  caution  :
"  Go,  and  sin  no  more" — language  involving  condemnation  of  the  past,  but  full  of  hope
with  regard  to  the  future ;  and  if  his  advice  were  acted  upon,  he  would  become  hor
Defender  and  Friend.

Lessons.  1.  The  most  depraved  and  wicked  really  are  the  most  harih  and  censorious.
The  servant  which  has  been  forgiven  a  hundred  pounds  by  his  master  is  the  most  likely
to  abuse  his  fellow-servant  who  owes  him  fifty.  He  who  has  a  beam  in  his  own  eye
is  the  first  to  charge  his  brother  with  having  a  mote.  The  witness-box  is  more  sinful
often  than  that  of  the  criminal.  2.  77ie  most  holy  are  the  most  merciful.  Jesus  was
so  purely  holy  that  he  could  afford  to  be  abundantly  merciful.  He  is  the  foe  of  sin,
but  the  Friend  of  sinners.  The  climax  of  holiness  is  love  and  mercy.  3.  Outward
morality  may  stand  the  test  of  a  human  judge,  hut  not  that  of  th»  Divine  one.  The  Law
is  spiritual ;  the  Jud^e  is  omniscient.  What  is  real  and  immortal  in  man  is  spiritual ;
what  he  is  spiritually  he  is  really  to  God.  Jesus  was  more  tender  to  tempted  and
fallen  sinuers  than  to  self-righteous  hypocrites.  The  former  he  helped,  the  latter  he
denounced.  A  scar  on  the  skin  is  more  easily  cured  than  cancer  on  the  vitals.  The
accused  fared  better  than  her  accusers.  4.  The  greater  the  opposition  to  Jesus  the  more
brightly  his  character  shone,  and  the  more  unfortunate  and  impenitent  sinners  are
benefited.  The  character  of  Jesus  never  shone  more  brightly  than  in  this  cunning  and
dark  plot.  His  superior  knowledge,  wisdom,  authority,  holiness,  and  mercy  shone
so  brilliantly  that  in  the  fiery  furnace  we  see  One  not  like  unto,  but  the  very  Son  ol
man  and  the  very  Son  of  God ;  and  the  poor  woman  derived  a  great  advantage.  On
tlie  tide  of  hatred  she  was  carried  into  the  lap  of  infinite  love,  and  by  the  seething  wave
of  human  vindictiveness  she  was  thrown  into  the  warm  embrace  of  Divine  forgiveness.
5.  The  sinner  and  the  Saviour  are  best  alone.  Jesus  alone,  and  the  woman  in  the  midst.
Spell-bound  by  his  authority,  and  more  by  the  secret  and  magic  influence  of  his  Divine
compassion,  she  stood  still.  Her  accusers  all  were  gone,  and  she  was  the  only  one  that
remained  in  the  Divine  society — a  dumb  suppliant  at' his  feet.  No  one  sliould  go
between  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour,  between  the  sick  and  the  Physician.  Let  them
alone.     A  sound  advice  will  be  given,  and  eternal  benefit  derived. — B.  T.


oil.  vm.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  889

Ver.  12. — The  Light  of  the  world.  Our  Lord  was  now  in  the  temple.  A  crowd
was  around  him.  It  was  early  in  the  moraing.  The  sun  rose  over  Olivet  and  looked
through  the  porticoes  of  the  temple  on  its  Creator  teaching  the  people  within.  The  sun
is  an  old  and  eminent  missionary  of  God  in  nature.  It  was  as  seraphic  and  ready  to
convey  new  ideas  and  truths  now  as  ever.  The  people  naturally  tiu-ned  to  greet  its
appearance.  Our  Lord  took  advantage  of  the  occurrence  to  reveal  himself  as  the  world's
Light.  Wiiat  the  sun  is  to  the  physical  world,  he  is  to  the  moral.  "  I  am  the  Light,"
etc.     Notice —

I.  Chbist  as  the  Light  op  the  world.  "I  am,"  etc.  This  implies  :  1.  That  the
world  was  morally  dark.  It  became  so  by  the  early  sin  of  its  first  inhabitants.  Its
moral  condition  was  like  that  of  its  physical  at  the  beginning — without  form  and  void,
and  darkness  brooding  on  the  face  of  the  abyss.  It  deviated  from  its  original  and
proper  centre,  aad  wandered  into  moral  gloom ;  it  became  spiritually  ignorant  of  God,
of  immortality,  and  of  its  highest  good,  spiritually  impure,  depraved  and  dead,  lying
in  wickedness,  and  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  2.  That  Christ  lecame  its
Light.  "  I  am,"  etc.  He  is  the  physical  Light  of  the  world.  The  sun  is  but  the  dazzle
of  his  presence,  the  stars  are  but  the  smiles  of  his  face,  and  the  day  is  but  the  placid
light  of  his  coimtenance.  He  is  the  mental  Light  of  the  world.  Intellect  and  reason
are  the  emanations  of  his  genius.  If  he  hides  his  face,  they  are  eclipsed ;  if  he
withdrew  his  support,  they  would  be  extinguished.  He  is  the  spiritual  Light  of  the
world,  the  Light  of  the  heart  and  conscience.  By  the  Incarnation  he  is  specially
the  spiritual  Light  of  the  world.  He  is  the  Sun  of  the  spiritual  empire.  (1)  He  is
the  Source  and  Medium  of  spiritual  khovjledge.  He  is  the  Eevealer  of  God  and
man,  their  mutual  relationships,  and  the  way  of  access  to  and  peace  with  him.  He
sheds  full  light  upon  every  subject  which  pertains  to  the  highest  well-being  of  the
human  race.  (2)  He  is  the  Source  and  Medium  of  spiritual  holiness.  Light  is  an
emblem  of  purity.  Jesus  is  the  Medium  and  Source  of  man's  sanctification.  His  life
was  an  embodiment  of  purity.  His  character  was  spotless,  his  doctrines  and  Spirit  are
sanctifying,  his  example  is  pure  and  leads  the  soul  upwards,  and  his  life  is  still  like  the
perfume  of  heavenly  roses,  making  even  the  air  of  our  world  fragrant.  (3)  He  is  the
Source  and  Medium  of  spiritual  life.  Light  is  life,  and  life  is  light.  "  In  him  was  life,
and  the  life  was  the  Light  of  men."  "  He  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  He
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light,  and  by  faith  they  are  communicated  to  men.
3.  That  he  is  the  only  true  Light  <f  the  world.  (1)  He  is  the  only  original  and  inde-
pendent Sowce  of  Divine  light.  In  the  solar  system  there  are  many  stars  and  planets,
but  only  one  sun,  from  which  all  the  other  bodies  derive  their  light.  John  the  Baptist
was  a  bright  and  a  shining  light.  The  prophets,  apostles,  and  reformers  through  the  ages
were  shining  luminaries,  but  they  only  reflected  the  light  they  borrowed  from  him  who
is  the  Light  of  the  world.  He  is  the  great  and  only  inexhaustible  and  independent
Source  of  light,  of  spiritual  knowledge,  purity,  and  life.  He  is  not  the  stream,  but  the
Fountain ;  not  a  borrower  of  light,  but  its  original  Source.  "  He  is  the  true  Light."
(2)  He  is  the  worWs  Light  naturally  and  essentially.  By  virtue  of  the  divinity  of  his
Person  and  mission,  by  his  eternal  fitness,  voluntary  choice,  and  Divine  election.  His
advent  was  no  intrusion  upon  the  order  of  this  world,  and  created  no  jarring  in  the
system  of  things,  but  naturally  fitted  in.  Without  him,  all  would  be  discord ;  with  him,
all  will  be  harmony ;  and  when  his  influence  will  be  fully  felt,  earth  and  heaven  will
be  filled  with  the  sweetest  music.  His  incarnation  was  natural,  like  the  rising  sun  and
the  consequent  day,  4.  ITiat  he  is  specially  the  Light  of  this  our  world.  As  God,  he
Is  the  Light  of  all  worlds  and  systems — they  all  revolve  around  his  eternal  throne,  and
receive  their  light  and  life  from  his  Presence ;  but  as  God-Man  he  is  peculiarly  the  Light
of  this  world.  This  world  is  a  platform  on  which  the  Almighty  has  acted  a  special  part,
taught  special  lessons,  performed  a  special  work,  and  shone  with  special  brilliancy.
But  far  be  it  from  us  to  limit  the  influence  of  the  incarnate  life  of  Jesus.  We  know
not  to  what  extent  what  he  did  in  our  world  affected  even  thrones,  principalities,  and
powers ;  how  high  or  low  or  wide  the  "  It  is  finished  1 "  echoed.  It  may  affect,  and  pro-
bably does  affect,  the  remotest  confines  of  his  vast  empire ;  but  enough  it  is  for  ui  to
know  that  he  is  the  Light  of  this  world.  In  this  comparatively  email  mansion  of  his
Father's  house  the  matchless  drama  of  Divine  mercy  was  acted,  and  here  Divine  love
h'azed  iu  sacrifice,  and  in  our  sky  "  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  arose  with  healing  iu  hia


390  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDlNG  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  Tin.  1—59.

win°;8.''  6.  That  he  is  the  Light  of  the  whole  of  this  world.  Not  of  a  part  of  it,  not  ol
a  cei  tain  number,  but  of  the  whole  human  family.  There  is  no  aun  for  Europe,  and
another  lor  Asia ;  but  one  sun  for  the  world,  and  one  is  sufficient.  Jesus  is  the  one
Light  of  the  moral  world,  and  he  is  enough.  As  a  Prophet,  the  whole  human  family
may  sit  at  his  feet  at  the  same  time  and  be  taught  of  him  ;  as  a  King,  his  sceptre
ruleth  over  all ;  as  a  High  Priest,  he  holds  the  world  in  bis  arms,  and  successfully
pleads  for  it.  The  sacriSce  he  presents  is  for  the  whole  world,  and  it  is  sufficient ;  the
world's  prayers  may  ascend  in  the  incense  and  be  answered.  He  has  given  "  the
heathen  for  his  inheritance,"  etc.  He  is  the  world's  Light,  and  it  has  a  right  to  him.
6.  That  this  is  a  well-attested  fact.  (1)  Attested  by  the  testimony  of  Christ  himself.
"  I  am,"  etc.  He  bears  record  of  himself,  but  his  record  is  true.  If  he  bore  not  record
of  himself,  who  would  or  could  ?  His  bearing  record  of  himself  was  a  simple  necessity.
Who  could  relate  the  story  of  him  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  eternity,  but  he
himself?  He  knew  what  no  human  being  could  know,  and  he  was  too  intelligent  to
mistake,  too  pure  in  character  to  deceive,  and  too  great  to  overrate  himself.  When
we  speak  of  ourselves  we  are  in  danger  of  overrating  ourselves.  But  Jesus  could  not
make  himself  greater  than  he  was ;  he  made  himself  less — made  himself  of  no  reputa-
tion. He  bore  record  of  himself.  The  sun  does  this.  It  is  a  witness  to  itself,  and
says,-"I  aift  the  light  of  the  world,"  by  filling  it  at  the  same  time  with  a  flood  of  radiance.
Jesus  did  the  same,  bringing  life  and  immortality  to  light.  (2)  Attested  by  the  obser-
vation and  experience  of  others.  The  presence  of  the  sun  is  attested  by  a  thousand  eyes.
•During  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  the  multitudes  basked  in  his  light.  The  physically
and  spiritually  blind  saw  the  light,  and  to  them  who  sat  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow
of  death  arose  a  great  light,  and  all  saw  that  had  eyes  to  see.  (3)  It  is  an  ever-
increasingly  attested  fact.  It  became  mote  evident  with  the  increasing  light  of  the
Lord  and  the  increasing  capacity  of  mankind  to  comprehend  and  enjoy  him.  He  shone
in  his  pure  and  loving  life,  his  gracious  words,  his  mighty  and  benevolent  deeds,  and
especially  in  his  self-sacrificing  death.  True,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  was  eclipsed  on
Golgotha;  but  it  was  only  partial  and  temporary.  If  it  was  dark  on  this,  it  was  light
on  the  other  side.  If  the  women  wept,  mercy  and  truth  met  in  loving  embraoe  and
smiled  above  the  sacrifice,  and  the  Divine  throne  was  encircled  with  a  wreath  of  saving
radiance.  So  light  it  was  that  the  blind  thief  was  restored  to  sight  and  saw  a  kingdom,
and  from  the  gloom  of  death  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  rose  into  its  meridian  splendour,
and  through  succeeding  ages  it  has  shone  with  ever-increasing  brilliancy.  The
evidence  of  Christ  being  the  Light  of  the  world  duly  grows  stronger,  and  will  soon  he
complete  in  a  world  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.

II.  Chbist  as  the  Light  op  the  world  in  the  conditions  of  its  enjoyment
AND  BLESSINGS.  1.  In  its  Conditions.  The  enjoyment  of  all  mercies  is  conditional.
The  simple  existence  of  light  will  not  ensure  its  enjoyment.  It  has  conditions.  The
condition  of  enjoying  the  Light  of  the  world  is  to  follow  Christ.  This  involves :  (1)  The
soul  being  within  the  sphere  if  his  attraction  and  light.  This  involves  knowledge,
faith,  obedience,  discipleship,  to  sit  at  his  feet  and  learn  of  him,  acknowledgment  oi
his  leadership,  and  impressibility  to  his  influence.  (2)  Consecration  of  soul  to  him.
The  earth's  enjoyment  of  the  hght  and  heat  of  the  sun  depends  upon  its  position  in
relation  to  that  luminary.  This  makes  its  spring  and  summer.  The  enjoyment  of
Christ  by  the  soul  depends  upon  its  attitude  in  relation  to  him.  This  attitude  should
be  one  of  entire  consecration,  self-surrender,  prayer,  and  yearning  for  his  guidance  and
inspiration.  The  face  of  the  soul  should  be  turned  right  towards  him.  This  will
make  its  summer  and  spring.  (3)  A  continually  progressive  move^nent  in  his  direction.
To  follow  means  progress.  The  soul  cannot  be  stationary  and  follow  Christ,  but  it
must  ever  press  forward  and  upward  in  the  direction  of  his  example,  character,  life,
Spirit,  and  glory.  2.  In  its  hlessingi.  (1)  The  avoidance  of  darkness.  "  Shall  not
walk,"  etc.  What  a  blessing  it  is  to  avoid  physical  darkness,  especially  in  its  per-
manency and  progress  1  To  be  in  it  for  a  while  is  bad  enough,  but  to  walk  in  it  is
worse  still^ dangerous  and  miserable.  To  follow  Christ  is  a  sure  exemption  from
spiritual  darkness,  ignorance,  vice,  and  death,  and  their  terrible  consequences,  misery
and  helL  There  may  be  clouds  and  shadows  arisng  from  the  imperfection  of  the
following,  from  the  native  gloom  of  the  soul,  or  perhaps  from  the  effulgence  of  the  light ;
but  these  will  only  be  temporary.    The  follower  of  Christ  can  never  be  long  in  dark-


CH.  vni.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  891

ness.  (2)  Enjoyment  ofligU.  "The  Light  of  life."  Without  life  there  ii  no  light.
The  Divine  life  is  the  parent  of  every  light,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest — physical,
mental,  and  spiritual  light.  The  follower  of  Jesus  shall  have  light  from  him  who  is
the  Life,  which  produces  and  supports  life,  and  leads  to  life,  the  highest  life,  the  spiritual
life  of  the  soul,  enjoyed  here  and  to  be  enjoyed  hereafter  under  the  most  advantageous
and  permanent  circumstances,  which  will  result  in  the  most  exquisite  happiness  and
the  most  ecstatic  delights.

Lessons.  1.  Jesus  was  the  greatest  or  the  most  selfish  and  deceptive  the  world  ever
law.  The  world  has  had  its  philosophers  and  poets,  men  of  learning  and  sages,  but
none  of  them  professed  to  have  more  light  than  was  sufScient  to  see  the  gloom  within
and  without,  and  to  sigh  for  more  light ;  but  here  is  a  carpenter's  Son,  saying  with  the
greatest  confidence  and  naturalness  to  a  mixed  audience  in  the  gorgeous  temple  of  his
country,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world."  He  could  not  be  selfish  and  deceptive.  This
would  be  diametrically  opposed  to  his  whole  life  and  character.  He  must  be  what  he
pvefessed  to  be,  for  there  is  light.  The  evidence  of  the  ages  is  on  his  side.  For  upwards
of  eighteen  centuries,  none  have  eclipsed  him  and  none  have  approached  him,  only  a
few  of  his  most  eminent  followers.  2.  Although  the  Light  of  the  world,  yet  he  is  the
Light  of  every  individual  soul.  He  is  great  enough  to  be  the  Light  of  the  world,  yet  his
rays  are  subtle  enough  to  enter  every  human  heart  and  conscience.  Angels  may  for  ever
learn  of  him,  but  Mary  may  sit  at  his  feet.  Bright  seraphim  bask  and  blaze  in  his
light,  still  his  gentle  beams  will  cheer  the  lowly  heart  and  contrite  spirit.  3.  Being
the  Light  of  the  world,  its  destiny  is  very  hopeftd.  In  spite  of  darkness,  ignorance,  vice,
death,  and  misery,  we  may  well  hope  for  better  things.  "  Through  the  shadows  of  the
globe  we  sweep  into  a  younger  day."  4.  Being  the  Light  of  the  world  and  of  life,  let
the  world  and  life  have  their  own.  Let  not  the  world,  let  no  human  life,  grope  in
darkness  for  want  of  light.  Through  enlightened  souls  alone  can  the  light  of  Christ  be
transmitted  to  the  world ;  if  we  are  enlightened,  it  is  our  duty  to  bear  the  light  abroad.
6.  Being  the  Light  of  the  world,  it  is  the  solemn  duty  of  the  world  to  follow  him.  The
only  way  to  avoid  darkness.  Apart  from  Christ  there  is  no  light  but  the  weird  flames
of  misery  and  lurid  fires  of  torture.  Follow  him,  and  all  the  dark  circumstances  of
life  will  be  radiant ;  follow  him,  and  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  will  become
bright  as  day,  and  introductory  to  a  day  without  a  cloud  or  ending. — B.  T.

Vers.  31,  32. —  True  Christian  disdpleship.  I.  In  its  conditions.  Theie  are:  1.
The  possession  of  Christ's  Word.  (1)  The  possession  of  his  Word  is  necessary  to  faith
in  him,.  The  Word  of  Christ  reveals  him  to  faith — reveals  his  mind,  his  thoughts,  his
heart,  his  will,  his  character  andmission.  His  Word  is  as  an  instrument— -is  the
generator  of  faith.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing,"  etc.  It  is  the  great  medium
of  communication  between  Christ  and  faith,  and  the  means  by  which  faith  transforms
Christ  into  the  soul.  It  is  the  nutriment,  strength,  and  the  life  of  faith.  (2)  Faith  in
'  Christ  is  necessary  to  discvpleship.  Christian  discipleship  begins  with  faith  in  Christ.
This  is  its  lowest  condition  and  first  grade.  These  Jews  were  disciples  because  they  had
a  certain  degree  of  faith  in  Christ;  but  they  were  weak  disciples,  their  faith  being
weak  and  young — they  were  infant  scholars.  But  they  could  not  be  even  this  without
a  degree  of  faith,  and  faith  comes  from  the  Word.  (3)  His  Word  is  the  great  disciplinary
instrti/ment  of  his  school.  It  contains  the  lessons  taught  by  him  and  learnt  by  the
disciples.  All  illumination,  knowledge,  inspiration,  moral  and  spiritual  training,  and
progress,  are  attained  through  his  Word.  In  his  Word  the  disciples  meet  and  find  him.
(4)  His  Word  must  hepossessed  in  its  fulness  and  purity.  "  My  Word."  It  must  be  Christ's
Word,  pure  and  simple,  and  the  whole  of  his  Word,  without  any  addition,  subtraction,
or  admixture.  Any  of  these  will  affect  the  discipleship,  make  it  incomplete  or  unreal.
2.  A  vital  possession  of  Christ's  Word.  The  possession  is  not  merely  outward  and
intellectual,  but  inward  and  spiritual.  The  Word  must  be  in  the  soul,  and  the  soul  in
the  Word.  Christ  is  in  the  Christian,  and  the  Christian  is  in  Christ.  Christ's  Word  is
in  his  disciple,  and  the  disciple  is  in  his  Word.  Both  mean  the  same,  only  in  the  latter
prominence  is  given  to  the  Word.  This  implies :  (1)  The  closest  union  between  the
soul  and  the  Word.  The  Word  mm  the  soul,  and  the  soul  is  in  the  Word.  The  union
between  the  body  and  soul  is  not  as  near,  real,  and  lasting.  It  is  like  the  union
between  the  Divine  Son  and  the  Father.    (2)  The  Word  as  the  subject  of  the  most


892  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOHDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  viii.  1— 69.

devoted  study.  The  disciple,  heart  and  sonl,  is  in  it.  It  is  his  meditation  in  the  da;
and  his  song  in  the  night ;  so  attractive  it  is  that  it  has  stolen  away  all  the  thought*
and  affections,  and  become  their  centre  and  the  source  of  their  most  exquisite  delight,

(3)  The  object  of  implicit  faith.  "  In  my  Word."  The  whole  soul,  with  its  eternal
concerns,  rests  upon  it  with  childlike  confidence,  and  trusts  in  it  with  more  implicitness
than  even  the  farmer  and  the  mariner  trust  the  laws  of  nature.  (4)  The  olject  o/
absolute  obedience.  It  is  not  merely  the  object  of  faith  and  trust,  but  of  obedience.
Its  authority  is  fully  recognized,  its  directions  minutely  followed,  and  its  commands
strictly  and  joyfully  obeyed.  It  is  the  polar  star  of  the  soul  and  the  absolute  law  of
life,  and  tlie  disciple  is  its  willing  and  happy  slave.  3.  An  abiding  possession  of
GI'TisCs  Word.  "If  ye  abide,"  etc.  (1)  This  is  an  essential  condition  of  a  permanent
union  with  Christ.  Without  union  with  Christ,  there  can  be  no  discipleship.  With-
out abiding  in  his  Word,  there  can  be  no  true  union  with  him.  If  the  Word  be  forsaken
or  deviated  from,  the  chief  connecting  chain  between  the  disciple  and  the  Master  is
broken.  (2)  This  is  an  essential  condition  of  reality  of  discipleship.  "  If  ye  abide,"
etc.  There  may  be  discipleship  without  continuance  in  Christ's  Word,  but  it  is  not
real,  only  nominal.  Such  are  temporary  disciples,  not  disciples  indeed.  Abiding,
firmness,  and  perseverance  in  Christ's  Word  are  essential  features  and  conditions  of
reality.  What  is  real  is  abiding.  The  presence  or  absence  of  this  abiding  feature  of
faith  is  perceived  by  Christ  from  the  first,  but  must  be  manifested  by  the  conduct
of  the  disciple.  (3)  This  is  an  essential  condition  of  the  perfection  of  Christian  disciple-
ship. It  is  progressive.  The  Word  progresses  in  the  soul,  and  the  soul  in  the  Word.
As  the  soul  abides  in  the  Word,  it  is  admitted  from  stage  to  stage  to  the  society  and
confidence  of  Christ,  and  attains  the  perfection  of  discipleship  by  likeness  to  the  Master.

(4)  As  a  candition  of  true  discipleship,  it  is  certain.  There  is  an  "  if"  with  regard  to  the
condition — "If  ye  abide;"  but  there  is  no  "if"  with  regard  to  the  consequence,  "Ye
are  my  disciples  indeed."  Abiding  in  Christ's  Word  in  the  sense  indicated  is  real
discipleship.  It  is  not  perfect,  but  true.  The  soul  in  Christ's  Word  is  like  a  good  seed
in  a  good  soil,  ever  growing  up  in  and  unto  him.

II.  In  its  blessed  results.  There  are :  1.  Knowledge  of  the  truth.  (1)  There  is
the  highest  knowledge — the  truth.  There  are  many  truths,  but  this  is  the  truth.  This
truth  means  the  great  facts  of  human  redemption  through  Jesus  Christ.  We  need  not
enumerate  them ;  they  will  naturally  occur  to  each  in  their  magnitude,  beauty,  and
order.  They  are  various,  yet  one,  constituting  one  Divine  system  of  salvation.  This  is
the  truth  made  known  by  Christ,  and  to  know  this  is  the  highest  knowledge  attainable
by  man,  because  it  pertains  to  his  spiritual  nature,  and  involves  his  highest  good.  It  is
the  most  necessary  and  valuable.  (2)  It  is  a  most  reliable  knowledge.  Taught  by  the
highest  authority,  the  Son  of  God,  the  source,  the  centre,  the  natural  expression,  and
the  fulness  of  all  redemptive  truths;  in  fact,  the  truth  itself  It  is  communicated  in
the  most  direct,  absolute,  attractive,  and  convincing  manner — ^in  the  life,  example,
teaching,  testimony,  and  miracles  of  the  Son  of  God  in  human  nature.  (3)  This  know-
ledge of  the  truth  is  experimental.  It  is  not  merely  outward  and  intellectual,  but
inward  and  spiritual ;  not  as  illustrated  in  others,  but  as  experienced  by  the  soul  itself.
Know  the  truth  as  the  liberated  captives  know  the  blessings  of  freedom,  as  the  restored
sick  know  the  benefit  of  health.  Spiritual  truth  can  only  be  absolutely  known  by  the
spiritual  nature  and  experience.  Its  kingdom  is  within,  and  the  true  disciple  has  the
witness  in  himself.  (4)  This  knowledge  of  the  truth  is  the  natural  result  of  true
Christian  discipleship.  "  Ye  are  my  disciples  indeed,  and  ye  shall,"  etc.  The  truth  can
only  he  known  by  the  true  disciple.  Pilate  asked, "  What  is  truth  ?  "  He  had  no  reply ;
he  had  not  an  eye  to  see  it,  nor  a  heart  to  receive  it.  Knowledge  of  the  truth  is  alone
the  privilege  of  the  disciple  indeed.  2.  Spiritual  freedom.  (1)  Freedom  from  sin.
From  its  bondage,  its  control,  its  consequences,  its  guilt,  and  from  sin  itself.  In  the
true  disciple  sin  will  be  ultimately  effaced,  not  a  vestige  of  it  will  be  left  behind.  (2)
Freedom  from  the  Law.  From  its  curse,  penalties,  terrors,  its  heavy  and  unbearable
burdens.  The  known  truth,  or  Christ,  becomes  the  law  of  the  disciple's  life,  written
on  his  heart.  Its  letter  becomes  dead,  while  its  spirit  is  preserved.  (8)  Freedom  from
the  tyranny  of  self  .  From  the  lower  passions  and  appetites,  from  the  captivity  of  self-
seeking.  The  soul  is  brought  out  from  itself  into  Christ,  to  breath*  the  natural  and"
{/ur«  air  of  spiritual  life,  love,  holiness,  self-sacrifice,  and  willingness.    (4)  This  freedom


in.  Tin,  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  89J

it  effected  ly  the  truth,  (a)  The  truth  is  the  efficient  means  of  spiritual  freedom.  It
is  based  on  and  produced  by  the  great  facts  of  redemiition.  (6)  The  truth  is  the
efficient  incentive  to  spiritual  freedom.  The  revelation  of  sin,  in  its  enormity,  debasing
effects,  and  ultimate  consequences,  and  the  revelation  of  God's  loving,  costly,  and  self-
sacrificing  provisions  for  sinners,  are  calculated  to  inspire  the  captive  soul  to  struggle
for  and  accept  the  offered  liberty,  (c)  The  truth  experimentally  known  brings  the  fact
of  spiritual  freedom  to  the  consciousness.  No  sooner  the  facts  of  redemption,  such  a«
justification,  forgiveness,  and  reconciliation  by  faith,  are  experimentally  known  than
the  soul  begins  to  realize  in  itself  the  blessings  of  spiritual  freedom.  Christ  lives  In  the
disciple's  consciousness,  and  be  feels  that  he  is  a  subject  of  the  spiritual  empire  and  a
free-born  citizen  of  the  new  Jerusalem.

Lessons.  1.  The  weakest  faith  has  the  sympathy  and  care  of  Jesus.  The  faith  of
these  Jews  was  very  weak  and  imperfect,  hence  this  address  to  them.  He  despised  not
the  day  of  small  things — "  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,"  etc.  2.  The  weakest  faith
by  continuance  in  Ohrisfs  Ward  will  reach  perfection.  "  If  ye  abide,"  etc.  The  quality
of  faith  at  first  is  more  important  than  quantity;  quantity  will  follow.  Spiritual
millionaires  commenced  with  a  very  little  capital.  The  apostles  properly  addressed  as
"Ye  of  little  faith."  Lean  slieep  thrive  in  green  pastures.  It  is  surprising  how  a  weak
faith  is  improved  and  strengthened  in  the  society  and  under  the  tuition  of  Jesus.  3,
The  weakest  faith  by  abiding  in  Ohrisfs  Word  shall  enjoy  the  richest  blessings.  We
say — Know  all  first,  and  then  believe.  But  the  Christian  order  is  rather — Believe  first,
and  then  know.  The  little  knowledge  required  to  precede  faith  is  nothing  to  that
which  follows.  It  leads  to  true  discipleship,  and  to  the  highest  knowledge — the  know-
ledge of  the  truth.  It  opens  the  door  of  the  temple  of  redemptive  truth,  and  thus
opens  the  portals  of  eternal  freedom.  Ignorance  is  captivity,  knowledge  is  liberty
Let  the  scientific  facts  of  the  world  be  known,  and  men  will  be  intellectually  free ;  let
the  Divine  facts  of  redemption  be  experimentally  realized,  and  men  shall  walk  in  the
glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God. — B.  T.

Vers.  33 — 36. — TriK  freedom.  I.  True  freedom  involves  that  or  the  sottl.  1.
A  man  may  be  physically  free  without  being  free  indeed.  2.  A  man  may  be  socially
free  without  being  free  indeed.  He  may  be  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  social  and  political
privileges  and  yet  a  captive.  3.  A  man  may  be  mentally  free  without  being  free  indeed.
His  intellect  may  be  sound  and  grasping,  his  mental  vision  clear  and  far-reaching,  and
still  be  a  prisoner.  4.  True  freedom  involves  that  of  the  soul.  For:  (1)  The  soul  is  the
highest  part  of  man — that  which  makes  him  a  moral  being  and  immortal,  and  connects
him  immediately  with  God  and  his  government,  and  with  spiritual  existence  generally.
(2)  His  highest  nature  must  be  free  ere  he  can  be  free  indeed.  He  may  be  physically
bound  and  be  really  free,  but  if  the  soul,  the  spiritual  nature,  be  in  bondago,  it  affects
his  whole  being.

II.  True  freedom  involves  that  op  the  soul  from  sin.  1.  Sin  makes  the  soul
captive  to  the  Divine  Law.  Sin  is  a  transgression  of  Divine  Law,  and  must  be  punished.
"The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  The  sinful  soul  is  under  the  just  condemnation  of  the
Law  and  the  displeasure  of  the  Lawgiver,  a  prisoner  of  the  Law  and  justice.  2.  Sin
makes  the  soul  captive  to  itself.  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin,"  etc.  In  the  degree  a
man  is  under  the  control  of  sin,  he  is  its  slave.  Sin  enslaves  the  soul.  (1)  It  dims  its
spiritual  vision.  Cannot  see  into  the  invisible  and  eternal.  (2)  It  vitiates  its  spiritual
taste.  Cannotrelish  spiritual  food.  (3)  It  cramps  and  destroys  its  spiritual  aspirations
and  capacities.  Its  wings  are  clipped  by  sin  so  that  it  cannot  and  will  not  fly  aloft
into  its  native  air.  (4)  It  debars  the  soul  from  its  spiritual  rights  and  privileges.  The
peace  and  friendship  of  God,  and  the  society  of  the  good  and  pure.  3.  All  souls  by
nature  are  in  the  bondage  of  sin.  (1)  Some  are  unconscious  of  it,  like  these  Jews — a
sad  condition.  (2)  Some  are  conscious  of  'it — a  more  hopeful  state.  (3)  Whether
conscious  or  unconscious  of  it,  the  fact  remains.  The  soul  by  nature  is  the  slave  of  sin
and  in  the  bondage  of  corruption.  4.  In  order  to  be  truly  free,  the  soul  must  be  liberated
from  iin.  A  state  of  wilful  sin  is  a  state  of  willing  captivity,  and  deliverance  from  it
ii  essential  to  true  fireedom.

III.  True  freedom  or  the  soul  from  8i?i  is  effected  by  Christ.  1.  Se  can
iiberate  the  soul  from  sin,     (1)  He  has  power  to  pardon  sin.     Without  this  the  soul


394  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  vin.  1—59,

cannot  Im  made  free.  The  sense  of  past  guilt  must  be  effaced,  and  a  way  of  escape
must  be  opened.  This  has  been  done  by  Christ  in  his  self-sacrificing  and  vicariuus  life
and  death.  In  him  Divine  forgiveness  is  a  glorious  fact,  and  "  he  has  power  on  earth,"
etc.  (2)  He  has  power  to  separate  the  soul  from  sin.  This  is  done  by  the  creation  of
a  new  life — spiritual  and  Divine  life.  Christ  by  faith  lives  in  the  soul,  so  that  the
believer  is  made  like  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and  between  him  and  sin  there  is  an  ever-
widening  gulfc  He  is  in  a  new  world — ^the  world  of  love  and  purity,  the  world  of
spiritual  joy  and  freedom.  (3)  Christ  alone  has  power  to  do  this.  He  alone  is  free
from  sin,  and  he  alone  can  make  the  soul  free  from  it.  He  alone  is  divinely  com'
missioned  to  do  this ;  he  is  the  only  spiritual  Liberator  of  the  human  race.  2.  The
freedom  effected  hy  Christ  is  most  real.  (1)  It  is  effected  h/  the  highest  authority.  By
the  eternal  Son.  From  him  there  is  no  court  of  appeal;  his  decision  is  final.  "If
Gkxi  be  for  us,"  etc. ;  "  If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,"  etc.  (2)  The  freedum  is  effected
in  the  mast  satisfactory  manner.  If  God  is  satisfied  and  man  willingly  consents,  this
is  enough.  No  consideration  nor  apology  is  due  to  Satan ;  he  is  a  tyrant,  a  usur]  ler,
and  a  thief,  and  has  no  right  to  the  property.  Let  the  Divine  government  be  satisfied
in  the  soul's  freedom,  and  it  is  reaL  In  Christ  this  is  gloriously  the  case.  "  God  is  just,
and  Justifier,"  etc.  (3)  The  freedom  is  most  thor<fugh  and  comprehensive.  It  is  spiritual,
the  freedom  of  the  soul  from  all  evil  and  its  admission  to  all  good,  "  from  the  kingdom
of  darkness  into  the  kingdom,"  etc.  It  involves  the  restoration  of  the  soul  into  its
original  state  and  right,  and  is  no  more  in  harmony  with  God's  will  than  with  the
soul's  true  nature  and  aspirations,  and  is  well  calculated  to  promote  its  highest  develop-
ment and  eternal  happiness.  (4)  This  freedom  is  permanent.  No  freedom  that  is
temporary  is  true.  The  servants  of  sin  are  only  tolerated ;  they  must  be  es-cluded  from
the  Father's  house  and  its  privileges  sooner  or  later.  But  the  freedom  effected  by
Christ  is  that  of  sonship.  All  made  free  by  Christ  become  the  sons  of  God,  and  like
Christ  are  entitled  to  remain  in  the  house  for  ever.  Their  freedom  is  as  permanent
as  the  soul,  as  the  existence  of  the  great  Liberator,  and  between  them  and  captivity
there  will  ever  be  a  progressively  holy  nature  and  the  infinite  power  of  the  eternal
Son.

Lessons.  1.  TTie  importance  of  having  right  views  of  freedom.  False  views  on  this
faubject  are  so  prevalent;  we  are  so  prone  to  make  mistakes  on  this.  They  are  so
dangerous.  2.  The  importance  of  having  right  views  of  the  enslaving  influent  of  sin.
Without  this  we  cannot  obtain  true  liberty.  So  important  is  this  that  Christ  calls
special  attention  to  it :  "  Verily,  verily,"  etc.  3.  The  importance  of  obtaining  true
freedom.  Man  is  so  prone  to  be  satisfied  with  false  freedom,  to  be  self-deceived.  True
freedom  is  the  only  one  worth  having.  4.  The  importance  of  being  made  free  by  Christ.
He  alone  can  make  us  free.  5.  The  duty  of  gratitude  to  him.  He  is  the  great  Liberator
of  humanity.  Those  who  are  made  free  indeed  should  be  indeed  thankful.  A  view
of  Christ  as  the  Liberator  will  make  heaven  all  ablaze  with  gratitude — ought  to  make
earth.— B.  T.

Vers.  41 — 47. — True  spiritual  paternity.    Notice—

I.  Their  mistaken  spibitual  pateenitt.  "  We  have  one  Father,  even  God."
This  in  a  sense  is  true.  (1)  God  was  their  Father  as  creatures;  (2)  he  was  their
Father  as  a  nation;  (3)  he  was  their  Father  still  in  his  yearning  lone  to  save  and  pity
themu  But  it  is  substantially  hollow  and  false,  as  proved  by  their  conduct  towards
Christ.  1.  They  failed  to  recognize  his  connection  with  Cod.  (1)  He  was  the  Bon  of
God.  "  I  came  forth  out  of  God."  He  was,  in  fact,  God's  Son,  as  evidenced  by  his
person  and  mirades.  (2)  He  was  come  on  a  Divine  mission.  Come  to  them,  and
come  on  a  mission  of  love  and  salvation.  (3)  He  was  divinely  sent.  "  Neither  came  I
of  myself,  but  he  sent  me  " — he  whom  you  call  your  Father.  2.  They  failed  to  under-
stand his  message.  Although  (1)  he  spoke  with  Divine  authority ;  (2)  with  Divine
simplicity ;  (3)  with  Divine  importimity  and  tenderness,  so  that  he  could  naturally
ask  the  pretended  children  of  God,  "Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech?"  3.
They  failed  to  believe  him  and  his  message.  Although :  (1)  His  cha/racteir  was  perfect,
"  Which  of  you,"  etc.  ?  (2)  His  message  was  truthful.  He  could  challenge  them  with
regard  to  the  truthfulness  of  his  message,  as  well  as  the  perfection  of  his  characte'-,  and
both  deserved  and  demanded  attention  and  faith.    (3)  Yet  they  disbelieved  and  ry'ected


CH.  viii.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  395

him  for  the  yeiy  reason  which  should  induce  them  to  believe  and  accept  him.  "  Because
I  tell  yon  the  truth,  ye,"  etc  4.  The$e  sad  faiUwrtt  fiaUy  amtradiet  their  pretended
relationship  to  Ood.    (Vers.  42 — 17.)

IL  Theib  tbue  spibitual  patkbhitt.  "  Te  are  of  your  &ther,"  etc.  Look  at  the
lacture  of  the  father  and  the  children  and  their  likeness.  1.  Look  at  hit  m-urderous
ptopensitiet.  (1)  The  devil  is  a  mtvrderer.  The  murderer  of  human  bodies  and  souls ;
the  destroyer  of  human  happiness  and  the  Divine  image  in  man.  The  Jewish  nation
bore  this  character.  From  time  to  time  they  manifested  murderous  propensities;
they  became  the  murderers  of  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Lord  of  glory.  (2)
The  devil  was  a  mwrderer  from  the  Jteginning.  Not  the  beginning  of  all  things,  nor
even  the  very  beginning  of  his  own  existence,  but  the  beginning  of  the  human  race.
His  fall  preceded  that  of  man,  and  perhaps  the  existence  of  man ;  but  no  sooner  had
he  perceived  Adam,  young,  innocent,  and  loyal  in  his  happy  paradise,  than  the  lust  of
murder  was  excited  in  his  breast,  and  he  fixed  upon  man  as  his  victim,  and  efiected  his
foul  purpose  in  the  spiritual  murder  of  our  first  parents.  This  was  the  character  of  the
Jews  from  the  beginning,  and  the  character  of  these  very  persons  since  the  beginning
of  Christ's  earthly  existence.  No  sooner  had  the  second  Adam  appeared  on  the  scene
than  they  sought  by  every  means  to  kill  him.  (3)  The  devil  is  a  most  selfish  and
wilfid  mwrderer.  This  was  the  case  with  regard  to  our  first  parents.  There  was  no  pro-
vocation, no  gain  beyond  the  gratification  of  his  own  selfishness  and  malice.  This  was  the
case  with  these  Jews  in  the  murder  of  their  Messiah ;  they  could  find  no  reason  for  it
but  in  their  own  dark  and  selfish  hatred.  2.  Look  at  his  lying  propensities.  (1)  The
devil  is  a  liar.  He  is  opposed  to  truth,  to  all  truth,  especially  to  the  great  system  of
truth  brought  to  light  by  Christ.  Thus  his  falsehood  serves  well  his  murderous  opposi-
tion't*  the  redeeming  truth  of  the  gospel.  In  this  the  heads  of  the  Jewish  nation
resembled  him;  they  miu-derously  opposed  Jesus,  and  lie  came  to  help  murder;  they
bore  false  witness  against  him.  (2)  The  devil  became  o  liar  hy  falling  from  the  truth.
He  was  in  the  truth  once  and  the  truth  in  him,  but  abode  not  in  it  long  enough  to  be
morally  safe.  He  fell  wilfully,  of  his  own  accord.  He  is  a  backslider,  and,  having
fallen  from  truth,  he  had  no  place  to  fall  but  into  the  whirlpool  of  falsehood,  with  all
its  concomitant  vices.  How  like  their  spiritual  father  were  the  Jewish  nation!
They  were  bom  into  great  religious  privileges,  they  had  eminent  spiritual  fathers,
brought  up  under  the  watchful  care  and  in  the  tender  lap  of  a  kind  Providence,  nursed
on  the  breast  of  Divine  and  precious  promises,  and  familiarized  with  the  idea  of  a
coming  Messiah,  their  Divine  Deliverer;  but  they  abode  not  in  the  truth,  but
wilfully  fell  into  falsehood.  It  seems  as  if  only  the  children  of  special  light  alone  are
capable  of  becoming  the  veritable  children  of  the  prince  of  darkness.  (3)  The  devil
as  a  liar  is  most  complete.  "There  is  no  truth  in  him."  He  is  completely  lost  to
truth,  and  truth  to  him ;  there  is  not  a  vestige  of  it  in  his  nature.  It  is  so  completely
gone,  that  eternal  hatred  of  it  now  sits  on  its  old  throne,  and  the  very  thought  of  it  is
repugnant  and  unbearable.  In  this  how  like  their  father  these  children  were  !  Jesus
■  appealed  to  every  sentiment  of  virtue  and  affection  in  their  breast,  but  in  vain.  He
exhibited  in  his  life  and  character  all  that  is  attractive  in  human  nature,  and  all  that
is  mighty  and  benevolent  in  the  Divine;  but  all  this  not  only  did  not  excite  their
admiration  and  gratitude,  but  excited  their  most  deadly  hatred,  which  proves  the  sad
hollowness  and  falsity  of  their  character.  There  was  no  truth  in  them.  (4)  The  devil
OS  a  liar  is  terribly  original.  "  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own,"  etc.
It  is  not  a  passing  impulse,  the  result  of  temptation,  but  the  natural  outflow,  and  a
part  and  parcel  of  his  nature.  Here  the  problem  of  the  existence  of  evil  is  somewhat
solved ;  we  have  found  its  father,  its  original  propagator.  His  children  partake  of  his
spiritual  nature,  otherwise  they  would  not  be  his  children.  The  days  of  repentance,
straggle,  resistance,  and  prayer  are  past ;  these  are  days  of  spiritual  generation,  and  in
this  case  the  result  is  a  progeny  of  the  devil.  These  Jews  were  more  than  under  his
influence;  they  were  his  progeny.  Terribly  original,  self-responsible,  volimtary,  inde-
pendent and  complacent  in  their  sin,  they  spoke  of  their  own ;  their  falsehoods  were
their  own,  and  their  murderous  act  was  especially  their  own,  the  outflow  of  their  evil
nature.  "Let  his  blood  be  upon  us,"  etc.  The  father  of  murder  has  not  finished
with  any  one  till  that  one  carries  on  business  on  his  own  footing,  manufactures  his
own  goods  and  disposes  of  them  at  his  own  risk,  and  does  all  this  naturally.    Then


89«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vm.  1—69.

bis  paternity  is  complete,  the  relationship  real,  and  his  possession  safe.     This  is  the
lowest  point  of  moral  deterioration  reached  in  this  world.

Lessons.  1.  Man  in  thit  world  is  capable  of  the  highest  and  the  lowett  spiritual
affinities.  He  may  partake  of  the  Divine  or  a  devilish  nature,  may  become  the  child  of
God  or  the  child  of  the  devil.  Truly  we  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made.  2.  Man
in  this  world  is  capable  of  the  most  serious  self-deception  with  regard  to  hii  spiritual
paternity.  These  Jews  thought  that  they  were  the  children  of  God,  while  they  were
really  the  children  of  the  devil.  Such  a  self-deception  is  very  characteristic  of  him,
whose  chief  delight  is  to  lie  and  deceive,  and  is  perhaps  the  climax  of  his  evil  genius
with  regard  to  men.  He  cares  but  little  about  the  name,  only  let  him  have  the  game.
Of  all  self-deceptions  this  is  the  most  miserable  and  disappointing  I  3.  No  one  can
claim  Ood  as  his  Father  who  despises  and  refects  his  Son.  Our  conduct  towards  him
and  his  gospel  decides  our  spiritual  fatherhood  at  once.  4.  To  Christ  our  spiritual
paternity  is  quite  evident,  which  he  will  reveal  sooner  or  later.  And  in  the  light  of  his
revelation  this  is  not  difScult  for  each  to  know  for  himself.  6.  Nothing  can  explain  the
conduct  of  some  men  towards  Christ  and  his  gospel  but  a  true  statement  of  their  spiritual
paternity.  Let  this  be  known,  and  the  sequel  is  plain.  6.  Even  the  children  of  the
devil  condemn  him,  for  they  do  not  like  to  own  him  as  their  father.  State  the  fact,  they
are  insulted.  The  alliance  must  be  nnholy  and  unnatural.  Many  of  them  claim  God
as  their  Father — ^the  compliment  of  vice  to  virtue.  A  compulsory  admission  and  a
full  realization  of  this  relationship  will  be  painful  in  the  extreme.  7.  Let  his  children
remember  that  they  are  such  by  their  own  choice.  For  spiritual  generation,  for  good  or
evil,  is  by  and  through  the  wUI.  It  is  not  fate,  but  deliberate  and  voluntary  selection.
"  His  lusts  it  is  your  will  to  do."  All  are  either  the  children  of  God  or  of  the  devil  by
their  own  choice.    Hence  the  importance  of  a  wise  choice. — ^B,  T.

Ters.  64 — 69. — Christ  ami  Abraham.  "Whom  makest  thou  thyself?"  In  answer
to  this  question  and  to  the  objections  made  by  his  opponents,  our  Lord  Airther  reveals
himself.

L  In  BELATioir  to  the  Fatheb.  1.  Bis  entire  devotion  to  him.  This  includes :  (1)
His  perfect  knowledge  of  him.  "  I  know  him."  His  knowledge  of  the  Father  was
essential,  absolute,  and  most  intimate.  It  was  not  merely  knowledge  which  he  had
gathered  in  the  past,  but  which  he  derived  and  possessed  in  the  present,  then,  on
account  of  his  oneness  with  him.  (2)  Km  faithful  confession  of  him.  "I  know  bun."
He  confessed  him  before  men  ;  did  not  hide  the  knowledge  he  possessed  of  the  Father,
but  faithfully  declared  it.  (3)  His  thorough  obedience  to  his  will.  "  I  keep  his  saying."
His  saying  was  his  will  expressed  in  and  to  Christ.  The  Father's  saying  was  Jesus'
message ;  this  he  faithfully  kept  and  devotedly  published.  He  swerved  not  from  his
Fathers  command  on  account  of  the  most  menacing  threats  of  his  foes,  but  most
minutely  and  enthusiastically  carried  it  out.  2,  Some  of  the  features  tf  his  peculiar
honour.  (1)  The  honour  of  absolute  self-denial  and  self-forgetfuln«ss.  He  honoured
not  himself,  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation.  (2)  The  honour  of  tlte  m^st  devoted
loyalty.  (3)  Honour  derived  from  the  highest  source.  It  was  not  self-sought,  self-
derived,  nor  self-conferred.  This  honour,  he  says,  would  be  worthless.  "  My  Father
honoureth  me."  He  was  really  what  his  Father  made  him,  and  he  made  him  what  he
was  because  of  his  essential  dignity  and  relationship  and  his  o£Scial  integrity  and
devotion.  3.  His  entire  contrast  with  his  foes.  (1)  They  were  ignorwit  of  him  whom
they  called  their  Ood.  "  Ye  have  not  known  him.  In  spite  of  their  great  advantages,
these  had  been  lost  on  them.  Christ  knew  him  absolutely,  and  manifested  and  proved
his  knowledge.  (2)  They  were  utterly  false.  They  were  liars — false  to  themselves,  to
Jesus,  and  to  God.  Christ  was  true  to  all.  He  was  the  faithful  and  true  Witness.  (3)
Their  claimed  relationship  to  Ood  was  an  empty  boast.  It  was  disproved  by  their  spirit)
language,  actions,  and  whole  conduct.  Christ's  relationship  to  God  was  real.  His  Son-
ship  was  most  conclusively  proved  by  his  Divine  knowledge,  his  public  ministry,  his
Divine  miracles,  by  his  whole  life.

IL  In  his  belation  to  Abraham,  anb  Abbahah  to  hiu.  These  Jews  claimed
Abraham  as  their  father,  and  attempted  to  cause  a  discord  between  him  and  Christ ;
but  he  reveals  himself  in  relation  to  the  patriarch.  1.  In  relation  to  his  highest  interest.
(1)  The  incarnate  life  of  Jesus  engaged   the  patriarch's  most  rapturous  attention.


OH.  viii.  1— 59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  897

"Your  fether  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day.**  The  incarnate  life  of  Jesna  was
revealed  to  him  in  the  promise  which  God  repeatedly  made  to  him.  This  excited  his
interest,  and  became  the  subject  of  his  ardent  study.  He  meditated  on  it  with  delight,
raised  Idmself,  as  it  were,  on  tiptoe  to  look  over  the  shoulders  of  ages  to  catch  a  glimpse
of  it ;  stretched  forward  with  eagerness  and  joy  to  behold  it ;  made  use  of  every  light,
and  earnestly  prayed  for  more.  (2)  A  vision  of  his  incarnate  life  was  granted  him.
"  And  he  saw  it."  His  faithful  efforts  met  with  success,  and  his  eager  faith  was
rewarded  with  the  desired  vision.  Whether  this  refers  to  the  general  vision  of  his  life
of  futh,  or  to  some  special  one,  is  not  certain.  Perhaps  it  was  specially  enjoyed  on  the
summit  of  Moriah,  and  through  his  own  experience  in  offering  up  his  only  son  he  had  a
special  vision  of  the  incarnate  life  of  the  Son  of  God.  This  served  as  a  telescope  through
which  he  saw  the  distant  day  close  at  hand,  and  beheld  its  leading  features,  and  graspied
its  Divine  and  human  bearings  and  import.  (3)  2%i<  vision  filed  his  soul  with  joy.
"  He  saw  it,  and  was  glad."  Being  the  chief  vision  of  his  life,  his  soul  overflowed  with
delight  and  gladness.  His  was  the  joy  of  overflowing  gratitude,  intense  satisfaction,
and  Divine  fulfilment.  Since  he  saw  that  day  his  joy  was  in  his  soul,  a  springtide
which  carried  him  at  last  to  the  brighter  visions  and  diviner  joy  beyond.  2,  In  relation
to  AhraJMm's  age.  "  Before  Abraham,"  etc.  This  implies :  (1)  The  priority  of  his  being.
It  was  very  little  for  him  to  say  that  he  was  before  Abraham,  considered  in  the  full  light
of  his  statement,  but  it  was  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  and  a  reply  to  the  objection
of  his  opponents.  (2)  The  eternity  of  his  leing.  "  I  am."  "  I  was  "  here  would  place
him  among  created  beings,  but  "  I  am  "  at  once  reveals  him  as  uncreated,  eternal,  self-
existent,  and  independent  of  time  and  material  conditions  and  circumstances,  and  makes
him  belong  to  the  highest  order  of  being.  (3)  The  unchangedbility  of  his  leing.  "I
am."  In  time,  and  amid  the  changes  of  his  visible  and  earthly  existence,  his  eternal
personality  and  consciousness  are  preserved  unchanged.  He  is  still  the  "  I  am."  (4)
His  unquestionable  Divinity.  U  his  being  is  uncreated,  eternal,  self-existent,  and
unchangeable,  he  must  be  Divine.  This  he  most  emphatically  and  solemnly  asserts :
"  Verily,  verily,"  etc.

III.  HiB  REVELATION  OF  HIMSELF  IN  BBLATION  TO  BIB  OFFONEMTS.  1.  They  Under-
stood it.  It  was  intellectually  intelligible  to  them.  They  were  too  acquainted  with
the  attributes  and  designations  of  Jehovah  to  misunderstand  the  language  of  Christ,
and  their  application  to  himself  was  felt  by  them,  as  their  conduct  proves.  2.  It
became  to  them  unbearaible.  "  They  took  up  stones,"  etc.  A  proof  of:  (1)  Inability  to
refute  his  statement.  When  stone-throwing  begins,  argtmients  are  at  an  end.  Stone-
throwing  is  a  sign  of  weakness.  (2)  Inability  to  be  convinced.  Their  false  and
malicious  nature  was  patent  against  conviction.  They  could  not  rise  to  the  Divinity  of
his  Person  and  mission.  This  inability  was  sad,  but  wilful  and  criminaL  (3)  Inability
to  control  themselves.  Passion  was  their  master;  hatred  was  on  the  throne.  They
fail  to  conceal  them,  3.  It  widened  the  gulf  between  him  and  them.  It  was  wide
before — ^wider  now.  As  he  revealed  himself  in  the  sublimest  manner  as  their  promised
Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God,  they  in  consequence  revealed  themselves  in  stone-throwing
as  hia  most  implacable  and  deadly  foes.  4.  Bis  revelation  was  suitably  appended  by  his
apparently  mirotoidous  escape.  "  But  Jesus  hid  himself,"  etc.  Hid  himself  in  the  folds
of  his  glory.  A  suitable  sequel  to  his  revelation  of  himself  as  their  Divine  Deliverer.
How  easily  and  effectively  could  he  defend  himself,  and  retaliate  in  their  fashion !  But
he  preferred  his  own.  He  had  a  royal  road.  He  departed  as  a  King,  He  could  walk
through  the  crowd  unobserved,  and  through  the  stones  unhurt.  The  weak  are  more
ready  to  attack  than  the  strong,  but  there  is  more  majesty  in  the  retreat  of  the  strong
than  in  the  attack  of  the  weak.  When  stone-throwing  begins,  it  is  time  for  the
messenger  of  peace  to  retire.  The  stones  may  kill  his  person,  but  cannot  kill  his
published  message,  and  he  may  be  wanted  elsewhere.

Lessons.  1,  Natural  relationships  often  survive  the  tptrttual.  The  natural  rela-
tionship between  these  people  and  Abraham,  and  even  between  them  and  God,  still
remained,  while  the  spiritual  was  all  but  gone.  This  is  true  of  God  and  evU  spirits.
2.  When  the  spiritual  relationship  is  destroyed,  the  natural  availeth  nothing.  It  is  caly
the  foundation  of  an  empty  boast  and  hypocritical  self-righteousness,  and  at  last  the
source  of  painful  reminiscences  and  contrasts.  3.  The  best  of  fathers  often  have  the
wont  of  children.    This  is  true  of  Abraham,  and  even  of  God — the  best  Father  of  alL


398  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [oh.  vm.  1—69.

4.  Much  of  the  religious  capital  of  the  present  is  derived  entirely  from  the  past,  M«ny
claim  relationship  with,  and  boast  of,  the  reformers  and  illustroug  men  of  bygone  ages,
and  this  is  all  their  stock-in-trade.  Their  names  are  on  their  lips,  while  their  principles
are  under  their  feet.  5.  It  was  the  chief  mission  of  Christ  to  expladn  wad  establish  the
s/iiritnal  relationship  between  man  and  God.  Toestablish  itona  sound  basi« — ^the  basis
of  faith,  obedience,  and  love.  To  be  the  real  children  of  God  and  of  our  pious  ancestors,
we  must  partake  of  their  spiritual  nature  and  principles.  This  Jesus  taught  with
fidelity,  although  it  cost  him  at  last  a  cruel  cross.  6.  We  are  indirectly  indebted  to  the
cavils  of  foes  for  some  of  the  sublimest  revelations  of  Jesus  of  himtdf.  It  was  so  here.
Their  foul  blasphemies,  after  all,  served  as  advantageous  backgrounds  to  his  grand
pictures  of  incarnate  Divinity  and  love;  so  that  we  are  not  altogether  sorry  that  they
called  him  a  "Samaritan"  and  a  demon,  as  in  consequence  be  shines  forth  with
peculiar  brilliancy  as  the  Friend  of  sinners,  the  Son  of  Crad,  and  the  Saviour  of  man-
kind.—B.  T.

Vers.  1 — ^23. — Excluded  from  the  destination  of  Jesu*.  In  one  aenM  Jesua  wm
very  near  to  men,  very  closely  connected  with  them.  At  the  same  time  he  was  very
far  from  them,  separated  in  many  ways.  The  Gospel  of  John  abounds  in  indicatioua  of
this  felt  difference  and  superiority.  Tet  there  is  much  to  help  and  cheer  even  in  words
like  these :  "  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come."  The  truth  of  Jesua  is  the  same,  spoken
to  friends  or  to  enemies,  and  everything  Jesus  said  on  the  earth  has  something  of
gospel  in  it.  If  we  are  born  again  and  take  shape  after  the  new  creature,  then  we  also
shall  be  from  above.

I.  The  destination  that  jEsns  himself  assubedlt  will  beaoh.  Jesus  is  on  •
definite  journey,  knows  where  he  is  going,  and  that  he  will  get  there.  His  life  is  not
an  aimless  wandering.  In  all  his  goings  backwards  and  forwards  between  Galilee  and
Judsea  his  face  was  set  towards  Jerusalem,  l>ecause  there  for  him  the  door  was  to  open
from  the  seen  to  the  unseen,  from  the  life  of  time  to  the  life  of  eternity.  His  enemies
speak  of  him  as  if  his  thoughts  were  running  in  the  same  direction  as  those  of  Job.
When  Job  sat  among  the  ashes,  despoiled  of  his  property,  bereaved  of  his  children,
smitten  with  pain  all  over  the  body,  he  thought  death  and  the  grave  his  best  friends,
where  the  wicked  would  cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary  be  at  rest.  But  Jesus
was  thinking  of  what  he  would  attain,  not  what  he  would  escape.  The  heavenly  state,
with  its  security,  glory,  and  blessedness,  was  not  an  unexpected  thing  to  Jesus.  Jesus
speaks  as  knowing  for  himself  that  the  end  depends  on  the  way.  Jesus  knows  where
he  is  going,  for  he  has  been  there  already.  In  the  autumn  of  1492  three  Spanish  ships
are  making  their  way  over  the  Atlantic,  in  waters  where  ship  has  never  been  known
to  pass  before.  Christopher  Columbus  of  Genoa  commands  those  ships,  and  he  is  going
on  an  enterprise  of  pure  faith.  He  believes  there  is  a  lapd  ahead,  but  he  has  never
been  there.  At  present  thousands  go  over  that  same  Atlantic,  returning  home.  And
so  Jesus  was  going  back  whence  he  had  come.  Every  step  took  him  nearer  that  day
when  he  would  pray  the  prayer,  "  Glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self,  with  that  glory
which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was."

II.  The  destination  that  some  most  cebtainlt  will  not  beaoh.  Most  of  the
listeners  would  trouble  very  little  about  what  Jesus  meant.  They  would  say,  "  Let
him  go,  or  let  him  stay ;  it  is  no  great  concern  of  ours."  But  if  we  do  really  believe
that  Jesus  has  gone  into  a  state  of  glory,  that  he  individually  can  no  longer  suffer  pun,
no  longer  be  exposed  to  temptation,  must  it  not  be  serious  for  us  to  reflect  that  possibly
we  cannot  go  where  he  has  gone  ?  Heaven  is  not  to  be  earth  over  again.  The  mixtures
and  conflicts  of  the  lower  world  are  not  to  be  known  in  the  upper  one.  Gk>od  people
have  no  monopoly  of  transit  to  any  place  on  the  face  of  the  earth ;  but  there  is  a  state
to  which  the  evil  cannot  reach.  A  man  may  say,  if  he  likes,  that  he  will  have  a
garden  without  weeds,  but  that  will  not  keep  the  weeds  out.  But  Jesus  is  the  great
and  effectual  Excluder.  Beyond  the  veil  there  are  divisions  more  intense  and  more
manifest  than  any  that  obtain  here.  Jesus  came  amid  the  unions  of  time  to  make  the
separations  of  eternity.

III.  The  destination  that  all  mat  iusaoh.  Speaking  of  exclusion  is  the  strange
work  of  Jesus.  Even  while  he  said,  "  T«  cannot  come,"  at  the  same  time  he  said,
"  Cotne."    Any  one  can  come  who  will  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  and  tread  the  narrow


OH.  vni.  1—69.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDIKa  TO  BT.  JOEK.  tM

way.    Any  one  can  come  who  will  give  the  seed-ground  of  his  heart  as  good  ground
for  the  seed  of  eternal  truth. — Y.

Ver.  12. — 2^  Light  of  the  world.  We  shall  hardly  he  wrong  in  assuming  that  Jesus
said  these  words  in  the  full  warmth  and  radiance  of  a  most  sunshiny  day.  Surely  the
Sim  speaks  so  every  day  in  his  rising,  "  I  am  the  light  of  the  world."  Sometimes  he
iBnys  it  more  emphatically.  More  emphatically  in  summer  than  in  winter,  more
emphatically  on  a  bright  day  than  a  cloudy  one,  but  always  saying  it  afresh  every
morning  with  the  return  of  daylight  to  the  earth.  Jesus  means  that  just  as  the  sun
gives  light  to  the  world  in  one  way,  so  he  gives  light  in  another.  When  the  light  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  in  all  its  fulness,  then  the  night  passes  from  our  life.
There  is  a  darkness  that  is  not  banished  with  the  dawn,  unless  Jesus  banishes  it ;  and
if  Jesus  stays  with  us,  then  there  is  a  light  that  will  not  vanish  with  the  sunset.  In
him  we  get  securities,  comforts,  and  opportunities,  such  as  make  us  independent  of
unfavourable  times  and  seasons.    Take  tliis  declaration  in  connection —

L  With  safety.  Night  is  the  time  of  danger.  The  thief  comes  by  night.  Day-
light gives  a  freedom  of  movement  which  at  once  ceases  with  the  darkness.  So  he
who  is  the  true  Light  of  the  world  brings  a  safety  that  is  impossible  without  him.
Who  can  tell  into  what  depths  of  destruction  and  misery  they  plunge  who  refuse  the
light  of  the  Lord  Jesus?  After  all,  the  only  real  destruction  is  self-destruction.  When
Jesus  lodges  the  light  of  his  truth  in  oiu*  hearts,  then  our  notions  of  danger  get  turned
upside  down.  So  it  was  with  the  jailor  of  Philippi.  Jesus  shows  to  us  spiritual  peril
and  saves  us  firom  it.  To  any  one  who  has  clearly  seen  what  a  terrible  thing  spiritual
peril  is,  and  what  a  real  thing  spiritual  salvation  is,  how  absurd  and  exaggerated  much
of  the  world's  prudence  must  appear.  The  moment  Christ  begins  to  rise  upon  the
heart,  spiritual  danger  and  spiritual  salvation  will  cease  to  be  mere  words.  All
spiritually  anxious  ones  are  where  they  are  just  because  Jesus  is  the  Light  of  the
world.  None  can  tell  into  what  light  he  may  be  travelling.  To  see  one's  peril  is  half
one's  salvation.

IL  With  human  ignobance.  What  can  a  man  know  of  the  scene  round  him  in
the  dark  ?  Take  him  to  some  elevation  from  which  in  daylight  there  is  a  spacious  and
charming  prospect,  and  he  is  none  the  better.  But  what  a  change  a  few  short  hours
will  make — a  change  going  all  the  way  from  ignorance  to  knowledge  1  Visible  objects
are  not  properly  known  till  seen  in  daylight.  In  the  light  that  streams  from  Jesus
how  different  we  seem  to  ourselves  I  The  duties,  the  possibilities,  and  the  associations
of  life  become  altogether  different.  Life  is  as  full  of  interest  as  ever,  yea,  fuller ;  but
we  are  interested  in  different  things,  or  in  old  things  in  a  different  way.  No  one  knows
so  much  of  permanent  and  comforting  value  as  the  Christian.

III.  With  fbactioal  pebplexities.  Many  have  made  great  mistakes  in  life,  and
had  to  go  through  toils  and  trials  they  might  well  have  been  spared,  if  only  they  had
been  practical  Christians,  completely  at  the  disposal  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Jesus  knows
well  what  poor  guesses  we  can  make  at  consequences  and  probabilities.  He  who  claims
to  rule  us  will  never  leave  us  in  doubt  as  to  what  we  are  really  to  do.  The  continu-
ance of  serious  perplexity  comes  not  &om  want  of  light,  but  want  of  disposition  to
make  use  of  the  light.

IV.  With  woBK.  "  The  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work."  Jesus  gives  the  light
whereby  we  may  be  useful  down  to  the  very  end  of  our  present  life.  Jesus  must  show
how  best  to  employ  our  time,  how  best  to  serve  the  world.  Never  yet  did  true
Christian  look  back  on  wasted  life.  The  miserable  retrospects,  the  terrible  confessions,
belonging  to  the  men  of  this  world  are  not  his. — Y.

Ver.  31. — Oenuine  diseipleshvp.  In  the  earlier  part  of  his  ministry  Jesus  probably
had  a  great  many  disciples.  At  all  events  this  might  be  suspected.  He  taught  a  great
deal,  and  the  testimony  is  that  he  spoke  "  with  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes."
We  may  be  sure  he  was  always  ready  to  speak  concerning  the  things  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  In  synagogue,  in  temple,  in  the  homes  of  the  people,  out  in  the  open  air,  he
lost  no  opportunity.  He  that  soweth  sparingly,  reapeth  sparingly.  Thus  a  large
company  of  nominal  disciples  would  be  gathered.  But  Jesus  did  not  care  for  mere
qitantity  as  such.    He  was  quite  prepaied  for  desertions  and  backslidings.    Only  a


400  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINd  TO  ST.  JOHN.    [ch.  Tin.  1 -60.

hundred  and   twenty  wen  gathered  in  the  upper  room  to  wait  for  the  Day  of

Pentecost.

I.  The  DiFFiouiiTT  OF  DisoiFLEBRiP.  Nominal  Christianity  is  easy  enough,  but  to
be  s  real  disciple  is  as  hard  as  eyer.  Jesus  made  it  hard  for  those  who  first  thronged
round  him,  and  the  same  tests,  the  same  requirements,  the  same  difficulties,  foce  us
stilL  The  would-be  disciple  has  to  contend  with  his  own  indolence,  impatience,  self-
indulgence.  What  changes  in  our  thoughts  and  ways  there  must  be,  so  that  our
thotights  may  become  as  the  thoughts  of  Jesus,  our  ways  as  the  ways  of  Jesus  1  We
are  not  to  be  known  by  distinctions  in  outward  appearance,  but  by  deep  distinctions  in
character  and  purpose.  He  who  wants  an  easy,  smooth,  level  life  will  not  indeed  find
it  anywhere ;  least  of  all  will  he  find  it  with  Christ.  It  is  not  mere  attendance  at
school  that  makes  the  scholar — ^it  is  learning ;  and  in  the  school  of  Christ  learning  by
practice.

n.  See  Jbbus  tebtinq  diboifles.  The  man  who  said  he  would  follow  Jesus  wherever
he  went.  The  man  who  said  he  would  follow  when  he  had  buried  his  father.  The
man  who  said  he  would  follow  after  saying  farewell  to  his  friends.  The  disciples  in  the
storm,  who  deemed  they  trusted  Christ,  and  yet  could  not  trust  him  till  they  had
wakened  him  from  sleep.  Faith  in  Jesus  as  a  Teacher  must  rise  above  the  difficulties
of  any  particular  single  demand  of  his.  You  must  learn  to  look  at  Jesus,  not  in  any
one  single  action,  not  in  any  one  single  word,  but  in  the  sum  total  of  all  his  actions  and
all  his  words.  Jesus  is  always  teaching,  and  we  have  to  be  always  learning.  What
others  reckoned  to  be  discipleship  he  did  not  so  reckon.  Departure  from  old  associations
does  not  make  discipleship.  Departure  into  new  circumstances  does  not  make  disciple-
ship. He  is  the  disciple  indeed  who  breaks  from  an  old  life  into  a  new  one — into  that
new  life  which  gets  nearer  perfectness  the  nearer  it  gets  to  perfect  trust  in  Jesus.
Diogenes  went  about  Greece  with  his  lantern,  looking  for  an  honest  man ;  and  so  Jesus
goes  about  among  us  with  his  tests  and  with  his  searching,  undeceivable  eye,  looking
for  a  disciple  indeed.  He  looks  to  see  whether  we  abide  in  his  Word,  whether  we  carry
it  into  every  thought,  every  transaction,  every  temptation,  every  trouble.  He  would  lead
us  on  from  lesson  to  lesson,  deepening  our  faith,  marking  us  off  as  his  disciples  more
and  more  distinctly — those  ever  learning  and  ever  able  to  come  more  and  more  to
knowledge  of  the  truth. — Y.

Yer.  32. — The  liberating  truth.  There  are  two  kinds  of  freedom :  the  freedom  of  the
liberated  prisoner  and  the  freedom  of  the  manumitted  slave.  Living  in  a  country  like
England,  we  are  most  likely  to  think  of  the  former  kind.  But  it  is  quite  evident  that
Jesus  was  thinking  of  servitude  rather  than  captivity.  Many  may  have  to  be  under
restraint  because  they  have  broken  laws ;  it  is  right  that  they  should  be  prisoners  for  a
time,  perhaps  even  for  all  their  lives.  But  servitude  never  can  be  right ;  it  has  had  to
remain  awhile  because  of  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,  and  as  men  have  got  more  light
upon  human  equality,  they  have  seen  that  no  man  should  be  legally  compelled  into  the
service  of  another,  whether  he  would  or  not.  In  the  time  of  Jesus  there  were  many
bond-slaves,  and  he  had  no  magic  process  whereby  he  could  liberate  them.  But  there
were  bond-slaves  beinde*,  tmconscious  of  their  servitude,  deluded  with  the  notion  that
they  were  already  free,  and  therefore  all  the  harder  to  Uberate.  To  such  Jesus  spoke
here.    He  spoke  to  slaves,  and  told  them  what  would  liberate  them.

I.  The  pbooers  of  libebation  hay  be  beal,  though  fob  a  whils  we  abe  hot
0ONSCIOIT8  OF  IT.  The  prisoner  is  free  when  no  longer  in  prison ;  the  slave  is  free  when
no  longer  under  the  legal  control  of  his  owner.  But  Christian  liberty  cannot  thus  be
made  up  of  negations ;  it  would  be  a  poor  thing  if  it  could.  It  is  of  no  use  to  attempt
a  definition  of  Christian  liberty ;  it  is  a  thing  into  which  we  mnst  grow.  We  must
grow  until,  even  as  Paul  did,  we  look  back  on  the  days  once  counted  free  as  days  of
the  worst  servitude.  Going  where  Christ  wants  us  to  go,  being  what  Christ  wants  us
to  be,  we  shall  see  in  due  time  what  a. real  and  blessed  thing  spiritual  freedom  is.  Still,
though  it  must  be  a  time  before  we  know  this  properly,  yet  we  may  know  something
of  it  At  OBce  i»  studying  the  veiy  greatest  illustralion  of  red  liberty  we  can  find,
namely,  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  ft  is  not  abstract  truth  that  liberates,  bat  truth  as
embcdied  in  the  wisdom  and  power  of  Jesus.

IL  THW  BBINOS  (78  INTO  THE  LIBBRTT  OF  DOINO  GoD's  WILL,       Ohlift'S  OWIk  libert/


OH.  VIII.  1—59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOHN.  401

was  not  that  of  doing  as  he  liked.  He  went  by  the  likings  of  his  Father  in  heaven.
He  did  nothing  without  liking  to  do  it ;  yet  he  also  did  nothing  just  because  he  liked
to  do  it.  To  desire  what  God  desires,  that  is  liberty,  without  a  check,  •  jar,  or  a  fret.
Suwing  just  what  we  like,  we  shall  certainly  reap  what  we  do  not  like.  Christ  wants
to  liberate  us  from  the  thraldom  of  our  own  strong,  foolish  desires.  The  psalmist
exactly  expresses  the  Christian's  privilege  and  attainment,  when  he  says  so  cheerfully,
"  I  will  run  the  way  of  thy  commandments,  when  thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart."

III.  Tbhth  brings  ns  into  the  liberty  or  seeino  thinos  with  odb  own  eyes.
The  reputed  wise  in  Jerusalem  would  only  have  led  Jesus  into  a  bondage  of  falsehoods
and  delusions.  What  a  Pharisee  they  would  have  tried  to  make  him  I  Beally  free-
thinking  is  the  only  right  thinking,  and  our  Teacher  was  the  freest  thinker  that  ever
hved.  It  is  our  duty  as  much  as  our  right  to  judge  everything  in  connection  with
Christ  for  ourselves.  By  that  rule  we  shall  be  judged  at  last.  Others  may  help  us
in  the  way  when  chosen,  but  they  are  not  to  choose  it  for  us.

IV.  Truth  bbinqs  us  into  the  liberty  or  a  loving  heart.  The  heart  of  Jesus
could  not  be  kept  within  rules  and  precedents  and  prejudices.  It  was  a  Divine  love,
shed  abroad  in  his  heart,  that  kept  him  safe,  pure,  and  unspotted,  in  a  world  abounding
with  things  to  pollute.

V.  Truth  brings  ns  into  the  liberty  or  a  gracious  life.  That  is,  the  liberty  of
Jesus  never  interfered  with  the  true  liberty  of  others,  but  increased  and  established  it.
H«  iwTer  broke  away  from  the  beaten  track  for  the  mere  sake  of  doing  it.— Ti


IB


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX

TO

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  JOIN.


CHAPTER  L

THEm  TAQR

Prologue  of  the  Gospel       ...           ...  43

Jesus  Christ  in  Belation  to  Creation ...  44
The  Witness  of  the  Baptist  to  the  True

Light  ... 45

The  True  light  in  its  Manifestation  45

The  Double  Bejectlon  of  the  Light  ...  46

The  Grace  of  Adoption       ...            ...  46

The  Beality  of  the  Incarnation         ...  47

The  Testimony  of  John  the  Baptist ...  48

Christ  the  Fulness  of  Grace  and  Truth  48
The  Second  Testimony  of  John  the

Baptist               ...            ...            ...  49

Third  Testimony  borne  by  the  Baptist

to  Jesus             ...           ...            ...  50

The  First  Gathering  of  Disciples  to

Jesus  ...            ...            ...            ...  SI

The  Beception  of  Peter  by  Christ    ...  52

The  Calling  of  Philip         52

The  Calling  of  Kathanael  ...            ...  53

The  Divine  Daybreak        ...           ...  54

Christ  rejected  and  accepted  ...  55
The  Inference  from  the  Human  to  the

Divine              ...            ...            ...  56

A  Disclaimer  and  a  Claim  ...           ...  57

Guests  of  Jesus    ...            ...            ...  58

A  Brother's  Love  and  Service          ...  59

The  Great  Discovery          ...            ...  60

The  Candid  Disciple           ...            ...  61

« Come  and  see"  ...           ...            ...  62

The  Unrecognized  Creator  ...            ...  63

The  Bejeoted  and  Beceived  Saviour ...  65

Th»  Divine  Bevealer          ...           ».  68


The    Jewish    Deputation    and    the

Baptist  ...  ...  ...  69

The  Guileless  Inquirer       ...  ...  71

The  Life  that  gives  Light  to  Hen    ...  73

Beceiving  Christ,  and  the  Besult  of  it  74

Moses  and  Christ ...  ...  ...  75

A  Question  for  Seekers      ...  ...  76

Bringing  Men  to  Jesus        ...  ...  76

Jesus  and  Kathanael  ...  ...  77

OHAPTEB  IL

The  First  Miracle  ...  ...  94

The  Transition  between  Private  and

Public  Life        ...  ...  ...  95

Christ  in  the  Temple  ...  ...  95

Our  Lord's  Work  in  Jerusalem        ...  96

Jesus  and  Social  Life  ...  ...  97

Jesus  and  the  Marriage-State  ...  98

Jesus  and  Nature ...  ...  ...  99

The  Marriage-Feast  at  Cana  a  Pledge

of  the  Marriage-Supper  of  the  Lamb  99

"They  have  no  Wine"       ...  ...  100

"  Mine  Hour  is  not  yet  come  "  ...  1 00

"  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it "  lOJ
"  Thou  hast  kept  the  Good  Wine  until

now"  ...  ...  ...  ...  101

"  This  Beginning  of  his  Signs  "  ...  1 02
"Jesus  .   .   .  manifested   forth    his

Glory"  102

"His  Disciples  believed  on  him"  ...  103
The    Vindication    of    a    Desecrated

Temple  ^  m  ...  103


Index.


THKUB  PAQB

The  Miracle  of  Cana           ...  ...  101

Genuine  Zeal        ...            ...  .,.-  106

The  Beginning  of  Miracles  ...  108

The  Honour  of  the  Father's  House  ...  109

Jesus  knowing  Man            ...  ...  110


CHAPTER  III.

i'he  Interriew  of  Christ  with  Nicode-

muB     ...            ...            ...            ...  185

The  Advent  of  a  wholly  New  Tea(  hiug  137
The  Revelation  of  the  Divine  Plan  of

Salvation           ...            ...            ...  138

The  Immensity  of  God's  Lore  to  the

World...            ...            ...            ...  139

The  Incarnation  regarded  respectively
in  its  Design    and    in    its  Actual

Result                189

The    Ministry  of   our    Lord   in   the

Country  Districts  of  Judaea           ...  140
The  Relation  between  our  Lord  and

his  Forerunner  ...            ...            ...  141

The  Baptist's  Confirmation  of  his  State-
ment respecting  the  Superiority  of

Christ 141

Christianity  the  Kingdom  of  God    ...  142

"Born  anew  I"     ...            ...            ...  143

The  Wind  and  the  Spirit    ...            ...  144

An  Emblem  of  Salvation    ...            ...  145

"The  Gift  of  God"            145

Faith  and  Judgment           ...            ...  146

Lovers  of  Darkness             ...            ...  147

Ummeasured  Gifts               ...            ...  148

The  Greatness  of  God's  Love  to  the

World 149

The   Great  Purpose  of   God  in  the

Mission  of  his  Son           ...           ...  150

The  Bridegroom's  Friend  true  to  the

last 152

Coming  to  Jesus  by  Night ...            ...  154

Jesus  humbling  Vaunted  Knowledge  155

"  Born  of  Water  and  of  the  Spirit"  ...  156

The  Lifting  up  of  the  Son  of  Man    ...  156

The  Love  of  God  in  Deed  and  Truth  157

John  and  Jesut     ...            ...            ...  157


CHAPTER  IV.

The  Journey  of  our  Lord  through
Samaria  ...  ...  ...     ISl

The  ConTCTsation  with  the  Samaritan
WoMMt  M.  ...  ...     182


THEME  PAOB

A  Serious  Turn  to  the  Conversation ...  188

The  Spirit  of  the  True  Worship        ...  184
Our  Lord's  Revelation  of  himself,  and

its  Remarkable  Effects    ...  ...  18i^

Jesus  and  his  Disciples       ...  ...  IS.'i

Jeeus  and  the  Samaritans  ...  ...  18U

Our  Lord's  Return  to  Galilee  ...  187

The  Second  Miracle  of  Cana  ...  187

Patriotism  and  Christianity  ...  188

"  If  thou  knewest  l"  ...  ...  188

"Prom  whence?"  ...  ...  189

The  Suppliant  supplicated ...  ...  190

Worship  and  Holy  Places   ...  ...  190

Worship  and  Worshippers  ...  ...  191

The  Divine  Search  ...  ...  192

The  Power  of  a  Personal  Revelation  193

Spiritual  Work  and  Spiritual  Food  ...  194

"  The  Saviour  of  the  World  "  ...  194

The  Growth  of  Faith  ...  ...  195

The  Physical  and  Spiritual  Food  of

Man    ...  ...  ...  ...  196

The  Christian  Harvest        ...  ...  198

The  Fountain  of  Liviog  Water  ...  200

The  Fallacy  of  Holy  Places  ...  201

The  Astonishment  of  Ignorance        ...  20]

The  Purpose  of  Jesus  in  Eating        ...  202

The  Two  Harvesti  .^  ...  203


OHAPTBB  V.

The  Cure  ofthe  Impotent  Man         ...  SSS

Outbreak  of  Jewish  Hostility  ...  226

Our  Lord's  Vindication  of  his  Conduct  226
The  Two  Resurrections  and  the  Two

Judgments  by  the  Son    ...  ...  227

The  Witness  to  the  Son      ...  ...  229

The  Cause  and  the  End  of  Jewish

Unbelief  ...  ...  ...  229

The  Will  to  be  healed         230

Christ  who  saves  is  Christ  who  rules  231

The  Incessanoy  of  Divine  Ministry  ...  281

Offence  with  Christ  ...  ...  282

The  Father  and  the  Son     ...  ...  233

The  Human  Judge  upon  the  Divine

Throne  234

The  Voice  that  reaohei  the  Dead     ...  234

The  Scriptures  and  the  Christ         ...  235

The  Help  of  the  Helpless  ...  ...  236

Suffering  alleviated  by  the  Bemoval  of

Sin      237

Eternal  Life         ...  ...  ...  239

The  Two  Besurreotien*      .„  ,„  240


INDEX.


iii


TBBHB  FAGB

A  Commendable  Search  and  a  Sad

Failure               ...            ...            ...  241

A  Remarkable  Question  of  Jesus      ...  243

The  Healer's  Warning        ...            ...  243

Tlie  Witness-bearing  Works  of  Jesus  244

A  Special  Hindrance  to  Faith           ...  245

CHAPTEK  VI.

The  Miracle  of  the  Loaves  and  Fishes  276

Christ  Walking  on  the  Sea . . .            ...  277

The  Dialogue  between  Jesus  and  the

Jews  in  the  Synagogue  of  Capernaum  277

The  Nature  of  the  Gift  from  Heaven  278
The  Divergence  between  the  Thoughts

of  Jesus  and  those  of  the  Jews      ...  278
Our    Lord's  Explanation    of   Jewish

Unbelief            279

The  Increasing  Difficulties  of  Jewish

Unbelief            280

The  Growth  of  Discontent  and   Un-
belief among  his  Disciples             ...  281
The  Crisis  reached  at  last  ...            ...  282

"It is  II"             283

"Seeking  Jesus"...            ...            ...  283

Fruitless  and  Fruitful  Toil               ...  284

The  Work  of  God...            ...            ...  285

The  True  Bread  ...            285

The  Father  draws  the  Soul  to  Christ  286

The  Ascension  foretold       ...            ...  287

The  Flesh  and  the  Spirit   ...            ...  288

Desertion  and  Adhesion      ...            ...  289

The  Human  and  the  Divine  Idea  of

Kingship            289

False  Seekers  and  a  True  Saviour    ...  291
l-he  Father's  Will  and  its  Executor  293
The  Sad  Departure  from  Christ        ...  295
Tie  Departure  of  the  Many  consoli-
dating the  Few...            ...            ...  296

The  Feeding  of  tlie  Five  Thousand  ...  297

Gathering  the  Fragments  ...            ...  298

Working  and  Eating           ...            ...  299

Never  turned  away             ...            ...  300

Apostasy  from  Jesus           ...            ...  301


CHAPTEB  VII.

Our  Lord's  Stay  in  Galilee ...  ...    323

The  Appeal  to  Jesus  on  the  Part  of

his  Unbelieving  Brothers  ...     323

Inquiries  and  Speculations  concerning

Christ ...  ».  324


THEHE

Justification  of  hia  Doctrine
Justification  of  his  Conduct
The  True  Origin  of  our  Lord


PAGE

324
325
326


Tlie  Effect  of  our  Lord's  Teaching  on

the  Bulers  and  on  the  Multitude  ...  326

The  Address  of  Jesus  ...  ...  327

Effect  of  this  Address  upon  the  Multi-
tude    ...  ...  ...  ...  328

The  Meeting  of  the  Sanhedrin  ...  328

Brethren,  but  not  Believers  ...  329

Christ's  Witness  against  Sin  ...  330

A  Good  Will  the  Condition  of  Spiritual

Discernment     ...  ...  ...  331

The  Thirsting  invited  to  tlie  Fountain

of  Living  Waters  ...  ...  332

The  Prophet         ...  ...  ...  332

The  Christ  333

The  Incomparable  Words    ...  ...  334

Class  Prejudice  and  Christianity      ...  335

Jesus  in  Belation  to  Time  ...  ...  335

"Where  is  he?"  ...  ...  ...  337

An  Important  Division        ...  ...  338

Captivity  led  Captive         ...  ...  339

The  Time  of  Jesus — when  is  it  to

come?...  ...  ...  ...  340

Christ's  Authority  and  the  Way  to

ascertain  it        ...  ...  ...  341

Good  News  for  the  Thirsty  ...  842

CHAPTER  VIIL

The  Woman  caught  in  Adultery       ...  374

Jesus  the  Light  of  the  World  ...  375

The  Objection  of  the  Pharisees,  and

the  Answer  of  our  Lord  ...  ...  375

The  Scornful  Bejoinderof  the  Pharisees  376
A  Warning  to  the  Jews  of  the  Impor-
tance of  the  Present  Hour              ...  376
A  Still  Clearer  Bevelation  in  Store
for  them             ...            ...            ...  377

The  Bondage  of  the  Jews,  and  the

Source  of  True  Liberty   ...  ...  377

Misapprehension  of  the  Disciples  cor-
rected... ...  ...  ...  377

The  Spiritual  Parentage  of  the  Faith-
less Jews  ...  ...  ...  878

The  Indignant  Betort  of  the  Jews     ...  380

Deliverance  of  the  Believer  from  Death  380
The  Accusers    condemned    and    the

Accused  absolved  ...  ...  381

The  World's  True  Light     ...  ...  382

"Who  art  thou?"  882


IV


INDEX.


THEME  PAGE

"  My  Disciples  "  ...            ...  ...  383

Spiritual  Fieedom              ...  ...  381

The  SinleBsnesB  of  Christ    ...  ...  381

Obedience  and  Immoitality  ...  385

Christ's  Superiority  to  Abraham  ...  385
A.  Miserable  Sinner  and  a  Merciful

Saviour              ...            ...  ...  386

The  Light  of  the  Wagld     ...  889, 399


True  Christian  Diecipleship  ...  391

True  Freedom      ...            ...  ...  393

True  Spiritual  Paternity    ...  ...  394

Christ  and  Abraham           ...  ...  396

Excluded    from    the   Destination    of

Jesus  ...            ...            ...  ...  398

Gennine  Discipleship         ...  ...  399

The  Liberating  Truth        ...  ...  400


m  u


:yAUi,>'~-ii^i}i'Mv'  uy      i


(!1U  lii  ininnvciiti)
l!M'lifmii'i{inlii!lj)iuiMTJJUvi"ujii:m1iniiiiUi


111  nu  J  ii),ii  111):


HUH)  i-u  m  n^iUHUuni
,)  I.  i.iv  nt^,^ntll^i  n»j
)»n    iifu  Hutniumi  i  ■

"   "iwj  HH"  ' "

ij  mi-iiHH  t  It,

iijn  nm  >i,t  ii)>..
iiu  iMtnwuuiimiJ-i
mv)  inuijiiiii  "


)  iH)A  IliMH+lflH-Hb  iwmun-l  -Hi. ,,,,,,,,    .,,,,,     ,,,,,,


MMMdt  u  KUKuinsiiwMHMfljiani


■>4*d-mH.HW»i.BiJi  tmu  inn.


intiHiiwiiMJVl.,., .,

HI!  ^  mKinnitiiijluHtMHtifiH

!t!lllil.;!iK;feV.SI!11»!!!l!''l!liriii;ri'irmijinmiii^         iijij

II)      1  unnnniMiivi nt}mi  in  Ui     ihuh  i  lu   mid  win  ti
ijiij-i  innii   iK(»  iiiHlimniiMiii   niuiiui  ihiui  nutitimii    ,,  ,
)(.!.  iiJi  unmniD!  iDJuuiniuuiiiniiiij-iiu  »  iJii'Hiutnytt  tiuuii  .|

ii)ii!>  iiu|iuin»)ntHniiiMfniMit;]))iniiii)iii(iMui;uiMinl(  )  t  ituii
11   H  n  I'l  iJMM!  HUM  1  nuiUii-uiinmi ' .-.i...i,n


'tHt!Hi'HI!!}!i!!iJ!i:i  [{}

..ij'iUjiu  ■  ■  *'*

lOiidviitfi  mm
(uKuiiinfMtiim
nm(H+m>MHf '}


lliUii.UllUmUi^^l)i\)it)  If)  U1)1M)1M)JHHI,


i-^tfUii


■  -(iti'i  ->mi  t  ■

twDimiu-N  4

(I  imtmvi-fit  n

uiHum  iinH!V)i)-iJi  Mill  (lHlt^i^lll^^imlU!'tJ
iiinxviuui  mmn-mmni  ^  uMiuumuU^  m  i  i
■  ■■lltHi4)i!l^^il(l.l^I)llmnl*l^iHfi'm'^t'^H^^■J'


:ii,t!j!ip

'III


4mfti

, ,  (mm

U  UMH)

(Immr.
-  mini  J

nmu  I


(Hii  m  ■
-u))n)4i


HHilMH

.Klsmmi;
(inm)--  ■'


uifSWHT--.!  m^'-iii-l)  >i»  -
^      jj-  IMA  rUj-Hiwrn  J  imi    I

1     U>  W-),l^VJ-53  J.JiV.4m.U

;u*j4.-iai.^w;mi4»H'H»a>J.)n  >  1  1     t       i     ^^  i     i     n    u    :
ii^nm:j.i.rii  I  irfiu.iUfijfrj-1  niWJi-ii>u>%i  j  h  vwji-  !'4iin  \  mu)m

vt  rijwikvjj^uu  ij-t(jAH5.v.ji4titt>i  mwm>  i  mtmsni.  imi-(-t  i  ni  i  nwi  nni  i  )H)ti»ui»n';
-Aji  -.j  1  1  >iMtimt.>j.).i4i»i>j  iim»H.H  n^innuu-}  i  u.  n*in h  linuvu  ihiinum-Hinim  mtinui
'     '  -     i-w..w-iUH.i/  .Kvnwuii  1)  iu.t  lu  Mn  .i  i  i)  n  itn-iM  i  liiiu  )?ii  lii  uumjjut-'

uv»iJ>tmij-iiV)Hmwifi»*..  )  un  nlHii-  jw>it>  t)n  i  iln^iH  >  )  ifj  .if ti>i)Jiimi)',,...r. -,.,.„. ,-,,.,, .,, -...., --

11  (■V'rt'^TH/J^  i>f  jmRfU  >)-!  >  !>  »)   imm      t      >  hji-uui  it- 1  iiii.»iJi>iiiiuimnHifi  \u»  h   '  iim'    makinfu  «)>Uh  h-  , .  <■  •)
>.i  i.,i«  in»u  i-jJ  I  >  Hvi-i'  hn  iiu,i)v  iiiij  1 1  i  immnnimwivHUu  Un  ihinil  uimm  mu,j4jimm.nmm  'rt


inn um  tumtiiuium))  iijjivu  hjhuuhjuoi)  ii  i   h
.Mmi)iUfln>nJmutnnin'n«  HnimOHi  HirWinCf'"


,uu»M)U»uwu>m ;» -)

l}..tUd4l»,;mti')»i3W4»^tl
.  ■iW*W»«i»'HMJl-Hf  t>>i-"'

-j*.m.  1


im  u  I

1)     }.-)  J-  JU  if     111

uHi  1  m  ! )  1
ui  ijuijvijutiu  .1)1.  J  mvi
,.>  u>>i  t  iji»ut)-in  In  1  iim
..-  n  1mi  uiuw)ui>j  Jiiii  uiii
umn  niimivuii  iiiii  i  '^  ">

^  ni,j  -f  ( >  f  -  )i

iiM  )  1 1  un,]
m  1 11


mwummw  imii>  Jm  )>i  tnui  miiim  iuiiun  mih  j  i- j

iim  1  wmuiiimiui  ih  mu  Dtmimim'linuiJ-mjumi  Ui

in  m  m  1  iwswuit  U'    ->mmit  MjHiJMjmUmtniHt  u   i»   iJ]
III-  iii-Di  niHiiHHjJu*iit  in  mjiiiiuliuitini'iiuimu  Mijij.  ■»"

« 1(1  HHUtlii  iih m  inifmitiuimltuitiMMt
ni)liHi4iimUnnti»)iMnii  tinti>ui,iiimnn


lUtlii  iih m  inifmitiuimltuitiMMt  Hint  m
,   . .  iii^inniiiiihuni  Mnii>)ii>iiimK]i  nmi  »»>

»)»)  llW(4}IHiltlft)>f-IHl  )  ii>)(hintmjt»  MMUMtnil  lt>>       >

HH  jimi*?m,jii)i  Himi  im>ui-iitm)  uimiv*  rUi  nit  ■-

Ii  iivfiiMi  mini  uhhin  iiimumiiliimmiiuihiimi  i  ■  ■
)(!*im]Uiimi!JlmiMUiJiminnmiH"tii»i*'»'*""'*'"M*
-  -  ^ ^ ni\i\i '  —   -i


I  If    -Jh    KM     »l(M|-t?fl*/ll»)t     (tJUll

1  t  (  M  .iiitiM)Mumii-M"i  ti<IOH
ill  Ji  lUi  1IM1  mini  iniiiiii  film


.,Hi  <i  >niiuiii>-.tii)i))  mini  lu,)  miriiid)!  nnjnmifjt.  i^

v>  ini.)-m  ill  imm»iiv(i*  *  mh  j  i  iiMipiimHiimiwi
-      '  mtm  mjiH  K>(H)  nn!U»iniiMr»»

1  Y<t  4i   mtm)M!4t)»iHim  in  li   >i>imif»*itm)i»iHitti»  oni Umitt)  \\\^\%

-  M  )imi)i  imm  imimu  .imi(lmiiit)i)>m<iii!m.mn  ihU  Hunutn  Mt

■\  i»  inji  iiui  u  uiuili  t  siJi(mn'tmii'»il>Hi(ili»i(i> »  "

' 1  i      1  iiiiiiiiii  uiiiIiHiiui.iii.iWi>jt]ij-ij("-'- ■  ■


muniiiii)


iinm»  HJH.j  rinmjHMm


>m)  II  inimiDDMi  iii>tf)imHi>»>)JHfiiHmtmi  i/iiiHiiniiJi!ii)'iJii"i)JtiH)i
injNtu-  pMiiHii  HHi»i  hiii  imJi)  HDimin  ii  u  mijinwiuJ'ii  u/iJiitJiJi  '
)  ij  .fh»  H*  m  tmtii'>iimm)mj'f  m  nt'  in  i  m  "li  ilii  \y  i  i  li-is-n
)  m  nHjj'Htiit  iiift  m)^iiMii»))}imiim)t;Mi  Hin  iinii  >  iwi

)  j>iti>»jSJ.  ^\  wy  mi'jtmuuHHHiimm'iin  ii    J  »    i  '  o  n,i
1  1^1  M  )  ^\>M\,y\^y^l^n^^\\^-^iY\\i^'>M'l\^^\i  \\\\>\\\    liM       "'
I  il>,'Jt  IIVMI)  HHdtlJll  imiWUi  1J-!I1hH»M'H  I"  I"      '

I     n    I  ,1)  m  i-itiim  \u\\\\.  i  i  uni  n  ii<t  ii  ui  >
)  Ui  .It    1  iimi-i  iMimlii  f  iz-ifnin   i.i«mMiiiiii
wir>ihfj  Hjiuhjh  if.it -uiitm  J    n  nil  ii  ii

iiHniii  iHJ.u.-HfiiJxU  mjiniiujm  ii  in  u   ,m  m  i

Uti  t|  1  am  timu  ii'mmii  imfim  i  iHi>nt  i  i.ninit/if  ,
J  m  IV  mih^\u/i\}    mnmi  vMmh  i.fi/  \,i\n>  i  jimirj  i
