I 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

QR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  LiterattfrCf 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bihle^  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  MJ^. 


Royal  Octavo,  Cloth,  e«ch  about  650  pages,  per  Volumo,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
jKKjket-book,  the  minister  who  sges  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  i.  I.   and    II.   Chronicles,  Isaiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2,  Ezra,   Nehkmiah    and  Jeremiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxii. 

Exodus.  Esther.  Jeremiah,    Vol.    II:  xxiii- 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs.                                    Hi. 

Deuteronomy.  The   Psalms,  Vol.  I:  i-  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 

Joshua,  Judges  AND  Ruth.  xxvi.  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  II, 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Col,»s81an». 

St.  Mark.  Thdssalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vox..  2.  Second  Timotht,  Titus,  an© 

St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol,  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol,  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Jude. 

Ephbsians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 

Bend  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL     COMPANY 

NEW     YORK:    »58   Fifth  Avenue  CHICAGO:   80   Wabash  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Ulustradoos; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreiga 
literature,   on  the   Verses  of  the    Bible 


BY 

Rbv.  JOSEPH  S.  feXELL,  MM 


SAINT  MATTHEW 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


GENEBAL    INTRODUCTION  TO  THB   NEW 

TESTAMENT. 

Tea  PBivAB&TKni  fob  thx  Gospbl. — CliriBtlanity  eannot  be  separated  from  Urn 
past.  It  was  not  aa  accident  or  an  afterthought,  bat  foreknown  before  the  foim4»- 
tion  of  the  world.  The  Incarnation  as  it  is  seen  now  is  the  central  point  of  all 
history.  .  .  .  The  Gospel  was  no  sadden  or  solitary  message.  The  legend  of  Pallaa 
is  the  very  converse  of  the  Nativity.  Christianity  is  in  one  sense  as  ancient  aa  the 
Creation,  resting  on  a  foundation  wide  as  the  world  and  old  as  time.  Step  by  step 
the  groundwork  of  the  Church  was  laid  in  the  silent  depths,  and  at  last,  when  lUl  was 
now  ready,  it  rose  above  the  earth,  that  all  men  might  ooneoiously  combine  to  rear  the 
spiritual  temple  of  the  living  God.  What  is  true  of  the  subject  of  the  Gospel  ii  tme 
in  a  less  complete  degree  of  the  record.  The  writings  of  the  New  Testament  are 
not  a  separate  and  exceptional  growth,  but  the  ripe  fruit  of  minds  which  had  been 
matured  through  long  ages  of  various  fortunes  and  manifold  influences.  The  vary 
language  in  which  they  are  written  is  in  some  sense  an  epitome  of  ancient  history. 
For  it  was  the  will  of  Providence  that  the  people  whom  He  destined  to  become  the 
special  depository  of  His  revelations  should  not  only  develop  their  individoal 
character,  but  also  by  contact  with  Egypt,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Bome,  assimilate  the 
foreign  elements  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  their  work.  The  history  of  the  Jewa 
thus  becomes,  as  it  were,  the  key  to  the  history  of  the  world ;  and,  by  regarding  the 
various  stages  through  which  it  passed,  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  the  variooa 
constituents  which  combined  to  form  the  character  of  the  apostles  and  to  prepare 
men  for  their  teaching.  It  follows,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  that  the  Old  Testa- 
inent  is  itself  the  Divine  introduction  to  the  New.  In  the  records  of  the  religiooe 
kfe  of  the  Jews,  in  the  settling  of  worship  and  the  widening  of  hope,  it  is  possible 
to  see  the  foreshadowings  of  apostolic  doctrine,  while  the  vicissitudes  of  their  national 
history  exhibit  most  clearly  the  growing  purposes  of  God.  ...  A  retrospect  of  the 
manifold  vicissitudes  of  their  history  will  show  the  rich  variety  of  discipline  by 
which  the  Jews  had  been  moulded,  and  the  work  which  they  were  fitted  to  perform 
in  the  apostolic  age.  The  spirit  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  had  been  embodied  in 
every  great  typical  form.  The  several  phases  of  partial  and  independent  develop- 
ment were  now  completed.  Judaism  had  existed  in  the  face  of  the  most  varied 
nationalities,  and  had  gained  an  elasticity  of  shape  without  losing  its  distinctness  of 
principle.  But  each  concrete  system  which  was  substituted  for  the  faithful  antici- 
pation of  the  Messianio  times  led  in  the  end  to  disappointment  and  confusion,  and 
the  scattered  exiles  were  unable  to  spiritualize  the  nations  among  whom  they 
Bojoumed.  The  hierarchy  which  seemed  so  full  of  life  in  the  age  of  Ezra,  at  lart 
degenerated  into  a  mere  sect.  The  kingdom  which  had  been  thought  to  herald  the 
final  triumph  of  the  nation  ended  in  a  foreign  usurpation.  The  alliance  with  Greek 
philosophy  had  led  on  the  one  hand  to  an  Epicurean  indifference,  on  the  other  to 
an  unpractical  mysticism.  But  meanwhile  the  prkusiples  which  lay  at  the  basis  ol 
these  partial  efforts  had  gained  a  substantive  existence,  and  were  silently  woridog 
in  the  whole  people.    The  truths  which  had  been  felt  once,  still  lived  even  ander 


tl  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

the  rains  of  the  Bjstems  which  had  been  reared  npon  them.  Law,  freedom,  thought, 
•a  intense  national  pride,  and  a  world-wide  dispersion,  a  past  bright  with  the  glories 
of  •  Divine  presence,  a  present  lost  in  humiliation,  a  future  crowded  with  pictures 
of  certain  triumphs,  combined  to  fashion  a  people  ready  to  receive  and  propagate  • 
nniversal  Gospel.  A  missionary  nation  was  waiting  to  be  charged  with  the  heavenly  oom> 
mission,  and  a  world  was  unconsciously  prepared  to  welcome  it.  (B.  F,  Weitcott,D.D.) 

Tna  Nahb — Nbw  Tebtahxht. — The  term,  "  New  Testament,"  is  nnquestionably 
oonnected  with  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  Lord  Himself  designates 
the  Eucharist  the  New  Covenant  in  His  blood,  and  this  name  is  strictly  oorreoi. 
The  New  Testament  fellowship  of  believers  reconciled  to  God  by  Christ,  which,  bo 
to  speak,  commences  in,  and  is  introduced  by  baptism,  is  completed  and  appears 
ontwardly  in  the  Holy  Supper.  Li  the  Eucharist  the  Lord  carries  out  that  New 
Covenant  with  the  Church  which  is  founded  upon  His  holy  life  and  His  Word,  upon 
His  atoning  death.  His  victory,  and  on  the  conversion  of  individual  believers. 
While  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist  is  a  remembrance  of  the  first  foundation  of 
the  Church,  it  ever  inaugurates  anew  the  formation  of  the  Church,  and  also  serves 
for  its  manifestation.  Hence  the  writings  which  record  the  foundation  of  this  new 
and  eternal  Covenant  are  themselves  called  the  New  Covenant,  the  New  TestamenL 
Lastly,  this  designation  indicates  the  connection  and  the  contrast  between  thess 
writings  and  those  of  the  Old  Covenant.    {J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.) 

Thk  New  TestambKt. — The  New  Testament  is  not  one  book,  but  seven  and 
twenty  pieces  by  eight  or  nine  authors,  writing  at  different  times,  nearly  always  for 
different  readers,  for  the  most  part  under  diijfering  circumstances,  and  so  from 
different  points  of  view.  Not  nntil  nearly  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  do  we  find 
a  list  of  New  Testament  books  exactly  corresponding  with  that  in  oar  Bibles. 
During  that  period  these  writings  had  been  circulated  singly,  or  in  special  oollee* 
tions  of  a  few  pieces  together ;  but  in  k.t>.  397,  at  the  Council  of  Carthage,  the 
whole  volume  as  we  have  it  received  recognition  as  the  authoritative  literature  of 
Christian  revelation.  When  our  Lord  ascended.  His  apostles  and  disciples  began  to 
preach  and  to  form  Christian  congregations,  at  first  in  Palestine,  then  in  more 
distant  countries.  It  was  for  the  guidance  of  these  infant  congregations  that  the 
earliest  writings  of  the  New  Testament  were  composed.  The  first  in  date  are  almost 
certainly  some  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  The  historic  part  of  the  yolome  would  not  be 
needed  till  a  later  time.    {J.  R.  Luniby,  D.D.) 

BSUIION   BKTWBEN   Ou>  AKD  NeW  TESTAMENTS. — L  ThE  NeW  IS  A  COKTINXTATIOV 

ov  THE  Old.  Not  two  separate  trees  of  life,  but  one  and  the  same,  with  the  Pen- 
tateuch for  its  deep  roots,  and  then  a  grand  old  trunk  of  history,  from  which  go 
ont  strong  boughs  of  Hebrew  poem  and  prophecy.  It  had  a  time  of  rest,  during 
which  it  added  nothing  to  its  growth ;  but  then  it  began  again  to  spring  upwards  in 
a  solid  stem  of  the  history  of  Christ  and  the  early  Church,  and  to  throw  out  new 
branches  of  apostolic  teaching,  till  the  loftiest  point  was  reached  in  the  book  of  the 
Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  so  the  Scripture  was  complete.  Through  Holy 
Writ,  from  Genesis  to  Bevelation,  run  the  same  great  thoughts — God  a  just  Ood 
and  a  Saviour — man  a  sinner,  man  a  saint — angels  of  God,  the  devil  and  his  angels 
— sin,  death,  righteousness,  life — the  peace  and  strength  of  faith — the  sovereignty 
of  grace — sacrifice,  priesthood,  redemption  by  blood,  prayer,  love,  hope,  obedience, 
holiness — ^judgment  to  come.  In  treating  of  these,  the  New  Testament  is  not  a 
beginning  of  revelation,  but  strictly  a  continuation,  while  not  a  repetition,  of 
the  Old.  II.  STBacTDHAii  BESBUBLAMCE.  1.  Look  at  the  arrangement  of  each.  (1) 
Histories.  (2)  Beasonings  and  teachings.  (3)  Prophecies  and  visions.  From  alt 
the  sacred  books  of  the  East,  the  Bible  is  distinguished  by  the  large  proportion  ol 
narratiTS  in  eaeh  of  its  grand  divisions,  so  that  all  its  reflections,  arguments,  and 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  vil 

•dmonitionB  rest  on  a  basis  of  veritable  facts.  2.  We  find  something  quite  nniqae 
in  the  way  of  Divine  expression  throughout  the  Scriptures;  the  siame  voice  of 
majesty — the  same  method  of  teaching  by  history  and  biography  rather  than  by 
argumentation — the  same  calmness  and  unflinching  fidelity  of  narrative — the  same 
Bounding  forth  of  mercy  and  of  judgment — and  the  same  fearless  reproof  of  all 
unrighteousness  and  ungodliness.  III.  The  Nevt  Testament  is  am  advancb  cfon 
THE  Ou>.  1.  As  respects  the  messengers  of  Ood.  It  may  be  that  Luke  is  no  greater 
than  Samuel,  or  Peter  than  David,  or  Paul  than  Isaiah,  or  John  than  Ezekiel  or 
Daniel ;  but  their  writings  have  a  certain  advance  in  dignity,  from  the  fact  that 
they  followed  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  were  composed  to  publish 
the  preciousness  and  develop  the  teachings  of  Him  who  spake  as  never  man  spake. 
a.  In  the  light  and  fulness  of  the  revelation  itself  (2  Cor.  ill).  Shadows  have  given 
place  to  substance ;  elements  and  rudiments  to  perfection ;  minute  regulations  to 
profound  principles ;  patterns  of  heavenly  things  to  heavenly  things  themselves. 
In  the  old  time,  there  was  dimness  as  of  light  coming  through  a  veil ;  in  the  new 
time  we  have  unveiled  faces,  and  God's  own  marvellous  light.  The  heavens  seem 
to  open  more  fully  and  brightly  over  as  ;  and,  because  Jesus  la  there,  we  can  look 
steadfastly  up  into  heaven.  Herein  ia  implied  no  disparagement  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, but  simply  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  Bible  is  a  progressive  booki 
and  that  the  second  division,  containing  more  advanced  and  developed  truth,  ia  to 
rule  oar  interpretation  and  use  of  the  first  division ;  not  the  first  to  determine  the 
meaning  of  the  second.  There  has  been  a  bettering  as  well  as  a  lengthening  of 
revelation  regarding  theology,  ethics,  and  worship.  God  is  the  same  God  in  both 
Testaments ;  but  in  the  New,  God  is  more  known — duty  more  exalted — holiness  in 
principles  and  motives  based  on  fellowship  with  God  in  light — love  is  shown  to  be 
the  sphere  in  which  the  God  of  light  and  the  children  of  light  abide — and  worship 
b  through  free  access  to  the  Father,  by  one  Spirit,  through  Christ  Jesus.  {Donald 
Frcuer,  DJ).) 

FoBHATZOH  or  THE  New  TESTAMENT. — ^A  distinot  conception  of  the  spirit  of  the 
apostolic  age  is  necessary  for  a  right  understanding  of  the  relation  of  the  Gospel 
to  the  Gospels — of  the  Divine  message  to  the  lasting  record — at  the  rise  of  Chris- 
tianity. Experience  has  placed  in  so  clear  a  light  the  fulness  and  compreheniive- 
nesB  of  the  Christian  Scriptures  that  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  they  must  have 
occupied  from  the  first  the  position  which  the  Church  has  assigned  to  them.  But 
this  idea  is  an  anachronism  both  in  fact  and  in  thought.  The  men  who  were 
enabled  to  penetrate  most  deeply  into  the  mysteries  of  the  new  revelation,  and  to 
apprehend  with  the  most  vigorous  energy  the  change  which  it  was  destined  to  make 
in  the  world,  seem  to  have  placed  little  value  upon  a  written  witness  to  words  and 
acts  which  still,  as  it  were,  lived  among  them.  They  felt,  as  none  else  ever  can  feel, 
the  greatness  of  the  crisis  in  which  they  were  placed,  and  the  calm  progress  of 
common  life  appeared  to  be  for  ever  interrupted  by  the  spiritual  revolution  in  which 
they  were  called  to  take  part.  The  "coming  age"  to  which  they  looked  was  not 
one  of  arduous  conflict,  but  of  completed  triumph.  The  close  of  the  old  dispensa- 
tion, and  the  consummation  of  the  new,  were  combined  in  one  vision.  The  outward 
fashion  of  the  world — the  transitory  veil  which  alone  remained — was  patting  away. 
The  long  development  of  a  vast  future  was  concentrated  in  the  glory  of  its  certain 
issue.  But  while  everything  shows  that  the  apostles  made  no  conscious  provision 
for  the  requirements  of  after  times,  in  which  the  life  of  the  Lord  would  be  the 
subject  of  remote  tradition,  they  were  enabled  to  satisfy  a  want  which  they  did  not 
anticipate.  ...  It  was  most  unlikely  that  men,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  a 
aystem  of  training  generally,  if  not  exclusively,  oral,  should  have  formed  any  design 
of  oommitting  to  writing  a  complete  account  of  the  history  or  of  the  doctrinea  of 
the  Gospel.   The  whole  influence  of  Palestinian  habits  was  most  adverse  to  inch  an 


tiii         GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

undertaking.  The  rules  of  soriptural  interpretation,  the  varied  extensions  of  tha 
law,  and  tiie  sayings  of  the  elders,  were  preserved  either  by  oral  tradition  or 
perhaps,  in  some  degree,  in  secret  rolls,  till  the  final  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  nation 
ted  to  the  compilation  of  the  Mishna.  Nothing  less  than  the  threatened  destraction 
of  the  traditional  faith  occasioned  the  abandonment  of  the  great  rule  of  the  schools. 
"Commit  nothing  to  writing,"  was  the  characteristic  principle  of  the  earlier 
Rabbins,  and  even  those  who,  like  Gamaliel,  were  familiar  with  Greek  learning 
faithfully  observed  it.  Nor  could  it  be  otherwise.  The  Old  Testament  was  held  to 
be  the  single  and  sufficient  source  of  truth  and  wisdom,  the  reflection  of  Divine 
knowledge,  and  the  embodiment  of  human  feeling.  The  voice  of  the  teacher  might 
enforce  or  apply  its  precepts,  but  it  admitted  no  definite  additions.  .  .  .  Tradition 
was  dominant  in  the  schools,  and  from  the  schools  it  passed  to  the  nation ;  for  the 
same  influence  which  affected  the  character  of  the  teachers  must  have  been  felt 
still  more  powerfully  by  the  great  mass  of  the  Jews.  In  their  case  the  want  of  means 
was  added  to  the  want  of  inclination.  ...  To  descend  one  step  further :  the  art  of 
writing  itself  was  necessarily  rare  among  the  peasantry,  and  the  instinct  of  compo- 
rition  proportionately  rarer.  If,  then,  the  first  Christians  were  writers,  it  oould 
only  have  been  by  the  providential  influence  of  circumstanoea,  while  they  were  oral 
teachers  by  inclination  and  habit.    {B.  F.  Westcott,  D.D.) 

Tbzt  or  THB  New  Tbstahemt. — We  might  have  expected,  had  we  been  framing 
the  history  of  a  revealed  religion  according  to  our  wishes  or  a  priori  assumptions, 
that,  BO  far  as  it  depended  on  written  records,  those  records  would  be  preserved 
through  successive  ages  as  an  authentic  standard  of  appeal.  Facts  are,  however, 
against  all  such  theories  of  what  ought  to  have  been.  Not  a  single  autograph 
original  of  any  book  is  known  to  exist  now,  nor  does  any  writer  of  the  second  or 
third  century  say  that  he  had  seen  such  an  original.  Failing  this,  we  might  have 
fallen  back  on  the  notion  that  each  transcriber  of  the  books  would  be  guarded  by  a 
supernatural  guidance  against  tha  usual  chances  of  transcription ;  that  each  trans* 
later  would  be  taught  how  to  convey  the  meaning  of  the  original  without  error  in 
the  language  of  his  version.  Here  also  we  have  to  accept  facts  as  we  find  them. 
There  has  been  no  such  perpetual  miracle  as  this  theory  would  require,  extending 
M  it  does  extend,  when  pushed  to  its  logical  conclusions,  to  the  infallibility  of  every 
compositor  in  a  printer's  office  who  had  to  set  the  type  of  a  Bible  in  any  language. 
Manuscripts  vary,  versions  differ,  printed  Bibles  are  not  always  free  from  error. 
Here  also  we  trace  the  law  in  things  spiritual  which  we  recognize  in  things  natnraL 

••  The  Father,  from  whose  gift  all  good  things  flow, 
No  easy  path  hath  oped  His  truth  to  know." 

Here,  also,  the  absence  of  any  immunity  from  error  has  tried  men's  faith  and  ronsed 
them  to  labour,  and  labour  has  received  its  reward.  Accepting  probabiUty  as  tha 
only  attainable  result,  the  probability  which  they  have  actually  attained  is  scarcely 
distinguishable  from  certainty.  Experience  shows  that,  had  they  begun  with 
postulating  infaUibility  somewhere,  and  accepting  its  supposed  results,  inquiry 
would  have  ceased,  criticism  would  have  slumbered,  and  errors  would  have  crept  in 
and  multiplied  without  restraint.  Dealing,  then,  with  facts,  we  have  to  realize  to 
onrselves  in  what  way  copies  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  were  multiplied. 
It  is  obvious  that,  prior  to  the  invention  of  printing,  two  methods  of  such  mnltipli- 
eation  were  possible.  A  man  might  place  a  MS.  before  him,  and  copy  it  with  his 
own  hand,  or  he  might  dictate  it  to  one  or  more  writers.  The  former  was  probably 
the  natural  process  when  Christians  were  few  and  poor,  when  it  was  a  labour  of 
lova  to  transcribe  a  Gospel  or  an  Epistle  for  a  friend  or  a  church.  The  latter  beoams 
ymtn^yi  in  its  torn,  when  the  books  were  in  sufficient  demand  to  be  sold  by  book* 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  NEW  TESTAMENT,  ix 

■ellers,  or  when  Christian  aooietiea  were  eafficiently  organized,  as,  e.g.,  in  monsB- 
teries,  to  adopt  the  methods  of  the  trade.  Each  process  had  its  own  special  forma 
of  liability  to  error.     Any  one  who  has  corrected  a  proof-sheet  will  be  able  to  take 

•  zneaBore  of  what  they  are  in  the  former.  Any  one  who  has  had  experience  of  the 
results  of  a  dictation  lesson  can  judge  what  they  are  in  the  latter.  We  may  assume 
that  in  most  eases,  where  the  work  was  done  systematically,  there  would  be  a 
process  for  correcting  the  errors  of  trauBcripticn,  analogcue  ic  that  of  oorreotlag  the 
errors  of  the  press  now.  MSS.  of  the  New  Testament,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  often 
bear  traces  of  such  correction  by  one  or  more  hands.    {Dean  Plumptre.) 

Emqlibh  Yebszomi. — Our  Saxon  forefathers,  like  the  rest  of  Western  Christen- 
dom, had  only  portions  of  the  Bible  in  the  vernacular.  The  Vulgate  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  clergy,  the  lay  people  knew  mainly  the  Psalms  and  the  Gospels  in 
their  native  speech.  It  was  not  till  WycliSe's  Bible  appeared  {circa  1383)  that  the 
whole  of  either  the  Kew  or  Old  Testament  was  given  to  the  English  in  one  uniform 
Tersion.  This  Bible  (like  all  the  Saxon  and  English  versions  which  preceded  it)  was 

•  translation  from  the  Latin  of  the  Vulgate,  and  of  course  bears  many  marks  that 
It  is  the  version  of  a  version.  Being  made  a  full  century  before  the  invention  of 
printing,  it  was  never  circulated  except  in  MS.  Before,  however,  the  new  art,  which 
should  multiply  copies  without  limit,  was  half  a  century  old,  Ood  raised  up  one  who 
has  stamped  his  impress  on  the  English  Bible  so  completely  that  no  time  seems 
likely  to  efface  it.  William  Tyndale,  bom  about  the  time  when  the  first  printed 
book  came  forth  in  England,  early  conceived  the  thought  of  making  a  new  transla- 
tion of  the  Bible.  At  first  he  tried  to  compass  the  work  in  his  own  land.  But  there 
was  no  place  for  him  there.  So,  driven  abroad,  he  laboured  successively  in  Ham- 
burg, Cologne,  and  Worms,  at  which  last-named  city  he  put  forth  two  editions  of 
the  Kew  Testament  in  1525.  He  published  afterwards  various  other  Old  Testament 
translations,  and  six  editions  of  his  New  Testament  were  issued  during  his  life- 
time. The  next  translator  was  Miles  Coverdale,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Exeter,  who 
had  been  a  fellow-worker  with  Tyndale.  He  completed  his  version  in  1535,  and 
issued  it  with  a  dedication  to  Henry  VHL  A  second  edition  was  published  two 
years  later,  and  this  was  followed  in  the  same  year  by  a  composite  version,  under 
the  name  of  T.  Matthew,  but  really  the  work  of  Tyndale's  friend,  John  Rogers.  In 
this  Bible  was  incorporated  all  that  Tyndale  had  left  unprinted  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, his  New  Testament  of  1535,  and  only  the  remaining  portions  of  the  Old 
Testament  and  Apocrypha  printed  from  Coverdale.  This  was  a  great  advance  on 
all  the  editions  before  it,  but  the  mind  of  Cromwell,  the  king's  vicegerent,  longed  to 
bring  the  English  Scriptures  to  still  greater  perfection.  And  no  less  anxious  was 
Covadale.  So,  at  Cromwell's  request,  he  undertook  to  revise  Matthew's  Bible ;  and 
hia  work,  printed  partly  in  Paris,  and  the  remainder  in  London,  appeared  in  1539, 
and  is  known  as  the  Great  Bible.  A  copy  of  this  was,  by  royal  injunction,  set  up 
in  every  church  of  the  kingdom.  In  the  same  year  was  sent  forth  another  revision 
of  Matthew's  Bible,  made  by  a  learned  lawyer  named  Taverner,  but  the  Great  Bible 
lOon  threw  it  into  the  shade.  After  thia  we  have  no  English  Bible  put  forth  for  a 
long  time.  The  exiles  from  England  at  Geneva  issued,  in  1557,  a  New  Testament, 
which  appears  to  have  been  the  work  of  Whittingham,  CsJvin's  brother-in-law,  and 
the  whole  Bible  waa  completed  by  him  and  his  fellow -labourers  in  1560.  This 
Geneva  Bible  was  popular  for  home  reading,  as  it  was  furnished  with  a  marginal 
commentary.  In  1568,  through  the  exertions  of  Archbishop  Parker,  was  published 
what  is  known  as  the  Bishops'  Bible,  beeanse  several  prelates  took  part  in  thia 
xeviaion ;  and  in  1611  there  appeared  what  we  speak  of  as  the  Authorized  Veraion, 
prepared  at  the  inatigation  of  King  James  L.  Since  then  no  public  reviaion  was  pat 
forth  for  270  years,  till  the  Bevised  Mew  Teetament  was  issaed  on  17th  May,  1881. 
(/.  R.  Lumby,  D.D.) 


X  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

The  Okai.  Gospkl. — Both  from  the  nature  of  their  charge  and  the  character  of 
their  hearers,  the  apostles  sought  other  means  of  fulfilling  their  great  oommission 
than  such  as  books  afforded.  Their  Master  enjoined  on  them  during  His  presence 
•nd  at  the  moment  of  His  departure  to  preach  the  Gospel.  And  while  they  fulfilled 
the  office  for  which  they  were  fitted  no  less  by  habit  than  by  the  effusion  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  they  could  not  have  felt  that  more  was  needed  for  the  permanent 
establishment  of  the  Christian  society.  "  How  shall  men  believe  without  a 
preacher?"  is  the  truest  explanation  of  the  feeling  and  hope  of  the  apostles. 
They  cherished  the  lively  image  of  the  Lord's  life  and  teaching  without  any  written 
outline  from  His  hand ;  and  they  might  well  hope  that  the  Spirit  which  pre&9r\'ed 
the  likeness  in  their  hearts  might  fix  it  in  the  hearts  of  others.  ...  It  must  not, 
however,  be  supposed  that  this  tendency  to  preach  rather  than  to  write  was  any 
drawback  to  the  final  completeness  of  the  apostolic  Gospel.  It  was,  in  fact,  the  very 
condition  and  pledge  of  its  completeness.  Naturally  speaking,  the  experience  of 
oral  teaching  was  required  in  order  to  bring  within  the  reach  of  writing  the  vast 
subject  of  the  life  of  Christ ;  and  it  cannot  be  urged  that  any  eztraordinaiy  pro- 
vision was  made  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  task  which  is  now  rightly  felt  to  have  been 
of  the  utmost  importance.  The  Gospel  was  a  growth,  not  an  instantaneous  creation. 
The  Gospels  were  the  results,  and  not  the  foundation  of  the  apostolic  preaching.  The 
wide  growth  of  the  Church  furnished  the  apostles  with  an  adequate  motive  toi 
adding  a  written  record  to  the  testimony  of  their  Uving  words ;  and  the  very  form 
of  the  Gospels  was  only  determined  by  the  experience  of  teaching.  The  work  of  an 
evangelist  was  thus  not  the  simple  result  of  Divine  inspiration  or  of  human  thought, 
but  rather  the  complex  issue  of  both  when  applied  to  such  a  selection  of  Ohrist'a 
words  and  works  as  the  varied  phases  of  the  apostolic  preaching  had  shown  to  ba 
best  suited  to  the  wants  of  men.  The  primary  Gospel  was  proved,  so  to  speak,  in 
life,  before  it  was  fixed  in  writing.  Out  of  the  countless  multitude  of  Christ's  acts, 
those  were  selected  and  arranged  during  the  ministry  of  twenty  years  which  were 
seen  to  have  the  fullest  representative  significance  for  the  exhibition  of  His  Divine 
life.  The  oral  collection  thus  formed  became  in  every  sense  coincident  with  the 
"  Gospel " ;  and  oar  Gospels  are  the  permanent  compendium  of  its  contents.  .... 
Even  la  the  sub-apostolic  age  the  same  general  feeling  survived,  though  it  was 
modified  by  the  growing  organization  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  knowledge  of 
the  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  the  details  of  His  life  was  generally  derived  from 
tradition  and  not  from  writings.  The  Gospels  were  not  yet  distinguished  by  this 
their  prophetic  title.  The  Old  Testament  was  still  the  great  storehouse  from  which 
the  Christian  teacher  derived  the  sources  of  consolation  and  conviction.  And  at  the 
close  of  the  second  century  Irenseus,  after  speaking  of  the  Scriptures — the  sum  of 
the  apostohc  teaching — as  "the  foundation  and  pillar  of  our  faith,"  speaks  of  "  a 
tradition  manifested  in  the  whole  world,"  and  "  kept  in  the  several  churches  throagh 
the  succession  of  the  presbyters."  In  one  respect  the  testimony  of  IrenaBus — the 
connecting  link  of  the  east  and  west — is  extremely  important,  as  distinctly  recog- 
nizing the  historic  element  in  the  apostohc  tradition.  Th«  great  outlines  of  the 
life  of  Christ  were  received,  he  says,  by  barbarous  nations  without  written  documents 
by  ancient  tradition  :  and  this  combination  of  facts  and  doctrine  existed  from  the 
first.  "  The  Gospel " — the  sum,  that  is,  of  the  oral  teaching —  in  the  language  of 
Ignatius  represents  *•  the  flesh  (aap^)  of  Jesus."  The  Saviour's  personal  presence 
was  perpetuated  in  the  living  voice  of  His  Church.  At  a  still  earlier  time  the 
writings  of  the  New  Testament  contain  abundant  proof  that  the  "  Gospel "  of  the 
first  age  was  not  an  abstract  statement  of  dogmas,  but  a  vivid  representation  of  the 
truth  as  seen  in  the  details  of  the  Saviour's  life.  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the 
apostohc  letters — the  first  preaching  and  the  subsequent  instmotion  of  the  Chorehei 
--show  that  the  facts  of  the  life  of  Christ  were  the  rule  by  which  the  work  of  tha 
Christian  (eaeher  was  measured.     (B.  F.  Westcott,  DJ).) 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  tA 

Obal  Teaching  as  the  Soubcb  of  the  Gospels.— From  the  day  of  Pentecost  the 
•postles  began  the  work  of  preaching  the  Gospel,  which  was  in  a  short  time  to  over- 
gpread  the  world ;  but  it  is  certain  that  for  many  years  not  one  of  the  four  GospeLi 
existed  out  of  which  they  might  preach.  So  zealous  were  the  apostles  in  theii 
work  that  they  divested  themselves  of  the  labour  of  ministering  to  the  poor,  in 
order  that  they  might  "  give  themselves  continually  unto  prayer  and  to  the  min- 
istry of  the  Word  "  (Acta  vi.).  Prayer  and  preaching  were  the  business  of  their 
lives.  Now,  their  preaching  must  in  great  part  have  consisted,  fiom  the  nature  ol 
the  case,  of  a  recital  of  the  facts  of  the  life  of  Jesas  Christ.  They  had  been  the  eye- 
witnesses of  a  wonderful  life,  of  acts  and  sufferings  which  it  concerned  the  world  to 
know.  Many  of  their  hearers  had  never  heard  of  Jesus ;  many  others  had  received 
false  accounts  of  One  whom  it  suited  the  rulers  of  the  Jews  to  denoimce  as  an  im- 
postor. The  ministry  of  the  Lord  had  taken  place  chiefly  in  Galilee,  but  the  first 
preaching  was  in  Judea.  It  would,  therefore,  be  necessary  to  lay  a  groundwork  of 
facts,  before  there  could  be  inferences  from,  and  applications  of,  those  facts.  The 
preaching  would  be  more  akin  to  the  daily  lessons  in  a  modem  service,  than  to  the 
sermon  (See,  e.g..  Acts  x.  34-43 ;  xiii.  16-41).  Now,  there  would  be  a  tendency  to 
preserve  one  form  and  order  in  this  historical  preaching.  The  account  of  some 
miracle  would  be  told  again  and  again  in  one  form  of  words,  and  the  narrative  of  a 
jonmey  would  follow  the  same  order  of  events,  and  the  events  selected  would  be 
always  the  same.  Thus  there  would  grow  up  a  body  and  form  of  preaching,  pre. 
served,  at  first,  only  in  the  memory  of  those  who  preached  and  heard,  of  which  the 
life  and  words  of  Jesus  formed  the  subjects,  and  which  tended  to  be,  not  merely  in 
Bubstance  but  in  details,  one  and  the  same  everywhere,  with  a  resemblance  closer 
and  more  marked  in  proportion  as  the  words  and  events  were  more  important. 
{Archbishop  Wm.  Thonuon.) 

Thx  Unwritten  Gospel. — It  may  be  looked  npon  as  an  ascertained  resnlt  of 

criticism,  that  the  Gospels  were  all  written  within  the  first  century ;  none  earlier 

than  about  a.d.  60,  none  later  than  about  a.d.  80.     This  historical  fact  will  seem 

strange  to  certain  modem  notions.    Consider  for  a  moment  how  the  matter  really 

stands.    Let  us  put  ourselves  in  imagination  back  to  Pentecost.    In  those  her  bridal 

days,  the  young  Church  was  filled,  not  with  new  wine,  but  with  a  holy  and  heavenly 

enthusiasm.    The  light  of  the  everlasting  morning  had  not  yet  ceased  to  flood  her 

spires  and  battlements.    Her  tabernacle  was  yet  on  the  holy  hills,  and  the  cry  rose 

to  her  lips,  "  Lord !  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here."    With  loins  girded  and  lamps 

burning,  she  waited  for  her  Lord's  coming,  and  strained  her  eyes  towards  the  eternal 

dawn.    She  was  the  "  Pilgrim  of  Eternity " ;  and  the  song  which  she  rolled  oat 

strong  and  grand  against  the  winter  sky  was,  "  Arise  we  and  depart :  for  this  is 

not  oar  rest."  It  may  be  that  she  had  not  special  days  of  commemoration,  Christmas 

or  Oiooi  Friday,  Easter  or  Ascension.    But  she  lived  upon  her  Lord's  birth  and 

death,  upon  His  resurrection  and  ascension.    She  needed  no  book  of  His  \6yia,  of 

His  disooorses,  or  His  works.     There  were  those  with  her  who  had  seen  Him  on 

the  mountain  of  Transfiguration ;  who  had  heard  Him  say,  "  Peace  be  unto  yon," 

m  the  great  Easter  Sunday ;  and  had  felt  joy  deepening  within  them,  as  they  looked 

upon  the  stoning  wounds.  ...  It  seems  to  be  as  certain  as  anything  of  the  kind 

can  be,  that  an  nnwritten  traditional  life  of  Jesus,  graven  upon  the  living  heart  of 

the  Church,  preceded  the  written  life.    In  this,  startling  as  it  seems  at  first  hearing 

to  some,  there  is  no  derogation  from  the  honour  of  the  written  word.    No  ark  of 

the  New  Covenant  overlaid  round  about  with  gold  kept  in  its  side  the  book  of  the 

New  Law.    There  was  not,  as  in  Eacon's  fine  romance  of  Atlantis,  the  pillar  and 

cross  of  light,  breaking  up  and  casting  itself  into  a  firmament  of  many  stars,  and 

the  branch  of  palm  covering  the  ark  of  oedar  which  floated  npon  the  calm  mysterious 

sea,  with  the  volome  of  the  Gospels  shrouded  in  its  depths.    Yet  the  Holy  Spirit 


xa  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

gnided  the  memories,  and  freely  nsed  the  intelligences  of  apostles  and  their  dlBciplM, 
that  His  Church  might  know  the  certainty  of  those  things  wherein  she  had  bem 
instructed ;  and  that  across  the  gulf  of  ages,  and  the  mists  of  history,  down  to  the 
end  of  time,  the  eyes  of  Christians  might  see  the  authentic  lineaments  of  the  King 
in  His  beauty.    {Bishop  Wm.  Alexander.) 

Obioik  or  THB  Gospels. — Two  things  may  be  regarded  as  certain  in  the  histoiy 
of  our  religion :  first,  that  it  spread  with  extraordinary  rapidity — that  within 
twenty  or  thirty  years  of  our  Lord's  death  the  Gospel  had  travelled  far  outside  the 
borders  of  Palestine,  so  that  there  were  Christians  in  widely  separated  cities ;  and 
secondly,  that  the  main  subject  of  the  preaching  of  every  missionary  of  the  Church 
was  Jesus  Christ  (A^ots  v.  42,  xi.  20 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  5).  Whatever  were  the  dissensions 
in  the  early  Church,  of  which  we  now  hear  so  much,  they  did  not  affect  this  point 
(Phil.  i.  15).  The  zeal  of  the  first  disciples  made  every  Christian  a  missionary  into 
whatever  town  he  went ;  and  the  work  of  the  missionary  was  to  preach  a  Person. 
Consequently  the  preacher  must  have  been  prepared  to  answer  the  questions,  Who 
was  this  Jesus  whom  you  preach  ?  What  did  He  do  ?  What  did  He  teach  ?  And 
since  the  preachers  could  rarely  answer  these  questions  from  their  personal  know- 
ledge, it  was  a  necessity  for  their  work  that  they  should  be  furnished  with  authentio 
answers  resting  on  a  higher  authority  than  their  own.  We  cannot  doubt,  then, 
that  the  first  age  of  the  Church  must  have  had  its  Gospels.  (Oeorge  Salmon,  D.D.) 
The  earliest  account  of  the  origin  of  a  "  Gospel "  is  that  which  Papias  has  given 
on  the  authority  of  the  Elder  John.  Papias  was  himself  a  *'  direct  hearer  "  of  this 
John,  and  John  was  •'  a  disciple  of  the  Lord  "  (if  the  text  of  Papias  be  correct),  or, 
at  any  rate,  contemporary  with  the  later  period  of  the  apostolic  age.  "  This  also 
the  Elder  used  to  say.  Mark,  having  become  Peter's  interpreter,  wrote  accurately 
all  that  he  remembered  {or  that  he  [Peter]  mentioned :  Ifivrtfiovtwrev) ;  though  he 
did  not  [record]  in  order  that  which  was  either  said  or  done  by  Christ.  For  he 
neither  heard  the  Lord  nor  followed  Him ;  but  subsequently,  as  I  said,  [attached 
himself  to]  Peter,  who  used  to  frame  his  teaching  to  meet  the  wants  [of  his 
hearers] ,  but  not  as  making  a  connected  narrative  of  the  Lord's  disoourses.  So 
Mark  committed  no  error,  as  he  wrote  down  some  particulars  just  as  he  recalled 
them  to  mind  (or  as  he  [Peter]  narrated  them).  For  he  took  heed  to  one  thing, 
to  omit  none  of  the  facts  that  he  heard,  and  to  make  no  false  statement  in  (liii 
account  of]  them."    {B.  F.  Wettcott,  D.D.) 

Ths  tbansition  fboh  ths  eabusst  Oaui  Gospel  to  the  spxcino  roBMS  wbioh 

IT  AITEBWABOS   ASSUMED   IS   CAPABLE   09  BEIMO   EASILY    BEALIZED.       The    great    Step* 

in  the  process  are  still  marked  in  the  Gospels  themselves.  The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark, 
conspicuous  for  its  vivid  simplicity,  seems  to  be  the  most  direct  representation  ot 
the  first  evangelic  tradition,  the  common  foundation  on  which  the  others  were 
reared.  In  essence,  if  not  in  composition,  it  is  the  oldest ;  and  the  absence  of  the 
history  of  the  infancy  brings  its  contents  within  the  limits  laid  down  by  St.  Peter 
(Acts  i.  21,  22)  for  the  extent  of  the  apostolic  testimony.  The  great  outline  thus 
drawn  admitted  of  the  introduction  of  large  groups  of  facts  or  discourses  combined 
to  illustrate  or  enforce  some  special  lesson.  In  this  way  the  common  tradition 
gained  its  special  characters,  but  still  remained  a  tradition,  gaming  fixity  and  dis- 
tinctness till  it  was  at  last  embodied  in  writing.  For  the  Gospels  of  St.  Matthew 
and  St.  Luke  represent  the  two  great  types  of  recension  to  which  it  may  be  supposed 
that  the  simple  narrative  was  subjected.  St.  Luke  presents  the  Hellenic,  and  Si. 
Matthew  (Greek)  the  later  Hebraic  form  of  the  tradition,  and  in  its  present  shape 
the  latter  seems  to  give  the  last  authentic  record  of  the  primitive  GospeL  Yet  in 
both  these  a  common  tradition  furnished  the  centre  and  basis  on  which  the  after 
works  were  boilt  op.     The  original  principles  of  oombination  regulated  the  later 


OENEBAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.         xiH 

•dditioDB,  and  clear  resemblance  of  shape  remained  in  the  fuller  narrative.  In  thia 
way  the  successive  remoulding  of  the  oral  Gospel  according  to  the  peculiar  require- 
ments of  different  classes  of  hearers  furnishes  a  natural  explanation  of  the  general 
similarity  in  form  and  substance  between  the  several  Gospels,  combined  with  pecu- 
liarities and  differences  in  arrangement  and  contents.  The  assumption  of  a  com- 
mon  oral  source  is  equally  capable  of  explaining  the  phenomena  of  the  language  of 
the  Gospels.  The  words  of  the  Lord  and  the  questions  proposed  to  Him  would 
necessarily  first  be  fixed,  while  the  narrative  by  which  they  were  introduced 
remained  more  free.  Single  phrases  would  be  impressed  with  peculiar  force ;  and 
the  recurrence  of  strange  words  in  the  same  connection  in  the  different  evangelists, 
even  when  the  construction  of  the  sentence  is  changed,  seems  scarcely  to  admit  of  a 
simple  explanation  except  on  the  admission  of  a  traditional  record.  And  while  the 
free  development  of  common  materials  gave  full  scope  for  variations  in  detail,  as 
well  as  for  interpolations  of  fresh  matter,  it  included  the  preservation  of  language 
hallowed  by  long  use  in  its  well-known  shape.  Nor  is  it  an  unimportant  fact  that 
in  this  respect  also  St.  Mark  occupies  the  mean  position  between  the  other  evan- 
gelists, as  would  naturally  be  the  case  if  he  represents  moat  closely  the  original 
from  which  they  started.    {Ibid.) 

To  CONSIDEB  THE   FoUB  GoSPKLB  AB   BEQULAB  BlOOBATHIBfl  OV  CUB  LoBO   IS    AH 

IBBOB  WHICH  HAS  LOQioALLT  ixD  TO  BEBious  coNSEguENOBB.  The  Gospel  is,  in  the 
strictest  sense,  one  evayytkiov  Terpanop^ov.  But  the  four  evangelists  represent 
that  great  Ufe,  as  four  painters  might  represent  a  vast  range  of  mountains  from 
four  different  points  of  view.  Each,  having  his  materials  fully  before  him,  arranges 
and  moulds  them  according  to  certain  leading  thoughts,  certain  fandamental  con- 
ceptions.    {Bithop  William  Alexander.) 

The  Cemtbaii  Fioube. — The  Bible  centres  in  the  story  of  a  life  which  was  so 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  that  this  Man  became  the  symbol  of  the  Most  High,  the 
sacrament  of  His  Being  and  Presence,  the  sacred  shrine  of  Deity.  As  when  the 
long-drawn  travail  of  instrumentation  labours  through  the  opening  movements  of 
the  ninth  symphony,  with  a  strain  too  fine  for  any  voicing  save  by  man,  there 
bursts  at  length  upon  the  tumultuous  storm  of  sound  the  clear,  high  song  of  joy 
from  human  lips ;  so  from  the  mounting  efforts  of  a  nation's  insufficient  utterance 
there  rises  at  last  a  voice  which  takes  up  every  groaning  of  the  spirit  in  humanity 
into  the  perfect  beauty  of  a  Human  Life  Divine.  The  life  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  the 
light  of  men — light  for  our  minds  and  warmth  for  our  hearts.  In  the  power  in 
whom  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,  we  see  "  Our  Father  who  art  in 
heaven."  In  the  laws  of  life  we  read  the  methods  of  His  schooling  of  our  souls. 
In  the  sorrows  of  life  we  receive  His  disciplinings.  In  the  sins  that  cling  so  hard 
upon  as  we  feel  the  evils  of  our  imperiection,  from  which  He  is  seeking  to  deliver 
US  through  His  training  of  our  spirits.  In  tbe  shame  of  sin  we  are  conscious  of 
the  guilt  that  His  free  forgiveness  wipes  away,  when  we  turn  saying,  "Father. I  have 
sinned."  In  death  we  face  the  doorway  to  some  other  room  of  the  Father's  house, 
where,  it  may  be  just  beyond  the  threshold,  our  dear  ones  wait  for  us  I  In  Christ 
Himself  we  own  our  heaven-sent  Teacher,  Master,  Saviour,  Friend ;  our  Elder 
Brother,  who  in  our  sinful  flesh  lives  oar  holy  aspirations,  and,  smiling,  beckons  as 
to  follow  Him,  whispering  in  oar  ears — "  To  them  that  receive  Me,  I  give  power  to 
become  the  sons  of  God."    The  power  of  the  Bible  is — Christ.     (R.  Heber  Newton.) 

Titles  ow  the  Gospels. — Benan  observes  that  the  formalsB  "according  to 
Matthew,"  "  according  to  Mark,"  <&c.,  indicate  that  the  earliest  opinion  was,  not 
that  these  stories  were  written  from  one  end  to  the  other  by  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke, 
and  John,  but  only  that  they  contain  traditions  emanating  from  these  respective 
Boarces  and  guaranteed  by  their  authority.    Bat,  assoredly,  if  that  had  been  what 


xiv  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

was  intended  by  the  phrase  *•  according  to,"  the  second  and  third  Gospels  wonI4 
have  been  known  as  the  Gospel  according  to  Peter  and  the  Gospel  according  to  PaaL 
The  account  of  Papias,  that  Mark  did  nothing  but  record  narrations  of  Peter  eon- 
ceming  our  Lord,  was  received  with  general  belief  by  the  early  Church.  And  it 
■was  just  as  generally  believed  that  the  third  Gospel  rested  on  the  authority  of  St. 
Paul.  Some  ancient  interpreters  even  understand  the  phrase  "  according  to  my 
Gospel "  (Rom.  ii.  16,  xvi.  25  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  8 ;  see  also  2  Thess.  ii.  14),  to  refer  to  the 
Gospel  according  to  St.  Lake.  Clearly,  then,  if  the  phrase  "  according  to  "  had  been 
understood  to  imply  anything  less  than  actual  authorship,  the  Church  would  nevei 
have  been  content  to  designate  these  Gospels  by  the  names  of  those  who  trans- 
mitted the  tradition  at  second-hand,  but  would  have  named  them  more  honourably 
after  the  great  apostles  on  whose  authority  they  were  believed  to  rest.  It  is  plain, 
then,  that  the  phrase  indicates  only  the  Church's  sense  of  the  unity  of  the  fourfold 
narrative,  the  same  good  tidings  being  contained  in  all,  only  presented  differently 
by  different  hands.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  titles  of  our  Gospels  afford  internal 
evidence  of  their  antiquity.  They  must,  in  any  case,  be  earlier  than  Justin  Martyr 
(a.d.  150).  In  Justin's  time  the  word  Gospel  had  acquired  its  technical  meaning ; 
for  he  uses  it  in  the  plural  number,  and  says  that  the  memoirs  of  the  apostles  were 
called  Gospels.  The  titles,  on  the  contrary,  bespeak  a  time  when  the  word  Gospel 
had  acquired  no  such  technical  meaning,  and  when  the  appellation  *•  evangelist " 
was  not  confined  to  the  authors  of  four  books.  All  the  apostles  and  other  preachers 
of  the  new  religion  had  the  same  message  of  good  tidings  to  deliver.  Whatever 
might  be  the  diversity  of  form  in  their  teaching,  aU  preached  *'the  Gospel." 
Further,  these  titles  regarded  in  another  point  of  view  prove  their  own  historic 
character.  If  they  had  been  arbitrarily  chosen,  we  may  be  sure  that  persons  of 
greater  distinction  in  the  history  of  the  Church  would  have  been  selected.  Matthew 
is  one  of  the  least  prominent  of  the  apostles,  and  the  dignity  of  apostleship  is  not 
even  claimed  for  Mark  and  Lake.  It  would  have  been  so  easy  to  claim  a  more  dis- 
tinguished authorship  for  the  Gospels,  that  we  have  the  less  right  to  refuse  credence 
to  what  is  actually  claimed :  namely,  that  the  two  evangelists  jast  named,  though 
not  apostles,  and  possibly  not  even  eye-witnesses  themselves,  were  in  immediate 
contact  with  apostles  and  eye-witnesses.     {George  Salmon,  D.D.) 

Thb  Gospeii  Kabbatiteb  :  thxib  Scopb. — The  Gospel  of  Jesns  Christ  ia  contained 
in  four  books,  each  giving  His  Gospel  "  according  to  "  a  particular  writer.  The 
books  have  come  to  be  called  in  common  speech  the  four  Gospels.  ...  No  attempt 
at  a  complete  biography,  in  the  modem  sense  of  the  word,  has  been  made  in  any  of 
the  eases.  Of  the  first  thirty  years  of  Christ's  life  on  earth,  and  of  His  train- 
ing for  His  brief  ministry  in  that  time,  there  is  hardly  any  record.  Evidently  the 
writers  did  not  consider  that  a  continuous  record  of  growth  and  training,  of  youth- 
ful aspirations  and  of  self-consecration  to  a  future  work,  belonged  to  their  purpose. 
With  the  baptism  of  Jesus  commences  the  more  complete  narrative  of  His  life.  .  . 
The  Gospels  present  a  history  of  the  salvation  of  mankind  by  Jesus  Christ  the  Son 
of  God,  and  not  a  minute  and  exact  life  of  the  Saviour.  Not  a  complete  life  ;  but 
the  hfe  as  it  bore  on  the  belief  and  convictions  of  the  people  of  God.  (ArehbUhop 
Wm.  Thomson.) 

Thb  Numbeb  of  Gospbls — Foub. — I  daresay  yon  have  heard  of  the  reasons  given 
by  Irenseus  why  there  are  exactly  four  Gospels,  neither  more  nor  less.  He  argues 
that  the  Gospel  is  the  pillar  of  the  Church  ;  the  Church  is  spread  over  the  whole 
world ;  the  world  has  four  quarters  ;  therefore  it  is  fitting  there  should  also  be  four 
Gospels.  Again,  the  Gospel  is  the  Divine  breath,  or  wind  of  Hfe,  for  men  ;  there 
are  four  chief  winds ;  therefore,  four  Gospels.  He  builds  another  argument  en  the 
fourfold  appearance  of  the  oherabim.     The  cherubim,  he  says,  are  foorfoM,  and 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  xt 

iheir  faces  are  images  of  the  activity  of  the  Son  of  Ood.  The  first  beast  was  like  a 
lion,  signifying  Hia  commanding  and  kingly  dignity  ;  the  second  like  a  calf,  signi" 
fying  His  priestly  office ;  the  third  like  a  man,  denoting  His  incarnation ;  the 
fourth  like  an  eagle,  denoting  the  Holy  Spirit  flying  over  the  Chnrch.  Like  these 
are  the  Gospels.  John,  who  begins  with  the  Oodhead  and  descent  from  the  Father, 
is  the  lion ;  Luke,  who  begins  with  the  priesthood  and  sacrifice  of  Zachariaa,  is  the 
ealf ;  Matthew,  who  begins  with  His  human  genealogy,  the  man ;  Mark,  the  eagle 
who  commences  with  the  announcement  of  the  prophetic  spirit — "  the  beginning  o) 
the  Oospel  as  it  is  written  by  Isaiah  the  prophet."  You  are  aware,  I  daresay,  that 
this  is  not  the  appointment  of  the  four  beasts  to  the  Gospels  which  nltimatel} 
prevailed  in  the  West,  John  being  usually  represented  as  the  eagle ;  Matthew  as  the 
man ;  Luke  as  the  ox ;  and  Mark  as  the  lion.  But  LrensBus  goes  on  to  say  thai 
Christ's  dealings  with  the  world  are  fourfold.  To  the  patriarchs  the  word  of  God 
eame  directly ;  to  those  under  the  Law  through  the  priestly  office ;  Christ  Himsell 
oame  as  man ;  since  then  He  has  dealt  with  the  Chnrch  by  His  Spirit  overshadow, 
ing  the  Church  with  Hia  wings.  Thus  the  Gospel  also  is  fourfold,  and  those  destroy 
its  fundamental  eonoeption  who  make  the  number  either  greater  or  less ;  either 
desiring  to  seem  to  have  found  out  more  than  the  truth,  or  rejecting  part  of  God's 
dispensatioD.  .  .  .  We  are  not  ooocemed  with  the  validity  of  his  mystical  expla- 
nations ;  .  .  .  bat,  at  any  rate,  they  prove  that  towards  the  end  of  the  second 
•entury  the  Church  held  the  belief  that  the  four  Ootpeli  are  to  be  venerated  aa 
iaspired  records  of  our  Saviour's  life,  and  that  no  others  can  be  placed  on  a  Isvo^ 
with  tbsM.    {Qtorg*  Salmon,  DJ>,) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST. 
MATTHEW. 

AuTHOB. — In  the  lietg  of  the  apoBtles  of  Jesns  (Matt.x  ;  Mark  ill. ;  Lnke  rl  {  aal 
Acts  i.)  there  is  an  apostle  of  the  name  of  Matthew ;  in  Matt.  x.  8  he  is  oaMed  • 
"  pablioan."  There  is  every  probability  that  the  acooont  of  the  calling  of  Matthew 
(Matt.  iz.  9)  refers  to  the  same  person  who  bears  the  name  of  Levi  (Mark  ii.  14 ; 
Lnke  t.  27).  The  facts  are  the  same,  and  occur  in  the  same  connection,  in  all 
three  narratives.  He  may  have  been  called  Levi  before  he  became  an  apostle,  and 
Matthew  afterwards :  there  is  nothing  nnasual  in  the  assuming  a  new  name  on 
some  important  change  of  position;  Peter  and  Paul  are  examples  of  this.  .  .  . 
There  ii  not  a  word  about  the  later  life  and  ministry  of  Matthew  in  the  Act$,  nor  in 
any  other  part  of  the  New  Testament.  .  .  .  Clement  of  Alexandria  says  that  he  wa> 
given  to  ascetic  practices,  and  that  he  preached  the  Gospel  to  the  Hebrews  for  fifteen 
years  after  the  ascension.  Eusebius  mentions  that  he  then  went  to  other  parts  of 
the  world.    (Archbishop  Wm.  Thomson.) 

Thb  details  of  St.  Matthew's  lieh  which  have  been  pbbbebvbd  abb  vest 
BCAHTY. — There  oan.however,  be  little  doubt  that  the  Matthew  of  the  first  Gospel  is  the 
same  as  the  Levi  of  the  second  and  third,  though  the  persona  were  distinguished  even 
in  very  early  times.  The  change  of  name,  which  seems  to  have  coincided  with  the 
crisis  in  the  life  of  the  apostle,  and  probably  bore  some  reference  to  it,  finds  a  complete 
parallel  in  the  corresponding  changes  in  the  cases  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  even  if  it 
appear  strange  that  no  passing  notice  of  the  identification  occurs  in  the  catalogues 
of  the  apostles.  According  to  the  present  text  of  St.  Mark  (ii.  14),  Levi  (Matthew) 
is  called  the  s<m  ofAlphaus;  and  in  the  absence  of  any  further  mark  of  distinction, 
it  has  been  usual  to  identify  this  Alphesus  with  the  father  of  James ;  in  which  case 
St.  Matthew  would  have  been  nearly  related  by  birth  to  our  Lord.  His  occupation 
was  that  of  a  collector  of  dues  (6  reXwvtjc)  on  the  sea  of  Galilee ;  and  this  alone 
shows  that  he  cannot  have  observed  the  traditions  of  the  Pharisaic  school.  At  a 
later  time  he  is  described  as  a  rigorous  ascetic,  living  on  seeds  and  fruits  and  herbs 
without  flesh,  as  if  by  a  natural  reaction  he  had  exchanged  the  licence  of  his  former 
life  for  the  sternest  self-denial ;  but  this  austerity,  which  was  rather  that  of  an 
Beaene  than  of  a  Pharisee,  appears  as  part  of  his  practice  and  not  of  his  teaching ; 
not  ean  it  have  been  without  influence  on  the  progress  of  the  Christian  faith  thai 
the  Hebrew  evangelist  was  one  who,  it  it  was  only  on  the  narrow  stage  of  a  Gali- 
lean town,  had  yet  ventured  beyond  the  strict  limits  of  national  hope.  St.  Paul, 
who  was  trained  in  the  most  straitest  sect  of  his  religion,  when  once  conviaced, 
hastened  to  the  opposite  pole  of  truth :  St.  Matthew,  passing  to  the  new  faith  by  a 
less  violent  transition,  naturally  retained  a  firmer  hold  on  his  earlier  belief.  His 
apostolio  commission  tended  to  strengthen  this  feeling ;  for,  according  to  a  very 
early  tradition,  he  remained  at  Jerusalem  with  the  other  apostles  lor  twelve  years 
after  the  death  of  the  Lord,  busy  among  his  own  countrymen.  When  this  work  wm 
ended  he  preached  the  gospel  to  othen  ;  bat  no  trustworthy  authority  mentions  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MATTHEW,  xvffl 

■oene  of  his  missionary  labours,  which  in  later  times  were  popularly  placed  in 
Ethiopia.  The  mention  of  his  martyrdom  is  found  only  in  legendary  narratives, 
and  is  opposed  to  the  best  evidence,  which  represents  him  to  have  died  a  natural 
death.  These  notices,  however  slight,  yet  contribute  in  some  measure  to  mark  tha 
fitness  of  St.  Matthew  for  fulfilling  a  special  part  in  the  representation  of  the 
GospeL  The  time  and  place  at  which  he  wrote  further  impress  upon  his  work  a 
distinctive  character.  Tile  Hebrew  Christians,  during  a  succession  of  fifteen  bishops, 
outwardly  observed  the  customs  of  their  fathers,  and  for  them  he  was  inspired  to 
exhibit  in  the  teaching  of  Christ  the  antitypes  of  the  Mosaic  law,  to  portray  the 
earthly  form  and  theocratic  glory  of  the  new  dispensation,  and  to  unfold  the  glorious 
consummation  of  tha  kingdom  of  heaven,  faintly  typified  in  the  history  of  his 
oountiymen.    {B.  F.  Westeott,  D.D.) 

Matthew  was  k  "  Pobtitob." — The  Soman  taxes  being  nsually  in  the  hands  of 
Roman  knights,  these  high  personages  farmed  the  customs  out  to  local  men, 
**  portitores,"  who,  having  to  pay  a  fixed  sum  for  the  privilege  of  collecting,  squeezed 
as  mnch  as  they  could  in  addition  out  of  the  people.  The  police  winked  at  the  ex- 
tortion ;  there  was  seldom  any  redress,  but  the  "  portitor,"  or  collector,  was  gene- 
rally hated.  He  was  employed  by  the  knight  much  as  the  hangman  is  employed  by 
the  sberifif,  to  do  the  dirty  work.  His  prey  were  the  rich  and  middle  classes — out 
of  the  dregs  of  the  people  he  could  not  raise  very  much.  He  was  glad,  probably, 
at  times  to  take  refuge  with  them,  and  they  would  be  flattered  by  the  attentions  of 
a  richer  man,  however  looked  askance  at  by  his  social  equals.  At  any  rate  Matthew 
had  a  certain  following  among  the  lower  orders,  and  a  good  many  of  them  rose  up 
and  followed  him  when  he  rose  up  from  the  receipt  of  custom  and  followed  Christ. 
What  became  of  him  afterwards  we  can  but  vaguely  conjecture.  To  the  end,  if  we 
are  to  judge  by  a  certain  bias  in  the  Gospel  which  bears  his  name,  he  remained  a 
Jew,  with  a  double  conscience — full  of  Jewish  ardour,  respect  for  the  Temple,  atten- 
tive to  ceremony,  though  disliking  the  Pharisees — indeed,  they  may  have  suffered 
from  his  exactions,  and  reciprocated  his  hatred — wholly  changed  in  heart,  he  was 
but  half  changed  in  mind.  He  records  with  reverence  many  sayings  which  mast 
have  remained  strange  and  unintelligible  to  him.  Although  writing  or  editing  after 
Paul's  death,  he  probably  had  no  idea  of  Paul's  importance.  To  him  Christianity 
is  still  the  work  of  the  twelve.  He  is  the  type  of  the  transition  period  between 
Judaism  and  Christianity,  and  his  value  lies  wholly  in  his  memory  and  the  abun- 
dance of  Logia  which  early  passed  current  under  his  name,  and  have  found  a  place 
in  the  Gospel  which  is  sealed  by  it.  We  shall  associate  Matthew  of  Capernaum,  in 
Galilee,  most  correctly  with  the  inner  circle  at  Jerusalem — the  friends  and  family 
of  Jesus.  He  may  have  left  the  doomed  city  in  their  company,  and  taken  refnge 
with  the  saintly  Uttle  group  at  Pella,  beyond  Jordan.  There,  in  converse  with  the 
mother  of  Jesus,  who  kept  so  many  sayings  in  her  heart,  with  Nicodemus,  and 
Cloophas,  and  Nathaniel,  and  now  and  then  one  or  more  of  the  twelve,  Matthew 
laay  have  collected  sundry  "  libelli,"  or  booklets,  and  formed  a  record  supplemented 
from  his  own  memory.  Living  mostly  with  Jews,  he  would  recognise  in  Jesus  the 
Jewish  Messiah,  and  lay  special  stress  on  that ;  but  the  value  of  the  Gospel  is  not  in 
its  theory,  which  is  ill-defined,  or  its  incident,  which  is  largely  derived  from  Mark, 
bat  in  its  words — they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life — they  inspire  the  real  Gospel  aoeord- 
ing  to  Matthew.     {H.  JR.  Haweit,  M.A.) 

Tin. — The  ancient  authorities  tellus  that  it  was  written  whDe  Peter  and  Paul 
preached  in  Rome  (Irenseas),  and  that  Matthew  wrote  first  of  all  (Origen,  and 
Clement  of  Alexandria).  .  .  .  There  is  nothing  in  the  Gospel  to  hint  to  as  that 
Jerusalem  had  already  fallen,  that  the  temple  was  destroyed.  The  flight  of  the  dii- 
dples  (Matt  xxiv.  15-20)  had  not  yet  taken  place.    In  the  great  prophecy  of  JesiUt 

A* 


XTia         INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MATTHEW 

wherein  the  typical  destrnotion  of  Jerasalem  appears  hardly  distinguishable  in  point 
oi  perspective  of  time  from  the  judgment  of  the  whole  world,  there  would  sorely  be 
■ome  word  of  comment  from  the  evangelist,  if  one  great  portion  had  been  completed, 
and  had  passed  out  of  prophecy  into  history,  whilst  the  other  remained  yet  ontul> 
filled.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  probable  that  the  destruction  of  the  city  was  not  fax 
off.  A  considerable  time  between  the  events  of  the  Lord's  life  and  the  writing  mast 
have  elapsed,  or  there  would  be  no  force  in  the  words,  **  until  this  day  "  (Matt. 
zzvii.  8 ;  xiviii.  15).  .  .  .  Upon  the  whole,  we  are  pushed  by  probabilities  on  either 
side  towards  a  date  somewhere  about  63-65.    {Archbi$hop  Wm.  Thomson.) 

State  o»  Palestine  when  this  Gospel  was  written. — The  social  and  political 
condition  of  Palestine  at  that  time  (63-65)  threatened  a  great  crisis.  Society  was 
fast  declining  into  anarchy,  and  there  seemed  no  help  from  any  quarter.  There  was 
cogent  reason  for  desiring  to  secure  in  a  permanent  form,  for  the  Jewish  converts, 
the  Gospel  facts  which  had  so  long  been  preached  to  them  from  oral  tradition,  and 
perhaps  from  separate  and  fragmentary  narratives.  After  the  death  of  Claudius,  it 
needed  no  great  foresight  to  discern  the  peril  tha*>  beset  the  Jewish  nation.  Felix, 
«•  amidst  every  kind  of  cruelty  and  lust,  exercised  the  royal  office  with  the  soul  and 
spirit  of  a  slave."  Long  years  of  mutual  distrust  between  the  conquerors  and  a 
proud  and  sullen  race,  had  made  government  almost  impossible.  Two  years  of 
honest  endeavour  on  the  part  of  Festus  (60-62)  could  do  little  to  recall  Judea  from 
this  anarchy.  His  successor  Albinos  (62-64)  was  a  mere  robber,  bent  on  getting 
gold  from  any  quarter  by  any  means.  When  he  was  recalled,  he  opened  the  doors 
of  all  the  prisons,  and  "  left  the  prisons  empty,  but  the  land  filled  with  thieves." 
As  the  candle  flame  casts  a  shadow  from  the  lime-light,  so  did  the  villany  of  Albinoi 
appear  dull  by  the  light  of  his  successor's  misdeeds.  Gessius  Floras  (64-66)  waa 
a  mere  brigand,  who  had  crept  into  the  kingly  seat.  Josephns  can  hardly  find  words 
to  describe  his  conduct.  The  misery  of  the  people  under  this  evil  succession  must 
have  been  great :  their  endurance  taxed  to  the  utmost.  It  was  impossible  that  this 
should  last.  The  clouds  were  gathering  so  thick  that  they  must  at  last  explode  in 
•hunder,  and  the  bolts  of  heaven  must  fall.  It  was  probably  in  this  time  of  feverish 
•ixpectation  that  the  Gospel  before  os  was  brought  into  a  written  shape.  With  a 
Bociety  aboot  to  part  asunder,  with  the  constant  fear  of  persecution,  the  disciples 
must  have  become  convinced  that  the  precious  depesit  of  the  Gospel  must  no  longer 
be  trasted  to  tradition  alone.  Matthew  is  departing;  others  have  gone.  And 
therefore  the  apostle  gathers  into  a  Uospol  the  treasure  of  preaching  that  the  Choroh 
possessed.    (Ibid.) 

Lamouaoe. — From  the  first  half  of  the  second  century  downwards,  it  was  the 
general  behef  that  Matthew  wrote  for  his  own  people,  a  Jew  for  the  Jews,  and  that 
he  wrote  in  the  Aramaic,  or  late  Hebrew,  language.  There  are,  however,  strong 
reasons  to  question  this  .  .  .  The  general  conclusions  that  seem  warranted  at 
present  are,  that  the  existence  of  a  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,  attributed  to 
fit.  Matthew,  is  assured  by  the  general  voice  of  ancient  tradition ;  that  this  Gospel 
was  seen,  in  one  of  its  two  forms,  by  Jerome,  and  by  him  translated  into  Greek ; 
that  the  tradition  as  to  its  authorship  is  mainly  traceable  to  Papias ;  that,  so  far 
aa  this  Gospel  is  known  to  us,  it  is  not  the  same  as  our  St.  Matthew ;  that  it  is 
probably  a  secondary  work,  and  possibly  a  translation  from  Greek  sources ;  that, 
whatever  be  the  case  with  the  Hebrew  Gospel,  we  have  in  the  canonical  St  Matthew 
•  work  that  has  been  received  from  the  earliest  times  as  the  writing  of  the  apostle, 
and  that  it  is  not  a  translation  from  any  Hebrew  source.  The  Gospel,  then, 
was  written  in  Greek.  {Ibid.)  There  is  not  the  least  difficulty  in  believing 
that  Matthew  might  have  written  a  Gospel  in  Greek,  even  on  the  supposition 
\}t^  he  intended  it  only  for  the  ose  of  the  Christiana  in   Palestine;   and  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MATTHEW.  six 

lint  Gospel  oontains  internal  evidence  that  it  was  meant  to  have  a  wider  dicn- 
lation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  proof  to  be  derived  from  Josephas  of  the  literary 
nae  of  the  Aramaio  language  in  his  time  makes  it  equally  easy  to  accept  evidence 
of  the  existence  of  an  apostolic  Hebrew  Ckispel,  if  only  decisive  evidence  for  its 
existence  were  forthcoming.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  any  of  the  witnesses  had 
themselves  seen  such  a  Gospel,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  any 
Greek  text  bat  the  one  which  was  onivereaUy  regarded  as  authoritative.  Cureton 
imagined  that  he  could  gain  evidence  for  the  Hebrew  orignal  of  St.  Matthew  from 
the  Syiiao  version  which  he  published,  and  which  he  contended  had  not  been 
made  from  Greek,  but  from  the  original  Aramaio.  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  if 
there  had  existed  in  use  among  Hebrew-speaking  Christians  what  was  known  to  be 
the  real  original  Gospel  written  by  St.  Matthew,  such  a  corrupt  version  of  it  as  that 
circulated  among  the  Nazarenea  could  not  have  gained  acceptance ;  and  that  the 
origin  of  the  latter  Gospel  is  more  easily  explained  if  we  suppose  that  it  was  in 
Greek  the  facts  of  the  Gospel  history  had  been  authoritatively  published,  and  if  we 
regard  the  Nazarene  Gospel  as  an  attempt  made  by  one  not  very  ecrupulons  about 
accuracy  to  present  these  facts  to  those  who  spoke  Aramaic.  For  these  reasons, 
and  on  account  of  the  signs  of  originality  which  are  presented  by  the  Greek  Gospel, 
I  ftm  disposed  to  pronotmce  in  favour  of  the  Greek  original  of  St.  Matthew. 
{Oeorge  Salmon^  D.D.)  All  early  writers  agree  in  affirming  that  St.  Matthew 
wrote  in  Hebrew  (Aramaic),  and  owing  to  them  this  belief  gained  universal  eurraiey 
till  the  era  of  the  Beformation.  At  the  same  time  all  equally  agree  in  accepting 
the  Greek  Gospel  as  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  without  noticing  the  existence  of 
any  doubt  as  to  its  authenticity  .  .  .  But  on  the  other  side,  it  is  argued,  from 
internal  evidence,  that  the  present  Gospel  bean  no  marks  of  being  a  translation, 
that  several  details  in  it  point  to  a  late  and  not  to  an  early  date,  and  that  there  is 
.  no  evidence  to  show  that  any  one  who  mentions  the  Hebrew  original  had  seen  it. 
The  last  objection  is  evidently  unreasonable.  Till  it  can  be  shown  that  the  writers 
quoted  are  untrustworthy  generally,  it  is  purely  arbitrary  to  reject  their  statement 
because  it  is  not  sufficiently  explicit.  The  two  other  facts  are  perfectly  consistent 
with  a  belief  in  the  Hebrew  original  and  in  the  Greek  St.  Matthew.  The  oral 
Gospel  probably  existed  from  the  first,  both  in  Aramaio  and  in  Greek,  and  in  thia 
way  a  preparation  for  a  Greek  representative  of  the  Hebrew  Gospel  was  at  onee 
found.  The  parts  of  the  Aramaic  oral  Gospel  which  were  adopted  by  St.  Matthew 
already  existed  in  the  Greek  counterpart.  The  change  was  not  so  much  a  venion 
as  a  substitution ;  and  frequent  coincidence  with  common  parts  of  St.  Mark  and 
St.  Luke,  which  were  derived  from  the  same  oral  Greek  Gospel,  was  a  necessazy 
consequence.  Tet  it  may  have  happened  that  as  long  as  the  Hebrew  and  Greek 
churches  were  in  close  connection,  perhaps  till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  no 
authoritative  Greek  Gospel  of  St.  Mrttthew,  i.e.,  such  a  revision  of  the  Greek  oral 
Gospel  as  would  exactly  answer  to  St.  Matthew's  revision  of  the  Anmaic,  waa 
committed  to  writing.  When,  however,  the  separation  between  the  two  sectioaa 
grew  more  marked,  the  Greek  Gospitl  was  written,  not  indeed  as  •  translation,  but 
M  a  representation  of  the  original,  an  a  Greek  oral  counterpart  was  already  current; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  those  few  additional  notes  were  added  which  imply  a  later 
date  than  the  substance  of  the  book  (Matt.  xxviiL  15).  By  whose  hand  the  Greek 
Gtospel  was  drawn  up  is  wholly  unknown.  The  traditions  which  assign  it  to  St. 
John  or  St.  James  are  without  any  foundation  in  early  writers.  {B.  F.  WtttetU, 
1>J>.) 

OosTZKTS  ASS  Stbttotttbi. — ^The  work  Is  carefully  eonstmcted.  Apart  troiii  tht 
•ooount  of  the  childhood,  the  ministry  falls  into  two  portions — the  official  life  rm 
Galilee  and  the  preparation  for  the  Crucifixion — the  Baptism  being  the  introdnetioa 
to  on*  of  these,  and  the  Transfiguration  to  the  other.    Each  of  them  begins  witk  • 


sx  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  MATTHEW. 

formal  annoancement  of  the  evangelist :  "  From  that  time  Jesus  began  to  preaeh 
and  to  say,  Bepent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ia  at  hand  "  (chap.  iv.  17) ;  and 
"Prom  that  time  forth  began  Jesaa  to  show  unto  His  disciples  how  that  He  mnst 
go  onto  Jerusalem,  and  soSer  many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and 
scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third  day  "  (chap.  xvi.  21).  The  one 
of  these  stages  leads  naturally  up  to  the  other.  Jesus  teaches  long,  and  works 
wonders  of  love,  and  then  takes  account  with  the  apostles  of  the  result  of  all  this 
activity  before  He  anfolds  the  history  of  Hia  suffering.  "  Whom  do  men  say  that 
I  am  f  "  During  the  latter  stage,  that  of  the  cross,  the  activity  and  the  preaching 
recede  before  the  shadow  of  the  coming  events.  In  the  former  stage  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  is  put  out  of  its  place  (oomp.  Luke),  and  made  the  opening  of  the 
ministry,  for  it  is  the  new  law  of  the  new  *' kingdom  of  heaven,"  and  must  be 
brought  into  the  most  prominent  place.  Then  follow  (chaps,  viii.  and  iz.)  proofs 
of  His  wonder-working  power;  then  the  sending  forth  by  the  Shepherd  of  tha 
people,  the  apostles  to  the  children  of  Israel,  to  whom  the  new  kingdom  was  offered 
(chap,  z.)  The  effect  of  His  work  on  various  classes  and  places  now  shows  itself : 
John  ia  in  doubt  (chap.  zi.  1-6) ;  the  people  are  perverse  (chap.  zi.  18, 19) ;  Cho- 
razin  and  Bethsaida  are  harder  to  convince  than  Tyre  and  Sidon  (chap.  zi.  20-22) ; 
the  Pharisees,  cramped  and  eonfioed  by  the  glosses  of  the  law,  cannot  understand 
the  Oospel  liberty  even  a  little  (chap.  xii.).  Now  a  group  of  parables  of  the  Kingdom 
of  God  seems  to  be  the  opening  of  a  fresh  period,  the  structure  being  somewhat 
the  same.  First,  these  parables,  answering  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  then, 
new  miracles,  and  even  more  conspicuors — the  two  feedings  of  the  multitudes  with 
a  little  bread  (chaps,  ziv.,  zv.) ;  and,  lastly,  a  fresh  account  of  the  results  of  the 
teaching,  as  shown  by  various  minds :  "  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of  Man 
am?"  (chap.  zvi.  13).  "But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am?"  (chap.  zvi.  15).  This 
eeeond  section  has  probably  for  its  chief  scene  a  new  missionary  circuit  round , 
Galilee.  St.  Luke  places  the  parable  of  the  Sower  in  the  beginning  of  such  a 
Jonmey,  when,  accompanied  by  the  twelve,  and  now  by  certain  women  also,  who 
had  been  healed  of  evil  spirits.  He  passed  through  the  land,  carrying  with  Him  the 
glad  tidings  of  God  (Luke  viii.  1-6).  Throughout  the  first  great  section  (chaps,  iv.- 
xvi.)  the  purpose  never  flags  or  changes :  this  kingdom  of  Messiah  is  preached  to 
the  Jews  who  were  its  heirs :  thus  it  was  preached,  thus  it  was  enforced,  and  thus 
received  by  the  ungrateful  people ;  whilst  of  the  darker  lessons  of  the  second  part 
the  disciples  understood  nothing  at  the  end  of  the  first.  "  Be  it  far  from  Thee, 
Lord,  this  shall  not  be  nnto  Thee "  (chap.  zvi.  22).  The  second  section,  opening 
with  the  Transfiguration — the  witness  from  heaven — has  its  sermon  too ;  but  this 
time  the  circle  is  narrower  to  which  it  is  addressed ;  the  disciples  who  now  learn 
the  doctrine  of  suffering  and  the  cross,  are  to  learn  the  ethics  of  suffering  also : 
in  the  child's  Immility  (chap,  xviii.  3,  4);  in  the  tender  consideration  for  the 
smallest  and  weakest  (chap,  xviii.  10-14);  in  the  constant  forgiveness  of  wrongs  (chap, 
zviii.  21-35) — the  strength  of  His  ministers  would  lie.  Miracles  follow  (chaps,  ziz., 
zz.),  but  they  are  not  so  prominent  now  in  the  narrative.  Again  and  again  the 
gloomy  prophecy  of  His  death  is  pressed  home  to  the  disciples  (chaps,  zvi  32 ; 
zvii.  22 ;  zx.  17-19 ;  zzvi.  1,  2) ;  nntil  at  last  the  fulfilment  comes.  All  the  world 
of  Jndea  passes,  for  a  kind  of  judgment,  before  His  judgment  seat ;  scribe  and 
Pharisee,  and  the  doomed  Jerusalem,  wherein  these  rule  so  perversely,  are  ntterly 
condemned  (chap,  xxiii.) ;  and  through  the  smoke  and  fire  of  the  city's  destruction 
may  be  seen  the  grand  lines  of  a  greater  judgment  (chaps,  zziv.,  zzvi).  {Arehln$hop 
Wm.  Thornton.) 

LxASXH*  InzAs. — This  Gospel  follows  two  fundamental  eoneeptioni.  1.  It  !■ 
the  Gospel  of  the  Diseonrses.  Many  chapters  are  filled  with  the  reoord  of  Ohrisi'i 
leaching.    I  need  only  indicatp  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  the  instruction  to  tb« 


INTRODVtlTION  TO  TEE  GOSPEL  OP  ST.  MATTHEW.  xzi 

•poBtles  on  their  first  Mission ;  the  olaater  of  the  parables  of  the  Kingdom ;  the 
eightfold  woe  in  ohap.  xzi. ;  the  esohatologioai  predictions  and  parables  in  ahaps. 
zziy.  and  xxr.  A  brief  answer  may  suffice  to  certain  qnestions  which  have  been 
•aked,  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  disturbing  simple  Christians  in  the  quiet  enjoy* 
ment  of  their  Master's  words.  How  do  yon  know  that  it  is,  indeed,  the  very  eeho 
of  His  voice  which  comes  to  yon  across  the  gulf  of  time  t  Was  there  a  reporter  in 
the  apostolic  company  who  could  write  short-hand,  and  take  sufficient  notes  T  Are 
not  these  Discourses  like  the  speeches  in  Thuoydides  or  Livy  t  As  Christiams,  we 
are  satisfied  with  that  sentence,  "  The  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  shall 
teach  you  all  things  " — that  is,  all  things  not  of  the  first  creation,  which  is  the 
object  of  science,  bnt  of  the  second,  which  is  the  object  of  revelation : — "  and  bring 
all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  yon."  There  is  no 
tablet  like  a  loving  memory,  no  remembrancer  like  Qod  the  Holy  Ghost.  S.  It  is  the 
Gospel  of  Types  in  history,  in  law,  in  worship,  accomplishing  themselves,  onreeog- 
nized  by  those  to  whom  they  specially  pertained.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  Prophecy, 
accumulating  and  interweaving  its  marvellous  coincidences  (sometimes  in  dark  say- 
ings, like  those  of  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver — chap,  zxvii.  9,  ef.  Zech.  xi.  12,  13, 
and  of  the  going  before  the  disciples  into  Galilee — xxvi.  81,  82,  of.  Zech.  xiii.  7) 
round  the  birth  and  life,  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesns.  It  is  the  Gospel  of 
the  Christ,  crowning  the  aspirations  of  saints  and  seers,  bnt  not  the  carnal  expec- 
tations of  the  Jews.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  true  Judaism,  as  opposed  to  the  corrupt 
Judaism  of  priests  and  scribes,  of  Pharisees  and  Sadduoees.  This  is  written  an 
its  forefront :  **  The  Book  of  the  Generation  "  (chap.  i.  1) ;  not  "  the  History  of  the 
Childhood,"  but  the  *'  Liber  de  Originibns  Jesu,"  Jesns  the  Messiah,  the  Child  of 
Abraham,  in  whom  all  families  are  to  be  blessed;  the  Boyai  Heir  of  Dand's 
throne,  yet  rejected  by  the  Jews.    {Bishop  Wm.  Alexander.) 

This  Gosfbl  is  hoi  thb  um  or  a  dbad  has.  It  is  the  specimen  of  an  Eternal 
Life  manifested  upon  earth  for  a  while,  by  which  we  came  to  know  in  some  measure 
what  He  is  who  is  our  Lord.  This  is  why  it  is  that  to  leave  off  reading  the  daily  les- 
ion or  chapter  is  to  forget  Christ,  and  with  Him  home  and  goodness.  This  is  why 
men  in  the  evening  of  their  days,  as  they  look  back  with  bitter  «wlf-acoueation, 
remember  that  the  time  which  they  most  deplore  coincided  exactly  with  the  time 
when,  by  shutting  up  their  New  Testament,  they  shut  oat  Christ's  presence  from 
their  lives.  Yet,  thank  God,  we  know  Him,  or  we  may  know  Him.  We  may  know  Him 
M  the  leper  knew  Him ;  as  Peter  did,  when,  with  the  spray  in  his  hair  and  the  storm- 
light  on  his  face,  he  cried,  "  Lord  i  save  me  " ;  as  Galilee  knew  Him,  when  He  went 
about  doing  good.  Still  above  the  clouds  that  hang  over  the  Church  and  the 
world,  He  is  the  Light,  the  Dawn  and  Morning  Star  of  saeh  new  era,  until  the  final 
revelation,  when,  over  the  last  olouds  going  ap  from  a  boming  world,  the  Sign  afaall 
appear.    {Ibid.} 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOS. 

ST.  MATTHEW. 

CHAPTEB  L 

VsBM.  1-15.  Tbe  book  of  tlie  generation. — The  U*$ont  of  ChrUVt  genealogy  : — 
1.  It  ig  a  proof  of  the  reality  of  Christ's  hamanity.     2.  It  suggests  the  relation  of 
Cfhrist's  work  to  the  whole  human  race.     3.  It  marks  the  importance  of  the  birth 
of  Christ  as  a  historical  epoch.     Let  it  remind  us  also  (1)  Of  the  shortness  of  human 
life ;  (2)  Of  the  subserviency  of  persons  of  every  class  and  character  to  the  purposes 
of  God's  moral  government.     (G.  Brooks.)        The  double  use  of  genealogies : — 1.  A 
profane  use  for  ostentation.     2.  A  holy  use  (1)  For  the  observing  of  judicial  laws ; 
(2)  For  the  distinguishing  the  church  from  those  without ;  (3)  For  the  setting  forth 
the  pedigree  of  the  Messiah,  lest  it  should  be  thought  that  He  were  some  obscure  or 
secret  person.     {R.  Ward.)        The  old  and  new  in  Jesus  ; — The  first  record  is  the 
book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ.      What  does  this  signify  ?     1.  A  man's 
beginnings,  a  man's  ancestors,  have  something  to  do  with  boih  his  character  and 
his  hfe.     2.  Christ  was  the  sacred  heir  of  all  the  ancient  world.     3.  The  genealogy 
reminds  us  how  all  the  past  was  preparing  for  Jesus.     4.  But  more  than  all,  the 
generations  of  Jesus  Christ  show  us  the  birth  of  the  new  world,  and  the  new  time, 
and  the  new  institutions,  which  are  to  end  in  the  perfect  glory  of  the  Father  and 
the  perfect  blessedness  of  the  race.    (W.  H.  Davison.)         The  genealogy  of  Christ:— 
1.  There  is  much  in  good  lineage.     2.  Sin  has  tainted  the  blood  of  the  best  races 
oi  men,  and  frequently  makes  itself  manifest.     3.  God's  grace  can  flow  through 
very  crooked  human  channels.     4.  No  man  stands  alone.         Lessons  of  Christ's 
genealogy  : — 1.  This  table  of  our  Lord's  genealogy,  inserted  in  the  beginning  of  the 
gospel,  invests  the  book  with  an  air  of  naturakiess  and  reality,  which  probably 
nothing  else  could  have  done  so  well.    No  man  writing  fiction  would  have  ventured 
to  preface  it  with  a  dry  list  of  obscure  names.     2.  It  connects  Jesus  and  His  teach- 
ings with  all  God's  revelations  and  promises  which  had  been  given  before.    It 
binds  ap,  as  in  one  sheaf,  all  generations  of  the  church  in  one  uniform  moral 
system.     3.  The  Lord's  ancestral  roll  serves  to  identify  Him  in  closer  connection 
and  sympathy  with  the  race  whom,  as  their  God,  He  came  to  redeem.     4.  The 
account  of  those  who  were  Christ's  ancestry  before  His  first  advent  suggest  the 
anxious  inquiry,  whether  our  names  are  written  in  the  Book  of  Life  as  members  of 
His  spiritual  family.     (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)         Very  man  • — 1.  He  is  a  man.     2.  He 
is  a  Jew.     3.  He  is  a  king.     (1)  God's  purpose  is  to  bless  by  a  mpn  ;  (2)  To  teach 
by  a  man  ;  (3)  To  judge  by  a  man;  (4)  To  rule  by  a  man  ;  (5)  To  Unk  earth  and 
heaven  together  by  a  man.     (Dr.  Bonar.)        The  text  appears  at  first  sight  like  a 
valley  of  dry  bones  without  any  life  or  fertility,  or  a  rugged  pass  that  leads  to  green 
pastures.     Nevertheless,  there  are  important  lessons  in  it  respecting  the  human 
race  and  its  relation  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     I.  It  shows  the  cojraoN  obigin  of 
THB  BACE.   St.  Luke  traces  the  ancestry  of  Jesus  to  Adam — the  head  of  the  race.    IL 
Thk  PHTSiCAii  CONNECTION  OF  THB  BACE.     Having  Sprung  from  a  common  head, 
there  must  be  a  physical  connection  between  the  various  members.     (1)  War  seems 
doubly  barbarous  and  unnatural.     (2)  Men  ougbt  to  sympathize  with  and  promote 
one  another's  welfare  apart  from  Christianity,  &c.     III.  The  common  Savioub  or 
THS  BACE.     lY.  The  uobal  distinction  of  ihr  back.    What  a  mixtore  of  good 
•ad  bad  tiiere  is  in  the  genealogy  t    {W.  Edwards.) 

I 


S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA»,  i. 

\     Vers.  16,  17.  Josepli  the  husband  of  Mary. — Jesus  the  seed  of  the  woman : — 1. 

':  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  2.  He  has  a  human  ancestry.  3.  He  has  a  Jewish  ancestry. 
4.  He  has  a  Gentile  Eincestry.  5.  He  has  a  royal  ancestry.  6.  He  has  a  lowly 
ancestry.  7.  He  has  a  holy  ancestry.  8.  He  has  an  imperfect  ancestry.  9.  He 
has  a  mortal  ancestry.  10.  He  has  an  immortal  ancestry,  (Dr.  Bonar.)  Joseph 
and  Mary  were  one  thing  by  right  of  inheritance,  another  by  present  condition. 
Tney  were  BuccesBors  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  but  were  poor.  Why  does  G^d  per- 
mit the  righteous  to  be  deprived  of  their  right  and  to  be  brought  to  poverty  ?  1, 
Because  thus  He  will  prove  them.  2.  Because  worldly  abundance  is  not  so  fit  foi 
them.  3.  That  He  may  crown  them  with  future  blessedness  more  abundantly.  4. 
That  He  may  let  us  see  how  careful  He  is  of  us  when  we  are  in  need.  5.  How  con- 
tent were  Joseph  and  Maiy  in  their  low  estate.  6.  The  way  to  heaven  is  by  adver- 
Bify.    {B.  Ward.) 

Ters.  18-20.  A  Juet  man. — An  Jionest  man's  dilemma: — I.  That  tkottblbb  a»h 
iBRESPECTivE  OF  CHAEACTER.     II.  That  the  mental  perplexities  of  the  good  arise 

Ofteu  FROM   THE  WANT  OF  INSIGHT  INTO  THE  DiVINE  MOVEMENTS.      The  CycleS  of  God'S 

providence  are  too  vast  for  our  limited  capacities.  HI.  That  God  graciously 
BEMOVES  THE  HONEST  BCBUPLE8  OT  THE  RIGHTEOUS.  Joseph's  mental  difficulties 
were  removed  (1)  By  an  angelic  communication  ;  (2)  By  revealing  the  dignity  ol 
Chrint's  birth  ;  (3)  By  showing  the  nature  of  His  mission.  Jesus  was  the  only  man 
born  with  special  mission  in  reference  to  sin.  IV.  That  this  mysterious  conception 
and  noble  birth  came  to  pass  in  accordance  with  prophetic  prediction  (Isa.  vii. 
14-16).  V.  Joseph's  belief  in  the  angelic  communication,  and  obedience  to  th» 
Divine  command.  Faith  essential  to  willing  and  unreserved  obedience,  and  to  the 
removal  of  mental  difficulties.  (W.  Edwards.)  Joseph  : — 1.  His  natural  suspicion, 
2.  His  merciful  determination.  3.  We  need  the  tempering  of  justice  with  mercy, 
and  mercy  with  justice.  (R.  Ward.)  Nothing  so  clearly  discoTerB  a  spiritual 
man  as  his  treatment  of  an  erring  brother.     [Augustine.) 

yen.  21,  22.  Jesus. — The  design  of  our  Saviour's  coming: — ^I.  Consider  Bin  as 
AN  enemy.  1.  Behold  sin  with  regard  to  God.  2.  Behold  sin  in  its  names.  3. 
Behold  the  effects  of  sin.  4.  That  Christ  derives  from  this  work  His  highest  title. 
II.  Consider  in  what  manner  He  saves  His  people  rROM  their  sins.  1.  He 
redeems  them  by  price.  2.  He  saves  them  by  power.  3.  He  saves  from  the  guilt 
of  sin.  4.  He  saves  from  the  love  of  sin.  (W.  Jay.)  In  old  times  God  was 
kaown  by  names  of  power,  of  nature,  of  majesty ;  but  His  name  of  mercy  waa 
reserved  till  now.  [Bishop  J.  Taylor.)  The  name  and  work  of  Jesus: — I.  Hia 
name.  II.  His  work.  1.  Whom  He  saves — •'  His  people."  2.  From  what  He 
Bavea — "their  sins."  3.  How  He  saves.  By  His  atonement  He  saves  them 
virtually  ;  by  His  spirit,  vitally  ;  by  His  grace,  constantly  ;  by  His  power,  eternally. 
Kemarks  :  (1)  Jesus  as  a  suitable  Saviour  ;  (2)  a  willing  Saviour ;  (3)  an  all-sufficient 
Saviour.  {E.  Oakes.)  Christ  a  Saviour: — I.  The  work  He  is  to  accomplish 
is  a  most  great,  glorious,  and  blessed  one.  "He  shall  save."  Another  Scripture 
says,  He  shall  destroy.  "  For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that 
He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  These  characters  are  consistent.  He 
,  demolishes  the  works  of  Satan  because  they  stand  in  His  way  as  Saviour.  1.  He 
'  saves  His  people  from  the  penalty  of  their  sins.  2.  From  the  dominion  and 
practice  of  sin.  3.  In  the  end  He  saves  from  the  very  existence  of  sin.  4.  And 
I  from  the  painful  remembrance  of  their  sins.  II.  The  same  oub  Lord  is  to  beab 
!  IN  consequence  or  this  work  of  salvation.  Learn  from  this — 1.  The  character 
'  in  which  God  most  delights  to  regard  His  Son.  2.  It  shows  us  that  He  would 
have  OB  regard  Him  chiefly  as  a  Saviour.  3.  This  name  may  have  been 
given  to  Christ  to  endear  Him  the  more  to  our  hearts.  4.  We  see  here 
beyond  all  dispute  the  real  nature  and  design  of  Christ's  religion.  {C. 
BradUy.)  T/w  name  of  Jesus : — I.  The  name  of  Jesus.  1.  The  significa- 
tion of  the  name.  2.  The  appointment  of  the  name.  Not  left  to  men'a 
choice,  n.  The  reason  for  the  name.  Some  would  rather  that  He  had  come 
to  save  them  from  poverty,  pains,  death ;  not  knowing  that  to  save  from  sina 
ia  to  save  from  all  these.  (J.  Bennet,  D.D.)  I.  A  work  of  most  blessed 
rtJuposE.  1.  Sin  is  itself  the  greatest  of  all  miseries.  It  is  (1)  deeper  ;  (2)  vaster ; 
(3)  more  abiding ;  (4)  the  source  of  all  other  miserieB.  II.  A  work  of  vast  maomi- 
tudk.  Its  magnitude  realized  by  dwelling — 1.  On  the  multitudes  of  the  saved.  3. 
On  the  nature  of  the  salvation.    3.  On  the  fact  that  this  salvation  is  wrought  hf 


CBAJ.  I.]  ST.  MATTHEW. 


Jesus  personaUy.  {U.  R.  Thomas.)  Jesus  the  Saviour: — I.  What  thb  gospei. 
BHALL  BBiNG — Saivacion  from  sins.  II.  Jesus  is  the  Saviour,  and  His  wobk 
CONSTITUTES  OUR  SALVATION.  1.  Tliis  word  teachcs  us  that  salvation  is  Divine. 
Because  Divine  it  is  (1)  sufficient ;  (2)  unchangeable  ;  (3)  infinite.  It  is  illimitable, 
SB  the  ail  to  the  bird.  2.  He  who  gives  this  salvation  stands  in  solitary  grandeur 
— "  He."  Nowhere  else  can  we  find  salvation.  3.  The  name  gives  an  immutable 
pledge  that  we  shall  be  saved.  III.  The  text  informs  us  op  what  this  saltatios 
CONSISTS.  "  From  their  sins."  Not  from  the  wrath  of  God  primarily.  1.  From 
the  guilt,  curse,  condemnation  of  sin.  2.  From  our  love,  habit,  practice  of  sin. 
8.  It  is  not  salvatioD  from  an  abstraction,  but  from  selfishness  and  self-will.  IV. 
The  oharacteb  of  the  people  of  God.  His  people  ;  peculiar,  chosen,  royal.  Are 
you  saved  from  sins  f  (J.  Denovan.)  Jesus  the  Saviour : — I.  Jesus  is  an  omnipo- 
tent Saviour.  1.  The  presumption  of  the  fact  from  the  infinite  wisdom  and  good- 
ness of  God,  who  never  provides  a  cause  unequal  to  the  effect.  2.  The  declaration 
of  the  fact,  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,"  &c.  II.  Jesus  is  a  willino 
Saviour.  III.  Jesus  is  a  living  Saviour.  IV.  Jesus  is  a  present  Saviour.  V. 
Jesus  is  a  personal  Saviour.  VI.  Jesus  is  a  sympathizing  Saviour.  (G.  H.  Smyth.) 
1.  Let  me  call  your  attention  to  the  Saviour.  Jesus  is  Divine ;  He  saves  His  people 
from  their  sins.  Not  the  word,  not  the  ordinances,  but  Jesus  Himself  saves.  II. 
Look  at  the  salvation.  1.  Jesus  saves  from  sin  by  bestowing  forgiveness — full 
forgiveness,  free,  immediate.  2.  Jesus  saves  His  people  from  the  pollution  of  sin  ; 
not  in  their  siuB,  but  from  their  sins.  III.  Let  us  look  at  the  saved.  •'  He  shall 
gave  His  people."  Who  are  His  people?  They  must  have  been  at  one  time  in 
their  sins.     Therefore  no  one  need  despair.     (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Jesus  only  worthy  of  trust  as  a  Saviour. — A  Christian  Hindoo  was  dying,  and 
his  heathen  comrades  came  around  him  and  tried  to  comfort  him  by  reading  some 
of  the  pages  of  their  theology  ;  but  he  waved  bis  hand,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  don't 
want  to  hear  it."  Then  they  called  in  a  heathen  priest,  and  he  said,  *'  If  you  will 
only  recite  the  Nuvitra  it  will  deliver  you  from  hell."  He  waved  his  hand,  as  much 
as  to  say,  **  I  don't  want  to  hear  that."  Then  they  said,  "  Call  on  Juggernaut." 
He  shook  his  head,  as  much  as  to  say,  '*  I  can't  do  that."  Then  they  thought 
perhaps  he  was  too  weary  to  speak,  and  they  said,  "  Now  if  you  can't  say  '  Jugger- 
naut,' think  of  that  god."  He  shook  his  head  again,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  No,  no, 
Eo."  Then  they  bent  down  to  his  pillow,  and  they  said,  "  In  what  will  you  trust  ?  " 
His  face  lighted  up  with  the  very  glories  of  the  celestial  sphere  as  he  cried  out, 
rallying  all  his  dying  energies,  " Jesus  1"  The  name  of  Jesus. — "This  nama 
Jesus,"  said  St.  Bernard,  "it  is  honey  in  the  mouth,  harmony  in  the  ear,  melody 
lin  the  heart."  "  This  name  Jesus,"  saith  St.  Anselm,  "  it  is  a  name  of  comfort  to 
sinners  when  they  call  upon  Him ;  "  therefore  he  himself  saith,  "  Jesus,  be  my 
Jebus. "  This  name  is  above  all  names :  first,  for  that  it  was  consecrated  from 
everlasting ;  secondly,  for  that  it  was  given  of  God ;  thirdly,  for  that  it  was  desired 
of  the  Patriarchs ;  fourthly,  for  that  it  was  foretold  of  the  Prophets ;  fifthly,  for 
that  it  was  accomplished  in  the  time  of  grace,  magnified  in  the  Apostles,  witnessed 
of  Martyrs,  acknowledged  and  honoured  shall  it  be  of  all  believers  unto  the  world's 
end.  This  name  Jesus,  it  is  comparted  to  "  oil  poured  out ;  "  oil  being  kept  close,  it 
«endeth  not  forth  such  a  savour,  as  it  doth  being  poured  out ;  and  oil  hath  these 
properties,  it  suppleth,  it  cherisheth,  it  maketh  look  cheerfully ;  so  doth  this  name 
of  Jesus,  it  suppleth  the  hardness  of  our  hearts,  it  cherisheth  the  weakness  of  our 
faith,  enUghteneth  the  darkness  of  our  soul,  and  maketh  man  look  with  a  cheerful 
countenance  towards  the  throne  of  grace.     (Christopher  Sutton.) 

Salvation  from  sin. — You  must  be  saved  from  sin,  not  in  sin,  as  Bome  seem  to 
imagine.  The  latter  is  like  saving  a  man  from  drowning  by  keeping  him  under  the 
water  which  is  destroying  him  ;  or  Uke  recovering  a  man  from  sickness  by  leaving 
him  under  the  malady  which  conbtitutes  the  complaint.     (W.  Jay.) 

Vers.  23-25.  Child. — I.  We  remember  that  God  came  to  us  in  that  child.  *•  God 
with  us."  This  should  remove  all  dread  of  God.  II.  That  God  can  come  to  as  in 
the  smallest  things.  III.  That  the  whole  of  life  is  sacred,  and  should  be  conse- 
crated  to  God.  IV.  That  great  endings  have  httle  beginnings.  {B.  Preece.) 
Emmanuel. — Emmanuel: — I,  Christ  came  as  God  with  man.  1.  To  live  with  man. 
2.  With  man,  to  die  for  him.  3.  With  man,  to  rise  from  the  dead  for  him.  4.  With 
man,  to  ascend  and  intercede  for  him.  II.  God  is  with  His  people.  1.  He  is 
with  them  in  their  lives.  2.  In  their  labours.  3.  In  their  triale  and  afflictions. 
4.  In  their  worship.     5.  In  death  and  in  glory.     (C.  H.  Wetherbe.)        The  birth  oj 


<  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

Christ: — L  The  importance  of  the  event  to  which  Isaiah  looks  forward,  and 
which  the  evangehst  describes  as  fulfilled.  1.  The  occurrence  was  of  a  preter- 
natural  character.  To  raise  us  from  degradation  Christ  Himself  must  be  sin- 
less. Evil  had  descended.  How  was  this  fatal  entail  to  be  cut  off  ?  The  virgin 
birth  was  the  answer.  2.  Christ's  birth  marked  the  entrance  into  the  sphese  of 
sense  and  time  of  One  who  had  existed  from  eternity.  3.  No  other  birth  has  ever 
involved  such  important  consequences  to  the  human  race.  II.  The  contkabt 
between  the  real  and  the  apparent  importance  of  Christ's  birth.  The  kingdom  of 
God  had  entered  into  history  without  observation.  Caesar's  palace  seemed  to  be 
more  important  to  the  world  than  the  manger.  The  apparent  is  not  always  the 
real.  HI.  What  is  the  practical  meaning  of  this  birth  to  us,  and  what  relation 
have  we  to  Him  who,  for  the  love  of  us,  was  bom  of  the  virgin  J  {Canon  Liddon.) 
Jesus  Christ  the  centre  of  history  : — I.  The  world  expected  an  Emmanuel.  II.  God 
was  preparing  the  world  for  the  coming  of  Emmanuel.  III.  The  world  could  not 
produce  the  Emmanuel.  IV.  As  the  Emmanuel  was  the  goal  of  ancient,  so  He  ii 
the  starting-point  of  modern  history.  (J.  C.  Jones).  At  an  earlier  age  the  Incar- 
nation would  have  been  meaningless.  The  mariner's  compass  has  been  known  in  China 
for  thousands  of  years  ;  nevertheless,  for  the  most  part  of  that  time  it  was  but  little 
better  than  a  toy — the  Chinese  mind  was  not  educated  enough  to  estimate  its  value. 
Only  a  few  centuries  ago  the  compass  became  a  blessing  to  mankind,  because  only 
a  few  centuries  ago  we  attained  the  intellectual  state  requisite  to  apprehend  its  use- 
fulness.  And  did  the  Incarnation  take  place  in  the  days  of  Abraham,  or  of  Moses, 
or  of  David,  it  would  have  been  an  idle,  purposeless  miracle,  so  far  as  its 
human  aspect  is  concerned,  and  Christ  would  have  died  in  vain.  (Ibid.)  Th4 
Man  Christ  Jesus : — 1.  Humanity  needed  a  Saviour.  2.  The  Mediator  was  to  coma 
in  the  purity  and  the  power  of  sinless  human  character.  3.  We,  as  a  part  of  the 
human  world,  must  join  in  this  longing  of  human  hearts  for  a  Christ.  4.  When 
this  yearning  of  mankind  was  taken  up  into  the  guidance  and  inspiration  of  God  it 
became  prophecy.  5.  These  things  are  a  declaration  of  the  one  fact  which  lies, 
central  and  life-giving,  at  the  heart  of  all  our  Christian  thoughts  and  hopes.  6. 
We  come  short  of  the  full  grandeur  of  the  gospel  wheti  we  take  the  clause,  "  God  with 
us,"  as  signifying  only  one  among  us — a  Deity  moving  among  individuals,  outside 
of  them  all,  and,  however  friendly  and  gracious,  still  an  external  Person,  saving 
them  only  by  a  work  wrought  all  above  them.  7.  Then,  too,  itwill  begin  to  appear 
what  Christ's  own  people  may  be,  acknowledging  their  membership,  confirmed  and 
aUve  in  His  body.  {Bishop  Huntingdon. )  Let  Him  be  one  of  us,  that  we  may  be  one 
in  Him.  {Ibid.)  Emmanuel,  God  irith  us  : — I.  We  know,  in  consequence  of  the 
revelations  made  by  Christ,  that  God  is  so  with  us,  so  near  to  ub,  that  our  vebt 
EXISTENCE  IS  EVERY  MOMENT  UPHELD  BT  HiM.  We  exist  not  by  chauce,  &c. ;  but 
whatever  subordinate  causes  may  be  employed,  they  all  derive  their  eflBcacy  from 
Him.  II.  We  know,  too,  from  the  incarnation  and  doctrine  of  Christ,  that  God  is 
with  us,  not  as  individuals  merely,  but  with  our  world,  and  that  also  in  the  way 
of  special  grace.  He  is  in  the  world,  not  to  exhibit  His  power  merely,  but  that  the 
world  of  men  may  be  redeemed,  &o.  III.  In  Christ  we  see  that  God  was  with  as, 
in  our  very  nature,  to  accomplish  our  redemption.  IV.  Though  ascended  into 
heaven,  He  is  still  "  God  with  us,"  by  the  invisible  but  mighty  influence  which 
He  exerts.  V.  God  is  with  us,  in  condescension  and  special  grace,  during  thb 
WHOLE  course  OF  DISCIPLINE  to  which  Hc  subjccts  us.  Is  Christ  our  Emmanuel  ? 
{R.  Watson.)  Influence  gained  by  oneness  of  condition : — A  Moravian  missionary 
once  went  to  the  West  Indies,  to  preach  to  the  slaves.  He  found  it  impossible  for 
him  to  carry  out  his  design  so  long  as  he  bore  to  them  the  relation  of  a  mere  mis- 
sionary. They  were  driven  into  the  field  very  early  in  the  morning,  and  returned 
late  at  night  with  scarcely  strength  to  roll  themselves  into  their  cabins,  and  in  no 
condition  to  be  profited  by  instruction.  They  were  savage  toward  all  of  the  raou 
and  rank  of  their  masters.  He  determined  to  reach  the  slaves  by  becoming  himsell 
a  slave.  He  was  sold,  that  he  might  have  the  privilege  of  working  by  their  side, 
and  preaching  to  them  as  he  worked  with  them.  Do  you  suppose  the  master  or  the 
pastor  cculd  have  touched  the  hearts  of  those  miserable  slaves  as  did  that  man  who 
placed  himself  in  their  condition,  and  went  among  them,  and  lived  as  they  lived, 
suffered  as  they  suffered,  toiled  as  they  toiled,  that  he  might  carry  the  gospel  to 
them?  This  missionary  was  but  following  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist, 
who  took  on  Him  the  nature  of  men,  came  among  them,  and  lived  aa  they  lived, 
that  He  might  save  them  from  their  sins.  {Beecher.) 
In  what  sense  is  Christ  God  with  us  ?   In  His  incarnation  nnited  to  onr  nature-— 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  MATTUEW. 


God  with  man — God  in  man.  He  is  God  with  ns  to  comfort,  enlighten,  protect, 
and  defend  us  in  time  of  temptation  and  trial,  and  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  God 
tcith  us,  and  in  us,  and  we  with  and  in  Him  to  all  eternity.  {A.  Clarke,  LL.D.) 
Behold  at  once  the  deepest  mystery  and  the  richest  mercy.  By  the  light  of  nature 
we  see  the  eternal  as  a  God  ahove  us :  by  the  light  of  the  law  we  see  Him  as  a  God 
against  us ;  but,  by  the  light  of  the  gospel,  we  see  Him  as  a  God  with  us,  reconciled 
to  us,  at  peace  with  us,  interested  for  us,  interceding  in  oar  behalf.  Thauks  be  \» 
God  f<»  Hig  unspeakable  gift  I     (Dr.  Hughes.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Veb.  L  Wise  men  from  the  East. — They  were  wise,  not  so  mnch  for  their  learning, 
but  because  they  sought  God  diligently.  Wisdom  does  not  make  unbelievers,  but 
folly.  {Wilmot  Buxton.)  Philosophy  and  the  Babe : — I.  The  wise  men  seeking 
Christ.  1.  They  are  presented  to  us  here  as  seekers.  2.  They  were  earnest 
seekers.  3.  They  sought  Christ  reverently.  4.  God  assisted  them  in  the  search. 
II.  The  wise  men  riNDiNO  Christ.  1.  They  were  seeking  a  person ,  2.  That  person 
must  be  a  king.  3.  They  sought  a  king  and  found  a  child.  4.  Having  found  the 
child  their  seeking  came  to  an  end.  5.  They  worshipped  Him.  (J.  G.  Jones.) 
Jesus  was  the  beginner  of  a  new  era,  the  founder  of  a  new  kingdom,  hailed  as  a 
King  alike  at  His  birth  and  on  His  cross.  I.  The  seekers.  Magi,  not  magicians ; 
astronomers,  not  astrologers ;  scientists,  not  wizards.  The  coming  of  these  wise 
men  prophetic  of  the  time  when  all  the  trophies  of  science  should  be  laid  at  the 
Saviour's  feet.  II,  The  sign.  "  His  star."  Various  conjectures.  God  never 
lacks  the  means  to  guide  earnest  inquirers.  III.  The  search.  Earnest.  Gave  up 
friends  and  home,  and  took  a  wearisome  journey.  Every  follower  of  Christ  must 
have  the  same  spirit.  No  earthly  joy  is  entirely  satisfactory.  Men  will  not 
earnestly  seek  Christ  till  firmly  convinced  of  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  other 
things.  Persevering  :  many  discouragements.  IV.  The  success.  Not  where  they 
expected  it,  in  the  capital ;  not  even  in  the  best  place  in  Bethlehem,  yet  where  their 
«oul-hunger  was  satisfied — the  "  house  of  bread."  They  came  not  empty-handed, 
but  presented  first  themselves,  then  their  gifts.  The  typical  nature  of  these  gifts. 
Around  the  manger  was  gathered  a  prophetic  group.  (Richard  Roberts.)  The 
Sages,  the  Star,  and  the  Saviour : — I.  Their  inquiry,  •*  Where  is  He  7  "  &o.  1. 
Interest  awakened.  2.  Belief  avowed.  3.  Ignorance  admitted.  4.  Information 
entreated.  5.  A  motive  declared.  II.  Their  encouragement.  1.  To  see  His  star 
was  a  great  favour.  2.  It  was  a  great  responsibility.  3.  They  did  not  regard  it  as 
a  matter  to  be  rested  in.  4.  They  did  not  find  satisfaction  in  what  they  had 
themselves  done  to  reach  the  child.  III.  Their  example.  1.  They  saw  the  young 
child.  2.  They  worbhipped  Him.  3.  They  presented  gifts.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Tlie  Eastern  Sages  led  to  Jerusalem : — I.  The  wise  men  here  referred  to.  The 
gospel  sometimes  triumphs  over  the  world  where  it  is  most  influential,  and  reduces 
the  wise,  rich,  and  great  into  a  willing  subjection  to  Christ.  II.  The  country  frosc 
which  they  came.  III.  The  means  by  which  they  were  conducted  to 
Bethlehem.  How  great  are  our  advantages  compared  with  theirs;  they  had  a 
star,  we  a  sun.  IV.  The  light  which  is  thrown  by  this  passage  on  some  of  thb 
perfections  of  God.  I.  On  His  wisdom,  particularly  in  adapting  means  to  an  end. 
2.  On  His  power  as  seen  in  the  star.  3.  On  His  faithfulness  as  seen  in  the  prophecy 
now  fulfilled.  4.  On  His  knowledge  as  displayed  in  revealing  the  true  intention 
of  Herod,  6.  A  remarkable  illuLtration  of  God's  superintending  providence. 
The  hearts  of  kings  are  in  His  rule ;  God  provides  for  the  safety  of  His 
servants.  (D.  Bees.)  The  illustrious  seekers  : — 1.  Their  title  was  illustrious. 
2.  Their  pursuit  was  illustrious.  3.  Their  wealth  was  illustrious.  4.  Their 
character  was  illustrious.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  I.  A  model  o»  sound 
WISDOM  FOR  all  TRUE  CHRISTIANS.  Examine  the  character  of  their  faith.  1, 
In  its  commencement :  promptitude  to  follow  the  call  of  heaven.  2.  In  its  pro- 
gress :  in  their  well-supported  constancy  when  the  star  disappeared.  8.  In  th« 
perfection  of  their  faith.  II.  A  portrait  of  the  blind  wisdom  o»  wobldlt  men, 
AS  seen  in  Herod's  persecution  of  Jesus  Christ.     1,  This  false  wisdom  is  at 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

enmity  with  God.     2.  God  is  at  enmity  with  this  reprobate  wisdom.     What  did 
the  new-born  Saviour  to  Herod  :— 1.  He  troubled  him.     2.  Made  him  odious.     3. 
Confounded  his  counsel.     4.  Made  him,  in  defiance  of  himself,  subservient  to  the 
designs  of  providence.     {Bourclilone.)         Intellect  and  Christ : — 1.  That  men  of 
intellectual  culture   have  in^iuired  earnestly  for  Christ.      2.  Men   of  intehectual 
culture  have  encountered  difficulties  in  finding  Christ.     (1)  A  long  journey;  (2)  A 
diificuU  journey;    (3)  A  dangerous  journey.     3.  Men  of  intellectual  culture  have 
been  led  to  Christ  by  the  strangest  ngencies.    4.  Men  of  intellectual  culture  have 
rendered  the  most  devout  homage  to  Christ  :  (1)  Intelligently,   (2)  devoutly,  (3) 
practically.     (J.   WoocViouse.)         The  star  guiding  the  wise  men  to  the  Babe  in 
Bethlehem: — 1.  Christ  is  owned  by  some  m  the  higher  orders  of  life.     2.  They  who 
are  desirous  of  finding  Christ  will  not  miss  Him  for  want  of  direction.     3.  We 
should  deem  no  difficulties  too  great  to  encounter,  no  sacrifices  too  great  to  make, 
in  seeking  after  Christ.     4.  We  are  to  be  concerned  to  honour  Him  as  well  as  to  be 
eaved  by  Him.     (IT.  Jay.)         The  mngi  are  commended  : — 1.  For  their  prerogative 
of  a  deeper  wisdom.     2.  For  their  fervid  searching.     3.  For  their  constant  asking 
of  the  place.     4.  For  the  sweetness  of  tlieir  spiritual  joy.     5.  For  their  devotion  of 
humble  adoration.     6.  For  the  value  of  th  ir  gifts.     7.  For  the  prudent  caution 
of  their  return.     (J.  M.  Ashley.)         The  fulness  of  the  faith  is  gained: — 1.  By 
asking  light  from  God.     2.  By  wisely  seeking  kn  wledge.     3.  By  pressing  forward 
in   hoUuesa.     (Ibid.)         The  visit  of  the  wise  men  of  the  East  to  Christ: — I.  Tbm 
DESCRIPTION  AFFORDED  OF  TriESE  VISITANTS  AT  Beth  ehem.  1.  The  power  of  God  oveir 
the  human  mind.     2.  A  fulfilment  of  prophecy.     11.  The  stab  which  oonductep 
THESE  wise  men  TO  Christ.     1.  The  condescension  of  God — He  often  meets  man  i» 
man's  own  paths.     2.  The  greatness  of  God— He  often  puts  much  honour  on  Chrisn 
by  the  means  which  He  makes  use  of  to  lead  sinners  to  Him.     3.  The  compassion 
and  care  of  God — He  adapts  His  guidance  to  our  needs.     III.  The  conduct  o» 
THESE  MEN.      1.  Their  faith.     2.  The  moral  greatness  they  exhibited.     8.  Their 
devotedness  to  Christ.     (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)        The  nativity  of  C/m.s(:— These  wise 
men  were  assisted  in  their  hopes  by  an  inward  inspiration.     The  solicitation  of 
grace  worked  within  them.     (G.  Bateman,  M.A.)         Wise  men  from  the  East:-- 
1.  That  despisers  of  Jesus  are  doubtless  to  be  viewed  as  despisers  of  Him  whom  EHfc 
Heavenly  Father  delighteth  to  honour.     The  song  of  the  angels.     2.  That  Jesus  i» 
to  Gentiles  as  well  as  to  Jews  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.    3.  Tbat  the  Christian  faith 
is  not  to  be  viewed  as  exclusively  embraced  by  the  poor  and  illiterate.     4.  As  to  the 
enjoyment  of  external  advantages  we  are  more  highly  favoured  than  these  men, 
{A.  Tel'er.)         The  Epiphany  goodness: — 1.  In  the  largeness  of- the  plan  of  Hi* 
salvation,  Christ  not  only  breaks  over  all  the  narrow  notions  of  national,  family, 
and  social  prejudice,  but  He  permits  every  heart  to  come  to  Him,  in  spite  of  iti 
imperfections  and  errors,  by  tbe  best  light  and  the  best  feeling  it  has.     2.  At  eveiy 
step  forward  in  the  Christian  life,  each  disciple's  amount  of  privilege  or  blessing  in 
generally  in  proportion  to  the  growth  of  his  faith  up  to  that  time.     3.  After  all, 
wherever  the  starting-point,  whoever  the  travellers,  whatever  the  gentleness  that 
forbears  to  quench  our  feeble  hfe,  and  however  merciful  the  long-suffering  that 
waits  for  us,  there  is  an  end  of  the  whole  way,  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord,   (Bishop  Hun- 
tingdon.)      I.  The  persons.     1.  Their  country.    2.  Their  condition.     II.  Theib 
JOURNEY.     They  saw,  understood,  and  set  out.     IH.  1.  Let  us  evermore  give  thanks 
to  our  Lord  God  for  tbe  revelation  of  that  great  mystery  of  mercy,  the  restoration  of 
the  Gentiles  to  that  Church,  from  which  they  bad  been  for  so  many  ages  excluded, 
or  rather,  we  should  say,  they  had  excluded  themselves.     2.  Diligence  is  gejaerally 
rewarded  with  the  discovery  of  that  which  it  seeks  after — sometimes  of  that  which 
is  much  more  valuable.     3.  Let  us  learn  to  be  watchful  and  observant  of  those  lights, 
\f  hich  at  sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  are  vouchsafed  to  us.  (Bishop  Home.) 
The  Epiphany : — I.  How  the  magi  sought  and  found  the  Lord.     1.  Who  they 
were.    2.  They  sought  with  the  utmost  assiduity.    3.  They  were  ultimately  directed 
to  Him  by  the  written  Word.     4.  From  first  to  last  they  were  divinely  guided.     II. 
The  feemngs  with  which  the  magi  contemplated  Him.     1.  With  exceeding  great 
joy.    2.  With  devout  adoration.    3.  They  presented  most  costly  offerings.  Lessons : 
(1)  Except  we  thus  seek  and  find  the  Saviour  we  perish.    (2)  Do  you  know  .»ad  feel 
that  you  have  not  sought  Him  ?  (3)  Are  you  greatly  discouraged  in  seeking  Himf 
{F.  Close,  M.A.)         This  visit  of  tbe  wise  men  shows  us  :— I.  How  variously  God 
speaks  to  us, — how  many  are  the  voices  whereby  He  calls  us,  if  we  will,  out  ol 
darkness,  whether  of  mind   or  of  heart,  into  His  marvellnus  ligbt.     He  uses  a 
language  to  each,  which  each  can  understand.     The  Universal  Father  sooner  or 


CHAP.  II.]  ST.  MATTHEW. 


later  has  a  word,  a  star,  for  all  of  us.  II.  How  tedth,  if  it  is  to  be  grasped  im 
ITS  FDLNEss,  MUST  BE  EARNESxiiY  souonT  FOR.  Thcse  wise  men  had  a  little  stock  at 
truth  to  start  with,  but  they  made  the  moat  of  that  which  had  been  given  them. 
Some  word,  some  example,  some  passing,  inward  inspiration,  may  be  the  star  ia  the 
East,  bidding  the  soul  hope  and  persevere.  III.  This  history  teaches  what  is  thh 
BEAL  OF.JECT  OF  RELIGIOUS  INQUIRY.  Worship  is  the  joint  result  of  thought,  affection, 
and  will,  rising  upward  towards  God,  and  then  shrinking  into  the  very  dust  before 
Him.  It  is  much  more  than  mere  religious  thought,  it  is  the  Boul  seeking  the  true 
centre  of  the  spiritual  universe  with  all  its  powers.  (Canon  Liddmi.)  His  birth- 
place, as  in  everything  else  belonging  to  Him,  is  a  living  parable.  L  It  was  a 
FOREIGN  COUNTRY.  In  Judsea,  not  in  Galilee.  To  teach  us  that  this  world  ia  an 
ahen  land  to  us,  although  we  may  have  grown  old  in  it.  Jesus  Christ  was  only  a 
Btranger  and  a  sojourner  in  it ;  and  we  in  like  manner  are  sojourners.  II.  It  was  a 
BMALL  viLLAGK.  The  Kiug  of  kings  is  born  in  an  obscure  place,  and  the  Lord  of 
might,  of  lowly  parentage.  God  reverses  the  judgment  of  tbis  world  concerniug 
many  things.  III.  It  was  in  Bethlehem.  In  Bethlehem,  **  the  house  of  bread," 
was  born  the  Living  Bread.  Before  Christ  was  bom,  the  world  was  full  of  starving 
men,  hungering  after  pleasures,  riches,  ani  honours.  He  Himself  satisties  all 
men's  hunger.  IV.  It  was  a  village  by  the  way.  Showing  that  our  present  life  is 
the  way  to  death.  May  ve  follow  Jesus  Christ  from  Bethlehem  to  Ziou. 
(William  of  Auvergne.) 

Good  menfouvd  outtide  the  pale  of  privilege  ;  or  Christian  knowledge  in  unlikely 
places. — Well,  the  last  year  I  passed  that  old  church,  I  noticed  something  which  was 
very  interesting.  The  tower  is  standing  pretty  entire,  and  the  spire  of  it  is  standing 
pretty  entire  also.  It  is  a  little  shaken  and  riven  with  the  weather  and  the  strokea 
of  time ;  but  there  it  stands.  And  what  do  you  think  is  climbing  up  the  sida  of  the 
Bpire  f  Why,  a  little  tree  that  has  got  its  roots  in  a  little  crevice  of  the  spire,  and  it 
is  covering  the  bare  stones  with  beautiful  green.  Now,  that  tree  to  me  is  like  the 
wise  men  of  the  East.  You  see,  God  in  Judaa  had  a  garden,  and  aU  the  trees  there 
were  planted  by  prophets  and  people  that  were  sent  to  do  the  work.  But  now,  how 
did  He  plant  these  trees  in  Chaldea — how  did  He  plant  that  tree  in  the  spire  of  the 
church  ?  "Whence  came  the  seed  there?  "  you  say.  It  was  not  a  man  that  went 
np  and  planted  it  there ;  it  was  not  planted  as  you  plant  a  tree  in  the  garden.  But 
then,  God  says  sometimes  to  the  little  birds,  "  Take  a  seed  and  plant  it  up  in  the 
rock,  and  let  it  clothe  the  rock."  Or,  He  says  to  the  winds,  •'  Waft  the  seed  up  to 
that  little  crack  in  the  spire  of  the  old  church,  and  let  it  become  a  living  tree."  </. 
Edmond.) 

In  search  of  a  great  man. — In  the  annals  of  the  Celestial  Empire,  there  is 
historical  evidence  of  Ambassadors  or  •'  wise  men  "  having  been  sent  towards  the 
West  in  search  of  the  "  Great  Saint  who  was  to  appear."  The  following  from  the 
Annals  narrates  the  circumstance  : — "  In  the  24th  year  of  the  Tchao-Wang,  of  the 
dynasty  of  the  Tcheou,  on  the  8th  day  of  the  4th  moon,  a  light  appeared  in  the 
Bouth-west  which  illuminated  the  king's  palace.  The  monarch,  struck  by  its  splen- 
dour, interrogated  the  sages,  who  were  skilled  in  foretelling  future  events.  They 
then  showed  him  books  in  which  it  was  written  that  this  prodigy  signified  the 
appearance  of  a  great  Saint  in  the  West,  whose  religion  was  to  be  introduced  into 
this  country.  Ths  king  consulted  the  ancient  books,  and  having  found  the  passages 
corresponding  with  the  time  of  Tchao-Wang,  was  filled  with  joy.  Then  he  sent  the 
officers  Tsa-yu  and  Thsin-King,  the  learned  Wang-Tsun,  and  fifteen  other  men  to 
the  West  to  obtain  information."  So  sensible  were  these  "  wise  men  "  of  the  time 
and  place  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  that  they  set  forth  to  hail  the  expected  Redeemer. 
The  envoT  encountered  in  their  way  the  missionaries  of  Buddhism  coming  from 
India  annuimcing  an  incarnate  God ;  these  the  Chinese  took  for  the  disciples  of  the 
true  Christ,  embraced  their  teaching,  and  introduced  them  to  their  fellow-country- 
men as  the  teachers  of  the  true  religion.  Thus  was  Buddhism  introduced  into  China 
in  place  of  Christianity. 

A  curious  Russian  tradition. — The  Russian  peasantry  have  a  curious  tradition. 
It  is  that  an  old  woman,  the  Baboushka,  was  at  work  in  her  house  when  the  wise 
men  from  the  East  passed  on  their  way  to  find  the  Christ-child.  "  Come  with  us,'* 
they  said ;  "we  have  seen  His  star  in  the  East  and  go  to  worship  Him."  **I  will 
come,  but  not  now,"  she  answered ;  "I  have  my  house  to  set  in  order  ;  when  thisii 
done  I  will  follow  and  find  Him."  But  when  her  work  was  done  the  three  kings 
had  passed  on  their  way  across  the  desert,  and  the  star  shone  no  more  in  the 
darkened  heavens.    She  never  saw  the  Christ-child,  but  she  is  living  and  searching 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 


for  Him  Ktill.  For  His  sake  she  takes  care  of  all  His  children.  It  is  she  who  in 
EuKsian  and  Italian  houses  is  helieved  to  fill  the  stockings  and  dress  the  tree  on 
Christmas  morn.  The  children  are  awakened  by  the  cry  of "  Behold  the  Babonshka !  " 
and  spring  up  hoping  to  see  her  before  she  vanishes  out  of  the  window.  She  fan- 
cies, the  tradition  goes,  that  in  each  poor  little  one  whom  she  warms  and  feeds  she 
may  find  the  GhriBt-child,  whom  she  neglected  ages  ago,  but  is  doomed  to  eternal 
disappointment. 

Ver.  2.  Seen  Mb  star. — Tfie  guiding  star:  —  It  was  revealed  to  the  ehepherdi 
end  then  to  the  wise  men.  1.  The  Jews  had  the  priority  of  time,  so  also  they 
had  a  superiority  in  the  manner  of  the  declaration.  To  one  a  living  angel ;  to 
the  other  an  inanimate  star.  2.  To  the  shepherds  it  was  done  much  more  feelingly 
than  to  the  magi,  it  was  loving,  joyous,  conlidential,  minute.  "  Fear  not,"  &c.  3. 
To  the  Gentile  the  intimation  was  distinct,  nufflcient,  but  it  was  a  silent  finger. 
But  to  the  shepherds  there  were  voices,  "  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising 
God,"  &0.  We  all  have  a  great  amount  of  truth  floating  in  our  minds ;  what  we 
want  is,  to  have  it  made  detinite,  and  brouffht  to  a  focus.  That  the  "  star  "  did  for 
them.  Probably  it  so  drew  them,  that  they  could  scarcely  resist  its  attraction.  We 
cannot  be  too  thankful  to  God  for  it,  that  truth  as  such  is  fascinating.  Every  one 
who  has  once  lost  and  then  recovered  a  Christian  hope  will  understand  the  joy  of 
the  magi  when  they  saw  the  star  again.  As  they  went,  where  did  they  look  ?  Not 
at  the  road,  nor  at  their  feet,  but  at  the  star  high  up  above  them.  How  many  go 
doubtingly,  slowly,  heavily,  wearily,  wrongly,  because  they  look  at  their  feet  and 
not  at  the  star.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Saviour's  star: — 1.  Shine  like  that 
Etar.  2.  Speak  like  that  star.  3.  Lead  like  that  star.  (G.  T,  Coster.)  The  star 
of  grace  : — Seen — 1.  In  its  creation  ;  2.  In  its  position  ;  3.  In  its  motion;  4.  In  ita 
brightness.  Let  us  follow  the  guidings  of  this  star.  (1)  Diligently ;  (2)  Lovingly; 
(3)  Hopefully.  {J.  M.  Ashley.)  The  star  and  the  wise  men  : — 1.  Science  helpi 
religion.  2.  Nature  needs  revelation.  3.  Knowledge  requires  action.  (T.  B. 
Stevenson.) 

Faith  a  heaven-bom  insight. — There  was  not  much  in  the  appearance  of  that  single 
iwar,  but  it  spoke  volumes  to  those  men.  You  know  what  it  is  to  be  walking  by  the 
Bide  of  some  man,  and  suddenly  he  leaps  aside  from  you  with  an  exclamation  of 
pleasure,  and  dives  down  into  some  Uttle  obscure  comer  or  hedge,  and  brings  up 
Bome  choice  botanical  specimen :  you  know  what  the  feeling  is  ;  you  have  a  kind  of 
deep  sense  of  inferiority  ;  your  own  nature  tells  you  that  he  possesses  some  secret 
knowledge  and  power  that  you  do  not.  It  is  the  insight  of  natural  science.  Well, 
the  insight  is'  analogous  here.  Men  go  through  the  world,  and  they  see  nothing  of 
God,  nothing  of  Christ ;  or  what  they  do  see  is  merely  the  building  in  which  Christ 
dwells — a  great  deal  about  His  Church,  a  great  deal  about  His  Word,  but  very  Uttle 
about  Himself.  The  insight  is  in  the  Christ-born,  the  Christ-taught  men  who  per- 
ceive Christ  in  everything.  They  take  Him  at  every  turn,  they  find  Him  lurking  in 
every  spot,  because  He  is  ever  in  their  hearts.  These  men  saw  the  star.  There 
were  thousands  about  them  who  looked  upon  the  same  star,  and  saw  no  meaning  in 
it.  It  led  them  through  the  long  desert  to  kneel  before  the  Satisfier  of  their  hopes. 
A  picture  that  I  once  saw  will  illustrate  what  I  mean.  It  represented  the  sea-shore, 
and  standing  beside  it  the  great  discoverer  of  the  far-off  continent  of  America ;  in 
his  hand  an  image,  rough-hewn  and  coarsely  coloured  ;  dawning  through  his  eyes  a 
keenness  of  obsei-vation,  thought,  and  reflection — a  dawning  of  some  noble  purpose. 
Behind  him  was  the  sea,  broken  by  a  brisk  wind  into  little,  fleecy  waves.  Beside  him 
was  his  wife,  half  indifferent,  half  curious,  looking  on  almost  perplexed  at  the  in- 
terest that  he  manifested.  It  showed  that  out  of  that  strange  little  rough-hewn 
god  there  was  bom  the  thought  of  a  far-off  world  to  which  he  would  go.  But  it  told 
more  than  that.  It  told  of  a  purpose  that  was  graven  in  upon  his  spirit ;  and  though 
the  danger  was  great,  though  the  sacrifice  was  the  leaving  of  the  wife  who  leant 
npon  him,  yet  still,  because  of  the  deep  thought  which  had  been  struck  into  his 
Boul,  he  must  perforce  go,  bome  by  the  spirit  of  enterprise,  till  he  had  put  his  feet 
npon  the  far-off  land.  It  is  this  insight  of  enterprise  which  God  gives  to  His  chil- 
dren. The  star  shot  the  thought  of  Christ  into  the  hearts  of  the  wise  men,  as  the 
rough-hewn  image  shot  into  the  heart  of  Columbus  the  story  of  the  undiscovered 
continent  beyond  the  seas.  So  is  it  with  Christ's  children  in  this  world.  They  see 
by  an  insight  of  faith  what  other  men  do  not  see.  Christ's  religion  vindicates  itself 
by  the  spiritual  insight.     (W.  B.  Carpenter.  M.A.) 

'^ilftit  speech. — Or,  if  you  were  at  sea,  and  saw  a  lighthouse,  yon  know  it  would 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  MATTHEW. 


Bay,  "Keep  away  from  the  rooks."  Its  light  through  the  dark  night  would  speak 
that  to  you ;  or  if  you  lived  on  a  dangerous  part  of  our  coast,  and  heard  the  signal- 
gun  fired  by  the  coastguard  men,  you  would  know  that  that  said,  "  A  ship  is  coming 
on  the  rocks.  Come  and  help,  men  of  the  life  boat,  come  and  helpl"  Or  if  you 
saw  fiags  flying  from  the  church  tower  and  many  houses,  you  know  that  would  speak 
Df  glad  news,  perhaps  the  birthday  of  the  Queen,  or  the  marriage  of  one  of  her 
shildren,  or  the  coming  of  some  great  man  to  the  town.  So  the  star  spoke  to  the 
wise  men,  and  it  told  happy  news.     {G.  T.  Coster.) 

The  joy  of  a  guiding  light. — I  was  many  years  ago  travelling  among  the  Pyre- 
Bees.  Our  carriage  had  to  go  over  a  mountain,  by  a  road  which  ran  for  a  great  part 
of  the  way  along  the  edge  of  a  frightful  precipice.  The  rocks  descended  to  a  vast 
depth,  and  the  river  roared  below  out  of  sight.  There  was  no  wall  or  hedge  on  the 
side  of  the  road.  At  the  post-house  at  the  bottom  of  the  pass  we  were  given  horses 
and  a  postman  to  drive  them,  and  wp  started.  Night  fell  before  we  reached  oui 
destination,  black  with  heavy  clouds,  obscuring  the  stars.  The  horses  were  wild, 
unbioken-in  colts,  and  they  plunged  from  side  to  side.  Whether  the  driver  had  been 
drinking  or  had  lost  his  head  in  the  excitement  I  cannot  say,  but  he  was  perfectly 
nnable  to  control  the  horses.  They  dashed  from  side  to  side  of  the  road,  and  the 
carriage  rocked,  and  the  wheels  grazed  the  edge.  Every  moment  we  expected  one 
of  the  horses  or  the  carriage  to  roll  over  the  edge,  when  we  should  all  have  been 
dashed  to  pieces.  I  was  then  a  little  boy,  and  I  sat  on  my  mother's  lap.  My  father, 
not  knowing  the  danger,  had  walked  on  from  the  post-house  by  a  short  cut  over  the 
mountains,  to  the  inn  at  the  top  of  the  pass,  where  we  were  to  spend  the  night. 
My  mother  prepared  for  her  end.  The  horses  were  plunging  and  racing  about,  so 
that  it  was  impossible  to  descend  from  the  carriage.  She  kissed  me,  and  bade  me 
Bay  my  prayers,  and  her  lips  moved  in  prayer  also  ;  I  felt  a  shudder  run  through  hei 
at  each  sway  of  the  carriage  towards  the  edge.  All  at  once,  above  us,  shone  out  a 
bright  light.  The  postman  shouted,  the  horses  seemed  to  become  less  restive.  A 
strong  hand  was  laid  on  their  reins,  the  carriage  was  stopped,  and  my  father's  voice 
was  heard.  He  had  arrived  at  the  top  of  the  pass  long  before  us,  and,  uneasy  at  the 
delay,  had  walked  down  to  meet  us.  The  light  we  saw  was  in  a  window  of  the  post- 
house,  set  as  a  guide  to  travellfcrs.  I  cannot  describe  to  you  the  relief,  the  joy,  that 
rose  in  our  hearts  when  we  saw  that  guiding  light,  and  when  we  heard  the  voice. 
"We  knew  then  that  we  were  safe,  following  the  ray  of  light  we  should  reach  our 
place  of  rest,  guided  by  the  firm  hand  on  the  bits  of  the  untamed  horses,  we  should 
■  %e  safe  from  being  flung  down  the  abyss.  Our  course  through  life  is  like  that 
mountain  journey.  These  wild  undisciplined  horses,  ready  to  bring  us  to  destruc- 
tion, are  our  passions,  the  driver  is  conscience,  the  light  is  revealed  truth,  and  He 
who  meets  us  on  our  way  and  guides  us  is  our  Heavenly  Father.  {Baring-Gould.) 
A  boy  who  followed  the  star  of  right. — When  Whitefield  (the  great  preacher) 
■^■ent  to  America  (he  went  five  times),  he  stood  on  the  steps  of  the  Court-house  in 
Philadelphia,  and  preached  to  the  people  ;  and  there  was  amongst  the  trowd  a  little 
boy.  The  little  boy  saw  that  Mr.  George  Whitefield  couW  not  see  to  r^^ad  his  Bible 
very  well,  so  he  got  his  lantern,  and  lit  it,  and  held  the  lantern  for  Mr.  Whitefield  to 
see  to  read  by.  Mr.  Whitefield  was  very  much  obliged  to  him.  The  little  boy 
listened — with  all  his  might  and  main — to  Mr.  Whitefield's  preaching.  He  listened 
6C  much,  that  he  let  the  lantern  tumble  down,  and  it  was  broken  all  to  pieces. 
Many  years  afterwards  Mr.  Whitefield  came  back  again  to  America,  on  his  fifth 
jou)-ney.  He  stopped  at  the  house  of  a  minister,  who  said  to  him  one  day :  "  Do 
you  remember,  sir,  preaching  once  in  Philadelphia,  and  a  little  boy,  who  was 
holding  the  lantern,  dropped  it,  and  broke  it  ?  "  "  That  I  do,"  said  Mr.  Whitefield, 
•'  and  I  would  give  anything  in  the  world  to  know  what  has  become  of  that  little 
boy."  The  minister  said,  "  I  was  the  little  boy,  sir.  I  held  the  lantern.  I  listened 
to  you.  I  let  it  drop.  Your  preaching  made  me  what  I  am,  a  Christian  minister." 
He  "  followed  the  star."     {J,  Vaughan.) 

False  lights. — Of  olden  times  on  the  coast  of  Cornwall  there  were  wreckers. 
These  men  tied  a  lantern  on  the  head  of  an  ass,  and  drove  the  animal  along  the 
heights  that  fringe  the  shore.  Ships  at  sea  saw  this  light,  and  thinking  them  to 
be  guides  where  open  water  was,  ran  towards  them,  fell  on  rocks,  and  were  dashed 
to  pieces.  Then  the  wreckers  came  down  to  the  shore,  and  took  from  the  wrecked 
ship  aU  that  could  be  saved.  There  are  a  host  of  these  false  signals  about  in  the 
religious  world,  leading  men  to  destruction.  What,  then,  are  we  to  do?  Lrok  to 
the  lighthouse  of  the  Church,  built  by  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  it  He  has  set 
the  clear,  steady  light  of  revealed  truth.     {Baring-Gould.) 


;^ 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Ver.  3.  Herod. — Herod: — 1.  Blind.  2.  Luxurious.  3.  Eevengeful.  4.  Flat- 
tered. 5.  An  habitual  sinner.  (J.  M.  Ashley.)  1.  The  shortneBS  of  kingdoms. 
2.  The  fear  of  an  evil  conscience.  3.  Various  uses  of  Holy  Scripture.  4.  Th# 
disposition  and  temper  of  the  world.  6.  The  conditions  of  an  acceptable  offering. 
The  magi  offered  (1)  their  best  gifts  ;  (2)  sincerely  opened  their  treasures  ;  (3)  of 
their  own  substance  ;  (4)  with  humility,  without  pomp  ;  (5)  their  hearts  with  their 
gifts ;  (6)  the  care  and  prudence  of  God ;  (7)  the  firmness  of  God's  counsels.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  Priests  and  scribes. — Near  in  privilege,  far  from  piety. — Some  that  are 
best  acquainted  with  the  gospel  are  practical  strangers  to  it.  They  are  like  one 
who  should  pore  over  a  map,  mastering  its  geography ;  marking  each  sea,  lake, 
river ;  understanding  the  position  of  every  range  of  mountains  ;  learning  the  names 
of  all  the  localities  indicated,  but  never  visiting  them.  A  living  author,  describing 
his  journey  to  the  falls  of  Niagara,  says :  "  I  met  with  a  gentleman  who  told  me 
that  he  had  walked  from  Boston,  a  distance  of  seven  hundred  miles,  to  see  Niagara. 
When  within  seven  miles,  he  heard  what  he  thought  might  be  the  roar  of  the 
torrent,  and  asked  a  man  who  was  at  work  on  the  road  if  this  was  so.  The  man 
replied  that  he  didn't  know  ;  it  might  be,  but  he  had  never  been  there  himself.  Yet 
he  had  lived  within  sound  of  it  all  his  life  I  "  Wonderful  stupidity,  this  1  Who 
does  not  reprobate  such  folly  ?  Nevertheless,  it  is  nothing — absolutely  nothing — 
compared  with  the  direr  folly  which  may  be  witnessed  any  day  that  we  choose  to 
look  around  us.  Numbers  are  within  sound  of  "  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  " 
without  an  actual,  personal  experience  of  its  benefit.  (Rev.  T.  R.  Stevenson.) 
Like  in  this  to  those  who  built  the  ark  for  Noah,  providing  others  with  a  refuge, 
themselves  perished  in  the  flood  ;  or  like  to  the  stones  by  the  road  that  show  the 
miles,  but  themselves  are  not  able  to  move.    {Augjistine.) 

Ver.  6.    A  Governor. — Messiah's  government: — I.  The  ch^vbacteb  of  the  Governor. 

1.  His  dignity  (Rom.  ix.  5  ;  Col.  ii.  9 ;  Jer.  ixxiii.  6  ;  Isa.  xlv.  18,  24 ;  Bom.  xiv. 

II,  12;  John  i.  1,  and  others).  Suitably  sustained  by  His  attributes.  2.  His 
condescension  (Phil.  ii.  5-8).  3.  His  fidelity — to  Him  by  whom  He  was  appointed 
(Matt.  xxii.  37,  38,  v.  17-19 ;  Luke  ii.  49  ;  Matt.  iii.  15  ;  John  iv.  31-34)  ;  to  them 
for  whom  He  was  appointed  (John  xvi.  12,  13,  33  ;  Eph.  iv.  7-13 ;  Luke  xii  50 ; 
Heb.  ii.  14-18,  vii.  25).  4.  His  clemency.  Ever  ready  to  pardon,  <feo.  IL 
The  chakacteb  of  His  subjects.  III.  The  character  or  Hia  government.  1. 
Divine  and  spiritual  (Luke  x.  18 ;  Col.  i.  13  ;  Heb.  i.  14 ;  Eph.  i.  18 ;  Col.  ii.  2,  3). 

2.  Mild  and  equitable.  Rules  without  coercion  (Psa.  cxix.  32).  3.  Vigorous  and 
effective  (2  Chron.  xvi,  9  ;  Psa.  xi.  4-7,  xxiv.  7-10,  ciii.  19-21 ;  Col.  ii.  15 ;  Heb.  ii. 
14;  Rom.  viii.  34-39).  4.  Staple,  prosperous,  everlasting  (Heb.  xii.  28;  Isa.  ix.  7; 
Daniel  vii.  27  ;  Heb.  i.  8).  Application :  Let  the  enemies  of  this  government 
tremble  (1  Cor.  xv.  15  ;  Psa.  ii.  9 ;  Rom.  ii.  4,  8,  9) ;  submit  and  find  peace  (Psa. 
ii.  10-12).  Let  the  subjects  of  this  government  rejoice  in  anticipation  of  its  pro- 
gressive and  rapid  conquests,  and  its  final  triumph  (Psa.  ii.  7,  8  ;  Bev.  vii.  9-12). 
(Zeta.) 

Ver.  7.    Search  diligently.     I.  Wicked  men  often  cloak  thbib  bviii  desiomi 

under  the  appearance  of  religion.  They  attempt  to  deceive  those  who  are  really 
good,  and  to  make  them  suppose  that  they  have  the  same  design.  But  God  cannot 
be  deceived,  and  He  will  bring  them  to  punishment.  II.  Wicked  men  often  maxb 
TJSK  OF  THE  PIOUS  to  advance  their  evil  purposes.  Men  like  Herod  will  stop  at 
nothing  if  they  can  carry  their  ends.  They  endeavour  to  deceive  the  simple,  allure 
the  unsuspecting,  and  to  beguile  the  weak,  to  answer  their  purposes  of  wickedness. 

III.  The  plans  of  wicked  men  are  orxEN  well  laid.  They  occupy  a  long  time ; 
they  make  diligent  inquiry  ;  and  all  of  it  has  the  appearance  of  religion.  But  God 
sees  the  design ;  and  though  men  are  deceived.  He  cannot  be  (Prov.  xv.  3).  (Dr.  A. 
Barnes.)  A  king  frightened  by  an  infant:  —  I.  That  men  may  be  interested 
in  Christ,  and  inquire  about  Him  from  different  motives  —  some  to  worship, 
some  to  murder.  1.  The  motive  of  the  wise  men.  3.  Herod's  motive.  II.  That 
inquiry  about  Christ  does  not  produce  the  same  results  in  all.  1.  The  wise  men 
rejoiced.  2.  Herod  was  troubled.  III.  That  all  opposition  to  Christ  and  His  oaoB« 
mnst  end  in  failure  and  overthrow.    (T.  Kelly.) 

Ver.  11.  Worshipped  Him — Gold  and  frankincense  and  myrrh. — Action,  Proffer, 
Sitrroto : — L  Gold   may  be  taken  as  representing  our  substance,  our  goods,  oof 


CHAP.  n.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  11 

material  wealth.  All  work,  all  material,  have  their  worth  in  gol.l.  This  oblation 
represents  the  eflSciency  of  that  which  is  external  to  us,  and  can  be  detached  from 
us.  II.  The  frankincense  is  a  substance  which,  once  kindled,  sends  up  sweet  olouda 
to  the  sky.  It  is  the  symbol  of  religious  thought  directing  itself  lo\-ingly  and  long- 
ingly towards  God.  It  typifies  what  is  inward.  There  is  a  life  of  contemplation 
as  well  as  of  action.  III.  The  last  offering  completing  the  text  is  myrrh.  Thii 
stands  for  sorrows  ;  in  this  we  are  equal  before  God.  We  can  offer  to  Him  our 
pains  and  repentance.  {M.  Dix.)  Tlie  character  of  their  worship  : — 1.  DeToat. 
2.  BeUeving.  3.  Self-sacrilicing.  4.  Intelhgent.  5.  Obedient  (ver.  12).  (1>.  C. 
Hughes,  M.A.)  Give  the  best  you  have  to  Jesus:  —  It  matters  not  how  poor 
the  offering  be,  if  it  is  the  best  you  can  give.  A  legend  tells  us  how  once  a 
little  boy  in  church  had  no  money  to  place  among  the  oflferinga  on  the  altar,  so 
he  gave  a  rosy  apple,  the  only  gift  he  had  to  offar.  Presently,  when  the  priest 
removed  the  alms  frum  the  altar,  he  found  there  an  apple  of  pure  gold.  The 
simplest  gift  is  in  the  eyes  of  God  as  pure  gold.  (H.  J.  Wilinot  Buxton.)  A 
Christmas-tide  address — Gifts  for  the  child  Jesus.  From  this  visit  of  the  magi 
has  grown  up  our  idea  of  keeping  Christmas  with  gifts.  We  wiU  try  to  see  the 
inner  meaning  of  the  good  old  custom.  I.  Oar  chief  idea  in  keeping  Christmas 
is  to  make  everybody  happy.  .  Jesua  came  to  make  us  all  happy  —  blessed  of 
God.  II.  Making  everybody  happy  can  be  done  best  by  giving  gifts.  All  sorts 
needed  —  should  be  adapted  —  make  everybody  happy  because  they  bless  both 
him  who  gives  and  him  who  takes.  III.  In  giving  gifts  we  remember  especially 
the  little  ones.  Because  we  think  of  Jesus  as  a  child,  &o.  Show  how  suggestive 
are  the  magi's  gifts.  IV.  Then  we  rise  beyond  the  little  ones  to  all  those  whom 
Jesus  taught  us  to  think  of  as  His  brethren.  Those  who  are  poorer  than  ourselve** 
&c.  Every  child  may  make  somebody  a  little  happier  with  their  love-gift  to-day 
(B.  Tuck,  iB.A.) 

Ver.  13.  Fle«  Into  Egypt. — The  duty  of  parents  to  their  children ;— L  Child- 
hood IS  exposed  to  imminent  dangers.  *•  Herod  sought  the  young  child's 
life."  Evil  is  never  so  active  or  persistent  as  when  it  seeks  the  ruin  of  th« 
young.  II.  On  what  conditions  the  safety  op  childhood  depends.  1.  The  first 
of  these  is  parental  love.  See  the  love  and  fidelity  of  Joseph  and  Mary.  Nothing 
more  natural  than  that  parental  love  should  seek  at  any  cost  the  safety  of  a  child, 
2.  Parental  love  wisely  directed.  The  parents  of  Jesus  did  not  trast  to  their  own 
wisdom.  3.  The  Divine  direction  given  to  parents  respecting  their  children  is  to  be 
followed  in  obedience  and  faith.  Joseph  and  Mary  obeyed  the  will  of  God.  (Monday 
Club  Sermons.)  The  truth  of  God  and  the  trials  of  its  Jriends : — I.  The  truth  ow 
God.  1.  Earth's  opposition  to  the  truth.  2.  Heaven's  interest  in  the  truth.  3. 
Man's  guardianship  of  the  truth.  U.  The  trial  op  its  friends.  {Dr.  Thomas.) 
Obedience  and  Divine  guidance  : — I.  That  God  can  use  not  only  the  extraordinary, 
but  even  the  trivial  events  op  lipe  in  the  rescue  and  guidance  op  His  people. 
"In  a  dream."  1.  He  puts  Joseph  on  his  guard.  2.  He  keeps  His  eye  on  Herod. 
8.  He  points  ont  a  place  of  safety.  II.  That  at  all  times,  especially  in  peril  and 
perplexity,  it  is  the  duty  and  privilege  op  God's  children  to  obey.  Obedience 
may  call  for — 1.  Prompt  action,  "  Flee."  2.  It  may  call  for  sacrifice  of  friends  and 
home — "Into  Egypt."  3.  It  sometimes  calls  for  patient  waiting — "Be  thou 
there."  4.  It  always  brings  God's  further  direction  and  blessing — "  I  bring  thee 
word."  (T.  Kelly).  The  flight  into  Egypt ;— 1.  That  when  God  brings  forth 
good,  evil  is  sure  to  oppose.  2.  God  permits  wicked  and  lawless  tyrants  to  be 
supreme  for  a  time.  3.  That  cross-handed  providences  often  bring  our  greatest 
mercies.  4.  That  while  self  is  always  in  a  hurry  to  display  itself,  real  greatness  ig 
content  to  wait  its  time.     {W.  P.  Balfern.)        The  flight  into  Egypt: — I.   Thb 

FLIGHT   IKTO   EoYPT.       II.    ThE    MASSACRE  OP   THE    INFANT   CHILDREN    AT    BetHLEHBM. 

Herod  may  be  considered  as  an  example  of  the  infatuating  influence  of  sin  and 
its  power  to  stultify  the  most  obvious  conclusions  of  a  rational  intelligence.  Herod 
never  thought  of  our  Lord  as  a  human  opponent,  but  as  the  Messiah.  He  did  not 
disbelieve  the  star  or  the  prophecies  interpreted  by  the  priests  and  scribes.  He 
was  fighting  against  God ;  He  thought  the  prophecies  might  fail  at  the  last.  III. 
Thx  RECALL  OF  THE  HoLY  Family.  Egypt  has  often  been  the  asylum  of  persecuted 
goodness  ;   Abraham,  Joseph,  Jacob.     (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 

Ood  takes  care  of  little  children. — I  remember  reading  a  story  of  a  baby — a  wee 
child — that  travelled  by  railroad.  Away  whirled  the  coach  very  fast ;  but  it  soon 
knocked  against  something,  and  all  were  thrown  out — men,  women,  mothers  and 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

babes.  Some  were  pitched  here,  some  there ;  heads  were  broken,  hands  cat  off. 
In  the  midst  of  the  confusion,  a  voice  was  heard  crying — "  Where  is  my  baby?  OhI 
my  dear  baby  I  I  cannot  find  him  anywhere.  Did  nobody  see  my  sweet  babyf 
What  shall  I  do  ?  "  One  man  lost  his  leg ;  another  his  hand  ;  another  hia  eye ; 
but  the  mother  did  not  mind  them,  but  was  going  about,  wringing  her  hands,  and 
crying — "  Where  is  my  baby  ?  "  After  much  search  for  it,  and  for  a  great  while  'xi 
vain,  at  length  a  man  went  over  to  a  place  where  was  a  bandbox.  He  took  up  the 
bandbox,  and  what  do  you  think  he  found  under  it  ?  The  baby,  fast  asleep  !  Now, 
if  God  takes  care  of  common  babies,  surely  He  would  take  care  of  His  own  child* 
Jesus.     (J.  Gregg.) 

The  efforts  of  a  mother  for  the  safety  of  her  child. — A  slave- mother  who  had  been 
faithful  under  the  very  worst  usage  remained  so  until  told  that  her  child  war  to  be 
severed  from  her  and  sold  in  New  Orleans.  It  was  midwinter,  yet  at  midnight  sh« 
started  for  the  Ohio,  determined  to  live  and,  if  need  be,  die  with  her  child.  As  she 
reached  the  bank  no  boat  was  near,  and  along  the  water  masses  of  broken  ice  drifted. 
Trusting  to  heaven,  she  put  her  feet  on  the  treacherous  element,  and,  with  it  bend- 
ing and  breaking  beneath  her,  she  boldly  pushed  on  from  cake  to  cake  imtil  sh* 
ealely  landed  on  the  Ohio  shore.  Five  minutes  sooner,  and  she  must  have  perished ; 
two  minutes  later,  and  she  would  have  met  with  a  watery  grave,  for,  before  she  had 
proceeded  twenty  steps,  the  ice  behind  her  on  the  Kentucky  side  had  broken,  and 
was  scattered  ere  she  reached  the  river.  ««  Thank  God,  you  and  your  child  are 
safe  1 "  exclaimed  the  hard-hearted  master,  rejoicing  that  he  had  escaped  the  re- 
eponsibility  of  their  death.  "  Brave  woman,"  said  a  Kentuckian,  who  had  witnessed 
her  escape,  "  you  have  won  your  freedom,  and  you  shall  have  it."  The  mother  and 
child  were  kept  together  in  Uberty  and  love,  and  in  a  humble  but  happy  home. 

Ver.  14.  Departed  Into  Egypt. — I.  The  natural  seed  of  Israel,  as  called  out  oi 
Egypt.  II.  The  Divine  seed,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  HI.  Thb  obosem  seed  that 
shall  be  brought  out  of  Egypt.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  16.  Slew  all  the  children. — The  holy  innocents: — The  narrative  presents 
sharp  contrasts  of  character  and  history.  I.  Christ  the  terror  of  the  tyrant  even 
when  a  helpless  babe.  II.  The  tyrant's  utmost  endeavours  are  all  in  vain  against 
the  child.  III.  Our  richest  blessings  are  often  baptized  with  blood.  IV.  The 
children  of  Bethlehem  were  unconscious  martyrs  for  Christ.  V.  The  holy  innocents 
died  for  Christ's  sake.  (S.  Mease,  D.D.)  I.  How  strongly  the  scene  of  our 
Lord's  nativity  wasguabded.  1.  From  the  gusts  of  popular  commotion,  which  were 
above  all  things  to  be  prevented,  in  order  that  full  scope  might  be  left  for  the 
gradual  development  of  the  Hedeemer's  ministry  with  its  attendant  evidences,  all 
which  would  have  been  hindered  and  disturbed  by  any  sudden  tumult  excited  in  the 
body  of  the  Jewish  people.  2.  It  was  guarded  also  by  securing  to  it  such  decisive 
and  indubitable  marks  of  the  certainty  of  that  which  was  transacted,  as  never  could 
be  brought  in  question,  or  disputed.  These  points  discover  to  us  in  the  plainest 
character  the  wisdom  and  control  of  Providence  in  all  the  work  which  was  effected. 
The  first  stone  laid  was  thus  deeply  placed  and  immovably  fixed  where  it  stands  to 
this  day.  II.  Three  sobts  of  hands  webe  employed  on  eabth  to  set  theib  seal 
to  that  witness  which  was  borne  from  heaven,  and  to  commend  it  to  perpetual 
regard.  1.  Friends.  The  shepherds  of  Judtea  were  of  all  persons  the  fittest  from 
their  solitarynSiTd^equestered  lives  to  bear  that  part  which  belongs  to  friends,  and 
to  become  the  first-called  witnesses  of  the  truth  of  those  events  which  took  place  at 
our  Lord's  nativity.  They  raised  no  clamour.  They  possessed  no  influence.  And 
yet  a  simple  heart  and  unsufipeeted  tongue  form  no  inconsiderable  properties  in  any 
witness  whose  word  is  to  be  taken  for  the  truth  and  reality  of  what  is  seen  and  done. 
2.  S^jaiQgers.  Man  clear  ot  just  suspicion.  They  came  from  afar  and  took  their 
first  measures  in  concert,  not  with  friends,  but  with  those  who  were  soon  to  fill  the 
place  of  foes  and  to  stand  forth  as  virulent  opponents.  3.  Enemies.  Herod.  He 
laid  traps  to  ensnare  the  strangers,  causing  them  to  deparllheTand  by  another 
course.  The  word  of  prophecy  was  exactly  brought  to  pass  by  the  cruel  stratagem 
which  he  devised  and  executed.  By  his  relentless  act  of  mingled  cowardice  and 
cruelty  he  lent  his  own  hand,  polluted  as  it  was,  to  the  confirmation  of  the  truth. 
Herod's  cruelty  at  Bethlehem  stands  recorded  both  by  friends  and  foes.  Not  only 
is  it  related  in  the  sacred  page,  but  it  is  also  transmitted  to  ns  by  writers  of  that 
age,  whose  undisputed  works  confirm  the  truth.  (Archdeacon  Pott.)  Holy 
innocents: — 1.  We  may  notice  in  connection   with   this  transaction   very    greal 


CHAP,  m.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  13 

opportunities,  and  very  satisfactory  information,  very  perversely  employed.  2. 
What  a  treacherous  thing  is  the  indulgence  of  malignant  passion  and  self-seeking. 
8.  We  are  reminded  of  the  estate  of  Christ  and  of  those  who  come  within  His  circle, 
in  relation  to  the  present  world.  (1)  Learn  not  to  be  unduly  alarmed  for  the  ark  oi 
the  Lord.  Jesus  in  His  cradle  is  mightier  than  Herod  on  his  throne.  (2)  Not  to  be 
unduly  grieved  at  cnr  losses  and  sufferings  for  Christ's  sake.  The  cause  is  safe. 
(8)  Learn  the  importance  of  having  our  children  in  close  relation  to  Christ.  (J.  A. 
Seiss,  D.D.)  The  slaughter  of  the  innocents: — Glance  at  the  history.  Herod't 
the  most  striking  instance  of  open  opposition  to  God.     He  knew  the  prophecies, 

Tet  fought  against  their  fulfilment.  Some  surprise  that  God  permitted  this  slaughter. 
.  It  is  not  necessary  to  the  vindication  of  God's  dealings  that  we  should  always  b& 
able  to  give  reasons  for  their  every  part.  There  are  reasons  which  will  tend  to 
remove  surprise  that  Herod  was  not  restrained  from  murder.  1.  This  murder  would 
fix  Bethlehem  as  the  birthplace  of  the  Christ.  Prophecy  had  announced  this. 
Herod's  sword  corroborated  this.  2.  This  murder  would  enable  Jesus  to  live  in 
obscurity  until  thirty  years  of  age.  Brought  up  at  Nazareth,  He  was  regarded  as  a 
Nazarite.  The  slaughter  of  the  innocents  would  prove  His  birth  at  Bethlehem. 
He  od  supposed  his  object  gained,  so  the  infant  Christ  was  allowed  to  rest  in 
obscurity.  3.  God  was  leaving  Herod  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  sin.  4.  God 
was  unquestionably  disciplining  the  parents  by  the  slaughter  of  their  children.  II. 
Tne  consequences  of  the  slaughter  as  far  as  the  innocents  themselves  were  con- 
cerned. Dying  before  they  knew  evil  from  good,  they  were  saved  by  the  virtue  of 
Christ's  propitiation.  Not  best  to  die  in  infancy  ;  better  to  win  the  victory  than  be 
spared  the  fight.  They  are  reckoned  amongst  the  martyrs  of  the  church.  Teaching 
for  those  who  bury  their  children.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Instances  of  infantile 
murder : — It  has  been  too  often  the  cruel  policy  of  the  despots  of  the  East  to  con- 
solidate the  foundation  of  their  thrones  by  the  slaughter  of  all  who  had  claims  or 
power  to  dispute  their  authority  (2  Kings  x.  1-14).  The  history  of  Abyssinia  for- 
nishes  an  instance  of  a  tyrant  ordering  the  destruction  of  about  400  children. 
Niebuhr  mentions  an  Arabian  prince  who  murdered  all  the  remotest  descendants 
of  his  predecessors  he  heard  of ;  and  Sir  Thomas  Roe  states,  that  a  king  of  Pegu, 
in  order  to  destroy  a  nephew  of  his  own,  whose  claims  interfered  with  his  posses- 
sion of  the  crown,  and  who  was  secreted  by  his  partizans  among  a  vast  multitude 
of  the  children  of  the  grandees,  commanded  the  whole  to  be  slaughtered,  to  the 
number  of  4,000 — a  massacre  much  more  terrible  than  Herod's,  in  which  it  it 
thought  that  not  more  than  fifty  infants  fell  a  prey  to  the  ^xaut'a  jealousy.  (Dr. 
Jamieson.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Teb.  1.  John  the  Baptist — I.  Thb  special  mssioR  or  the  Baptist.  1.  Ha  was 
the  herald  of  the  Messiah.  2.  He  belonged,  properly,  neither  to  the  Mosaio  nor  to 
the  Christian  dispensation.  His  was  a  transition  ministry.  3.  He  was  appointed 
to  prepare  for,  as  well  as  to  announce,  the  introduction  of  the  Gospel.  A  spiritual 
economy,  demanding  a  process  of  moral  and  religious  preparation.  4.  His  character 
corresponded  with  his  office — stem.  II.  The  chief  subject  of  his  pbeachino.  1. 
The  nature  of  repentance.  2.  The  duty  of  repentance.  3.  The  connection  of 
repentance  with  faith  in  Christ.  4.  The  evidences  of  repentance.  Learn  (1)  The 
necessity  of  repentance ;  (2)  What  are  the  hindrances  to  the  progress  of  the  gospel 
in  the  world.  (R.  Watson  and  D.  Moore.)  John  the  Baptist : — 1.  His  work.  S. 
His  qualifications.  3.  His  message.  4.  His  Divine  appointment.  6.  EUs  on 
worldliness.  6.  His  popularity.  7.  His  courageous  utterances.  (D.  C.  Hughes, 
Ji.A.)  Wilderness. — I.  In  his  solitude  he  did  breathe  more  pure  inbpibation. 
1.  Heaven  was  more  open.  2.  God  was  more  familiar  and  frequent  in  His  visita. 
tions.  3.  In  the  wilderness  his  company  was  angels.  4.  His  employment,  medi- 
tation  and  prayer.  5.  His  temptations,  simple  and  from  within.  6.  His  occasions 
of  sin  as  few  as  his  examples.  7.  His  condition  such,  that  if  his  soul  were  at  all 
busy,  his  Ufe  could  not  easily  be  other  than  the  Ufe  of  angels.     II.  In  soutudb 

nous   PERSONS   MAY  GO   TO   HEAVEN    BY   THB   WAY   0»    PRAYERS  AXD    DEVOTION.        1,    III 

society,  by  the  way  of  mercy,  charity,  and  dispensations  to  others.     2.  In  solitads 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

there  are  fewer  occasions  of  vices.  3.  But  also  the  exercise  of  fewer  virtues.  4. 
Temptations  though  they  be  not  from  many  objects,  yet  are  in  some  circumstances 
more  dangerous.  5.  Because  the  worst  of  evils,  spiritual  pride  seldom  misses  to 
creep  upon  those  goodly  oaks,  like  ivy,  and  suck  their  heart  out.  6 .  As  they  com« 
municale  less  with  the  world,  so  they  do  less  charity  and  fewer  offices  of  mercy. 

III.    MaNT  holy    persons  have   left  their   WrLBERNESS   AND  SWEETNESSES    OF   DEVO- 

TioN  IN  BETiKEMENT  TO  SERVE  GoD  IN  PUBLIC,  by  the  ways  of  chaxity  and  exterior 
offices.  IV.  John  the  Baptist  united  both  these  lives  ;  and  our  blessed  Saviour 
...  for  He  hved  a  life :  (1)  common ;  (2)  sociable ;  (3)  humane ;  (4)  charitable ; 
(5)  and  public.     From  both  we  are  taught  that — I.  Solitude  is  a  good  school. 

II.  The  world  is  the  best  theatre.  III.  The  institution  is  best  there,  but  the  prac- 
tice here.  IV.  The  wilderness  hath  one  advantage  of  discipUne.  V.  Society  hath 
opportunities  of  perfection.  VI.  Privacy  is  best  for  devotion.  VII.  PubUcity  for 
charity.     (Jeremy  Taylor.) 

Wiidcrness  of  Judcea. — Everything  in  this  desert  is  of  one  colour — a  tawny 
yellow.  The  rocks,  the  partridges,  the  camels,  the  foxes,  the  ibex,  are  all  of  thia 
shade,  and  only  the  dark  Bedawin  and  their  black  tents  are  distingnishable  in  the 
general  glare.  .  .  .  From  a  very  early  period  this  horrible  wilderness  appears  to 
have  had  an  attraction  for  ascetics,  who  sought  a  retreat  from  the  busy  world  of 
their  fellowmen,  and  who  thought  to  please  God  by  torturing  the  bodies  which  He 
had  given  them.  Thus  the  Essenes,  the  Jewish  sect  whose  habits  and  tenets  re- 
eembled  so  closely  those  of  the  first  Christians,  retired  into  this  wilderness  and 
lived  in  caves.  Christian  hermits,  from  the  earliest  period,  were  also  numerous  in 
all  the  country  between  Jerusalem  and  Jericho,  and  the  rocks  are  riddled  with  caves  in 
inaccessible  places  where  they  lived.  .  .  .  Lifeless  and  tieeless  though  it  be,  nature 
prepares  every  day  a  glorious  picture,  quickly-fading  but  matchless  in  brilliance  o£ 
colour ;  the  distant  ranges  seem  stained  with  purple  and  pink ;  in  autumn  the  great 
bands  of  cloud  sweep  over  the  mountains  with  long  bars  of  gleaming  light  between ; 
and  for  a  few  minutes,  as  the  sun  sets,  the  deep  crimson  blush  comes  over  the  rocka 
and  glorifies  the  whole  landscape  with  an  indescribable  glow.  {Lieut.  Conder,  R.E.) 
Solitude  sometimes  conducive  to  usefulness. — The  Baptist  did  not  rush  from  the 
society  of  his  species  into  the  solitudes  of  Judaea  to  hide  his  candle  for  ever  under  a 
bushel,  as  modern  and  ancient  asceticism  has  done ;  but  he  resorted  thither  only 
from  an  unselfish  and  most  expanded  motive,  namely,  in  order  that  his  candle 
might  all  the  more  brightly,  and  widely,  and  publicly  shine,  when  he  issaed  forth 
at  length  to  preach,  in  the  midst  of  mixed  crowds,  "  Eepent,  for  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  at  hand."  (R.  Jones.)  Solitude  necessary  to  inward  realization. — 
Only  in  quiet,  in  solitude  with  God,  in  unbroken  questioning  with  his  own  soul, 
can  a  prophet  of  God  discover  what  God  is  saying  to  his  spirit.    (S.  Brooke,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  Repent  ye. — The  forerunner  of  Jesus  was  distinguished  as  a  prophet.  L 
The  PREACHER.    Powerful  and  faithful.    II.  The  duty  enforced.    "  Eepentance." 

III.  The  PLEA  by  which  it  is  enforced.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  nigh.  (T. 
Heath.)  Preparing  for  Christ : — I.  A  general  view  op  the  character,  office, 
AND  ministry  OF  THE  Baptist.  It  was  preparatory  to  setting  up  the  gospel  kingdom. 
II.  The  appropriate  connection  between  repentance  and  any  part  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  between  spiritual  conviction  of  sin  and  the  realized  advent  of  Him  who 
is  to  deliver  us  from  its  guilt  and  power.  The  results  of  such  preaching : — 1. 
Humiliating  convictions  of  sin,  2.  It  makes  ready  for  the  reception  of  saving 
faith.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  I.  The  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  John's 
exhortation  was  addressed  (Luke  iii.)  Many  of  them  were  soldiers  and  publicans, 
or  Koman  tax-gatherers,  generally  notoriously  wicked.  But  many  of  them  were 
brought  to  a  temporary  repentance  (Luke  iii.  10-14).  The  bulk  of  them  were  pro- 
fessedly members  of  the  Jewish  Church  (Luke  iii.  15),  and  among  them  many  of 
their  two  great  sects — Sadducees  and  Pharisees.  II.  What  this  exhortation 
implies.  Piepentance — after-thought  and  consideration;  hence  arises  conviction, 
humiliation,  &o.  A  change  of  mind  and  heart  (Matt.  iii.  7-10 ;  Luke  iii.  7-14  ; 
2  Cor.  vii.  10,  11).  This  d'  ictrine  is  equally  necessary  to  be  inculcated  upon  us.  IIL 
The  MOTIVES  by  which  the  exhortation  is  enforced.  The  gospel  dis'pensation  is 
ooxne  (Luke  i  78,  79).  And  thus  is  a  foundation  laid  for  repentance.  Jesns  is 
exalted  to  give  repentance  (Acts  v.  31).  (Joseph  Benson.)  Repentance : — 
1.  Eepentance  is  generally  made  the  child  of  fear ;  both  John  and  Christ  pressed 
people  to  repent  because  something  good  and  happy  was  coming.  This  is  true  to 
oar  nature;  men  would  rather  tarn  their  conduct  by  an  expectation  of  good  than  bj 


«EAP.  ni.j  ST.  MATTHEW.  If 

dennnciation  of  evil.  Fear  is  repellent,  hope  is  an  attraction  ;  coldness  hardens, 
wBirmth  softens.  Let  man  see  a  future  near  he  likes  and  he  will  leave  the  past.  2. 
What  God  means  when  He  says  "  Kepent."  It  is  not  remorse,  sorrow,  conviction, 
but  a  change  of  mind.  You  want  a  great  change  before  Christ  comes.  (J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)        His  sermon  was  an  exhortation  to  repentance  and  a  holy  life.    I.  Eepbn- 

TANCB    18   THE   first  INTBOIIISSION   INTO   THE  8ANCTITIE8  OF   CHRISTIAN  BELIGION.      The 

Lord  treads  upon  no  paths  that  are  nut  (1)  hallowed  and  made  smooth  by  the 
soirows  and  cares  of  contrition  ;  (2)  cleared  of  the  impediments  of  sin  by  derelic- 
tion, end  the  succeeding  fruits  of  emendation.  II.  His  baptism  did  bionift  by  • 
cognation  to  their  usual  rites  and  ceremonies  of  ablution  and  washing  Gentila 
proselytes,  that  the  Jews  had  so  far  receded  from  their  duty  and  that  holinesa 
which  God  required  of  them  by  the  law,  that  they  were  in  the  state  of  strangers. 
L  To  be  treated  themselves  as  Gentile  proselytes  (2)  by  baptism  (3)  and  a  new 
state  of  life  (4)  before  they  could  be  accepted  by  the  Messias  (5)  or  admitted  to 
His  kingdom.  {Jeremy  Taylor.)  Repentance  should  be : — I.  Sinceeb.  Though 
God  is  merciful  He  is  not  fallible,  nor  will  He  take  the  odour  of  sacrifices,  or  the 
incense  of  words  in  lieu  of  a  solid,  laborious  virtue.  1.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
abandon  the  vice.  2.  The  thought  of  heaven  should  bring  moral  fortitude.  The 
repentant  soul  should  be  great  in  purpose,  rapid  in  action,  unshaken  in  constancy. 
II  TisiELV.  It  must  take  place  at  such  a  period  as  will  enable  us  to  make  a  real 
sacrifice  of  unlawful  enjoyment  to  a  sense  of  Christian  duty.  1.  Satiety  is  often 
m)  staken  for  repentance.  Many  give  up  the  offence  when  they  have  lost  all  appe- 
tit»<  for  its  commission.  2.  Change  of  body  is  mistaken  for  change  of  mind. 
Ht  who  quits  a  vice  that  has  become  unnatural  to  his  period  of  life  deems  himsell 
s  progressive  penitent,  and  believes  he  is  receding  from  pleasure  because  pleasure 
is  receding  from  him.  III.  Continuous.  If  only  a  year  of  life  remains  let 
th».t  be  a  whole  year  of  repentance.  IV.  Just.  In  making  (1)  restitution 
or  (2)  compensation  for  the  injuries  committed.  V.  The  soul  of  a  penitent 
mftn  should  be  as  kbm  against  futube  belapbe  as  it  is  sorrowful  for  past  iniquity. 
{Sydney  Smith.)  I.  Tbue  bioht  of  sin  is  beqdisitb  to  true  eepentance.  1.  A 
man  that  does  repent  must  see  and  know  his  sins.  2.  Must  be  grieved  and  humbled 
for  them.  3.  He  must  loathe  himself.  4.  He  must  be  ashamed  of  his  sin.  So 
long  as  a  man  walks  in  the  dark,  he  does  not  blush,  he  is  not  ashamed,  though  his 
clothes  be  ragged  and  torn,  because  he  is  in  the  dark ;  but  if  he  come  to  the  light, 
then  he  bhasbes.  5.  He  must  acknowledge  his  sins.  6.  He  must  labour  to  undo 
idn  sins.  II.  Repentance  is  a  fbuit  of  faith.  1.  Tears  of  repentance  flow  from 
th«  eye  of  faith.  2.  So  also  repentance  flows  from  love.  Love  is  the  cause  of  grief. 
III.  It  is  one  thing  fob  a  man  to  be  pbicked  in  heart,  and  anotheb  foe  a  man  to 
BBPENT.  1.  A  man,  a  malefactor,  when  he  sees  what  shall  become  of  him,  wishes  that 
he  had  never  done  it.  2.  A  man  may  be  broken  down  with  the  weight  of  sin,  yet  hia 
BOial  may  not  be  thawed  or  melted.  When  you  take  a  staff  and  break  the  ice  with 
your  hands,  though  you  break  it  in  one  place,  it  freezes  in  another ;  but  when  there 
is  i  thaw,  it  melts  and  breaks  everywhere.  3.  A  man  may  have  more  sorrow,  grief, 
repentance  in  the  ore,  yet  have  none  that  is  well  refined.  4.  It  is  one  thing  for 
grief,  sorrow,  and  repentance  to  be  more  in  view,  sense  and  noise ;  and  another 
thing  to  be  more  in  spirit,  and  in  profit.  {Wm.  Bridge.)  John  the  Baptist  a 
ttofm-ccntre. — Sometimes,  nay,  often,  a  church  or  a  nation  lies  like  a  ship  becalmed 
on  the  tropic  sea.  The  air  around  it  is  heavy  with  pestilence  and  with  death.  The 
heat  and  the  stagnation  bring  forth  a  brood  of  contemptible  vices.  Then  some 
rushing  storm-centre  comes  sweeping  across  the  waters,  and  gathers  into  its  bosom 
all  the  thunders  of  the  lurid  sky,  lashes  into  fury  the  lazy  elements,  torments  the 
putrescent  waves  into  spray  and  foam,  whirls  the  ship  along  with  the  noise  of 
waterspouts,  kindles  electric  fire  upon  its  masts,  making  the  ship's  crew  pale  their 
features  with  fear — drunken,  or  slumbering,  or  careless  as  they  are.  And  even  such 
a  storm-centre  of  moral  force  was  St.  John  the  Baptist.  For  a  brief  time  be  cleared 
the  air  of  a  reUgion  heavy  with  imposture,  but  it  was  too  late.  A  few  pure  souls 
prepared  by  him  had  listened  in  the  hush  which  followed  to  the  voice  of  Christ ; 
but  the  heavy  pall  of  formaUsm  and  insincerity  fell  again  upon  the  nation,  fold  by 
fold,  and  when  the  hurricane  burst  upon  it  once  more,  it  was  not  the  purifying 
Btorm  of  spiritual  regeneration,  it  was  the  tornado  of  final  destination.  {F.  W. 
Farrar.) 

Reverie  of  repentance. — There  are  thousands  of  persons  who  are  given  to  what 
may  be  called  the  reverie  of  repentance.  There  are  thousands  of  persons  who  foel 
■ad  that  they  are  such  wicked  creatures.     Really  they  feel  that  it  is  too  bad.     They 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m. 

at  times  fall  into  a  minor  key.  Perhaps,  if  they  are  educated  to  music,  they  sit  down 
to  the  piano,  and  play  touching  airs,  and  sing  of  the  wickedness  of  the  heart  till 
tears  flow  down  their  cheeks.  They  pity  themselves  that  they  are  so  pitiable.  How 
much  repentance  is  there  in  all  this?  Is  there  any  deflniteness  in  it?  Does  the 
man  say,  "  I  am  as  proud  as  Lucifer?  "  Not  a  word  does  he  utter  on  that  subject. 
Does  the  man  say,  "  I  am  meanly  selfish"?  Oh,  no ;  he  only  says,  "  I  am  sin- 
Bick."  Does  the  man  say,  "I  am  unscrupulous,  I  am  untrustworthy,  I  give  way  to 
debauch  in  this  direction,  an!  to  animil  appetites  in  that  "  ?  Does  the  man  follow 
the  example  of  that  surgeon  who,  when  called  to  dress  a  wound,  probes  it  in  all 
directions,  and  cleanses  it  thoroughly  before  he  binds  it  up  ?  Does  he  sit  down  and 
explore  his  heart  with  a  searching,  minute  examination?  No  ;  he  does  not  want  to 
go  particularly  into  it.  He  merely  wants  to  have  a  feeling  of  regret  in  view  of  his 
general  siufulness.     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  3.  Prepare  ye  the  way. — Preparing  the  way : — When  the  Pacha  of  Magnesia 
went  to  take  possession  of  his  new  appointment  at  Aleppo,  he  was  attended  by  a 
large  retinue  of  horse  and  foot  soldiers,  and  other  attendants,  to  the  number  of 
2,C00  persons.  The  road  had  been  recently  repaired  for  the  passage  of  the  Pacha 
to  his  government;  affording  a  striking  illustration  of  the  Scripture,  "  He  shall 
prepare  the  way  before  Him."  The  rough  places  were  attempted  to  be  made  plain. 
{ArundeVs  discoveries  in  Asia  Minor.)  The  Forerunner : — John  was  Christ's  fore- 
runner, as  the  ploughman  goes  before  the  sower.  Before  good  work  can  be  expected, 
there  must  be  excitement.  The  turf-bound  surface  of  communities  must  be  torn 
up,  the  compacted  soil  turned  to  the  air  and  light.  Upon  the  rough  furrowa,  and 
not  on  the  shorn  lawn,  is  there  hope  for  the  seed.    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  4.  Baiment  of  camel'a  hair. — We  read  of  John  the  Baptist  "having  hia 
raiment  of  camel's  hair,"  and  many  have  supposed  that  the  dress  of  Ehjah  waa 
similar.  The  hair  of  the  camel,  especially  the  coarser  woolly  tufts  about  the  hump 
and  back,  is  in  some  places  torn  off,  but  more  generally,  as  I  have  observed,  closely 
shorn  once  a  year,  and  used  for  weaving  into  a  coarse  thick  fabric  by  the  Arab 
women.  It  is  of  this  material  that  the  "  black  tents  of  Kedar  '•  are  generally  con- 
structed, as  it  is  much  thicker  and  stouter  than  woollen  stuff.  It  waa  very  harsh 
and  rough  to  the  touch,  and  thus  his  dress  was  in  accordance  with  the  austerity  of 
the  rest  of  the  Baptist's  mode  of  hfe.  {Canon  Tristram.)  The  modem  Bedawin 
dress  simply,  their  attire  consisting  of  a  cotton  shirt,  sometimes  white,  but  oftener 
blue,  whose  loose  folds  descend  to  the  ankles,  and  which  is  confined  with  a  leathern 
girdle  about  the  loins.  Besides  this  girdle,  both  sexes  wear  from  infancy  a  leathern 
girdle  around  the  naked  waist,  adonied  with  amulets,  and  also  with  shells.  ...  A 
woollen  cloak  of  camel's  hair,  in  broad  stripes,  brown  and  white,  is  thrown  loosely 
over  the  shouldera  of  the  desert  Arab,  and  is  his  only  covering  at  night  (Exod. 
xxii.  26,  27).  ...  A  thick  cord  of  brown  camel's  hair  binds  their  handkerchiel 
head-dresses  around  their  heads.  .  .  .  The  Bedawin  generally  go  barefooted,  or  else 
make  sandals  of  camel's  skin,  which  they  bind  with  thongs  around  their  feet. 
These  sandals  are  always  made  after  one  model,  and  appear  to  derive  their  form 
from  high  antiquity.  (Dr.  Van-Lennep.)  Locusts. — These  insects  are  found  ak 
all  times,  and  in  every  part  of  Western  Asia,  in  Arabia,  and  in  Northern  Africa. 
The  full-grown  locusts  are  from  two  to  three  inches  in  length,  and  differ  from 
the  common  grasshopper  in  their  regularly  elongated  bodies,  their  reddish  colour, 
and  the  length  of  their  wings,  which  enable  them  to  rise  to  a  considerable  height 
above  the  ground,  and  to  pass  over  a  distance  of  several  miles,  by  sailing  before 
the  wind.  The  statement  that  John  the  Baptist's  food  while  in  the  wildemaM 
chiefly  consif-ted  of  *•  locusts  and  wild  honey,"  best  describes  the  habitual  fare  of 
those  who  at  the  present  day  lead  a  life  of  isolation  and  poverty  in  the  same  region, 
and  we  know  that  the  Mosaic  law  allowed  the  Hebrews  to  eat  the  locust  (Lev.  ii.  22). 
The  full-grown  insect  is  extensively  eaten  by  the  poorer  classes,  .  .  .  particularly 
by  the  Bedawin  of  the  desert.  When  the  locusts  come  down  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth,  crowds  of  people  go  forth  and  collect  vast  numbers  of  them  in  baga, 
even  loading  horses  and  cattle  with  the  booty.  They  are  roasted  and  eaten  aa 
butter  upon  loaves  of  bread,  resembling  shrimps  in  taste,  or  they  are  boiled  in 
water  with  a  little  salt,  diied  in  the  sun,  and,  being  deprived  of  their  wings  and  legs, 
are  packed  in  bags  for  use.  Tliey  are  also  beaten  to  a  powder,  which  is  mixed  with 
flour  and  water,  made  into  little  cakes,  and  used  as  a  substitute  for  bread  when 
floux  iM  Boaroe.    Dried  locusts  are  generally  exposed  for  sale  in  the  markets  of 


jHAP.  ni.7  ST.  MATTHEW.  IT 

Medina,  Bagdad,  and  even  Damascus.  {Tbid.)  Wild  honey. — The  frequent  de- 
Bcription  of  Palestine  as  a  land  "  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,"  points  out  the 
fact  that  the  honey-bee,  and,  as  a  concomitant,  wild  flowers  too,  abounded  in  it 
anciently,  as  at  the  present  day.  The  flowers  are  so  various  in  Western  Asia,  that 
the  honey  of  different  districts  assumes  very  marked  peculiarities.  The  honey  of 
Kirk-Aghai,  near  Pergamus  in  Asia  Minor,  chiefly  made  of  the  flower  of  the  cotton 
plant,  it  is  said,  so  closfly  resembles  butter  in  appearance,  that  it  can  only  be 
detected  by  the  taste.  The  honey  of  Mount  Hymettus  is  dark  and  disagreeable  tc 
persons  unused  to  it ;  the  Athenians  prefer  it  to  any  other.  In  some  parts  of 
Asia  Minor  the  hives  which  are  kept  in  the  villages  are  transported  at  a  certain 
season  of  the  year  to  the  slopes  and  high  plains  of  the  mountains,  where  the 
bees  feed  upon  the  blossoms  of  the  pine  and  of  the  mountain  plants.  Orientals 
are  very  fond  of  honey,  and  usually  eat  it  in  the  comb.  (Ibid.)  When  the 
Egj-ptians  on  the  Upper  Nile  find  that  their  bees  obtain  no  more  honey  around 
their  villages,  they  take  their  hives  on  boats,  and  sail  down  the  river,  stopping  at 
svery  green  spot  to  let  the  bees  collect  honey  from  the  flowers  on  the  shore  ;  so  that 
by  the  time  tbsT  reach  Cairo,  which  is  their  market,  their  hives  are  fall  of  houcj. 
iPoeocke.) 

Yer.  5.  All  the  region  rotuid  about  Jordan. — This  would  include  the  whole  length 
Df  the  river  valley,  and  would  therefore  take  in  parts  of  the  PersBa,  Samaria,  Galilee, 
and  Gaulonitis.  (Rev.  E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.)  The  Jordan  Valley  is  not  only 
liie  most  remarkable  feature  of  Palestine,  but  one  of  the  most  curious  places  in  the 
world.  It  has  no  counterpart  elsewhere,  and  the  extraordinary  phenomenon  of 
clouds  sweeping  as  a  thick  mist  500  feet  below  the  level  of  the  sea  is  one  which  few 
European  eyes  have  seen,  but  which  we  witnessed  in  the  early  storms  of  the  spring 
of  1874.  The  Jordan  rises  as  a  full-grown  river,  issuing  from  the  cave  at  Banias, 
ibout  1,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean.  ...  In  twenty-six  and  a 
half  miles,  there  is  a  fall  of  1,682  feet,  or  more  than  sixty  feet  to  the  mile.  .  _,  . 
The  Jordan  Valley  was  now  one  blaze  of  beautiful  flowers,  growing  in  a  profusion 
not  often  to  be  found,  even  in  more  fertile  lands.  The  ground  was  literally  covered 
with  blossoms ;  the  great  red  anemone,  like  a  poppy,  grew  in  long  tracts  on  the 
stony  soil ;  on  the  soft  marls,  patches  of  deUcate  lavender  colour  were  made  by  the 
wild  stocks;  the  retem,  or  white  broom  (the  juniper  of  Scripture),  was  in  fuL 
blossom,  and  the  rich  purple  nettles  contrasted  with  fields  of  kutufy,  or  yellow  St. 
John's  wort.  There  were  also  quantities  of  orange-coloured  marigolds,  long  fields 
of  white  and  purple  clover,  tall  spires  of  asphodel  and  clubs  of  snap-dragon,  purplA 
ealvias  and  white  garlic,  pink  geraniums  and  cistus,  tall  white  umbelliferous  plants, 
and  large  camomile  daisies,  all  set  in  a  border  of  deep  green  herbage  which  reached 
the  shouldei's  of  the  horses.  Jordan's  banks  were  covered  with  flowers,  while  brown 
turfali  or  tamarisks  and  canebrake  line  the  rushing  stream,  and  the  white  marl 
banks  stood  out  in  striking  contrast.  (Lieut.  Conder,  R.E.)  But  certainly,  of  multi- 
tudes that  will  run  to  the  word,  and,  possibly,  particularly  flock  after  the  ministry 
of  some  for  a  time,  there  may  be  many,  as  doubtless  were  then,  that  are  but  light 
stuff,  carried  with  the  stream  as  corks  and  straws  are.  Men  should  examine  well 
even  such  things  as  seem  to  speak  some  love  of  religion  in  them,  whether  they  be  real 
or  not.     (R.  Leighton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Baptized  of  Him. — I.  In  baptism  we  are  admitted  to  the  kingdom  ol 
Christ.  1.  Presented  unto  Him.  2.  Consigned  with  His  Sacrament.  S.  Witness- 
ing a  good  confession.  4.  Undertaking  a  holy  life.  II.  In  baptism  we  (1)  give  our 
names  to  Christ ;  (2)  are  matriculated  and  adopted  into  our  Father's  house.  HI. 
Baptism  is  (1)  the  gate  of  the  Church ;  (2)  the  first  entrance  of  saints  to  an  eternal 
conversion  with  God  and  the  Church  ;  (3)  the  sacrament  of  initiation ;  (4)  investi- 
ture of  them  that  enter  into  religion.  IV.  Baptism  is  adoption  into  the  (1) 
covenant ;  (2)  a  new  birth  ;  (3)  our  sins  are  pardoned  now ;  (4)  and  we  are  put 
into  a  state  of  pardon  for  the  time  to  come.  (Jeremy  Taylor.)  Baptism : — 1.  An 
initiatory  rite.  2.  A  leading  ordinance.  3.  A  confirmatory  nte.  4.  An  instrument 
of  regeneration.  5.  A  representative  ordinance.  6.  A  sealing  ordinance.  {T. 
Watson,  M.A.)  Confessing  their  sins. — The  nobility  oj  confession:—!.    Con- 

fession of  sin  should  not  be  made  to  every  one  we  meet ;  it  should  be  discriminating. 
2.  It  should  be  honest.  3.  The  moment  a  man  attempts  to  be  honest  with  himself 
in  respect  to  his  moral  character,  and  to  make  confession  before  God,  everything 
that  is  in  him  rises  up  against  hiin : — 1.  Reason.     Reason  suborned  by  his  feelinjta 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  in. 

refuses  to  investigate.  It  returns  false  reports.  2.  Pride.  How  on  the  proud  man 
do  the  evidences  of  sin  beat  as  hailstones  on  a  slate  roof,  and  never  penetrate.  The 
mouth  of  pride  has  the  lockjaw,  when  it  is  a  question  of  confessing  wrong.  3. 
Vanity.  "Vanity  teaches  men  to  regard  more  the  opinions  of  men  than  of  God.  4. 
donscience.  Wlien  ready  to  confess,  conecience  says,  "  Stop,  insincere  hypocrite." 
6.  Pnidence.  "  Let  well  alone."  Let  the  past  alone.  6.  Yet  is  there  anything 
nobler  than  confession  of  wrong  done?  It  is  a  way  of  pleasantness  and  peace.  7. 
Do  not  be  afiaid  to  confess  your  sin  to  Jesus.  It  is  easy  for  Borrow  to  confesa  to 
lore.     {H.  IF.  Beecher.) 

Confession  without  extenuation. — Men's  faults  lie  like  reptiles — like  toads,  like 
lizards,  like  serpents ;  and  what  if  there  is  over  them  the  evening  sky,  Ut  with 
glory,  and  all  aglow  ?  All  the  gorgeousness  of  the  departing  day,  shining  down  on 
a  reptile,  leaves  it  a  reptile  still.  Men  think,  "  I  am  generous ;  I  am  full  of  fine 
feelings ;  I  am  endowed  with  superior  taste  ;  "  but  what  of  that?  Down  in  the  very 
thicket ;  down  where  men  do  not  love  often  to  go — there  their  faults  he  nestling. 
(Ibid.)  Confession  should  realize  the  nature  and  peril  of  sin. — Ah  I  the  bank 
is  breaking  away.  A  craw-fish  has  pierced  it.  The  stream  is  working,  and  working 
and  working.  The  engineer  ig  sent  up  to  see  if  all  ia  safe.  He  sees  that  a  stream 
is  running  through  the  bank,  big  as  his  finger.  He  looks  at  it,  and  waits  to  see  if 
the  stream  enlarges.  Soon  it  is  as  big  as  his  two  fingers.  He  waits  a  little  longer, 
and  it  is  as  big  as  his  hand.  It  is  wearing  on  either  side  the  opening,  and  the 
waters  are  beginning  to  find  it  out,  and  slowly  they  swirl  on  the  inside  towards  this 
point.  It  will  not  be  many  hours  before  the  bank  will  be  so  torn  that  it  will  give 
way,  and  the  flood  will  pour  through  the  crevasse.  But  the  engineer  goes  back  and 
■ays,  "  Well,  there  was  a  little  rill  there.  But  it  was  a  very  beautiful  place :  I 
never  saw  a  prettier  bank  than  that.  The  trees  that  grow  in  the  neighbourhood  are 
Buperb ;  and  the  shrubbery  there  is  very  fragrant  and  charming  ;  and  the  moisture 
vhich  finds  its  way  through  the  bank  seems  to  nourish  aU  vegetation  near  it." 
"  Well,  but  the  break  I  How  about  that?  "  '« It  was  something  of  a  break;  Vat, 
as  I  was  saying,  it  is  a  beautiful  spot.  And  right  there  is  a  fine  plantation ;  and 
the  man  that  owns  it — "  "But  how  about  the  crevasse  f"  "Yes,  there  was  a 
little  crevasse  ;  but,  as  I  was  saying,  all  things  conspire  to  make  it  a  lovely  scene." 
What  kind  of  a  report  is  that,  of  an  engineer  sent  out  to  investigate,  when  it  is  a 
question  of  impending  ruin  ?  What  kind  of  a  report  is  that,  when  the  elements  ar« 
at  work  which  will  soon  launch  desolation  on  the  neighbourhood?  Send  the 
engineer  Eeason  into  a  man's  soul,  and  aak  it  to  report  concei'uing  the  habit  of 
drinking  in  the  man.  It  comes  back  and  says,  "  Oh  1  well,  he  takes  a  little  for  the 
oft  infirmities  of  his  stomach  ;  but  he  is  a  good  fellow,  he  is  a  strong  man,  and  hia 
heart  is  in  the  right  place."  "  But  what  about  his  habit  ? "  "  He  takes  a  little 
now  and  then  ;  but,  as  I  was  saying,  he  is  a  generous  fellow.  If  you  had  heard  of 
his  kindnesses  to  that  family  when  they  were  in  iistress — "  "  But  what  about  his 
haUt  f  "    (Ibid.) 

Yet.  7.  Wrath  to  come.  —  L  The  meaning  wrapt  tip  in  John's  message.  1. 
Danger.  Futuie  retribution  has  become  to  many  a  kind  of  figment.  2.  The 
importance  of  confession.  3.  The  necessity  of  a  renewal  of  heart.  "  Behold  tho 
Lamb  of  God  1  "  II.  The  Baptist's  astonishment  at  his  own  success.  What  was 
the  secret  of  his  power  ?  Character  of  John's  life,  and  hia  hearers.  A  ministry  of 
terror — different  from  Chiist's.  Men  felt  he  was  real — secret  of  all  success.  The 
classes  of  men  on  whom  his  influence  told  (Luke  iii.).  Neither  of  these  isms  will 
satisfy  the  conscience.  (F.  W.  Eubertson.)  I.  That  there  id  wrath  connected 
WITH  the  government,  CHARACTER,  AND  DISPENSATIONS  OF  GOD.  God  has  made  all 
men.  Hence  they  must  be  governed  by  His  laws.  Obedience  must  be  enforced  by 
sanctions.  Man  has  broken  the  law.  Reward  therefore  has  become  inapplicable  to 
man.  God  is  "  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day."  The  facts  of  history  bear  this 
out — war,  famine,  disease.     Nature  speaks  the  same  truth.    II.  That  the  wrath 

IHCS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  CHARACTER  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  GOD  18  RESERVED 
ESPECIALLY  FOR   THE    FDTURE.       III.    ThAT    MEN   OUGHT   MOST   EARNESTLY  TO    SEEK   FOB 

k  REFOGE  FROM  THIS  WRATH.  "  FlcB  from  the  Wrath  to  come."  1.  If  it  overtakes 
you,  you  are  lost  for  ever.  2.  You  should  do  this  because  the  means  are  given  for 
avoiding  it.  IV.  That  it  devolves  upon  those  who  occupy  public  stations  ih 
TH«  Church,  earnestly  to  beseech  men  to  flee  frou  this  wrath  to  comb. 
1.  By  warnings.      2.  By  encouragements.      {J.  Parsons.)        L  Whither  abb  w» 

CO   TUEB?      II.   FbOM  what  ABB  WE  10  FLBK  ?      III.   HoW  AND  WHEN  ABE  WS  TO   FUUlV 


ontr.  m.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  10 

1.  Now.  Opportunities  pass  away  like  clouds.  3.  Earnestly.  For  Divine  di»- 
pleasure  pursues  us.  3.  Looking  to  Jesus.  Eager  for  relief  (Psa.cxxiii.).  (Anon.) 
Never  did  any  preacher  address  to  his  hearers  a  more  startling  question  than  this. 
I.  The  objects  trom  which  we  abe  warned  to  flee,  and  in  what  flight  from  il 
consists.  1.  As  sinners  we  are  exposed  to  wrath.  Wrath  against  sin  required  by 
Divine  holiness.  Manifold  revelations  of  the  wrath  of  God.  Declarations  of 
Scripture  (Numb.  xii.  9 ;  ',Psa.  vii.  11 ;  Rom.  i.  18).  In  the  cross  we  behold  the 
clearest  and  most  awful  evidence  of  His  determination  to  punish  sin.  Yet  it  is 
"  wrath  to  come"  (Eccles.  xii.  14;  2  Thess.  i.  7-9;  2  Pet.  iii.  7;  Eev.  xx,  11,  12, 
15).  Is  it  surprising  that  we  should  be  exhorted  to  escape  t  2.  The  flight  enjoined. 
There  must  be  anxiety,  hope,  and  promptitude.  II.  To  *'  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come  "  is  supremely  important.  Its  terrors.  Shortness  of  the  period  allowed  for 
our  flight.  If  we  perish,  it  wiU  be  aggravated  by  reason  ol  the  abundant  provisions 
made  for  our  escape.  1.  Hear  the  voice  of  wamiug.  2.  Flee  to  Christ  the  only 
refuge.  3.  Be  in  earnest.  Keep  close  to  the  place  of  shelter.  {John  Johnson,  M. A.) 
This  wrath  is: — I.  Divine;  11.  Deserved;  III.  Unmingled ;  IV.  Accumulated; 
V.  Eternal.  (Bradley.)  A  warning. — In  former  days,  when  a  military  company 
was  to  be  called  out,  the  notice  delivered  to  each  of  the  members  was  called  "  the 
warning."  An  officer,  who  was  a  Christian,  having  given  the  warning  to  a  young 
man,  was  playfully  accosted  by  another  young  man,  who  was  not  a  member  of  the 
company,  with  a  question,  "Have  you  not  a  warning  for  me  too?"  The  officer 
rephed,  "  Yes,  I  have  a  warning  for  you :  I  want  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come. "  This  unexpected  reply  proved  an  arrow  from  the  Lord's  quiver,  and  to  it 
the  young  man  ascribes  his  conversion.    (Anon, ) 

Ver.  8.  Fruits  meet  for  repentance. — Repentance  a  fructifying  energy.  FruiUfor 
repentance : — Hear  a  story,  or  a  parable.  In  a  dehghtful  bit  oi  country,  early  one  sum- 
mer  morning,  I  walked  out  to  be  refreshed  by  the  pure  sweet  air,  the  sight  of  fields  and 
woods,  grasses  and  flowers, beasts  and  birds,  when, presently,  I  came  upon  an  orchard, 
into  which  I  entered.  The  trees  were  beautiful  to  behold,  the  air  was  fragrant,  and 
fruit  was  abundant.  I  wandered  on  almost  enchanted,  until,  to  my  great  wonder, 
I  came  upon  a  tree  having  neither  bloom  nor  fi-uit.  I  was  so  painfully  impre*^ed 
that,  without  any  thought  of  hurting  or  giving  offence,  and  as  to  mysftll  I  saii, 
"  You  poor,  lost  tree,  what  can  you  be  doing  here  ?  I  marvel  you  are  not  removed." 
Upon  which,  to  my  astonishment,  this  tree  replied,  not  without  tartness,  "Ob, 
indeed,  sir ;  indeed !  No  doubt  you  think  you  are  wise,  wise  above  your  fathers. 
You  think  you  know  much  about  things,  I  dare  say,  but  you  are  in  a  great  mistake. 
I  am  neither  poor  nor  lost."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "you  have  neither  leaves  nor  fruit, 
and,  I  should  judge,  no  eap."  "What  has  that  to  do  with  it?  "  it  broke  out.  "  Youi 
ignorance  is  inexcusable,  You  seem  not  to  know  that  a  great  Saviour  of  trees  has 
been  down  here,  and  I  have  believed  His  gospel,  and  am  saved  by  grace.  I  have 
accepted  salvation  as  a  free  gift,  and,  though  I  have  neither  leaves  nor  fruit,  I  am 
saved  all  the  same."  I  looked  at  it  with  pity  and  said,  "You  are  a  poor  deluded 
tree ;  you  are  not  saved  at  all.  You  are  only  a  dead,  good-for-nothing  tree,  despite 
all  your  talk  about  grace  and  redemption.  The  only  salvation  you  can  ever  know 
u  to  be  made  living  and  fruit-bearing.  Life,  that  is  salvation.  When  I  come  and 
Bee  you  laden  with  fruit,  or  even  showing  signs  of  leaves,  I  shall  say,  •  Ah !  that 
poor  tree  is  saved  at  last ;  it  has  received  the  gospel  and  is  saved  by  grace.'  "  As 
I  turned  away,  I  heard  it  saying,  "You  are  not  sound ;  you  do  not  understand  the 
gospel."  And  I  thought,  so  it  is,  as  with  trees  so  with  men;  they  talk  as  if  grace 
and  salvation  were  something  God  keeps  for  them  outside  themselves,  and  will  not 
understand  nor  believe  that  he  who  is  saved,  he  who  takes  Christ  fully,  and  rests 
on  His  atoning  work  alone,  "is  made  free  from  sin,"  and  "has  his  fruit  unto 
holiness."  (W.  Hubbard.)  Repentance  a  moulding  energy. — And  it  ought  not 
to  be  a  mere  partial  sorrow  ;  but  it  should  permeate  the  entire  constitution  of  man. 
You  have  most  likely  seen  water  falling  in  drops  from  a  rock.  There  it  is  dropping 
— dropping — dropping,  summer  and  winter,  during  many  a  century ; — but  the  rock 
remains  a  rock  still.  There  are  many  who  shed  tears  which  seem  to  be  those  ol 
repentance,  but  whose  hearts  remain  as  hard  as  an  adamantine  rock.  Their  tears 
are  those  out  of  a  rock — a  rock  that  never  crumbles.  True  repentance  does  with 
man  as  the  furnace  with  the  metal.  There  is  the  metal  cast  into  the  furnace ;  and 
there  it  is  heated  and  melted  so  as  to  be  shaped  and  coined  according  to  wilL  The 
whole  of  man  should  be  completely  melted  by  repentance,  so  as  to  be  purged  of  all 
the  dross  of  sin  and  be  remodelled  by  the  plastic  influences  of  God's  Spirit,  an| 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

made  to  bear  anew  the  Divine  image.  {R.  Hughes.)  Repentance  a  purifying 
energy. — Eepontance  hath  a  purifying  power,  and  every  tear  is  of  a  cleansing 
virtue ;  but  these  penitential  clouds  must  be  still  kept  dropping :  one  shower  will 
not  suffice ;  for  repentance  is  not  one  single  action,  but  a  cause.  (Dr.  Soutk.) 
Repentance  fruitful  in  amendment. — Eepentance  without  amendment  is  like  con- 
tinual pumping  in  a  ship  without  stopping  the  leaks.  (Palmer.)  liepentanct 
fruitful  in  restitution. — Thomas  Olivers  was  an  itinerant  cobbler,  who  spent  hia 
time  working,  carousing,  and  contracting  debts.  He  congratulated  himself  on  his 
skill  in  defrauding  his  creditors.  This  reprobate  "Welshman  was  at  last  rescued  by 
Methodism,  and  became  one  of  Mr.  Wesley's  itinerant  corps.  So  great  had 
been  his  wickedness,  that  his  friends  thought  he  must  have  had  some  terrible 
fright.  Bis  uncle  said  to  him,  •'  Thou  hast  been  so  wicked,  thou  bast  seen  the 
devU."  His  conscience  was  awakened.  Of  his  old  debts  he  said,  "  T  feel  as  great 
sorrow  and  confusion  as  if  I  had  stolen  eveiy  sum  I  owed."  He  resolved  to  pay 
the  last  cent  from  money  due  to  him  from  the  estate  of  one  of  his  kindred.  With 
part  of  his  money,  he  bought  a  horse,  and  started  on  his  memorable  journey  from 
town  to  town,  preaching  Christ,  and  paying  his  debts.  He  went  to  Whithurst  to 
pay  a  sixpeuce.  Before  his  strange  pilgrimage  was  ended,  he  paid  about  seventy 
debts,  and  had  to  sell  his  horse,  saddle,  and  bridle,  to  finish  his  payments.  Such 
fruits  of  repentance  were  followed  by  great  reUgious  prosperity  and  usefoluess. 
(Anon.) 

Ver.  9.  Abraham  to  our  father. — Trees  marked  for  falling : — I.  That  God'b  tbbt 

07   ALL    MORAL   LIFE  IS  PRACTICAL,  NOT  THEORETIC,  NOR  CIRCUMSTANTIAL.      His  demand 

is  for  fruitfulness.  Jews  could  boast : — 1.  Their  national  lineage.  The  true 
element  in  this  :  (1)  gr^at  moral  influence  i  .sccnds  from  a  piouB  progenitor, 
and  more  or  less  imbues  oui  lif 3  and  feeling ;  (2)  tne  traditions  of  a  pious  ancestry 
are  precious ;  (3)  some  importance  is  to  be  attached  to  the  prayers  of  a  pious  ancestry. 
The  untrue  element  is  to  think  that  God  will  merge  all  considerations  of  a  personal 
character.  The  true  conception  of  a  pious  ancestiy  is  obligation.  2.  Another 
substitute  for  fruitfulness  upon  which  the  Jews  rehed  was  ecclesiastical  prerogative. 
3.  Another  substitute  upon  which  they  relied  was  doctrinal  orthodoxy.  II.  That 
God  pdts  cs  upon  our  probation  in  respect  os  these  practical  tbinqs  tc  bbm 
whether  we  will  do  them  ob  not.     {h.  alloh.) 

Ver.  10.  Axe  Is  laid. — The  axe  lying  at  the  root : — I.  The  kind  of  fbuit  which 
God  requires  from  us — "  good  fruit."  II.  The  means  which  God  employs  to 
RENDER  US  PRODUCTIVE  of  this  kind  of  fruit,  and  which  show  how  reasonable  it  is  that 
He  should  expect  it  from  us.  1.  God  has  endowed  you  with  a  capacity  to  produce 
this  kind  of  fruit.  2.  In  order  to  enable  you  to  bring  forth  good  fruit,  God  haa 
supplied  you  with  the  gospel  of  His  Son,  which  contains  the  means,  motives,  and 
influences  of  fruitfulness.  3.  God  has  visited  you  with  various  dispensations  of 
providence,  and  with  various  convictions  of  conscience.     IH.  The  continued  un- 

FRUITFULNESS  OP  SOME  PERSONS,  NOTWITHSTANDING  ALL  THE  MEANS  WHICH   THE   GOD  OF 

MERCY  HAS  EMPLOYED.  1.  Some  of  thcse  unfruitful  persons  are  sensual  and  profane. 
2.  Some  are  intellectual,  motal,  and  amiable.  3.  Some  are  professors  of  the  gospel. 
IV.  The  axe  which  is  lying  at  the  root  of  such  unfruitful  persons.  1.  The  axe 
which  is  lying  at  your  root  reminds  you  of  the  patience  and  long-suffering  of  God. 
2.  It  reminds  you  of  the  critical  circumstances  in  which  you  are  placed.  3.  It  has 
sometimes  admonished  you  of  its  being  there.  V.  The  awful  condition  to  which 
such  nNrRuiTFUL  persons  are  doomed.  1.  The  nature  of  this  condition  is  in- 
describably terrible  :  "He  is  hewn  down."  The  certainty  that  this  condition  wiB 
be  incurred:  "He  is  hewn,"  Ac.  (J.  Alexander.)  I.  Wh*i  ire  ws  to  ondkr- 
STiND  BY  the  AXE  ?  1.  It  may  denote  temporal  judgments.  2.  It  may  denote 
church  discipline.  3.  It  may  denote  eternal  wrath  and  vengeance.  The  axe  laid 
to  the  root  of  the  tree  seems  to  imply  its  utter  destruction.  II.  By  whom  is  thb 
AXE  laid?  1.  Ministerially,  by  preachers  of  the  Word,  2.  By  the  inflicting  of 
temporal  judgments.     3.  By  God  Himself.    Whether  it  be  an  act  of  mercy  or  of 

Judgment,  He  directs,  strengthens  for,  and  assists  in  it.  III.  The  aik  is  laid. 
:.  God's  judgments  are  certain  and  inevitable.  2.  They  are  near  at  hand  when  leasl 
expected,  least  prepared  for.  3.  These  judgments  already  begin  to  cperate. 
(B.  Beddome.) 

Ver.   11.  And  with  0x9.— The  fiery  baptitm  .—I.   Tms   Holt  Gboct  u  foou 


CHAP.  in. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  81 


Baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  ia  not  one  thing  and  baptism  with  fire  another,  but 
the  former  is  the  reaUty  of  which  the  latter  is  the  symbol.  II.  Christ  plunges  na 
INTO  THIS  FIRE.  What  a  grand  idea  is  conveyed  by  the  metaphor  of  the  complete- 
ness of  the  contact  with  the  Spirit  of  God  into  which  we  are  brought  I  How  it 
represents  all  our  being  as  flooded  into  that  transforming  power,  Christ's 
personal  agency  in  effecting  this  saturating  of  man's  coldness  with  the  fire  from  God, 
IIL  The  fiery  baptism  quickens  and  cleanses.  1.  Fire  gives  warmth.  It 
comes  to  kindle  in  men's  souls  a  blaze  of  enthusiastic  Divine  love,  melting  all  the 
icy  hardness  of  the  heart,  &c.  For  a  Cliristian  to  be  cold  is  sin.  Marked  absence 
of  this  "  spirit  of  burning "  in  the  Christian  Church.  2.  This  baptism  gives 
cleansing  by  warmth.  Fire  purifies.  The  Spirit  produces  hohness  in  heart  and 
character.  All  other  cleansing  is  superficial.  The  alternative  for  every  man  is  to 
be  baptized  in  fire  or  to  be  consumed  by  it.  {Dr.  MacLaren.)  The  Baptism 
of  the  Spirit :  —  1.  The  nature  of  the  promised  baptism,  John's  baptism 
was  introductory  and  transitory — Christ's  was  to  be  spiritual,  quickening,  search' 
ing.  Analogy  between  water  in  the  natural  world  and  the  Spirit's  influence 
in  the  moral  world.  The  baptism  of  the  spirit  includes  all  other  blessings  (Luke 
xi.  13,  with  Matt.  vii.  11).  II.  The  plenitude  of  the  promise.  A  baptism,  reple- 
tion, fulness,  &o.  Like  torrents  of  rain  poured  on  the  thirsty  earth  (Ezek.  xxxiv. 
26 ;  Joel  ii.  28 ;  Hos.  xiv.  5 ;  Mai.  iii.  10).  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  there 
was  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  abundant  communications  of  Divine 
influence  we  should  expect  I  III.  The  need  of  the  promised  baptism.  1.  In  the 
time  of  John.  2.  In  our  time — now.  The  low  and  languid  piety  of  many.  The 
comparatively  small  success  of  the  various  agencies  for  the  conversion  of  sinners. 
Church  agencies  can  only  be  spiritually  useful  as  they  are  charged  with  Divine 
force.  Have  you  received  t/(is  baptism  ?  "Ye  must  be  born  again."  {A.Tucker.) 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire,  John's  baptism  was  outward 
washing  merely,  significant,  but  no  inward  grace.  It  was  only  a  symbol, 
Christ's  would  be  the  same  in  outward  appearance,  as  water  was  employed, 
but  there  shall  be  an  inward  reality,  a  living,  glorious,  inward  grace  in  His  baptism. 
When  was  the  Baptist's  prediction  fulfilled  ?  Though  Christ  never  baptized  witfc 
His  own  hands,  yet  it  is  He  who  baptizeth  when  His  authorized  ministers  baptize. 
Theirs  are  the  hands,  but  His  the  grace.  Like  Elijah,  they  pour  the  water 
on  the  sacrifice,  but  He  gives  the  fire.  It  refers  to  Pentecost,  cloven  tongues. 
It  is  important  to  realize  the  double  aspects  in  the  gifts  of  God.  The  Holy 
Ghost  would  be  in  every  heart  a  Spirit  of  fire — fire  for  death  or  life,  to  purify  or  to 
»estroy.  God's  presence  in  man's  heart  is  His  greatest  gift ;  how  truly  it  may  be 
.ailed  a  firel  It  separates  good  from  evil.  It  punfiea.  It  tests.  Our  duty 
n  life  is  to  cherish  and  obey  this  awful  fiery  Spirit.  To  bum  in  the  spirit,  to 
lave  a  glowing  zeal  for  God.  The  spark  is  blown  into  a  flame  by  prayer. 
{G.  Moberly,  D.C.L.)  The  influence  of  fire  (1)  softens;  (2)  purifies;  (3) 
sanctifies;  (4)  is  a  solace.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Comforter  through  (1)  grief;  (2) 
sorrow ;  (3)  tribulation ;  (4)  poverty.  {H.  T.  Day.)  L  The  nature  and  im- 
portance  of  this  baptism.  II.  The  characteb  and  dignitt  of  the  person  who 
baptizes.  Not  a  mere  man — the  Son  of  God.  He  dispenses  this  blessing  as  the 
fruit  of  His  mediation.  UL  The  persons  who  mat  partake  of  this  baptism 
(Luke  iii.).  IV.  On  what  terms,  or  in  what  way  they  may  have  it  conferred, 
Repentance  towards  God.  Faith  in  Christ.  1.  Consider  the  necessity  of  this 
baptism,  dc  2.  If  you  have  received  it,  "Quench  not  the  Spirit,"  <fec.  {Joseph 
Ecmson.) 

The  fiery  baptis-m  continuous. — To  all,  sooner  or  later,  Christ  comes  to  baptize 
them  with  fire.  But  do  not  think  that  the  baptism  of  fire  comes  once  for  all  to  a 
man  in  some  terrible  affliction,  some  one  awful  conviction  of  his  own  sinfulness  and 
nothingness.  No  ;  with  many — and  those,  perhaps,  the  best  people — it  goes  oa 
month  after  month^  and  year  after  year.  By  secret  trials,  chastenings  which  none 
bnt  they  and  God  can  understand,  the  Lord  is  cleansing  them  from  their  secret 
faults,  and  making  them  to  understand  wisdom  secretly  ;  burning  out  of  them  the 
^haff  of  self-will  and  self-conceit  and  vanity,  and  leaving  only  the  pure  gold  of 
riguteousness,  {Charles  Kingsley.)  The  kindling,  warmth,  and  effect  of  the  fiery 
influence: — The  manner  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  enters  the  heart  resembles  tht 
manner  in  which  fire  is  kindled.  This  manner  is  not  always  uniform,  Sometimei 
a  spark  lies  smothered  for  a  while,  and  only  after  a  long  interval  bursts  out  and 
begins  to  burn.  So  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  spark  may  have  reached  the  heart, 
and  may  remain  there  ;  but  the  deceitfulness  of  worldly  cares  or  pleasures,  or  the 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  tat. 


remains  of  unsubdued  sin,  Btifle  it,  till  at  length  some  providential  circumstanc« 
occurs  ^iich  fans  the  spark  into  a  flame.  Anotlier  effect  of  fire  is,  to  cormmmicate 
its  warmth  to  all  that  come  within  its  .reach.  And  such  is  also  the  effect  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  upon  the  soul.  The  heart  of  man  is  by  nature  cold — cold  towards  God, 
and  cold  towards  his  fellow-creatures.  Not  so  the  man  whose  heart  has  been 
touched  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  shall  only  carry  this  comparison  one  step  further. 
We  all  understand  the  effect  of  fire  in  restoring  comfort  to  the  body.  We  approach 
closer  to  it  when  we  have  been  made  uneasy  through  the  chilling  influence  of  cold, 
and  the  genial  feelings  of  health  and  warmth  revive  within  us.  So,  likewise,  the  Holy 
Spirit  cheers  the  heart  and  re-animates  the  languid  feelings ;  gives  new  hfe  to  the 
Beal  and  piety,  which,  without  it,  would  sicken  and  decay.  {J.  B.  Sumner,  M.A.) 
The  fiery  influence  sometimes  gentle. — But  there  is  also  a  fire  that,  like  the  genial 
heat  in  some  greenhouse,  makes  even  the  barren  tree  glow  with  blossom,  and  benda 
its  branches  with  precious  fruit.  (Dr.  Mac.laren.)  The  fiery  influence  purifying. 
— Did  you  ever  see  a  blast-furnace?  How  long  would  it  take  a  man,  think  you, 
with  hammer  and  chisel,  or  by  chemical  means,  to  get  the  bits  of  ore  out  from  the 
Btony  matrix  ?  But  fling  them  into  the  great  cylinder,  and  pile  the  fire,  and  let  the 
strong  draught  roar  through  the  burning  mass,  and  by  evening  you  can  run  off  a 
glowing  stream  of  pure  and  fluid  metal,  from  which  all  the  dross  and  rubbish  Ib 
parted,  which  has  been  charmed  out  of  all  its  sullen  hardness,  and  will  take  the 
shape  of  any  mould  into  which  you  like  to  ran  it.  The  fire  has  conquered,  has 
melted,  has  purified.  So  with  us.  Love  "  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  given  unto  us,"  love  that  answers  to  Christ's,  love  that  is  fixed  upon  Him 
who  is  pure  and  separate  from  sinners,  will  purify  us  and  sever  us  from  our  sins. 
Nothing  else  will.  All  other  cleansing  is  superficial,  like  the  water  of  John'a 
baptism.  Moralities  and  the  externals  of  religion  will  wash  away  the  foulneafl 
which  lies  on  the  surface,  but  stains  that  have  sunk  deep  into  the  very  substance  of 
the  soul,  and  have  dyed  every  thread  in  warp  and  woof  to  its  centre,  are  not  to  be 
got  rid  of  so.      {Ihid.)  The  analogy  between  these  two  baptisms: — 1.  They 

are  both  sudden.  Y^hitefield  was  once  preaching  on  Blackheath,  and  a  man 
and  his  wife  coming  from  market  saw  the  crowd,  and  went  up  to  hear.  Whitefield 
was  saying  something  about  what  happened  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  the 
man  said  to  his  wife:  "Come,  Mary,  we  will  not  stop  any  longer.  He  is  talking 
about  something  that  took  place  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  WTiat'a 
that  to  us?  "  But  they  were  fascinated.  The  truth  of  God  came  to  their  hearts. 
When  they  were  home,  they  took  down  the  Bible  and  said :  "Is  it  possible  that 
these  old  truths  have  been  here  so  long,  and  we  have  not  known  it  ?  "  Ah  1  it  waa 
in  the  flash  of  God's  Spirit  on  Blackheath  that  they  were  saved — the  Spirit  coming 
mightily,  and  suddenly,  and  overwhelmingly  upon  them.  So  it  was  that  God's  Spirit 
eame  to  Andrew  Fuller,  and  James  Harvey,  and  the  Earl  of  Rochester,  and  Bishop 
Latimer  —  suddenly.  2.  They  were  both  irresistible.  Notwithstanding  all  out 
boasted  machinery  and  organization  for  putting  out  fires,  the  efforts  that  were  made 
did  not  repulse  the  flames  last  December  one  single  instant.  There  waa  a  great 
sound  of  lure-trumpets,  and  brave  men  walking  on  hot  walls ;  but  the  flames  were 
baulked  not  an  instant.  So  it  has  been  with  the  Holy  Spirit  moving  through  the 
hearts  of  this  people.  There  have  been  men  here  who  have  sworn  that  the  rehgion 
of  Jesus  Christ  should  never  come  into  their  households;  they  and  their  children 
kneel  now  at  the  same  altar.  3.  They  are  both  consuming.  Did  you  ever  see  any 
more  thorough  work  than  was  done  by  that  fire  last  December?  The  strongest 
beams  turned  to  ashes.  The  iron  cracked,  curled  up,  destroyed.  So  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  been  a  consuming  fire  amid  the  sins  and  habits  of  those  who  despise  God, 
4.  They  were  both  melting.  If  you  examined  the  bars,  and  bolts,  and  plumbing 
work  of  the  Tabernacle,  after  it  went  down,  you  know  it  was  a  melting  procese. 
The  things  that  seemed  to  have  no  relation  to  each  other  adjoined — flowed  together. 
So  it  has  been  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  melting  down  all  asperities  and  unbrotherli- 
ness.  Heart  has  flowed  out  towards  heart.  5.  The  fiery  influence  qualifying  for 
work, — If  God  baptized  us  with  fire,  it  is  because  He  meana  to  fit  ua  fur  hot  and 
tremendous  work.    {Dr.  Talmage.) 

Ver.  12.  Whose  fan.  —  Christ  a  tifter.  — Humanity  yields  its  twofold  crop,  ita 
whfat  and  chaff,  and  keeps  its  terrible  capacity  of  mixing  chaff  and  wheat  together, 
making  them  look  alike.  A  sifter  needed. — Something,  then,  is  wanted  to  lift  the 
cover,  to  unveil  the  reality,  to  exjyose  the  things  that  toe  do  and  the  persons  tluit  w* 
are,     Wliether  we  want  Him  or  not,  He  comea  "whoso  fan  ia  in  Hia  hand." 


•HAP,  ra.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  SS 

A  sifter  needed  for  the  take  of  tJie  truth.  —  Eealize,  too,  that  the  sifting  worS  ' 
mnst  be  done  not  only  for  the  truth's  sake  and  for  God's  sake,  but  for  the 
sake  of  the  foohsh  people  themselves  —  for  the  welfare  of  the  world.  Otherwise 
the  world,  cheated  by  the  delusion,  would  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  be  deluded 
to  destruction.  Life  foreshadows  a  sifting  process.  —  Christ  prflparea  the  way 
for  His  own  great  reckoning  to  come,  by  setting  foreshadows  of  His  sitting  work 
around  us  where  we  are.  Life  itself  moves  on  with  the  fan  in  its  hand.  So  into 
this  medley  where  you  live  there  springs  suddenly  some  new-comer.  It  isi  a  provi- 
dence  of  God,  A  contagious  disease  escapes  quarantine  and  breaks  out  in  the 
town.  There  is  a  wreck  on  a  reef  off  the  shore.  On  a  Western  river  great  water- 
floods  sweep  away  scores  of  houses  and  lives.  A  hundred  human  bodies  are 
crushed  and  burned  in  a  mass  in  some  building.  You  are  not  hurt ;  but  as  the 
report  strikes  man  after  man  in  the  neighbourhood,  if  you  could  look  underneath 
the  masks  which  some  people  from  pride  or  policy  keep  over  their  real  selves, 
would  you  not  see  always  two  sorts  of  men  revealed  ?  In  one  there  is  apathy,  and 
in  another  there  is  sympathy.  Here  are  the  two  sorts  of  men  disclosed.  Before, 
you  could  not  have  told  which  was  which  ;  all  looked  alike ;  but  in  the  threshing- 
floor  of  God  the  winnowing  has  begun.  Adversity  a  sifting  process. — One  family 
that  you  know,  overtaken  by  misfortune,  is  paralysed  or  embittered,  and  goes 
down.  Another,  struck  by  the  same  blow,  summons  its  interior  strength,  is  sweet- 
tempered,  hopeful,  and  courageous,  and  as  it  descends  in  style  rises  in  spiritual 
Btature.  The  reason  why  prosperity  seems  to  enlarge  some  persons  and  belittla 
others  is  not  so  much  that  it  actually  alters  their  dimensions  as  that  it  pubhshea 
what  their  dimensions  are.  It  is  a  shaking  of  the  fan.  Public  questions  sift. — 
Now  and  then  a  sharp  question  of  right  or  wrong  is  thrust  in  upon  a  whole  com- 
munity in  palpable  shape — a  question  of  public  justice  or  oppression,  of  fair  dealing 
between  capital  and  labour,  of  chastity  in  hterature  or  decency  in  art,  of  commercial 
honour,  temperance  in  drinking,  pohtical  integrity.  Everybody  must  take  Bides, 
openly  in  act  or  virtually  in  secret  choice  or  feeling.  This  new  truth  has  tin  fan  in 
its  hand.  It  sifts  your  gay  society,  getting  souls  in  position  for  their  judgment. 
At  certain  historical  epochs  great  characters  arrive.  They  utter  one  of  these  great 
truths,  and  stand  out  or  fight  for  it.  They  are  not  judges  of  men,  but  sifters  of 
men.  Every  one  of  them  has  a  fan  in  the  hand.  Character  cannot  per- 
manently  he  concealed. — There  is  no  privacy  for  character  in  the  universe.  The 
righteousness  of  God  has  arranged  it  that  we  shall  hve  surrounded  by  a  system  oi 
detectives  and  exposures,  and  all  the  uniforms  and  costumes  and  cosmetics  and 
masks  and  escapes  of  that  pubHc  stage,  society,  will  not  baffle  them.  This  life  is 
the  beginning,  though  not  the  end,  of  judgment.  Truth  a  dividing  power. 
— It  is  inwrought  benignantly  into  the  silent  and  steady  operation  of  the  tmth. 
Truth  itself  is  a  dividing  poXver.  Discrimination  a  laic  of  nature.  —  To  me  it 
establishes  faith,  and  makes  the  awful  doctrine  of  retribution  reasonable,  to  see 
the  law  wrought  into  the  whole  fabric  of  Nature  around  us  and  the  very  consti- 
tution of  man.  Even  in  the  orchards  and  gardens  there  is  a  visible  economy  of 
discrimination,  of  rejection,  of  judgment.  Bad  fruit  drops  off  and  is  cast  away  by 
the  same  hand  that  gathers  and  gamers  the  good.  Sow  chaff  and  grain  together 
if  you  choose;  the  chaff  rots,  while  the  vital  seeds  sprout  and  grow  and  yield 
"some  thirty,  some  sixty,  some  an  hundred."  Why  not  so  when  we  come  up  to 
the  immortal  wheat  ?  (Bishop  Huntingdon.)  1.  Christ  is  the  universal  Judge ; 
*'  His  fan  is  in  His  hand."  He  possesses  authority,  discrimination,  and  impartialityf 
— the  three  grand  qualifications  for  this  office.    (If.  Henry.) 

Wbeat — chaff. — 1.  In  the  Christian  Church  there  is  a  mtxtueb  of  nominal  and 

real  Christians.  Parable  of  the  Tares.  Of  the  Wedding  Garment.  Judas. 
Ananias  and  Sapphira.  The  false  are  the  careless  or  indifferent.  The  self- 
righteous  or  sentmaental;  the  hollow-hearted  or  hypocritical.  The  true  are 
penitents,  believers,  new  creatures.  II.  The  Head  of  the  Church  knows  the  trub 
CHAKACTEB  OF  ALL  its  members.  Seven  churches  of  Asia.  "  I  know  thy  works." 
Intimate  and  exact  knowledge  of  His  own  people.  III.  The  Head  of  the  Church 
WILL  SEPABATB  the  prccious  from  the  vile.  By  His  doctrine — providential  dealings 
— Satanic  temptations — fire  of  persecution.  IV.  The  final  doom  of  all  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Church  will  correspond  to  their  character.  The  wheat  to  the  garner. 
The  chaff  to  the  fire.  1.  Examine  yourselves.  2.  Prepare  for  judgment.  (Anon.) 
I.  The  TWO  GBEAT  CLASSES  into  which  the  world  is  divided.  Two  only.  In  tne  eyes 
sf  men  many.    Either  believers  or  unbelievers.     No  third  class.     II.  When  xhesh 


21  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chajp.  m 

TWO  CLASSES  WILL  BE  SEPARATED.  Not  yet.  When  Christ  comes  I  III.  The 
roimo:<  of  chkist's  people.  IV.  The  portion  of  those  who  abe  not  chf-ist's. 
(J.  C.  Ryle.)  The  icheat  and  the  chaff.— By  the  wheat  is  evidently  intended 
those  whose  characters  are  useful ;  by  the  chaff  those  who  are  worthless.  Wheat 
is  valuable  because  it  answers  the  purpose  of  the  cultivator,  which  is  to  produce 
food  for  himself  and  others  ;  so  those  persons  are  useful  who  answer  the  ends  for 
which  God  has  placed  them  here.  God  has  placed  us  here  to  glorify  Him  : — 1.  By 
our  exercising  suitable  dispositions  towards  Him ;  2.  By  cultivating  every  virtne; 
8.  By  our  doing  good  to  others.  From  this  description  of  the  wheat  we  may 
easily  infer  the  character  of  those  who  resemble  the  chaff.  1.  If  those  are  the 
wheat  who  exercise  suitable  dispositions  towards  God,  those  are  the  chaff  who  are 
without  such  dispositions.  2.  If  those  are  the  wheat  who  are  seeking  the  per- 
fection of  their  natm-e,  then  those  are  the  chaff  who  neglect  to  seek  it.  3.  If  those 
are  the  wheat  who  labour  for  the  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare  of  their  fellow- 
creatures,  those  are  the  chaff  who  live  chiefly  to  please  themselves.  4,  If 
those  are  the  wheat  who  glorify  Gnd  by  believing  in  Christ,  then  those  are  the 
chaff  who  remain  in  unbelief.  6.  To  which  of  these  two  classes  do  we  belong? 
(B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  Good  and  evil  are  really  different  in  kind,  absolutely  and 
intrinsically,  essentially  and  in  the  nature  of  things:  I.  By  the  free  choice  of  will, 
and  the  practice  consequent  upon  such  a  choice,  real  virtue  or  vice  can  be  acquired. 
II.  Every  man  is  as  to  his  moral  character  what  his  own  behaviour  and  practice 
make  him.  By  as  certain  and  determinate  a  distinction  as  wheat  and  chaff  are,  by 
their  real  and  proper  natures,  different  from  each  other.  III.  God  in  all  His  com- 
mandments really  desires  to  bring  men  by  the  habitual  practice  of  virtue  to  a  state 
by  which  they  can  become  capable  of  His  eternal  happiness  in  the  enjoyment  of  His 
unchangeable  favour.  Therefore  the  good  must  be  separated  from  the  evil  surely 
and  thoroughly,  if  we  would  win  salvation.  [Samuel  Clarke,  D.D.)  Similnrity 
between  real  Christians  and  hjpocritical. — And  let  me  remind  \ou  how  like  the 
chaff  is  to  the  wheat,  how  like  the  mere  professor  is  to  the  saint.  Of  what 
colour  is  the  chaff?  Precisely  the  same  as  that  of  the  wheat.  And  what  is  its 
form  ?  Exactly  that  of  the  wheat.  And  where  is  it  found  ?  Not  blowing  about 
the  highway,  but  in  close  contact  with  the  wheat.  It  is  upon  us  that  this  sifting 
trial  is  to  pass ;  and  it  matters  not  how  perfect  may  be  our  resemblance  to  the 
saints,  if  there  be  a  resemblance  and  nothing  more.     (P.  B.  Power.) 

Sect  distinctions  obliterated  ni  destiny. — I  have  seen  a  field  here,  and  a  field  there, 
stand  thick  with  com — a  hedge  or  two  has  separated  them.  At  the  proper  season 
the  reapers  entered  ;  soon  the  earth  was  disburdened,  and  the  grain  was  conveyed 
to  its  destined  resting-place,  where,  blended  together  in  the  barn  or  the  stack,  it 
could  not  be  known  that  a  hedge  had  ever  separated  this  com  from  that.  Thus  it 
is  with  the  Church.  Here  it  grows,  as  it  were,  in  different  fields,  and  even,  maybe, 
by  different  hedges.  By  and  by,  when  the  harvest  is  come,  all  God's  wheat  shall 
be  gathered  into  the  garner,  without  one  single  mark  to  distinguish  that  onoe  they 
differed  in  outward  circumstantials  of  form  and  order.     (Toplady.) 

Ver.  13.  Baptized  of  him, — The  baptism  of  our  Saviour  : — I.  The  circamstance  of 
TIME.  1.  Seasonable.  Men  were  at  this  time  being  baptized  and  confessing  theii 
sins.  People  were  expecting  the  Christ  (John  i.  19).  Let  man  be  diminished,  but 
let  God  arise.  The  truth  is  revealed  that  the  servant  may  not  rob  the  Master  of 
His  honour.  2.  This  adverb  of  time  points  to  the  age  of  Clirist.  Mature  age.  He 
taught  the  need  of  well-seasoned  timber  to  make  pillars  for  the  Church  of  God.  Am 
Christ  attained  perfect  age  in  nature.  His  servants  should  be  perfect  in  grace  and 
glory.  II.  After  what  manner  He  would  be  baptized.  1.  Upon  what  ground  did 
John  begin  this  new  ceremony  ?  It  betokened  the  end  of  the  old  ceremonies. 
Superstitions  turned  into  a  blessing.  Heathen  used  washings.  Turned  into  an 
immortal  laver.  2.  The  dignity  of  John's  baptism.  It  was  the  baptism  of  repent- 
ance. It  did  not  lack  grace.  But  Christ's  ministry  is  better  than  man's.  Dis- 
tinctions between  the  two  baptisms.  1.  John  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Messiah. 
Christ  bade  His  disciples  use  another  form.  2.  They  differ  in  extent — John  bap- 
tiz(-d  in  the  regions  of  Judaea,  Christ  bade  His  disciples  to  except  none.  3.  Christ's 
baptism  transcends  John's  in  the  variety  of  persons.  4.  Christ's  baptism  is  more 
operative  since  He  has  gone  to  His  Father.  5.  John's  baptism  was  good,  Christ's 
is  necessary  to  the  end  of  the  world.  (Ilnrket.)  1.  John  was  jealous  of  our 
Sa\'iour's  honour.  2.  He  confesses  his  vileness  and  inferiority.  {Ibid.)  Faith  it 
mthing  else  but  a  long-continued  astonishment,  which  knows  not  how  to  utter 


CHAP.  m.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  21 

itself,  because  the  Lord  hath  done  such  marvellous  things  for  ns.  {Ibid.)  Christ 
baptized  : — What  so  Divine  an  instigation  to  press  us  all  to  come  unto  the  flood  of 
living  waters,  to  thirst  for  that  immortal  spring  of  grace  than  this,  that  the  Son 
of  God  Himself  did  not  decline  to  be  partaker  of  the  baptism  of  repentance. 
To  make  the  sacrament  virtuous  and  powerful  for  them  that  should  take  it  after 
Him.  That  by  His  example,  to  undergo  a  new  rite  and  ordinance,  men  might  be 
drawn  from  old  customs  to  newness  of  life.  {Ibid.)  The  baptism  of  Christ  no 
degradation : — As  Caesar  did  not  lessen  his  own  dignity,  because  he  would  b«)th 
command  as  General,  and  yet  work  in  the  trenches  Uke  the  meanest  pioneer.  Dux 
confilio,  miles  exemplo ;  and  as  Helen,  the  mother  of  Constantino,  was  not  under 
the  honour  of  a  princess,  because  she  would  dress  the  blains  and  ulcers  of  poor 
cripples  in  the  hospital ;  so  the  mighty  Son  of  God  was  not  diminished  in  His  glory, 
because  He  put  Himself  into  the  rank  of  abject  ones  by  His  own  yielding  and 
accord,  not  by  compulsive  necessity.  (Tbid.)  I.  We  should  sincerely  feel,  thh 
WANT  OP  A  Divine  Bedeemer.  When  Jesus  demands  baptism  of  John,  the  latter 
publicly  declares :  "  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  Thee."  H.  We  bhodld  acknow- 
ledge  THE   WISE  counsels   OF    GOD.      III.    We    SHODLD    ADMIRE    THE    ORANDEtTR   AND 

MAJESTY  WITH  WHICH  Jesos  WAS  ENCOMPASSED.  We  behold  OUT  Saviour  encompassed 
by  a  glory  which  transcends  the  most  enchanting  pageantry  of  nature.  {From  the 
Danish  of  Dr.  Balle.)  The  baptism  of  Jesus  by  John: — I.  The  office  of  John  was 
to  awaken  the  conscience  of  mankind.  H.  John  had  a  ministry  of  separation. 
III.  John  was  a  forerimner  in  pointing  to  Christ.  IV.  John  was  to  identify  Christ. 
{Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.) 

The  significance  of  our  Saviour's  baptism. — ^We  can  only  allude  to  meanings  which 
have  been  discovered  in  it ;  all  of  them,  it  may  be,  parts  of  its  largest  import.  It 
was  te  ratify  the  mission  of  John ;  it  was  to  purify  the  water  of  baptism.  Christ 
was  ceremonially  unclean,  as  representing  sinners.  St.  Bernard  sees  in  the  baptism 
the  exhibition  of  perfect  humility  ;  and  Meyer,  of  perfect  obedience.  Still  other* 
look  upon  the  baptism  as  an  inaugural  announcement,  a  formal  identification,  of 
His  Person  as  the  Messiah — an  inauguration  of  His  Messianic  ministry.  It  is 
Important  to  notice  certain  respects  in  which  the  baptism  was  unlike  that  of  the 
y)eople.  1.  It  was  at  the  close  of  the  day.  He  waited  until  all  the  penitents  of  that 
day  had  been  baptized  ;  in  this,  as  in  all  else  involving  sin,  separate  from  sinners. 
2.  John  did  not  treat  Christ  as  a  sinner.  He  gave  Him  the  remarkable  testimony, 
••I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  Thee."  3.  At  Jesus*  baptism  there  was  no  confes- 
«on  of  sin.  In  the  place  of  confession  was  a  prayer.  4.  The  promised  token,  the 
descent  of  the  Spirit  as  a  dove,  which  abode  upon  Him,  while  a  voice  from  heaven 
•aid,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  15.  Then  he  Buffered  Elm. — When  the  pilot  of  a  ship  will  not  turn  hii  sail 
to  the  winds,  nor  observe  how  to  let  a  turbulent  wave  pass  by  him,  he  splits  hia 
vessel ;  therefore  the  conclusion  of  the  point  shall  be  with  Solomon,  A  haughty  spirit 
goes  before  a  fall ;  and  it  savours  much  more  of  a  Christian  mildness  to  be  easily 
drawn  off  from  our  own  imaginations  than  to  hold  a  stiff  opinion  in  our  teeth,  in 
despite  as  it  were  of  all  wise  persuasions.     {Hacket.) 

Ver.  16.  Heavens  were  opened  unto  Him. — This  great  sight : — 1.  Great  in  the  Object, 
2,  Great  in  the  Person.  3.  Great  in  the  Mysteries.  Trinity  Sunday  : — I.  The  Thheb 
PERSONS  IN  the  Holt  Trinity.  1.  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost  miracu- 
lously exhibited.  3.  The  Holy  Father.  II.  A  vivid  representation  of  gospbIi 
salvation.  1.  Here  was  salvation  embodied  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost 
falls  on  Him.  3.  The  Holy  Father's  solemn  attestation  of  the  sufficiency  of  Christ 
and  His  salvation.  IH.  The  privilege  of  believers  here  confirmed  in  thh 
Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  We  view  Him  as  our  Federal  Head  and  Eepresenta- 
tive.  2.  In  this  capacity  He  received  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  In  this  character  the 
Father  delighted  in  Him,  and  also  in  His  people.  (1)  What  a  practical  view  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  (2)  Have  we  a  personal  interest  in  this  great 
work  7  (3)  Let  the  power  of  these  truths  be  seen  in  our  lives.  {F.  Clvse,  M.A.) 
Divine  testimony  to  the  Tri-unity  of  the  Godhead : — I.  Demonstrate  from  Scripture 
the  Tri-imity  of  the  Godhead.  II.  Prove  Christ's  perfect  union  in  the  Godhead,  as 
the  true  ground  of  Christian  faith.  HI.  How  great  a  blessing  this  olobious 
doctrine  is  for  all  God's  people.  There  may  be  mines  of  precious  wealth,  of 
minerals,  gold,  silver,  jewels,  in  a  domain  only  partially  known;  so  with  this 
dictrine.     God  the  Father  planned  the  way  of  redemption.    God  the  Son  willingly 


26  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

came  to  accomplish  our  salvation.  And  God  the  Spirit  guides  ua  into  all  truth. 
The  whole  Trinity  joins  in  man's  salvation.  1.  How  great  the  condescension  ol 
Jehovah  thus  to  reveal  the  nature  and  perfections  of  mercy.  2.  How  much  all 
revelation  testifies  of  God  the  Father's  delight  in  His  beloved  Son.  3.  How  God  is 
well  pleased  in  the  soul's  salvation  by  Christ.  (J.  G.  Angley,  M.A.)  ChrisVt 
baptism : — I.  Christ's  sdbmission  to  the  ordinance  of  baptism.  1.  Jesus  humbly 
waits  upon  the  Baptist.  The  fortitude  with  which  to  meet  pubUcity.  2.  He  is 
piivutely  discovered  to  John.  3.  The  Saviour  meekly  persists  in  His  obedient 
resolution.  How  lovely  this  conflict  of  humility !  4.  Jesus  at  last  receives  the  sign 
from  His  forerunner.  II.  The  honours  Christ  received  at  His  baptism.  1.  The 
opening  of  the  heavens.  2.  The  descent  of  the  Spirit  followed.  3.  The  procla- 
mation of  the  Father  closed  the  scene  of  wonders.     (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)        I.  Hebb 

IS  A  DECLAKATION  OF  THE  DIGNITY  AND    ENDEAP.EDNES8    OP   THE    SaVIOUR,  "  My  bcloVed 

Son."  1.  The  dignity  of  His  Person.  2.  The  endearedness  of  the  Son.  II.  Thh 
Father's  complacency  in  the  Son.  Complacency  takes  place.  1.  In  Creation : 
•♦  All  things  were  made  by  II im.^'  2.  In  redemption  :  "  He  hath  made  us  accepted 
in  the  beloved."  3.  The  Father  is  well  pleased  with  Christ  in  His  incarnation  and 
mediation.  4.  He  is  well  pleased  with  Him  in  all  His  people.  _  (£f.  Budd,  M.A.) 
Here  we  have  (1)  the  rising  of  the  morning  star,  John  the  Baptist ;  (2)  The  more 
glorious  rising  and  shining  of  the  Sun  of  Bighteonsness  Himself ;  (3)  A  messenger 
from  heaven.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  a  dove-like  Spirit.  The  dove  was  the  fowl 
offered  in  sacrifice ;  so  Christ  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God,  (4)  A  voice 
from  heaven.  As  the  Holy  Ghost  manifests  Himself  in  the  likeness  of  a  dove,  bo 
God  the  Father  in  a  voice.  This  voice  speaks  God's  favour  to  Christ.  1.  Expresses 
the  relation  He  stands  in  to  Him.  2.  Expresses  the  affection  the  Father  hath  to 
Him.  Observe  God's  favour  to  us  in  Him.  He  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 
well  pleased.  Consider  what  God  is  out  of  Christ,  and  what  God  is  in  Christ  L 
What  God  is  out  of  Christ  to  the  sinner.  (1)  An  angry  God  ;  (2)  a  threatening 
God;  (3)  a  dishonoured  God;  (4)  a  distant  God.  II.  What  God  is  in  Christ. 
(1)  A  recoDciled  God ;  (2)  a  promising  God  ;  (3)  a  glorified  God ;  (4)  a  near  God. 
{Ralph  Erskine.)  The  arithmetic  of  heaven. — A  gentleman,  passing  a  church  with 
Daniel  Webster,  asked  him,  "  How  can  you  reconcile  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity 
with  reason?  "  The  statesman  replied  by  asking,  ♦'  Do  you  understand  the  arithmetio 
of  heaven?  "  The  application  is  evident.  (Anon.)  The  heavens  are  never  shut 
while  either  of  the  sacraments  is  duly  administered  and  received  ;  neither  do  the 
heavens  ever  thus  open  without  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  {Bishop  Hall.) 
1.  The  Person  that  did  bear  witness.  2.  The  manner  how  He  testified  to  the 
honour  of  His  Son.  3.  The  authority  of  that  voice  from  heaven.  4.  The  Person 
to  whom  the  witness  is  borne.  5.  What  is  witnessed  of  Him  in  respect  of  Himself. 
6.  What  is  witnessed  of  Him  in  respect  of  our  consolation,  we  the  beloved  in  Him. 
{Ilacket.)  As  the  Father  sent  His  voice  from  heaven  to  earth,  let  our  lips  he  lull 
of  praters,  that  we  may  send  our  voice  from  earth  to  heaven.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vkb.  1.  To  te  tempted  of  the  devlL — The  pomhiliiy  and  necessity  of  l%«  temptO' 

lion: — I.  If  our  Lord  had  not  become  incarnate  He  would  never  have  been  tempted, 
for  temptation  is  not  possible  to  God.  God  is  above  the  possibility  of  temptation  ; 
the  beasts  are  below  it.  The  possession  of  an  animal  nature  is  not  the  only  sooroe 
of  temptation,  or  the  *'  angels  who  kept  not  their  own  principality  "  could  never 
have  fallen.  The  conditions  of  any  moral  goodness  possible  to  a  creature  involve 
the  possibility  of  its  opposite.  Was  not  Christ  too  good  to  be  tempted  ?  1.  AU 
human  goodness  needs  the  strain  of  temptation  to  reveal  its  reality  and  depth.  Even 
when  that  goodness,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  His  case  alo«e, 
is  absolutely  without  fault  or  imperfection,  temptation  is  still  required  to  prove  its 
strength,  and  by  the  proof  to  reveal  the  depth  and  sohdity  of  its  foundations  in  the 
soul.  The  ship  that  Ues  at  anchor  in  the  harbour  when  hardly  a  breath  of  wind 
ripples  the  surface  of  the  water,  may  hold  to  her  moorings,  but  this  is  no  proof  ol 
the  strength  and  soundness  of  her  cable,  for  no  strain  has  been  put  upon  it ;  bat 
If  she  u  out  at  sea,  and  caught  in  a  furious  storm,  and  drifting  fast  on  to  A  let 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  27 

shore,  and  then  lets  go  her  anchor,  and  it  holds,  there  is  proof  enough  of  the  quahty 
of  her  cable.  J5u(  temptation  strengthens  goodness  by  assaulting  it.  There  are  soma 
shells  which  cling  to  the  rocks  in  spite  of  the  continual  buffeting  of  the  tides,  but 
those  shells  are  thickest  and  strongest  where  the  tide  has  smitten  them  with  ita 
fullest  might,  and  so  the  defences  of  the  soul  against  evil  are  strong  in  proportion 
to  the  evil  whicli  has  been  resisted.  And  this  is  why  no  human  character  becomes 
ttable  or  strong  in  goodness  until  it  has  been  exposed  to  temptation.  Shield  it  from 
all  the  fierce  blasts  of  temptation,  preserve  it  in  a  forced  isolation  from  the  world, 
and  it  will  remain  as  unstable  as  water  beneath  a  summer  sky  :  but  let  the  rough 
tosts  of  winter  fall  on  it,  and  the  biting  winds  lash  it,  and  it  will  slowly  knit  itself 
into  compact  and  solid  strength,  and,  like  the  ice,  will  defy  the  storm  which  haa 
only  given  it  strength  by  attacking  it.  But  we  have  not  exhausted  the  meaning 
of  cur  Lord's  temptations.  1.  They  had  a  representative  as  well  as  a  personal  sig- 
nifitance — He  was  the  Head  of  the  human  race.  2.  It  was  the  first  great  act  of  the 
redemption  of  the  race  from  sin.  3.  The  sbame  and  reproach  of  our  first  parents 
are  roUed  away,  as  the  Son  of  Man  returns  from  this  conflict  victorious.  (G.  S. 
Barrett,  B.A.)  The  reality  of  the  Temptation  : — 1.  The  evangelists  were  thoroughly 
convinced  of  its  reality.  2.  The  other  references  to  it  in  the  New  Testament  point 
in  tbe  same  direction  (Heb.  iv.  15,  ii.  18).  3.  Assuming  the  existence  of  Satan  he 
is  not  likely  to  have  engaf.'ed  our  Lord  in  any  unreal  way.  What  is  meant  when  it  it 
taid  it  was  iiriposnille  for  Christ  to  have  sinned  ?  Certainly  not  that  it  was  a  physical 
impossibility,  as  when  we  say  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  of  luxury  to  feel  the 
temptation  a  starving  man  feels  to  steal.  It  was  a  moral  impossibility  ;  He  would 
not  elect  to  yield.  We  are  certain  of  Christ's  immovable  loyalty  to  righteousness. 
Temptation  is  not  in  itself  an  admission  of  moral  iin perfection,  so  was  not  incon- 
sistent with  the  holy  character  of  our  Lord.  All  Christ's  temptations  came  to  Him 
from  without,  not  from  within  Him.  An  inward  bias  to  evil  is  not  essential  to 
temptation ;  temptation  may  appeal  to  what  is  best  within  us,  to  satisfy  lawful 
appetites  by  unlawful  means.  Thus  the  reality  of  Christ's  temptations  remain 
unbroken.  The  practical  results  of  this  admission: — 1.  The  reality  of  Christ's 
temptations  affects  their  entire  moral  significance.  We  feel  the  moral  subUmity 
of  His  character.  2.  It  affects  us  as  well  as  Himself  :  His  sympathy  with  us  and 
our  realization  of  His  sympathy  with  us.  The  Instrument  and  the  Divine  ordering 
of  the  Temptation  : — 1.  We  may  learn  that  it  is  never  the  will  of  God  we  should 
voluntarily  enter  into  temptation.  2.  We  ought  to  pray  that  God  would  not 
"bring  "  us  into  it.  3.  But  should  God  lead  us,  as  He  led  Christ,  into  temptation, 
then  we  may  confidently  appeal  to  God  for  grace  to  overcome.  {Ibid.)  The 
Tempter's  power  limited : — 1.  By  the  fact  that  he  is  a  mere  creature.  2.  By  the 
providence  of  God.  3.  By  man's  will.  4,  We  ought  not  to  exaggerate  the  power 
of  Satan,  let  us  beware  of  underrating  it.  [Norman  Ma cleod,  D.D.)  Reasons  why 
our  Lord  was  led  to  be  tempted: — 1.  In  order  that  the  reality  and  glory  of  Hia 
Sonship  might  be  made  manifest.  2.  That  He  might  redeem  man  from  the  evil 
to  which  he  was  subjected  by  the  fall  of  the  first  Adam.  3.  That  He  might  become 
experimentally  acquainted  with  the  evil  of  sin.  4.  The  temptation  of  our  Lord 
was  a  chief  element  in  His  sufferings  for  us  as  our  Mediator.  5.  Evil  is  compelled 
to  glorify  God.  (Ibid.)  iVhat  Satan  knew  of  Christ : — 1.  There  seems  little  reason 
to  doubt  that  Satan  knew  Jesus  to  be  the  promised  One,  whose  advent  the  prophets 
had  foretold.  The  artful  use  he  made  of  Scripture  upon  the  pinnacle  of  tha  temple 
sufficiently  shows  his  acquaintance  with  Holy  Writ.  2.  Satan  also  supposed, 
apparently,  that  Christ  possessed  superhuman  powers.  3.  13ut  although  Satan 
was  thus  far  in  posses.sion  of  the  truth  respecting  Christ,  it  does  not  follow  that 
ho  knew  the  whole  truth  respecting  Him.  4.  If  Satan  had  no  just  view  of  tha 
pejson  of  Christ,  of  His  true  divinity,  he  would  necessarily  have  imperfect  views 
of  His  perfect  holiness.  Even  if  this  view  be  not  admitted,  if  any  person  should 
Btill  believe  that  Satan  did  understand  the  divinity,  and  consequently  the  immaculate 
purity,  of  our  Lord,  it  is  not  incredible  nor  surprising,  even  on  this  supposition, 
that  he  should  attempt  to  lead  Him  into  sin.  Fur  it  is  possible  that  he  was  judi- 
cially blinded,  that  he  might  not  see  the  hopelessness  of  his  attempt.  (L.  H.  Wise- 
man.) The  entrance  into  Temptation : — I.  1  he  time  of  the  temptation.  Immediately 
after  our  Lord's  baptism.  The  time  reveals  one  object  of  the  temptation — the 
unveiling  of  the  tactics  of  the  Evil  One ;  it  was  "  for  a  precaution  to  us."  The 
opening  of  heaven  from  above  was  followed  by  the  ojpening  of  hell  from  beneath. 
We  have  to  guard  the  treasure  of  grace  after  it  is  given.  When  we  are  expecting 
peace  and  joy  we  have  suddenly  to  enter  into  struggles,  darkness,  and  desolation. 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

God  has  an  object  in  permitting  the  assaults  of  Satan  at  such  a  time ;  to  keep  the 
Boul  low  wheu  from  the  presence  of  Divine  favour  there  may  be  risk  of  self- 
exaltation.  11.  The  iMFLDENCE  uuiler  which  Christ  was  led  to  the  scene  of  conflict — 
♦•led  up  of  the  Spirit."  1.  The  source  of  the  influence.  The  Holy  Spirit.  Thia 
in  accord  with  other  notices  of  His  relations  with  the  incarnate  Lord.  Christ  wag 
conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  preached  under  His  guidance.  2.  The  extent  of  the 
Spirit's  influence.  A  stronger  term  is  used  by  St.  Mark — "  The  Spirit  driveth  Him." 
"We  must  hot  enter  into  temptation  unless  it  be  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  the  way  of  providence.  The  Spirit's  movements  are  often  to  be  known 
by  their  contrariety  to  our  inclinations,  and  should  lead  to  solitude,  mortification, 
Ac.  HI.  The  PLACE  whither  Christ  was  led.  Christ  called  to  meet  the  tempter 
in  the  wilderness,  that  by  His  unassisted  might  the  victory  should  be  won.  Thus 
He  sanctified  times  of  retreat  and  states  of  retirement.  They  should  form  a  part 
of  the  preparation  for  the  ministerial  office.  {W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  The  Per- 
sonality  of  Satan  : — I.  The  personautt  of  tlie  Evil  One.  Influence  is  that  which 
flows  out  from  personality.  In  proving  the  existence  of  God  arguments  from 
design  are  used ;  so  it  would  be  difficult  to  reconcile  the  condition  of  the  world 
in  its  misery  with  the  Divine  goodness  unless  some  other  agent  be  at  work  in  it. 
All  nations  in  the  past  have  borne  witness  to  a  belief  in  spiritual  beings.  The  evil 
of  the  inner  life  bears  the  same  testimony ;  no  mental  law  accounts  for  it.  Made 
clear  by  revelation.  Christ's  words  and  work  proclaim  existence  of  the  Evil  One. 
The  writers  of  the  New  Testament  testify  to  the  personality  of  Satan  (Acts  v.  3). 
The  temptation  makes  this  clear.     II.  His  qualifications  for  the  oflice  of  Tempter. 

1.  Skill ;  he  has  an  angehc  nature  ;  great  experience.  2.  Power  ;  (1)  rule,  power ; 
(2)  does  not  stand  alone  in  his  work ;  (3)  the  third  source  of  power  lies  in  that 
mysterious  relation  between  fallen  man  and  the  Tempter  which  necessitated 
redemption,  and  which  justified  the  expression,  "  Prince  of  this  world."  3.  Malice: 
with  skill  and  power  is  combined  unceasing  hostihty  to  God  and  man.  But  while 
we  note  the  extent  of  Satan's  power  we  must  not  forget  its  limits.  As  a  creature 
he  possesses  finite  capacities.  His  knowledge  is  restricted  in  two  ways :  he  cannot 
discern  our  thoughts,  nor  by  himself  read  the  future.  True,  he  has  acquired  a  con- 
jectural knowledge.  Also  limits  placed  upon  his  power :  on  the  Divine  side  there 
is  the  law  of  permission ;  on  our  side,  of  free  will.  Formidable  as  the  enemy 
is,  there  is  no  ground  for  despondency,  nor  excuse  for  failure  in  the  conflict.  In 
the  history  of  the  Tempter  see  an  instance  of  the  fearful  way  sin  may  be  permitted 
to  run  its  course.  (Ibid.)  Study  the  Enemy : — Among  military  rules  there  is  one 
in  all  authors  which  brings  some  advantage  with  it  to  study  the  nature  and 
oondition  of  our  enemy.  (Hacket.)  The  temptation  of  Christ  : — I.  A  few 
GENERAL  coNsiDEKiTioNs  UPON  THIS  SUBJECT.  1.  That  wc  are  to  Understand  the 
account  of  the  Evangelist  as  the  history  of  an  actual  occurrence.  2.  It  may  assist 
our  thoughts  to  be  reminded  of  the  true  character  of  our  Lord's  person.  3.  That 
this  history  represents  one  great  being,  as  the  head  of  others,  employed  in  the  work 
of  tempting  men,  and  frustrating  the  designs  of  God.  4.  Did  Satan  know  the 
Person  he  assaulted  ?  and  could  he  have  any  hope  of  success  ?  He  knew  something 
of  our  Lord's  character,  as  appears  from  the  question,  "  If  Thou  be  the  Son  ol 
God."  But  wicked  muids  often  commit  great  blunders  and  engage  in  hopeless 
tasks.  II.  Great  practical  lessons  which  the  transaction  appears  designed 
10  TEACH.  1.  The  deep  humiliation  of  our  Lord.  2.  The  variety  of  those  tempta- 
tions by  which  men  are  assaulted,  jfl)  They  are  subject  to  necessities.  (2)  They 
are  tempted  to  presumi^tion.  (3)  Temptations  to  the  worldly  spirit.  3.  We  see 
here  the  means  of  effectually  resisting  temptation.  4.  That  temptation  simply 
considered  is  not  sin.  (R.  Watson.)  The  temptation: — I.  The  cibcdmstances 
under  which  it  took  place.  1.  Time  when  happened.  2.  Influence  by  which 
directed.  3.  Place  whore  enacted.  4.  Exercise  by  which  prefaced — "Fasted."  II. 
The  particulars  of  which  it  consisted.  1.  Distrust.  2.  Presumption.  3.  Apos- 
tacy :  to  renounce  His  allegiance  to  God.  (1)  The  vision.  (2)  The  offer.  (3)  The 
condition.  III.  The  consequences.  1.  Satan  defeated.  2.  Jesus  comforted. 
Uses :  1.  Warning.  2.  Direction.  3.  Encouragement.  {H.  Parr.)  The  temp- 
tation of  Jesus  : — I.  Wuy  was  Jesus  tempted  ?  1.  Because  He  was  a  man.  2. 
Because  He  was  the  Messiah.  II.  What  is  the  significance  of  the  several  tempta- 
tions? 1.  In  the  first,  Christ  is  urged  to  satisfy  hunger  by  working  a  miracle. 
Christ  refused,  because  miraculous  power  must  not  be  used  simj'ly  for  personal 
advantage.     Clirist  recalls  the  great  fact  that  God  feeds  man  with  spiritual  food, 

2.  Satan  perceives  Christ's  frame  of  mind :  Is  Christ  filled  with  confidence  in  Hit 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  29 


Father?  From  tlie  Temple  roof  Christ  is  asked  to  cast  Himself  down.  The  act  urged 
would  have  been  presumptuous,  ostentatious,  and  untimely.  The  third  temptation 
was  to  sacrifice  principle  to  policy.  All  His  suffering  might  be  prevented  by  a 
momentary  act.  IH.  Lessons.  1.  Temptations  ply  us  through  the  constitutional 
avenues  of  our  being.  2.  Scripture  may  be  misapplied  to  lead  us  into  sin.  3.  Re- 
Bistance  of  temptation  is  aided  by  familiarity  with  God's  Word.  4.  A  Divine  peace 
follows  the  resistance  of  temptation.  (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.)  Christ 
tempted  of  the  devil  in  the  wilderness  : — I.  Why  our  Lord  was  tempted.  1.  "  Where- 
fore in  all  things  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren,  that  He  mi^ht 
be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest,"  &o.  2.  To  convey  to  all  His  people  an 
assurance  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the  power  of  Satan.  II.  How  our  Lord  was 
tempted.  1.  The  time  selected.  2.  The  circumstances  skilfully  adapted  to  the 
temptation.  UL  How  to  overcome  temptations.  1.  To  have  God's  Word  in 
our  hearts.  2,  To  have  God's  fear  before  our  eyes.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Christ 
tempted  in  the  wilderness : — I.  The  person  tempted.  1.  See  here  the  depth  of  our 
Lord's  abasement.  2.  See  the  height  of  His  love.  II.  The  part  which  God  took 
IN  OUR  Lord's  temptations.  "Led  by  the  Spirit."  III.  The  time  op  our  Lord's 
temptations.  1.  It  was  immediately  after  God  had  put  on  Him  special  honour. 
2.  Just  before  He  entered  upon  His  great  ministerial  work.  IV.  The  placb 
where  the  Lord  Jesus  was  tempted.  Look  on  the  exalted  Jesus  as  the  once  tempted 
Jesus.  (C.  bradleij.)  The  temptation  of  Jesus : — I.  The  sons  of  God  are  not 
exempted  from  temptation.  Many  new  converts  cherish  false  expectations  con- 
cerning the  peace  which,  in  the  Word  of  God,  is  promised  them.  II.  Temptation 
is  NOT  THE  same  THING  AS  SIN.  To  be  tempted  may  cause  us  much  pain  and 
Borrow,  but  it  is  not  sin.  III.  Temptations  are  divinely  ordered,  both  as  to  time 
%nd  measure  (ver.  1 ;  Job  i.  12,  ii.  6).  IV.  After  a  season  of  special  grace,  we  may 
expect  a  season  of  special  trial.  "  Then  "  (ver.  1).  It  is  not  the  vessel  in  ballast, 
but  the  vessel  richly  laden  that  is  in  danger  from  pirates.  V.  Satan  adapts  his 
temptations  to  our  character  and  circumstances.  Hence  our  watchfulness  must 
be  intelligent  and  comprehensive.  VI.  The  holiest  thinos  may  be  perverted  bt 
Satan  into  instruments  of  temptation  (vers.  3,  4,  6).  VII.  Though  temptationa 
are  varied  in  form,  they  are  pew  in  kind.  Jesus  was  tempted  to  three  things, 
♦'Then  the  devil  leaveth  Him,"  because  he  had  exhausted  all  his  means  of  assault, 
Vin.  Victory  itself  may  expose  us  to  assault.  We  must  not  think  we  are  rid 
of  him  wken  we  have  beaten  hiin  off.  Watch.  IX.  In  the  Word  of  God  we  have 
A  SUFFICIENT  ARMOURY  OF  DEFENCE  (vcrs.  4,  7,  10).  X.  In  the  stress  and  agony  of 
the  conflict,  when  we  are  tempted  to  yield  by  the  fear  that  resistance  is  hopeless, 
let  us  remind  ourselves  that  God  has  promised  grace  to  support  us  in  the  struggle, 
and  a  glorious  reward  when  the  victory  is  won.  (Anon.)  Moral  testing: — I. 
The  necessity  for  some  moral  testing  at  the  outset  of  life.  II.  Preparations  for 
testing  come  in  our  outward  circumstances.  III.  Such  testings,  or  temptings, 
take  a  great  variety  of  forms.  IV.  The  essence  of  all  such  testing  is  the  finding  out 
whether  we  really  mean  to  live  for  Self  or  to  live  for  God.  V.  The  force  to  resist 
evil  lies  in  having  our  will  set  on  God.  VI.  The  weapons  with  which  to  resist  evil 
are  God's  Word.  Learn : — 1.  Well-taught  childhood  prepares  for  the  temptations 
of  life.  2.  Early  decision  for  Christ  is  the  best  safeguard  against  the  tempter's 
power.  8.  Temptations  come  to  men  still  in  the  same  three  forms  as  they  did  to 
Jesus  (1  John  ii.  16).  4.  We  only  conquer  as  we  are  strong  in  God  and  in  Hia 
Word.  5.  A  first  conquest  of  evil  should  not  lead  us  to  think  that  the  Tempter  is 
conquered,  nor  make  us  cease  to  "  watch  and  be  sober."  {W.  O.  Simpson.)  Satan 
tempts  thvse  who  are : — I.  Beginners  with  difficulties  ;  II.  Progressobb  with 
LANQOOR.  Satan  makes  out  the  way  of  holiness  to  be — (1)  Long ;  (2)  rough ;  (3)  un- 
certain ;  III.  The  perfect  with  scruples  and  anxieties.  Satan  destroys  —  (1) 
Tranquillity  of  soul ;  (2)  All  spiritual  joy ;  (3)  All  sense  of  progress.  A  scruple  ia 
metaphorically  derived  from  a  small  stone,  which,  getting  inside  the  shoe  or  sandal, 
causes  pain  to  the  feet  at  every  step.  {James  MarcMnt.)  Our  great  adversary  : 
His — I.  Poverty.  He  had  nothing  to  offer  Jesus  Christ  suflScient  to  allure  Him. 
II.  Impudence.  Repelled  once,  he  returns  to  the  attack.  No  sense  of  defeat  or 
Bhame.  HI.  Weakness.  He  did  not  cast  our  Lord  down.  He  had  no  powet 
to  force.  rV.  Craftinebs.  He  attacks  our  Lord's  weakness  by  fasting.  He 
ciraduates  his  temptations.  V.  Is  false.  1.  Promises  that  which  he  cannot  giva 
2.  That  which  he  has  no  intention  of  giving.  {Matthias  Faber.)  The  retirement 
of  our  Lord  into  the  wilderness  teaches : — 1.  Humility  when  most  favoured  by  God ; 
when  most  illumined  and  blessed  by  His  Spirit.     2.  The  necessity  of  preparation 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

for  every  work  done  for  God,  if  that  work  is  to  be  really  fruitful.  3.  All  mis-sionary 
and  ministerial  work  is  to  he  begun  with  self.  4.  Preparation  is  necessary  a^'iinat 
the  temptations  of  the  Evil  One.  (S.Baring-Gould,M.A.)  Temptations: — I.  Temp- 
tations of  Sat'xn  are  to  be  feai^ed  :  (1)  For  the  skill  and  method  with  which  he  tempta; 
(2)  Bei'ftuse  his  warfare  is  gpLritual.  II.  Temptations  are  successive  and  variable. 
Satan  (1  )changes  the  objects  and  manners  of  the  temptation ;  (2)  Not  tempting  in  mora 
than  oTie  paruculur  at  a  time.  III.  Temptations  are  preserved  by  Satan  in  order  and 
METHOD.  1.  With  pleasure,  tlieu  with  vaingloiy.  2.  With  riches  and  ambition. 
IV.  Temptations  and  their  purposes  are  often  hidden.  The  eerpent  is  seldom  seen 
in  its  entire  or  full  length.  V.  Temptations  are  set  like  snakes.  Tliere  are  many 
social  questions  on  which  he  suggi-sts  an  inversion  of  God's  moral  laws.  VL 
Temptations  are  often  made  in  secret.  They  lose  their  power  if  divulged.  Many 
a  plot  is  oveilhro^\Ti  by  discovery.  VII.  Temptations  are  suited  to  opportunity. 
There  are  certain  moral  quahties  nearly  allied  to  certain  vices ;  as  harshness  to 
cruelty  and  pride ;  as  softness  to  luxury  and  disr^ipation.  VIII.  Temptations  have 
opposite  methods.  Gentle  persuasion  iirst,  violent  constraint  afterwards.  IX.  All 
temptations  are  alie_e  in  effect.  1.  Some  strike  the  tempted  one,  laying  him 
low  by  unexpected  occun-ences.  2.  Others  creep  into  the  mind  little  by  little,  killing 
while  resisting  by  soft  suggestions.  X.  Temptations  are  intermittent.  The  devil 
departs  for  a  season,  but  returns  to  be  victorious  when  least  expected.  {Claude  de 
Lingeirdes.)  It  is  not  enough  for  Him  to  fulfil  the  law,  but  He  suffers  Himself  to 
be  tempted  to  break  it.  (Faritidon.)  How  we  are  to  overcome  our  temptations : — 
I.  We  are  all  tkmpted.  Satau  is  behind  all  temptations.  II.  Some  occasions  aius 
MORE  suitable  TO  THE  tempter's  pukposes  THAN  OTUERs.  Momeuts  of  joy,  sorrow, 
or  unwatchfulness  be  often  seizes.  III.  The  temptation  to  sin  for  the  sake  of 
BREAD  IS  COMMON,  and  munv  are  misled  by  it.  Many  who  shiink  from  dark  ways  are 
guilty  of  distrust  in  their  temporal  circumstances.  What  an  alilnence  of  victorious 
power  there  is  in  that,  "  Hence,  Satan."  {Dr.  J.  P.  Lange.)  I.  Though  the  devil 
come  not  in  person  to  us,  as  he  did  to  Christ,  yet  he  comes  by  his  instruments. 
Ealak  sent  to  Balaam.  II.  There  be  some  that  will  say  they  were  never  tempted 
with  kingdoms.  It  may  well  be,  ior  it  needs  not,  when  less  will  serve.  The  devil  need 
never  carry  us  so  high  as  the  mount,  tbe  pinnacle  is  high  enough ;  yea,  the  lowest 
steeple  in  all  the  town  would  serve  t!ie  turn.  Let  us  but  stand  in  oar  window,  or 
in  our  doors,  if  he  will  give  us  but  so  much  as  we  see  there,  be  will  tempt  aa 
thoroughly.      We  will  accept  it,  and  thank  him  too.      III.  In  temptation  there 

is     BOTH     FIRE     TO     CONSUME     OCR     FAITU,    AND    A    DART     TO     WOUND    OUR    CONSCIENCES. 

(Bishop  Lancelot  Andrev}i's.)  The  temptation  of  Christ,  and  it»  subjective  results : 
— 1.  Succour.  2.  Sympathy.  3.  Example.  (T.  McRae,  I\LA.)  The  temptation 
of  Jc'^ui :  —  1.  Divinely  permitted.  2.  HumTuly  conditioned.  3.  Diabolicidly 
caused.     4.  Cunningly  jilanned.     5.  Successfully  resisted.     {D.  C,  Hvghe.f,  M.A.) 

Analogy  confirms  the  doctriiie  of  a  tempter: — Do  not  men  tempt  each  other? 
Sinners  entice.  Some  men  are  public  tempters  ;  tempters  of  a  nation,  of  an  age, 
to  bad  feelings,  priucii.'les,  and  practices.  A  Voltaire  is  a  tempter  by  his  wit ;  a 
Hume,  by  his  sophistry  ;  a  Rousseau,  by  eloquence  ;  a  BjTon,  by  the  splendours  ol 
poetic  genius.  Evt^ry  bad  man  in  an  elevated  situation  is  a  public  tempter.  {R. 
Wati!07i.)  Satan  an  indirect  h-mpter  a*  tJie  corrupter  of  our  nature  : — Green  wood 
will  not  bum  ;  dry  wood  soon  lakes  fire;  he  then  'aIio,  although  he  does  not  act 
the  part  of  an  incendiary,  dries  the  wood  in  order  that  it  may  the  sooner  ignite,  has 
a  real  share  in  the  caiiK«  of  tlie  conflagration.  {W.  II.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  The 
eoul  must  select  a  guiding  influence : — As  when  a  ship  nears  land,  various  pilots  are 
Bometimes  seen  to  approach  and  bid  for  her  guidan(!e;  then  one,  and  thon  another, 
comes  up  to  the  ves  el  till  the  terms  are  settled,  after  which  the  successful  appli- 
cant may  be  watched  as  the  sliip  is  tow  ed  out  of  the  channel  into  the  river.  So  the 
Boul  must  agree  to  accept  some  guiding  influence  amongst  the  different  ones  which 
beset  her,  and  to  be  controlled  and  conducted  afterwards  by  it.  {Ibid.)  Spiritual 
delight  varied  by  severe  timptation  : — This  mingling  of  contraries  runs  through  all 
our  history.  The  scenery  of  a  human  life,  like  the  scenery  of  nature,  has  its  fertile 
wlains,  its  grim  ravines,  its  bleak  and  barren  hills.  Now  it  is  bathed  in  the  sunlight 
of  a  great  joy,  again  it  is  overcast  and  saddened  by  the  sorrows  whose  memory  will 
never  fade.  {H.  Siuiw.)  Close  to  those  sunlit  heights  there  yawn  downwards  at 
oar  feet  black  and  awful  precipices,  and  one  false  step  may  be  fatal.  {O.  S.  Barrett, 
B.A.)  Christian  maturity  a  naf'gunrd  againtt  temptation : — The  smallest  bird  can 
pick  off  the  blossoms  of  a  trte  ;  if  tliat  blossom  be  not  nibbled  away,  but  grow  a  fail 
fipple,  the  hurt  is  small  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  can  do  unto  it :  so  the  iirstlinga 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.   MATTHEW.  81 

of  a  godly  life  are  in  the  greatest  danger ;  Satan  wants  no  sagacity  to  observe  his 
advantages,  but  is  aware  that  if  the  camp  put  their  spade  into  the  ground  for  a  few 
days,  and  cast  their  trenches,  they  will  hardly  be  displanted.  (Hacket.)  Christ 
is  no  sooner  out  of  the  water  of  baptism  than  He  is  in  the  fire  of  temptation. 
{Burkit.)  Temptation  a  ministerial  qualification: — Ministers  should  not  only  be 
men  of  science,  but  of  experience.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Temptation  a  test  of 
ability  for  special  work: — This  is  not  •^vithout  the  good  providence  of  God,  who 
hei  aby  will  prove  His  servants,  to  whom  He  will  commit  some  special  work.  (Ibid.) 
The  tempter  seeks  to  destroy  eminent  men  : — If  Satan  can  foil  the  leaders,  the  bands 
are  soon  overcome  ;  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep  will  be  scattered ;  cast  down 
cedars,  and  they  will  crush  many  shrubs  with  their  fall.  (T.  Taylor.)  Temptation 
no  evidence  of  Divine  disfavour  : — Jesus  was  not  less  the  well-beloved  Son  of  God  in 
the  wilderness  of  Judaea,  than  when  He  had  just  come  up  out  of  the  waters  of  Jor- 
dan. {D.  Lagot,  B.D.)  The  Tempter  seeks  to  frustrate  eminent  grace  : — The  un- 
furnished house  is  safe ;  danger  is  to  be  apprehended  only  when  the  dweUing  is 
well-stocked  with  money,  plate,  or  jewels.  The  traveller  may  proceed  with  immu- 
nity, whose  empty  purse  presents  no  attraction  to  the  robber.  {T.  Smith.)  The 
wicked  insensible  to  temptation : — The  bird  that  is  captured  by  the  fowler's  snare, 
or  overspread  Ly  his  ntt,  is  unaware  of  her  thraldom  so  long  as  she  lies  still,  or 
continues  feeding  on  the  eai'th ;  but  no  sooner  does  she  try  to  soar  aloft  and  seek 
the  heavens,  than  her  perplexity  begins,  and  the  more  she  strives,  the  more  she 
feels  herself  ensnared.  {Foid.)  Temptation  conducive  to  strength: — No  man  was 
ever  worth  much  who  did  not  pass  throu'^h  some  severe  ordeals.  A  mushroom  or  a 
cucumber  may  be  raised  in  the  summer-house :  not  so  the  oak.  When  you  want 
that  to  grow  you  plant  it  on  the  mountain  slope,  where  it  strikes  its  roots  deeper 
into  the  soil,  and  becomes  more  compact  in  its  fibre,  because  of  the  resistance  it 
offers  to  the  passing  storm.  The  human  frame,  if  it  is  to  acquire  strength,  must 
not  be  wrapi^ed  for  years  in  swaddUng  clothes,  but  trained  to  run  in  the  race,  and 
wrestle  in  the  strife.  The  good  soldier  is  not  made  in  time  of  peace.  (Dr. 
Landels.)  Inward  purity  tlw.  best  defence  against  temptation : — Put  a  burning 
match  to  tinder  or  gunpowder,  and  it  will  kindle  presently ;  but  put  it  to  water,  and 
it  will  quench  it  straight:  so  it  fareth  in  temptations.  Oar  corrupt  hearts,  Uke 
tinder,  do  easily  suffer  corruption  to  kindle  in  us;  but  Christ's  most  holy  heart 
did  presently  quench  the  evil  of  Satan's  motions.  And  thus  we  see  how  Chiist  was 
tempted,  and  yet  without  sin.  (IF.  Perkins,  D.D.)  Solitude  favourable  to  temp- 
tation : — The  lonely  tree  stands  more  exposed  to  the  tempest  than  that  which  is 
encircled  by  its  fellows.  (Ibid.)  Temptation  conducive  to  beauty  : — The  pebble 
cannot  be  pohshed  without  friction,  nor  can  the  graces  of  the  Clmstian  be  fully 
developed  without  trials.  (L.  H.  Wiseman.)  A  Christian  tempted  in  business  ia 
like  a  ship  in  a  gale  ;  occupation  and  necessary  duties  are  the  friendly  windward 
headlands  which  break  the  force  of  the  gale,  under  whose  shelter  the  vessel  may  ride 
in  safety ;  but  he  who  is  tempted  in  soUtu  ie  is  like  the  ship  which  has  to  encounter 
the  full  fury  of  the  hurricane  in  the  unsheltered  open  sea.  (Ibid.)  Divine  sym^ 
pathy  the  outcome  of  Divine  temptation  : — We  reaa  that  when  King  Richard  I.  had 
Been  on  the  sea  near  Sicily  like  to  be  drowned,  he  recalled  that  ancient  and  bar- 
barous custom  whereby  the  goods  of  shipwrecked  men  were  escheated  to  the  crown, 
making  provision  that  those  goods  should  be  preserved  for  the  right  owners.  (Dr. 
Taylor.)  The  tempter's  allies  within  the  soul : — If  we  had  no  enemies  to  batter 
down  our  wails  and  holds  without  us,  we  have  inward  and  domestic  rebels  and 
traitors  wh'  :h  continually  betray  us.  The  tempter  first  seeks  to  gaiyi  a  little  ad- 
vantage  : — As  a  cunn:ng  thief,  if  he  can  find  room  but  for  the  point  of  a  wrench, 
will  quickly  make  strong  doors  to  fly  open.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  tempter 
ignored  is  the  tempter  assisted: — Some  deny  the  existence  of  Satan.  He  knows 
that  he  can  often  work  most  effectually  where  his  presence  is  least  suspected.  As 
A  perfect  orator  wholly  forgets  himself,  being  absorbed  in  his  subject,  so  Satan,  as 
a  consummate  tempter,  is  willing  to  be  himself  forgotten,  if  his  ends  be  accom- 
plished. A  thief  never  wishes  to  make  himself  conspicuous.  Accordingly,  the 
most  subtle  and  dangerous  temptations  are  precisely  those  which  we  Ieb«(  imagine 
come  from  the  devil.     (L.  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  Fasted. — Temptation  : — I.  Satan  has  the  wobst  debions  undkb  th«  Most 
rBiENDLv  APPEARANCES.  II.  When  Satau  ttm;)ts,  he  can  appear  to  bb  uivisiblb,  as 
suits  him  best.  He  tempted  Christ  invisibly,  and  then  appeared  (Luke  iv.  2,  and  text, 
vers.  2,  3).  III.  Satan  tempts  us  to  doubt  some  things  most  plain  and  obbtain.  IV 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

When  temptations  are  well  suited,  they  are  sometimes  very  plausible.  To  Jeans — to 
prove  His  Sonship ;  for  food,  being  hungry.  V.  Things  lawful  in  themselves  become 
SINFUL  BY  CIRCUMSTANCES.  VI.  It  Is  En  cncouragement  to  the  tempted  to  see  how 
God  has  appeared  fob  others.  To  Jesus,  to  Elijah,  &m.  (Deut.  viii.  3,  4).  VIL 
He  that  would  prevail  against  temptation  must  stand  on  Scripture  ground.  (Skele- 
tons of  Sermons.)  Sundry  motives  for  relinious  fasting  : — 1.  Shall  Christ  fast  for 
us  and  not  we  for  ourselves  ?  2.  Shall  the  Pharisees  fast  twice  a  week  in  hj'pocrisy, 
and  we  not  once  in  our  hves  in  sincerity  t  3.  Can  we  cheerfully  take  us  for  our 
bodily  health  to  fasting,  and  will  we  do  nothing  for  our  soul's  health  ?  4.  Can 
worldly  men,  for  a  good  market,  fast  from  morning  to  evening,  and  can  Christiana 
be  so  careless  as  to  dedicate  no  time  to  the  exercising  of  fasting  and  prayer,  to  in- 
crease the  gain  of  godliness  T  6.  Is  not  this  a  seasonable  exhortation  ?  hath  not 
God  sounded  the  trumpet  to  fasting  ?  (Matt.  ix.  16.)  When  the  bridegroom  is  taken 
away  it  is  time  to  fast.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  This  was  the  true,  the  model  fast. 
Fulness  of  bread,  abundance  of  luxury,  makes  God's  work  impossible  ;  but  look  to 
it  that  the  fasting  be  not  the  substitute  for,  but  the  handmaid  of,  the  devotion — not 
the  end,  but  the  means.  {C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The  fast : — I.  The  limits  of 
Christ's  fast.  His  fast  lasted  the  same  length  of  time  as  that  of  Moses  and  Elias; 
thus  we  may  see  in  Christ  the  end  and  explanation  of  the  Old  Testament.  How 
often  in  Scripture  this  number  "  forty  "  occurs.  But  not  simply  the  length  but  to 
the  limit  of  Christ's  fast  we  direct  attention.  We  are  not  told  that  our  Lord 
practised  austerities,  except  in  the  desert.  The  universality  and  perfectness  of 
Christ's  life  did  not  admit  of  its  being  contracted  into  a  single  idea  or  type  of 
holiness.  He  too  would  thus  have  lent  support  to  the  idea  that  holiness  is  in 
external  practices  ;  whereas  it  was  His  great  purpose  to  point  to  states  of  mind  and 
heart  as  the  pith  of  perfection.  Christianity  must  not  in  all  cases  be  modelled 
upon  a  forbidding  asceticism ;  we  must  remember  the  limits  of  the  fast,  and  that 
He  who  sanctioned  austerity  was  present  at  the  marriage  festival.  II.  The  pub 
POSES  of  Christ's  fast.  1.  Its  purpose  in  reference  to  the  past.  The  first  sin  wai 
the  violation  of  the  law  of  abstinence ;  His  fast  was  an  expression  of  sorrow  for  that 
transgression,  and  for  the  sins  of  intemperance  which  have  resulted.  Fasting  mnj 
be  a  natural  effect  of  sorrow,  but  this  of  rare  occurrence  in  a  soul  burdened  with 
grievous  sin.  2.  Christ's  fast  had  also  relation  to  the  present.  He  fasted  as  an 
example  to  teach  us  one  of  the  means  for  vanquishing  the  tempter.  3.  Christ's 
fast  sanctified  fasting  also  in  relation  to  the  future,  as  a  means  for  increasing  illa- 
mination.  Coming  before  His  public  ministry  He  sanctioned  it  as  calculated  to 
produce  an  accession  of  light  in  the  soul.  It  will  be  seen  that  light  springs  from 
mortification  if  we  observe  how  darkness  is  the  result  of  self-indulgence.  III.  The 
conditions  of  Christ's  fast.  1.  It  must  be  a  real  self-denial.  The  first  degree  of 
mortification  is  the  ceasing  to  gratify  fallen  inclinations;  then  the  surrender  of 
superfluities ;  then  the  withdrawal  from  the  concerns  of  life ;  finally  it  touches  even 
the  necessaries  of  life.  2.  It  was  in  secret,  in  the  depths  of  the  desert.  It  should 
not  be  vainglorious.  3.  With  the  enlargement  of  the  motives  of  fasting,  there  was 
also  an  importation  of  brightness  into  the  practice.  Our  Lord  was  led  by  the 
Spirit,  and  where  the  Spirit  is,  there  is  joy,  peace,  &c.  There  is  danger  of  losing 
sweetness  of  temper  unless  the  fast  be  sustained  by  the  Spirit.  {W.  H.  Hutchings, 
M.A.)  Storming  the  inward  city  of  «tn;— The  root  of  sin  is  within.  You  may 
take  a  city  l<y  siege  as  well  as  by  direct  attack  ;  fasting  is  the  weakening  of  the 
enemy  by  the  former  process — by  the  withdrawal  of  supplies.  {Ibid.)  An 
himgred, — Temptation  through  the  bodily  appetites : — In  warm  weather  vast 
numbers  of  wasps  and  other  insects  are  caught  by  bottles  of  syrup,  into  which 
they  are  eceily  enticed  by  the  sweet  and  tempting  fluid,  but  are  unable  to  escape, 
and  so  are  drowned.  Temptation  often  assails  us  through  our  lawful  appetites. 
Christ,  whose  temptations  were  types  of  ours,  was  invited  by  Satan  to  make  bread 
to  satisfy  His  hunger.  ...  As  a  cunning  fowler  sets  his  limed  ears  of  com  to  catoh 
sparrows  in  a  hard  frost  or  great  snow,  when  they  are  ready  to  starve.     {Diez.) 

Ver.  8.  If  Thou  toe  the  Son  of  God. — His  object  is  to  shake  Christ's  confidence  in 
the  Fatherly  character  of  God.  (Dr.  MacLeod.)  Tempted  to  distrust  the  Divine 
Providence.  (Dr.  O,  Wirulow.)  As  the  devil  laboureth  most  against  our  faith, 
$n  should  we  most  labour  in  fortifying  it: — Policy  teacheth  men  to  plant  the 
most  strength  at  that  fort  or  part  of  the  wall  where  the  enemy  plants  his  greatest 
ordnance,  and  makes  the  strongest  assault.  And  nature  teacheth  us  to  defend  all 
our  parts,  but  especially  our  head  and  heart,  and  such  hke  vital  parts.    (Dr.  Taylor.) 


CHAP,  w.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  88 

Faith  deteiinines  victory  : — If  Scatan  take  away  oitr  root,  how  can  our  branch 
flourish  ?  If  he  break  our  band,  all  that  is  bound  up  will  shatter  in  pieces.  If  he 
cut  off  our  anchor,  our  vessel  will  be  driven  upon  the  rocks.  If  he  overcome  our 
trust  in  God,  he  will  siibdue  all  unto  himself,  fur  this  is  the  victoiy  that  over* 
Cometh  the  world  (1  John  iv.  5). 

Ver.  3.  Command  that  these  stones. — Implying  in  these  few  words  :  1.  That  it  Is 
an  easy  thing — say  the  word.  2.  Tnat  it  is  now  fit ;  here  is  an  object  ready,  hero 
be  stones,  these  ston«8.  3.  That  it  is  harmless,  only  a  proof  of  the  power  of  the 
Son  of  God.  4.  That  it  is  a  necessary  thing  ;  is  it  not  necessary  for  a  man  that  is 
ready  to  starve  to  eat  and  procure  bread  ?  5.  That  it  is  a  glorious  thing  to  command 
stones.  6.  That  it  is  a  work  of  special  use,  not  only  for  the  use  of  Thyself  in  this 
want,  but  to  satisfy  me.  7.  That  it  is  not  unreasonable ;  to  command  a  few  stones 
to  be  made  bread  will  be  no  hurt  to  any  man.  8.  The  Son  of  God  should  demean 
Himself  as  the  Son  of  such  a  Father,  therefore  by  this  action  manifest  that  which 
Thy  estate  doth  not.  {Ibid.)  An  inducement  to  gatixfy  lawful  needs  and  desires  by 
unlatvful  means : — What  is  the  safeguard  against  this  peril  ?  1.  Not  by  denying 
the  legitimacy  of  the  desires  of  the  bodily  organization.  2.  By  showing  that  man's 
present  life  was  not  the  gratification  of  a  bodily  need,  but  the  satisfaction  of  the 
hunger  of  the  spirit  in  God.  (G.  S.  Barrett,  B.A.)  Let  us  beware  of  acting  the 
devil's  part  by  discouraging  those  whom  God  has  afliicted.  (L.  H.  Wiseman.) 
Why  would  it  have  been  improper  had  He  turned  a  stone  into  a  Iciaff — 1.  He  would 
have  by  that  act  placed  an  impassable  gulf  between  Himself  and  His  brethren.  2. 
It  was  important  that  Christ's  miracles  should  be  free  from  suspicion,  that  they 
were  not  for  the  gratification  of  His  own  wants.  3.  The  motive  constitutes  an 
action  good  or  evil,  the  circumstances  in  this  case  would  have  determined  it 
wrong.  4.  It  would  have  been  inconsistent  with  the  whole  recorded  life  of  Jesus. 
(Ibid.)  The  cunning  of  Satan  in  this  temptation  : — 1.  He  skilfully  chooses  hia 
time.  2.  He  suggests  nothing  which  appears  to  be  a  great  sin.  6.  He  presents 
this  to  Christ  as  an  act  of  necessity.  4.  The  plea  he  employs  is  one  which  Jesus 
could  not  reject.  6.  In  the  proposal  there  was  no  appearance  of  pampering  the 
body,  but  only  of  providing  for  absolute  need.  Reply  to  thefirnt  temptation : — 1.  In 
this  answer  Satan  is  left  unsatisfied.  Uneducated  ilisciples  are  not  bound  to 
answer  all  Satan's  questions.  2.  The  snare  was  avoided.  3.  Patience  in  enduring 
hunger  till  God  send  Him  a  supply.  4.  When  we  have  bread  we  must  still  live  by 
the  Word  of  the  Lord.  6.  When  we  appear  to  be  without  bread  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  can  sustain  us.  (Ibid.)  The  first  t^ivptation: — I.  The  visibility  of  the 
tempter.  The  Evangelists  seem  to  imply  that  the  tempter  presented  himself  before 
the  eyes  of  Christ.  It  is  objected  to  this  view  : — 1.  That  while  good  angels  are  per- 
mitted to  address  men  under  visible  forms,  evil  angels  are  not  recorded  to  have  done 
80.  2.  That  Satan  by  undisguised  appearance  would  have  no  prospect  of  success. 
But  he  addressed  our  first  parents  under  a  visible  form.  The  second  objection 
assumes  that  the  visible  form  of  Satan  is  necessarily  unsightly.  _  II.  Satan's 
KNOWLEDGE  o»  Christ.  Satan  was  not  certain  about  Christ's  Divine  Sonsbip ; 
hence  he  sought  to  find  out  if  Christ  could  create  or  change  substances.  III.  The 
limits  of  the  temptation.  1.  It  has  been  said  that  Christ's  temptation  differs  from 
ours  in  that  His  were  only  external,  and  ours  internal  also;  that  Christ  had  no  sus- 
ceptibility to  temptation,  but  simply  heard  what  Satan  had  to  say  without  any 
inward  excitement  of  desire.  This  takes  fiom  it  its  essence  and  removes  it  front 
us.  We  would  not  limit  the  temptation  to  an  external  trial.  2.  We  would  not 
reduce  it  to  the  general  idea  of  suffering,  on  account  of  contact  with  the  tempter. 
We  maintain  that  each  temptation  appealed  to  a  desire  in  the  heart  of  Christ,  which 
His  will  restrained  and  refused  to  gratify.  The  true  limits  of  the  mystery :— 1. 
Christ  was  absolutely  sinless.  2.  Christ  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  no  taint 
of  the  Fall  was  permitted  to  intermingle  with  the  foundation  of  His  human  Ufe. 
There  was  a  eertain  impossibility  of  Hia  sinning ;  but  tliis  must  not  be  so  ex- 
plained as  to  destroy  the  faculty  of  free  will,  which  is  a  constituent  element  of 
human  nature.  We  must  not  so  interpret  impossibility  to  sin  as  not  to  perruit 
susceptibility  of  temptation  to  co-exist  with  it.  Upon  the  exercise  of  free  will  in 
Christ  depends  His  merits,  the  reaUty  of  His  temptation,  the  force  of  His  example. 
IV.  The  REALITY  of  the  temptation.  If  we  subject  temptation  to  analysis  we  find 
five  ingredients.  (1)  Desire  ;  (2)  Law ;  (3)  Opposition  between  desire  and  law  ;  (4) 
Suggestion  ;  (5)  Free  will.  Desire  may  be  simply  natural,  the  movement  of  pure 
nature  ;  or  when  some  morbid  quaUty  has  been  imported  into  it,  which  gives  it  a 

s 


S4  TUK  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  in 

wrong  direction.  The  former  was  in  Christ ;  but  not  the  latter.  There  are  two 
kinds  of  laws — positive  and  moral — the  natural  desires  may  be  restrained  by  the 
former,  the  corrupt  desires  by  the  latter.  The  craving,  whatever  it  be,  must  coma 
into  collision  with  the  law.  In  the  case  of  a  pure  creature  the  clash  must  be  with 
a  positive  law ;  with  a  corrupt  creature  it  will  be  also  with  the  moral  law.  Now  in 
Christ  the  desire  of  the  body  was  in  oppobition  to  the  Divine  will ;  the  pure  desire 
of  nature  was  contrary  to  what  He  knew  to  be  the  Father's  will.  In  this  sense  Hia 
was  inward  and  real  temptation.  Several  truths  must  be  taken  into  calculation  in 
comparing  Chnst's  temptation  with  ours.  1.  That  the  desires  which  are  original 
and  form  part  of  our  nature  are,  in  the  long  run,  the  more  intense.  2.  The  finer 
eensibilities  of  His  uncorrupt  nature.  (W.  U.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  1.  If  every  good 
Christian  were  satisfied  at  all  times  with  temporal  blessings  we  should  appear  to 
serve  God  for  our  profit.  2.  God  does  not  always  give  bread  to  him  that  is  his 
Bon,  that  he  may  loathe  this  world  and  look  for  reward  in  heaven.  3.  The  good 
man  shall  fill  his  bosom  with  better  fruits.  (Racket.)  Christ  and  the  Christian 
alike  in  temptation: — The  struggle,  as  far  as  possible,  was  the  same  as  in  us.  The 
lifeboat  must  brave  the  same  storm,  and  plough  through  the  same  foaming  billows, 
which  threaten  to  engulph  her,  as  the  wrecked  vessel  to  which  she  bears  relief ;  and 
though  so  constructed  as  to  be  able  to  bear  up  against  the  fury  of  the  waves,  she 
needs  the  careful  steerage,  persevering  efforts,  ay,  and  courage,  of  those  who  ven- 
ture forth  to  save  the  sinking  ahip.     (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  It  Is  written. — The  infallible  book  : — The  uses  to  which  it  may  be  pnt. 
Christ  used  it : — 1.  To  defend  His  Son  ship ;  2.  To  defeat  temptation  ;  3.  As  a 
direction  to  His  way ;  4.  For  maintaining  His  own  Spirit.  How  to  handle  the 
word : — 1.  With  deepest  reverence.  2.  Have  it  always  ready.  3.  Understand  its 
meaning.  4.  Learn  to  appropriate  Scripture  to  yourself.  6.  Stand  by  the  Scrip- 
tures, whatever  they  may  cost  you.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Bible  a  moral 
defence. — We  read  that  Oliver  Cromwell  had  in  his  army  one  regiment — a  fine, 
strong  regiment — called  '•  The  Ironsides."  They  were  very  religious  men.  And  it  was 
quite  the  custom  for  almost  every  soldier  to  carry  his  Bible  to  battle  with  him.  They 
used  to  carry  their  Bible  under  their  dress  ;  and  more  than  once,  in  a  battle,  the 
soldier  would  have  been  shot  through  the  heart  but  for  his  Bible.  The  bullet  went 
through  his  Bible,  or  it  would  have  gone  through  his  heart.  The  Bible  saved  the 
heart  1  (/.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Bible  a  victorious  power  : — This  is  the  sickle 
which  cuts  down  all  the  tares  which  Satan  sows  among  the  good  wheat ;  this  is  the 
ark  of  God  before  which  all  the  idols  of  the  Philistines  fall  flat  to  the  ground  ;  thig 
is  the  trumpet  of  Joshua  whose  noise  overtumeth  the  walls  of  Jericho.  (Hacket.) 
Bread  alone. — The  bread  of  life : — I.  There  is  that  condition  of  bking  in  which 
MAN  LIVES  BY  BREAD.  1.  It  represents  man  as  utterly  subservient  to  material 
necessities.  The  springs  of  man's  noblest  life  are  planted  in  necessity.  How 
beautiful  is  this  requisition  for  labour  1  A  consequence  of  this  law  of  effort  is 
mutual  service.  An  awful  thing  when  man  is  reduced  to  a  mere  machine  for 
getting  bread.  The  wickedness  of  systems  which  tend  to  intensify  such  a  con- 
dition. Such  a  man  lives  for  something  outside  himself — for  some  interest  which 
bread  represents.  Living  by  bread  alone  he  estimates  everything  by  the  bread 
standard.  II.  Let  me  ukge  upon  tou  the  hioheb  life.  "  Every  word  that  pro- 
ceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  "  I  have  bread  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of." 
1.  Every  good  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  that  God  from  whom  it 
comes.  2.  He  realizes  that  he  is  not  a  mere  instrument,  but  an  end  in  himself. 
8.  He  has  a  different  standard  of  valuation  from  that  of  the  mere  bread  standard. 
He  thinks  of  utilities  in  a  larger  and  nobler  sense  than  other  men.  He  values  the 
true  in  the  light  of  its  truth,  and  not  of  its  profit.  4.  How  we  live  upon  traditions, 
upon  the  mere  say-so  of  other  people,  the  current  of  popular  conviction,  instead  of 
coming  and  taking  the  word  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  1  IH.  The  point  of  the  most 
fearful  temptation  is  when  men  are  tempted  to  sacrifice  the  interests  of  thm 
nioBEB  life  to  the  claims  OF  THE  LOWER.  You  may  lose  fortune  but  gain  good- 
ness ;  you  are  made  one  with  Christ.  {E.  H.  Chaplin.)  Literally  true  that  man 
does  not  live  by  bread  alone  : — Do  we  think  of  the  bread  alone  when  it  is  placed  on 
our  tables  f  Are  we  not  reminded  from  whence  it  comes — what  wondrous  mysteriea 
have  conspired  to  bring  it  there — the  fair  sunlight  that  shone  upon  the  soil — the 
heavenly  dew  that  moistened  the  earth — the  mysterious  processes  of  nature  that 
brought  forth,  "  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  earf  " 
Does  mao  live  b^  bread  alone,  or  by  Divine  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  wbieb 


CHAP,  IT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  85 

conspire  in  the  wondrous  loom  of  nature  to  weave  the  result  and  form  the  agency  by 
which  we  get  that  bread  ?  (Ibid.)  Mentally,  man  does  not  live  by  "  bread  "  alom  ;— 
Sometimes  people  go  to  a  rich  man's  house  and  wonder  that  he  pays  so  much  money 
for  a  picture.  The  money  they  think  might  bring  in  interest  or  might  be  applied 
to  purposes  of  utihty,  and  they  consider  it  a  waste  to  expend  five  or  ten  thousand 
dollars  for  a  work  of  art.  Little  do  they  imagine  how  that  picture  enriches  and  re- 
fines that  man's  soul,  elevating  it  to  a  higher  conception  of  all  beauty ;  how  it  en-  ^ 
ables  him  to  understand  why  the  swamp  mists  become  festoons  and  upholsteries  of /I 
glory  before  the  setting  sun  ;  why  the  grass  is  green,  the  heavens  blue,  and  the  roll-'A!^ 
ing  waves  of  the  sea  are  interlaced  with  threads  of  sunlight ;  because,  viewing  thew 
fts  proceeding  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  he  comprehends  them,  and  says,  •'  The  money 
that  I  have  given  for  it,  that  could  not  make  me  richer,  because  it  perfects  me,  and 
helps  form  me  for  an  end."  (Ibid.)  The  poverty  of  the  "  bread  "  standard  of 
life: — He  discerns  as  much  the  glory  of  God  in  the  miniature  world  revealed  in  a 
single  drop  of  water,  aa  in  a  great  planet.  One  man  is  overawed  by  the  solemn 
aspect  of  the  mountain,  and  the  glory  of  the  forest  waving  with  the  breath  of  the 
summer  breeze.  Another  wonders  how  many  hundred  acres  of  land  there  are  and 
how  much  timber  in  it.  That  is  all  the  universe  is  to  him.  So  the  characters  of 
men  are  revealed  according  to  their  standard  of  valuation ;  and,  I  repeat,  if  a  man's 
life  is  wholly  down  to  the  bread  standard  of  life,  he  sees  merely  the  material  interests  of 
this  world.  (Ibid.)  Life  in  nature  needs  varied  elements  for  sustenance : — It  is 
like  saymg  that  a  tree  cannot  live  merely  upon  water.  It  needs  other  elements  which 
the  rich  earth  must  give.  (Phillips  Brooks.)  Every  word. — Man's  spiritual  food  :— 
L  Man  has  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a  corporeal  nature — a  spiritual  nature  which  re- 
quu'es  food.  II.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  true  food  of  the  soul  of  man.  It  is 
spiritual  food  adapted  to  man's  spiritual  nature,  and  also  to  its  condition  as  guilty 
and  impure.  (Studies  for  the  pulpit.)  Word  of  God  compared  to  food:— 1.  The 
PBOPitiLTY  of  the  metaphor.  As  it  is  essential  to  the  Ufe  of  the  soul,  and  the  source 
of  strength.  II.  Its  peculiar  charactebistics.  Heavenly  and  Divine,  superabun- 
dant, enrless  variety,  gratuitous  bestowment,  universal  communication.  III.  Our 
DXJTy  WITH  RESPECT  TO  IT.  We  should  thankfully  receive  it,  belieTingly  feed  upoa 
it,  grow  and  improve  by  it,  constantly  apply  it.     (Dr.  Burns.) 

Ver.  5.  Pinnacle  of  the  temple. — Tempted  to  self-destruction.  (Dr.  O.  Winslow.) 
The  second  temptation : — I.  Satan's  doubt.  "  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,"  <fec.  II. 
His  purpose.  He  urged  on  Christ  an  act  of  self-destruction.  He  was  from  the 
beginning  the  cause  of  death  in  all  forms.  III.  The  argument  with  which  he 
supported  it.  A  quotation  from  Scripture.  IV.  The  passion  to  which  he  appealed. 
The  pride  of  the  human  heart,  to  display.  V.  It  was  a  re^l  temptation;  it  con- 
tained desire,  collision  between  desire  and  law,  suggestion,  and  free  will.  (IF.  U. 
HutchingSf  M.A.)  Temptations  on  the  pinnacle  : — I.  View  the  temptation 
ITSELF.  1,  The  place  of  this  temptation.  It  was  high  ;  it  was  holy.  2.  The  first 
effort  of  the  devil  was  to  sap  the  foundations  of  the  Saviour's  strength  with  a  doubt 
— "  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God."  The  point  of  attack  was  our  Lord's  Sonship. 
B.  The  cunning  tempter  has  paved  the  way  for  the  Satanio  suggestion,  "  Cast 
Thyself  down."  4.  The  suggestion  was  backed  up  by  a  text  of  Scripture.  He 
ntisquMes  the  text  and  omits  "  in  all  thy  ways."  God  does  not  promise  to  keep 
as  in  ways  of  our  own  choosing.  6.  The  answer  which  the  Saviour  gave.  II.  A 
FEW  consideeations  deluged  from  thj:  whole.  1.  Jesus  was  tempted  as  I  am. 
2.  Jesus  was  tempted,  but  Jesus  never  Ein"-;rid.  3.  Jesus  not  only  did  not  fall, 
but  He  triumphed  gloriously.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  devil  may  suggest: 
compel  he  cannot.  {St.  Chrysostom.)  It  appeals  to  the  trust  which  had  been 
triumphant  over  temptation  a  moment  before.  Not  even  trust  in  God  can  expect 
God  to  save  it  from  the  consequences  of  presumption  and  disobedience  ;  it  must 
conform  to  the  laws  of  God.  Subordinate  lessons: — The  apparent  teaching  of 
any  isolated  text  of  Scripture  always  needs  to  be  interpreted  and  Umited  by  th« 
whole  of  Scripture.  2.  There  is  often  the  exaggeration  and  distortion  of  virtue. 
Trust  becomes  presumption.  Strike  any  one  note  of  human  goodness  and  you  will 
be  sure  to  hear  its  accompanying  discord.  (G.  S.  Barrett,  B.A.)  Practical  re- 
flections  : — 1.  No  place  is  so  sacred  as  to  be  free  from  the  devil's  intrusion.  2.  The 
difference  between  God's  miracles  and  Satan's  prodigies.  3.  How  different  is  the 
guioance  of  our  Saviour  from  the  guidance  of  our  adversary;  He  oasts  down  and 
then  hfts  up.  4.  Ye  who  dwell  in  lofty  places  remark  that  Satan  is  ever  near 
to  take  advantage  of  your  unwatchfulness  and  give  you  a  shameful  fall.    6,  The 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

limitation  of  his  power.  (L.  H.  Wiseman.)  Elevation  in  order  to  destruction :—' 
On  the  rocky  shore  of  Cornwall  \ou  may  see  the  black  cormorant  seizing  its  prey, 
a  ehell-fish,  flying  up  with  it  in  the  air,  and  then  letting  it  fall  upon  some  rock, 
that  the  shell  may  be  broken  in  pieces.  The  great  destroyer  Bometimes  deals  with 
those  who  serve  him  in  a  similar  way.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  Angels  charge. — The  angelic  ministert  of  the  good: — I.  Commissioned  by 
God.  They  are  "His  anRels" — obey  His  behests,  carry  out  His  purpose.  II. 
Exercised  for  the  godly  as  individuals.  God  does  not  overlook  the  individual  in  the 
multitude  (1  Kings  xi'x.  4-8  ;  Dan.  vi.  22;  Acts  xii.  7-10).  .  .  .  HI.  By  means  of 
the  exercise  of  this  angelic  ministry  the  godly  are  enabled  to  surmount  all  tha 
hindrances  and  conquer  all  the  foes  that  beset  their  way.  1.  Encouragement  to 
trust  in  God.     2.  The  dignity  of  the  godly.     {W.  Jones.) 

Ver.  7.  Not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God. — I.  The  essential  diffebenob  between  faith 
and  presumption.  II.  The  possibilities  of  presumption.  1.  When  we  undertake 
to  settle  questions  which  are  beyond  our  range.  2.  When  we  look  for  bodily  health 
without  obeying  the  laws  of  nature.  3.  When  we  expect  sufficient  means  without 
Buflicient  labour  and  moderation  in  enjoyment.  4.  When  we  hope  for  admission 
into  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  postpone  earnest  application  for  entrance.  5.  When 
we  expect  steadfastness  and  growth,  while  we  neglect  the  sources  of  spiritual 
strength.  III.  Its  heavy  penalties.  {W.  Clarkson,  B^.)  Proving  God  is  different 
from  tempting  Him.     (Wiseman.) 

Ver.  8.  Again,  the  devlL — Tlie  third  temptation : — I.  The  pbepabation  for  this 
temptation.  Satan  suits  the  external  circumstances  to  the  temptation,  and  drawi» 
his  snare  from  them.  Ail  the  senses  may  be  sources  of  temptation,  but  chiei 
amongst  them  is  the  eye.  It  is  more  closely  allied  to  the  imagination  than  the 
other  senses,  and  feeds  it  with  objects.  II.  The  offer.  1.  The  altered  form  of 
the  temptation.  He  did  not  preface  his  assault  with  the  confession  of  doubt  or 
flattery,  •'  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God."  Perhaps  he  felt  the  incongruity  of  such 
8  form  of  address  when  the  condition  he  proposed  was  an  act  of  adoration  to  him- 
self; or  he  no  longer  explored  Christ's  Divinity.  2.  The  passion  appealed  to — thn 
most  powerful — the  inordinate  love  of  possessing.  Satan  offered  to  resign  hi* 
power  in  this  world  and  the  next.  III.  The  condition.  IV.  This  is  a  beai 
temptation  to  Christ.  1.  A  warning  against  worldliness.  2.  That  such  an  act 
shoiild  be  suggested  to  Christ  may  prevent  those  who  are  troubled  with  horrid 
thoughts  from  despair.  (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  The pemistency  of  Satan: — Aa 
an  enemy  that  besiegeth  a  city  will  go  about  it,  and  espy  where  the  wall  iB  weakest, 
and  most  fit  for  his  entrance,  and  there  will  be  sure  to  give  his  strongest  onset ;  and  as 
a  man  that  would  strike  fire  with  a  flint  will  turn  it  about  in  his  hand,  to  see  what 
part  is  fittest,  even  so  the  devil :  he  goes  about  a  man,  and,  as  it  were,  turns  him  to 
and  fro  to  spy  out  his  weakness,  and  to  what  sins  he  is  most  inclined  ;  and  there  ha 
will  be  fcure  to  try  him  often,  and  to  assault  him  with  the  greatest  violence.  Example: 
If  a  man  be  impatient  of  poverty,  he  will  seek  to  carry  him  to  picking  and  stealing ; 
if  a  man  be  prone  to  covetousness,  he  will  provoke  him  to  fraud  and  oppression ; 
if  he  be  inclined  to  ambition,  Satan  will  puff  him  up  with  pride  and  vainglory. 
(W.  Perkins.)  Successive  temptations  : — Like  the  wave  that  falls  over  upon  the  sea 
chore,  only  to  be  followed  by  others,  perhaps  of  more  encroaching  violence.  (E, 
Scobell,  M.A.)  TJie  subtlety  of  Satan : — Satan,  by  the  subtlety  of  his  nature  and 
long  experience,  knoweth  our  estate,  our  temper,  our  hunger,  our  chief  desires ;  and, 
accordingly,  setteth  on  us.  For  though  he  know  not  the  heart  directly,  yet  he  knowa 
our  corruption  in  general,  as  we  are  men.  Further,  by  our  outward  behaviour  and 
gesture  he  can  gather  our  especial  corruptions,  as  a  physician,  by  outward  signs  in  the 
pulses  and  the  hke,  can  jnoge  of  the  particular  disease  within.  BesiJes,  his  experi- 
ence giveth  him  much  ligbt  into  our  weakness,  so  as  like  a  cunning  angler,  he  can 
bait  his  hook,  so  as  he  hath  experience  the  fish  will  take ;  and  though  he  see  not 
the  fish  in  the  water,  jet  by  his  gule  and  cork  he  can  tell  when  he  is  taken.  So 
Satan  hath  for  sundry  men  sundry  baits,  and  can  tell  by  the  eye,  hand,  speech, 
gesture,  whether  the  man  be  or  will  be  taken.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)-  Defeat  mads 
tubservient  to  victory  by  Satan : — It  is  said  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  that  he  knew 
how  to  extract  from  defeat  the  means  of  victory.  The  prince  of  darkness  is  well 
skilled  in  thia  art.  (L.  U.  Wisivian.)  Kingdoms  of  the  world.— His  aim  was  to 
induce  Jesua  to  seek  universal  dominion  in  an  easier  way  than  the  prophets  had 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  87 

foretold,  and  which  the  Father  had  marked  out.  (Ibid.)  Satan's  delusive  offer  of 
the  world  : — Satan  cannot  offer  ua  similar  greatness;  but  he  tempts  by  ruling  ambi 
tion  ;  as  in  the  case  of  Alexander,  CsBsar,  and  Napoleon.  And  how  the  poor  fools 
were  betrayed  !  Alexander  dies  of  drunkenness  ;  Ciesar  was  stabbed  in  the  Senate- 
house  by  a  friend ;  and  Napoleon  died  in  exile  at  St.  Hekna.  He  tempts  also  by 
mere  ordinary  worldly  blessings.      (R.    Watson.)  He  concealed   their  vanity. 

Reflections  on  the  third  temptation : — 1.  The  danger  attending  worldly  prosperity. 
2.  It  is  a  constant  device  of  Satan  to  present  to  us  a  partial  and  false  view  of  the 
world.  3.  In  the  example  of  Jesus  we  have  a  perfect  instance  of  deadness  to  the 
world.  4.  The  example  of  our  Lord  rebukes  covetous  and  worldly  ambition.  6. 
That  Satan  is  after  all  a  hard  master;  under  the  guise  of  liberality  he  solicits 
severe  conditions.  6.  Our  Lord  reveals  to  us  the  true  riches.  7.  The  Church 
is  destined  for  universal  dominion.    {L.  H.  Wiseman.) 

Ver.  9.  Will  I  give. — Abraham,  when  the  king  of  Sodom  offered  him  some  part 
of  his  spoils,  refused  to  take  so  much  as  a  shoe-latchet  of  him,  that  the  king  of 
Sodom  might  not  say  another  day  that  he  had  made  Abraham  rich ;  that  men 
might  not  tay  that  Abraham  had  been  made  rich,  not  by  God's  blessing,  but  by  tho. 
king's  means,  and  that  he  might  thank  the  king  of  Sodom  for  what  he  had.  So  a 
godly  man  will  not  gain,  or  desire  to  gain,  so  much  as  a  shoe-string  or  a  shoe-thread 
by  profaning  the  Sabbath  with  the  Sidonian  merchant,  by  fraud  or  deceit,  by  op- 
pression or  extortion,  by  biting  usury,  the  devil's  brokery,  by  rifling  and  plundering, 
or  by  any  other  unlawful  or  indirect  means,  that  the  devil  may  not  one  day  say 
that  he  hath  made  him  rich,  as  he  said  sometime  to  our  Saviour.  (Gataber.)  He 
never  keeps  his  promises.     (Wiseman.) 

Ver.  10.  Worship  the  Lord  thy  God. — Divine  worship: — I.  Divine  worship  is 
4  HDMAN  INSTINCT.  Amoug  all  the  living  occupants  of  the  earth,  man  is  the  only 
worshipper.  Man  feels  after  the  Divine.  Hence,  in  different  ages,  different 
evidences  of  man's  wor.shipf  alness — sacred  grove,  mosque,  synagogue,  temple,  church. 
Man's  natui\*l  tendency  has  never  been  not  to  worship ;  but  to  worship  too  many 
objects.  Paganism  divided  and  weakened  worship.  Christianity  concentrates  and 
gives  life,  force,  and  unity  to  the  worship.  11.  Christian  worship  ennobles  thb 
W0R8HIPPEB.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  I  "  In  the  worship  of  such  a  God,  man's  own 
intellect  is  ennobled,  and  his  heart  purified.  His  whole  humanity  is  raised.  III. 
The  worship  and  service  of  the  Christian  religion  are  unending.  '•  Thou  shalt 
worship,"  &c.  There  are  no  Umitations  to  that  command  in  the  Book ;  none  in 
the  human  heart.  The  moral  aspirations  of  the  soul  are  enduring  as  itself. 
{Nevison  Loraine.)  The  object  ofworship  : — I.  The  qualifications  necessary  to  con- 
stitute a  being  a  proper  object  for  Divine  adoration.  II.  What  is  the  worship  God 
requires?  III.  Why  we  should  worship  God.  He  commands.  Is  our  Creator, 
&c.  In  it  consists  our  happiness.  (Anon.)  Worship  and  service : — I.  We  must 
WORSHIP.  1.  A  man  can  never  be  too  reverent  to  God.  2.  Our  religion  must  ba 
uncovered.  3.  The  wandering  eye  must  learn  to  be  fastened  on  Him.  4.  Jacob, 
though  he  were  not  able  to  stand  or  kneel,  yet  leaned  upon  his  stu  ff,  and  worshipped 
God.  5.  This  must  be  done  as  duty  due  to  God,  and  in  regard  of  those  that  be 
strangers.  H.  We  must  serve.  1.  Bow  the  soul  when  we  bow  the  body.  2.  Wa 
must  serve  God  with  our  sacrifices.  3.  Not  with  our  sms.  4.  Not  with  our  iniquities. 
6.  God  must  be  above  all :  and  of  whomsoever  a  man  is  overcome,  to  him  he  ia  in 
bondage.    {Bishop  Lancelot  Andrewea.) 

Ver.  11.  The  devU  leaveth  him. — Tlte  end  of  the  temptation : — ^I.  Satan's  departure 
OH  THE  SIDE  OF  CHRIST.  Christ  had  repelled  Satan  in  the  third  temptation  in  quite 
a  different  way  from  that  in  the  previous  contests  (Luke  iv.  8).  A  coercive  and 
indignant  dismissal.  II.  Satan  also  withdrew  willingly.  He  had  exhausted  hia 
temptations.  All  the  varied  forms  of  temptation  are  reduceable  to  three — pride, 
avariae,  and  sensuahty.  Three  root-passions  (1  John  ii.  16).  So  Christ  tempted 
in  all  points  as  we  are.  Had  Satan  remained  he  had  no  more  weapons  to  try.  At 
the  fitting  moment  Christ  revealed  His  hatred  of  sin.  This  overthrow  was  a  new 
experience.  III.  How  far  this  withdrawal  was  temporary.  Satan  returned  in  the 
Pasrion,  but  indirectly  through  others.  He  entered  into  Judas.  {W.  H,  UutchingSf 
M.A.)  Primarily  temptations  few.  They  are  hke  languages  which,  though  many, 
are  divided  into  groups  or  families,  and  are  traceable  to  a  few  primitive  sources. 
(Ibid.)        Temptation  productive  of  good: — Thus  it  may  prove  with  aa  as  with 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \cnt^.  it. 

the  oypter,  •which  stops  with  a  precious  peail  the  hole  in  its  shell  which 
was  originally  a  disease ;  as  with  the  broken  limb,  which  having  been  set, 
may  be  strocger  than  if  it  never  had  been  broken.  It  may  fare  with  us  aa 
islanders  of  the  Southern  Ocean  fancy  that  it  fares  with  them  ;  counting,  as  they 
do,  that  the  strength  and  valonr  of  the  warrior  whom  they  have  slain  in  battla 
passes  into  themselves  as  their  rightful  inheritance.  The  strength  which  lay  in  the 
temptation  has  shifted  its  seat,  and  passed  over  into  the  man  who  has  overcome 
the  temptation.  {R.  C.  Trench.)  Christ  th"  Captain  of  the  tempted: — In  the  old 
Eoman  times,  there  was  a  great  Eoman  general  to  whom  one  of  his  soldiers  said  : 
"  Oh  1  the  enemy  are  so  many.  We  are  not  bplf  so  many  as  the  enemy  I  Th« 
enemy  is  tvnce  as  many  as  we  are."  The  general  said  to  him,  "  How  many  do  you 
count  me  for?"  Do  you  understand?  There  are  "more  with  us  than  there  are 
against  us."  Jesus  is  with  us.  How  many  do  you  count  Him  for  ?  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
The  victory  : — 1.  It  was  complete.  2.  It  was  not  final.  3.  It  was  the  precursor  of 
other  victories,  even  that  of  the  cross.  4.  He  has  not  endured  one  temptation 
more  than  was  necessary.  5.  The  propriety  of  the  prayer,  "  Lead  us  not  into 
temptation."  6.  It  was  obtained  throuRh  self- sacrifice.  7.  It  supplies  an  antidote 
to  doubt  and  despair.  8.  It  was  watched  in  heaven.  (L.  H.  Wiseman.)  Angel* 
came. — Ministering  angels: — 1.  Thoughts.  2.  Friends.  3.  Children.  4.  Books. 
6.  Flowers.  Angels  came  : — 1.  To  congratulate  Christ  after  His  victory.  2.  From 
a  disinterested  love  of  us.  3.  Because  of  their  love  for  Christ.  4.  To  honour 
God.  6.  To  teach  us  the  dignity  of  human  nature  when  faithful  in  temptation. 
6.  Christ  by  this  victory  had  formed  a  fresh  link  with  the  angels — they  had  passed 
through  trial.  7.  Human  nature  stands  between  heavenly  and  Satanio  influeucoa. 
(W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.) 

Ver.  16.  Sat  in  darkness. — Darkness  and  light : — I.  The  deep  darkness  which 
envelops  the  world  without  the  gospel.  "  Darkness  "  and  "  the  region  of  the 
shadow  of  death,"  striking  emblems  of  error,  ignorance,  sin,  guilt,  misery,  danger. 

1.  The  heathen  world  is  in  this  darkness  (Rom.  i.  18-32).  2.  In  the  very  midst  of 
Christendom  there  is  this  darkness.  Home  heathenism,  &g.  The  condition  of  all 
unregenerate  men.  II.  The  uprising  of  a  glorious  light  for  the  transformation 
of  the  darkness.  There  is  no  redeeming  principle  in  man's  apostate  nature.  But 
for  the  prospects  opened  by  the  gospel,  there  must  be  the  darkness  of  final  and 
absolute  despair.  Materialism,  &q.,  are  as  powerless  as  the  ancient  systems  to 
reach  the  conscience  and  renew  the  heart  (Isa.  xxxviii.  17,  xlv.  8,  and  others).  Bui 
glorious  is  the  view  in  the  text,  &o.  Concerning  this  light,  observe — 1.  Its  source. 
The  gospel  is  "  light,"  and  this  marks  its  divinity.     "  God'  who  commanded,"  Ao. 

2.  Its  adaptation  :  To  every  stage  of  human  society ;  to  the  common  wants  of  man 
.—instruction,  comfort,  <fec. ;  to  every  order  of  mind  ;  to  every  possible  condition, 
Ac.  The  gospel  offers  pardon  for  the  guilty,  &c.  3.  Its  diffusiveness.  A  "  great 
light " — penetrating.  Progress  of  the  gospel  in  apostolic  times,  &a.  In  how  many 
dark  places  has  "  light  sprung  up,"  Ac.  4.  Its  efficacy.  Not  a  dead  letter,  but 
"  the  power  of  God,"  &c.  It  will  finally  prevail — "All  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall 
see,"  &c.  1.  Has  the  light  arisen  upon  jour  soul ?  2.  Are  you  manifesting  it 
in  your  life,  &c.  f  3.  Are  you  doing  what  you  can  to  communicate  it  to  others? 
{A.  Tucker.)  Light  for  those  who  sit  in  darkness  : — I.  Some  souls  abb  ih 
GREATER  DARKNESS  THAN  OTHERS.  1.  The  darkucss  of  iguorance.  2.  The  darknesa 
of  error.  3.  The  gloom  of  discomfort  and  sorrow,  attended  with  fear.  4.  Hope- 
lessness, "  sat  in  darkness."  5.  In  the  region  of  death.  II.  For  those  who  are  in 
8  worse  condition  than  others  there  is  hope  and  light.  1.  In  barbarous  nationa 
Christ  has  won  great  victories,  2.  In  the  worst  hearts  Christ  has  dawned.  3. 
When  these  have  beheld  the  light,  they  frequently  become  eminently  useful  to 
others  4.  The  conversion  of  the  deplorably  dark  brings  the  highest  degree  of  glory 
to  God.  III.  The  true  light  for  a  soul  in  darkness  is  all  in  Christ.  1.  There  is 
light  in  Christ's  name  for  a  troubled  sinner.  2.  In  His  person  and  nature.  3.  In 
His  offices.  4.  In  His  character.  IV.  The  poor  soul  in  darkness  need  not  despair, 
roB  light  is  all  abound  tou.    It  has  already  "  sprung  up."    (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  17.  Jesus  began  to  preach. — Tlie  scientific  art  of  preaching : — I.  I  would 
Insist  upon  the  prominence  given  to  pieachiug  in  the  Clmrch  of  God :  the  text 
marks  the  introduction  of  a  new  science.  1.  Our  Lord  might  have  instituted  this 
agency  without  preaching  Himself.  He  might  have  sent  an  angel ;  but  He  set  ua 
the  copy  of  this  new  science  Himself.   Three  Greek  words  are  used  in  the  New  Tos. 


CHAP.  IV.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  SB 


tament,  and  translated  "  preach  "  in  connection  with  our  Lord's  ministry.  One  ia 
••  evangelize,"  which  means  to  declare  good  tidings ;  the  next  word  means  "  to 
declare  as  a  herald;"  a  third  word  implies  argumentation.  Here,  then,  we 
have  the  science  of  preaching  defined.  2.  From  these  historical  facts,  in  the 
description  of  which  we  gain  these  words,  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  deduce  the  under- 
lying principles  of  this  Divine  ecienee  of  preaching,  that  it  is  the  announcement  of 
glad  tidings,  the  presence  of  an  ambassador  as  the  one  announcing  and  pressing 
upon  men  by  arguments  which  address  the  conscience,  will,  affections,  and  under- 
Btaudjflg.  II.  The  text  gives  us  the  inauguration  of  a  new  akt.  Preaching  wai 
original  with  Jesus  Christ;.  1.  Show  that  this  is  a  new  science.  Preaching  did 
not  exist  in  patriarchal  times  :  it  was  not  a  Jev.dsh  institution  :  it  was  not  prac- 
tised among  the  Gentiles.  2.  It  was  original,  because  uncil  Jesus  lived  and  died 
there  was  no  good  news  to  be  told.  III.  This  was  a  new  bebponsibilitt.  1.  That 
preaching  is  the  sole  agency  for  man's  salvation.  2.  It  is  the  unhmited  privilege 
of  all  believers.  (S.  H.  Tyng.)  Repent. — Repentance: — I.  Its  origin.  1.  Itisof 
gospel  parentage.  2.  It  is  of  gracious  origin.  II.  Its  essentials.  1.  Illumina- 
tion. 2.  Humiliation.  3.  Detestation.  4.  Transformation.  III.  Its  com- 
PANioNB.  1.  Faith.  2.  Confession.  3.  Holiness.  4.  Peace.  IV.  Its  excellen- 
cies. 1.  Pleasantness.  2.  It  is  sweet  to  God  as  well  as  to  men.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Repentance  and  the  kingdom  of  God : — I.  Kepentance  signifies  a  changb  o» 
KIND.  1.  There  is  conviction  ol  sin.  2.  Sorrow  for  sin.  3.  Confession  of  sin.  4. 
Amendment  of  life.  II.  Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  nsATEN  is  at  hand.  The 
phrase,  "kingdom  of  heaven,"  is  used  only  by  St.  liliiithew.  Jews  did  not  want 
a  spiritual  kingdom.  National  quiet  brings  ruin.  Our  Lord  gave  Jews  an  oppor- 
tunity to  repent.  [A.  Jozies.)  Repentance  :  —  I.  The  meaning  of  repen- 
tance. 1.  The  commoiieemtint  of  repentance  is  a  deep  sorrow  for  sin.  2.  The 
utter  forsaking  of  sin.  3.  A  continuation  of  the  good  work  begun.  4.  The  adding 
on  to  the  whole  train  of  Christian  virtues.  II.  What  is  meant  by  thb  kingdom  of 
HEAVEN.  The  glorious  gospel  was  to  be  preached.  III.  The  necessity  of  repent- 
ing. {E.  Thompson, M. A.)  Repent: — I.  Repentance  is  a  necessaiy  qdalification 
TO  fit  us  fob  glory.  1.  Bo  it  never  so  troublesome  and  painful  a  work,  it  is  richly 
worth  our  while.  2.  Reward  is  the  life  of  action.  3.  The  encouragement  of 
industry.  II.  Repentance  does  not  only  give  us  a  future  evidence  for  heaven,  but 
PUTS  tis  into  actual  possession.  1.  It  instates  us  into  our  happiness.  2.  Is  an 
earnest  of  future  glory.  Thus  grace  is  the  incohation  of  glor^-,  and  glory  is  the 
consummation  of  grace.  III.  V/hat  content  must  this  needs  be,  to  enjoy  the 
morning  of  our  eternity,  even  in  this  life;  and  through  the  crannies  of  our  mortality 
to  have  a  glimpse  of  that  broad  day  of  glory,  which,  unhke  our  longest  days,  will 
never  have  an  end.  IV.  If  every  penitential  tear  were  a  diamond,  and  thou  didst 
nothing  all  thy  lifetime  but  shed  tears  of  Uqpid  pearl,  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
would  still  be  a  cheaf  purchase.  Thou  shouiost  never  have  cause  to  complain  of 
thy  bargain.  {Adam  Littleton,  D.D.)  Repentance : — This  definition  may  b« 
divided  into  three  parts.  I.  A  sobbowino  for  our  sins.  1.  This  only  is  the  penance 
whereto  all  the  Scru)ture  calleth  us.  2.  This  penance  do  I  now  call  you  all  unto. 
3.  This  must  be  contiriualiy  in  us,  and  not  merely  for  a  Lent-season.  4.  This 
must  increase  daily  more  and  more  in  us.  5.  Without  this  we  cannot  be  saved. 
n.  Examining  our  sins.  1.  Outward  evil  springs  cut  of  inward  corruption.  This 
must  be  perfectly  and  spiritually  understood  if  we  will  come  to  the  true  knowledge 
of  our  sins.  2.  Therefore  lei  us  get  God's  law  as  a  glass  to  look  in,  and  that  not 
only  Uterally,  outwai-dly,  or  partly,  but  also  spiritually,  inwaidly,  and  thoroughly. 
For,  ae  St.  Austin  saith,  it  is  a  glass  which  fcaruth  nobody  ;  but  even  look  what  a 
one  thou  r.  rt,  so  it  painteth  thee  out.  III.  A  trust  of  pardon.  IV.  A  purpose  to 
amend,  or  a  contei..  ..on  to  a  new  life.  Let  your  soiTowing  for  your  evils  demon- 
•traite  itsuf  by  depaztmg  from  the  evils  you  have  used.  Let  your  certainty  of  pardon 
of  your  gins  through  Christ,  and  your  joy  in  Him,  be  demonstrated  by  pursuing  the 
good  things  which  God'a  Word  teacheth  you.  1.  P.epent  your  sins.  2.  Believe  in 
God's  mercy  for  pardon.  3.  Earnestly  pursue  a  new  hfe,  bringing  forth  worthy 
and  true  f niits  of  repentance.  (John  Bradford.)  All  who  sincerely  obey,  and  do 
what  Ha  hath  commanded,  may  be  properly  said  to  serve  Him  (1)  By  acknow- 
ledging the  justice  and  goodness  of  His  laws,  and  (2)  His  power  and  authority  oyex 
them  ;  (3)  By  loving,  fearing,  trusting,  and  believing  on  Him ;  (4)  By  being  sober, 
temperate,  for  tbe  honour  of  His  image  enstamped  on  you ;  (5)  By  being  meek, 
patient,  and  thankful  in  all  conditions,  in  whatsoever  happens  to  you ;  (6)  By  being 
humble  and  lowly  in  your  own  eyes ;  (7)  By  being  bountiful,  kind,  and  merciful  to 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  it. 

others;  (8)  By  being  just  and  righteous  in  all  your  dealings.  {William  Beveridge, 
D.D.)  Kingdom  of  heaven  Is  at  hand. — The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand: 
— 1.  Daily,  Somebody  dies  every  day  ;  folks  are  travelling  in  ard  out  of  this  great 
Inn,  the  world,  continually.  2.  Death  may  suddenly  come  to  your  door.  Though 
he  hath  passed  by  often  without  calling,  he  will  knock  at  last,  and  when  he  sum- 
mons, thou  must  away.  As  the  angels  did  with  Lot,  while  thou  lingerest  he  will 
lay  hold  upon  thy  hand,  and  hasten  thee  away  even  against  thy  will.  Therefore — 
I.  Think  often  of  thy  own  end,  which  is  to  thee  the  end  of  all  things.  When  thou 
art  gone,  all  is  gone.  II.  Then  it  wiU  be  found  that  the  best  pillow  to  lay  a  dying 
head  on  will  be  a  good  conscience.  III.  Thou  must  then  bid  adieu  to  earth'a 
Bpangled  glories.  Honours  and  estates  will  prove  but  weak  cordials.  IV.  A 
thousand  worlds  will  then  be  bid  for  one  hour's  respite  ;  and  it  cannot  be  bought 
BO,  if  thou  hadst  them  to  give.     {Adam  Littleton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  Sea  of  Galilee. — The  New  Testament  shows  us  that  the  Sea  of  Oalilee 
was  well  stocked  with  fish,  as  it  still  is,  and  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
people  dwelling  on  its  shores  were  fishermen.  The  modes  of  catching  fish  were  the 
same  as  are  still  in  use  in  all  parts  of  Western  Asia.  They  are  taken  with  the  hook, 
or  with  a  scoop-net  fastened  around  a  hoop,  and  suspended  from  the  end  of  a  pole. 
.  .  .  Fishing  on  a  larger  scale  is  done  by  means  of  a  long  net,  some  three  or  four 
feet  in  width,  with  pieces  of  lead  attached  along  one  side  to  sink  it,  and  of  cork  on 
the  other  to  keep  it  afloat.  The  operation  is  performed  by  men  occupying  two 
boats.  To  one  of  these  is  made  fast  one  end  of  the  net,  while  the  remainder  is 
piled  up  in  the  other  boat.  The  latter  is  rowed  rapidly  off  in  a  curved  line,  while 
one  of  tne  crew  gradually  drops  the  net  into  the  water.  The  net  is  now  spread, 
resting  in  a  perpendicular  position  in  the  water.  The  two  boats  then,  holding  each 
end  of  it,  row  quickly  to  the  shore.  The  fishermen  jump  into  the  shallow  water, 
and  holding  the  net-ropes,  drag  it  to  shore,  where  they  sit  down  and  slowly  and 
carefully  collect  all  the  fish,  shell-fish,  and  refuse,  which  their  net  has  scooped  up, 
"  gathering  the  good  "  into  their  baskets,  and  "  casting  the  bad  away."  {H.  G.  Van- 
Lennep,  D.D.)  Christ  by  the  Sea  of  Galilee  : — I.  That  to  the  kye  of  Christ 
THE  CHIEF  object  IN  NATUEE  WAS  MAN.  1.  He  was  Unlike  those  who  view  it  in 
a  merely  mercenary  spirit.  2.  Or  those  who  view  it  in  merely  sentimental  mood. 
He  regarded  man  as  chief  in  nature — (1)  Because  man  is  the  highest  representation 
of  God  on  earth  ;  (2)  Because  he  is  the  only  intelligent  appieciator  of  God  on  the 
earth  ;  (3)  Because  he  is  the  only  voluntary  servant  of  God  on  the  earth.  11. 
That  the  chief  obligation  of  man  is  to  follow  Christ.  1.  The  simplicity  of  His 
claim.  2.  The  Divine  authority  of  His  claim.  3.  The  powerfulness  of  His  Word 
IIL  That  the  following  of  Christ  qualifies  a  man  to  rescce  his  fellow-mah. 
The  text  is  an  argument  again&t  upderrating  human  nature  ;  against  mysticism  in 
rehgion  ;  against  indolence  in  the  cause  of  Christ.     {U.  R.  Thomas.) 

Ver.  19.  Follow  Me. — Follow  Me : — 1.  Follow  Christ  as  yonr  Teacher.  2.  A» 
your  Example.  3.  As  your  Friend.  4.  If  you  see  to  the  following  what  will  Christ 
do?  (D.  B.  Hooke.)  1.  These  heavenly  fishermen  follow  Christ  personally.  2. 
They  fiillow  Him  circumstantially.  3.  They  follow  Him  singly,  with  a  single  eye. 
{H.  Cole.)  The  great  lesson  of  the  text  may  be  summed  up  in  this — that  successful 
work  for  Jesus  must  spring  out  of  a  devout  imitation  of  Him.  "  Follow  Me"  &c. 
In  the  example  of  Christ  there  are  two  points  which  it  is  important  to  look  at  I. 
The  estimate  Jesus  Christ  gave  to  humHuity  in  contrast  with  all  the  other  objects 
that  engaged  His  attention.  In  comparison  with  the  claims  of  man,  everything 
else  was  regarded  as  subsidiary.  II.  His  whole  career  was  evolved  from  this  central 
conception  in  regard  to  humanity.  To  save  men — that  was  His  mission.  I  must 
work — that  was  His  motto.  These  thoughts  were  always  present  to  His  mind.  Our 
grand  central  controlling  purpose  must  be  the  imitation  of  the  Master,  in  striving 
to  become  the  servant  of  all.  1.  Christian  work  must  so  far  resemble  Christ's 
work  as  to  be  inspired  with  the  soul  of  earnestness.  2.  The  possession  of  yearning 
pity  and  interest  in  humanity.  8.  The  cultivation  of  a  spirit  of  large  self-deniaL 
4.  Persistency  in  effort.  5.  Prayer.  Does  this  command  stir  your  soul  to  nobler 
work  and  better  service,  &c.  ?  What  is  your  response  7  (IF.  Kelynack.)  Follow 
Me  : — I.  Whom  ?  Not  simply  a  human  teacher,  but  Jesus,  who  qualified  Himself 
by  His  earthly  life,  with  its  temptations,  toil,  and  suffering,  to  be  the  elScient 
leader  of  men.  II.  How  ?  We  cannot  follow  His  person  as  the  disciples  did ; 
but  we  may — Obey  His  precepts  and  copy  His  example.     III.  Wht?    We  cannot 


CHAP,  nr.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  41 

direct  our  own  course — tliere  is  no  leader  equal  to  Christ — if  we  follow  Him 
we  shall  be  in  good  company.  Only  thus  can  we  escape  spiritual  danger  and 
eternal  death.  IV.  Whitiieb?  To  God  :  "lam  the  way,"  &c.  To  heaven  :  "In 
My  P'ather's  house,"  &c.  V.  When  ?  Now.  Always.  (Seeds  and  Saplings.)  Th» 
attractive  face  of  Jesus  : — In  lower  human  forms  this  magnetic  attraction  of  man 
on  man  ii  not  unknown.  It  is  the  orator's  power.  The  orators  of  revolutions — 
men  like  Mirabeau — are  full  charged  with  it;  they  are  like  jars  laden  with  electric 
fire  ;  there  is  that  in  their  words  which  flashes  out,  and  stirs,  sways,  and  rules 
mankind.  Christ  constitutes  in  a  still  higher  form  the  great  Captain's  power. 
(J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Fishers  of  men. — Ministers  fishers  of  men:  —  I.  The 
APPEOPBiATENESs  of  the  figure.  The  world  is  the  sea,  the  scene  of  their  labours. 
II.  The  DUTY  TO  BE  DISCHARGED.  TWs  net  must  be  employed — constantly,  dili- 
gently, skilfully.  I.  Let  the  Christian  fisherman  rightly  understand  his  net,  and 
the  appointed  way  of  using  it.  2.  Let  success  be  the  grand  object  of  attention, 
8.  Be  cheerfully  devoted  to  the  work.  4.  Our  resources  are  infinite  and  exhaustless. 
{Dr.  Bums.)  Fishers  of  men : — 1.  To  fish  well,  it  is  necessary  to  study  the  pecu- 
liarities of  fish.  2.  You  must  go  to  the  fish.  {Beecher.)  Scientific  knowledge 
not  enough  for  the  preacher : — It  is  necessary  to  know  more  than  the  science  of 
ichthv ology.  What  a  book  can  tell  a  man  about  fishing  is  worth  knowing,  but  it  is 
little  that  a  book  can  do  towards  making  a  man  a  true  fisherman.  If  a  man  is  going 
to  fish  tor  fish,  he  must  become  their  scholar  before  he  becomes  their  master;  he 
must  go  to  school  in  the  brook,  to  learn  its  ways.  And  to  fish  for  men,  a  man  must 
learn  their  nature,  their  prejudices,  their  tendencies,  and  their  courses.  A  man,  to 
catch  fish,  must  not  only  know  their  habits,  but  their  tastes  and  their  resorts  ;  he 
must  humoTU"  them  according  to  their  different  natures,  and  adapt  his  instruments 
according  to  their  peculiarities — providing  a  spear  for  some,  a  hook  for  others,  a 
net  for  others,  and  baits  for  each  one,  as  each  one  will.  To  sit  on  a  bank  or  deck, 
and  say  to  the  fishes,  "  Here  I  am,  authorized  to  command  you  to  come  to  me  and 
to  bite  what  I  give  you,"  is  just  as  ridiculous  as  it  can  be,  even  though  it  does  re- 
eemble  some  ways  of  preaching.  The  Christian's  business  is  not  to  stand  in  an 
appointed  place  and  say  to  men,  *'  Here  am  I ;  come  up  and  take  what  I  give  you 
Ks  you  should."  The  Chiistian's  business  is  to  find  out  what  men  are,  and  to  take 
them  by  that  which  they  will  bite  at.  {lOid.)  Fishers  of  men : — Christ  came 
upon  these  men  when  they  were  busy  at  their  everyday  work.  He  saw  them  casting 
B  net  into  the  sea.  His  eye  is  upon  us  in  all  the  work  we  do  in  the  world.  And  as 
He  looks  upon  us,  so  He  calls  us.  It  is  true  we  may  be  so  absorbed  in  other  pursuits 
fts  not  to  hear  the  call.  I.  What  was  His  call  ?  They  were  to  leave  their  work  that  they 
might  engage  in  higher  work.  II.  How  shall  we  hope  to  be  successful  7  1.  We  must 
follow  Christ.  2.  We  must  submit  to  His  teaching  and  influence.  3.  Christ  only 
can  qualify  us  for  the  work.  {A.  Thomas.)  Induxtry  an  indication  of  worth  : — • 
Whether,  as  He  watched  them  putting  out  the  net,  He  saw  signs,  which  were  indi- 
cations to  His  penetrating  and  prophetic  eye  of  fitness  for  the  higher  work  to  which 
they  were  to  be  called,  we  cannot  tell.  It  is  possible.  For  a  very  small  thing  will 
serve  as  a  revelation  of  character  to  those  who  are  keen-sighted,  and  who  under- 
stand how  the  little  is  allied  to  the  great.  Just  as  a  student  like  Owen  will  construct 
the  entire  skeleton  if  you  give  him  a  single  bone,  so  the  master,  in  the  study  of  the 
human  nature,  will  often  be  able  to  give  a  fair  judgment  of  the  whole  character  ii 
he  sees  only  what  many  would  regard  as  casual  and  meaningless  acts.  (Ibid.) 
Men  miss  the  call  of  Christ  through  over  occupation  : — You  cannot  attend  to  many 
things  at  once.  There  may  be  a  glow  of  heavenly  light  on  the  mountain-top,  but 
it  will  be  nothing  to  the  man  whose  eyes  are  fixed  on  the  path  along  which  he  is 
painfully  toiling.  There  may  be  the  sound  of  sweet  music  carried  on  the  night 
breezes  ;  but  it  will  be  lost  upon  those  who  are  disputing  luudly  and  striving  angrily 
with  each  other.  {Ibid.)  1.  A  fisherman  must  be  acquainted  with  the  sea — we 
must  know  the  locality  in  which  we  have  to  work.  2.  A  fisherman  must  also  know 
how  to  allure  fish.  3.  The  fisherman  must  be  a  man  who  can  wait  with  patience. 
4.  A  fisherman  is  one  who  must  run  hazards.  6.  The  fisherman  must  be  one  who 
has  learned  both  how  to  persevere  and  how  to  expect.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
Ashennan  must  also  knmo  hoio  to  allure  the  fish. — I  saw  on  Lake  Como,  when  we 
visited  Bellagio,  some  men  fishing.  They  had  torches  burning  in  their  boats,  and 
the  fish  were  attracted  to  them  by  the  glare  of  the  light.  You  must  know  how  to 
get  the  fish  together.  You  know  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  ground-bait  for  th« 
fishes.  You  must  know  how  to  allure  men.  The  preacher  does  this  by  using 
images,  symbols,  and  illustrations.   You  must  know  how  to  catch  the  fish,  throwing 


«2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it. 

oat  first.  {Ihld.)  The  Church  enriched  from  the  ranks  of  poverty . — A  few  years 
ago,  on  a  wintry  morning,  a  boy  in  the  habiliments  of  poverty  entered  an  old  EcbooU 
house  amotig  our  western  mountains,  and  avowed  to  the  master  his  desire  for  an 
education.  There  was  poverty  laying  one  of  her  richest  gifts  on  the  altar  of  religion, 
for  that  boy  was  Jonas  King.  On  his  bumble  shoemaker's  bench,  Carey  laid  the 
foundation  of  British  Baptist  Missions.  John  Newton  found  in  his  congregation  an 
unfriended  Scotch  boy,  whose  soul  was  then  glowing  with  new-born  love  to  Christ. 
He  took  l]im  to  John  Thornton,  one  of  those  noble  merchants  whose  wealth,  whose 
piety,  and  whose  beneficence  increased  together.  They  educated  him,  and  that  boy 
became  Claudius  Buchanan,  whose  name  India  will  bless  when  the  names  of  Clive 
end  Hastings  are  forgotten.  John  Bunyan  was  a  gift  of  poverty  to  the  Church. 
Zwingle  came  forth  from  an  Alpine  shepherd's  cabin ;  Melancthon  from  an 
armorrer's  workshop  ;  Luther  from  a  miner's  cottage  ;  the  apostles,  some  of  them, 
from  fishermen's  huts.  These  are  the  gifts  of  poverty  to  the  Church.  (Dr.  /. 
Harris.) 

Ver.  21.  He  callsd  tlism. — Jesns  calls  all  to  follow  Him.  When  engaged  in  their 
ordinary  occupations.  By  His  Word — Providence — Spirit.  I.  The  call.  1.  Who 
calls?  Jesus,  the  Saviour.  His  right  to  do  so.  His  love  in  doing  it.  2.  The 
action.  A  call.  Does  not  compel.  3.  The  purpose.  To  bring  from  toil  to  rest, 
from  danger  to  safety,  from  nature  to  grace.  II.  The  obedience.  Immediate — 
no  delay.  Thorough.  They  left,  renounced,  gave  op,  not  to  return  :  forsook,  parted 
with  possessions,  relations.  The  reason  was  to  follow  Him — imitate,  save.  Through 
humility  to  glory.  What  remarkable  faith  1  '\Vhat  ready  obedience  I  (J.  R, 
Taft,  M.A.)  The  character  of  St.  James.  I.  His  thoroughness.  II.  Hisreadi. 
ness.     III.  His  devotedness.     {Preh.  Griffith,  M.A.)       Forsakivg  all  and  following. 

I.  Consider  the  demand  made  upon  the  men  called.     1.  It  involved  the  sacrifice  of 

(1)  Domestic  ties  ;  (2)  Property  ;  (3)  Their  means  of  livelihood.  2.  It  secured  (1) 
Eidicule ;  (2)  Persivcution ;  (3)  St.  Andrew's  cross.  Such  was  the  prospect.  II. 
Contemplate  their  obedience  manifested.  1.  It  was  thorough.  (1)  They  forsook 
all ;  (2)  They  followed  Him — everywhere.  2.  It  was  constant.  III.  Now,  as  re- 
gards Y0XTrEEL\^s.     1.  You  have  been  called  to  follow  Christ — (1)  In  your  baptism; 

(2)  Preaching ;  (o)  Warnings  of  Providence.  2.  You  are  called  to — Renounce  evil  ways. 
3.  You  are  called  as  they  were,  to  endure  loss,  pain,  death.  Test  your  proceedings : — 
Sunday — how  do  vou  keep  it?  church — do  you  value  its  services?  Holy  Com. 
munion,  &c.    (G.  Venables^ 

Ters.  23-25.  Eealicg  all  manner  of  elck. — Moral  healing: — I.  Christ  is  able  to 
cure  ALL  SORTS  of  sins.     Fever  of  lust,  dropsy  of  drunkenness,  stone  in  the  heart,  Ac. 

II.  Clirist  healed  incurable  sinners — people  who  had  diseases  which  were  beyond 
the  physicians'  skill.  Tliere  is  hope  for  incurable  sinners.  III.  Jesus  healed 
diseases  from  all  countries,  and  eo  He  can  heal  sinners  of  all  lands  (vers.  24,  25). 
He  is  able  to  save  without  any  distinction  of  race,  or  clime,  or  time,  or  place.  IV. 
Jesus  Cbrist  healed  sinners  without  any  limitation  in  numbers — "multitudes," 
Christ  is  as  able  to  rave  a  multitude  as  to  save  one.  V.  He  received  nothing  foi 
all  that  He  did,  except  the  fame,  and  the  honour,  and  the  gratitude  of  their  loving 
hearts.  So  to-day,  poor  sinner,  Jesus  will  take  nothing  at  thy  hands,  and  it  is  a 
mercy  for  thee,  for  tliou  hast  nothing  to  give.  [C.  H.  spurgeon.)  Healing  for  all : — 
I  remember,  when  the  Master  Street  Hospital,  in  Philadelphia,  was  opened  during 
the  war,  a  telegram  came  saying,  "  There  will  be  three  hnndred  wounde<l  men  to- 
night ;  be  ready  to  tiiko  care  of  them  ;  "  and  from  my  church  there  went  in  some 
twenty  or  thirty  men  and  women  to  look  after  these  poor  wounded  fellows.  As  they 
came,  some  Irom  one  pai-t  of  the  laud,  some  from  another,  no  one  asked  whether 
this  man  was  from  Oregon,  or  from  Massachusetts,  or  from  Minnesota,  or  from  New 
York.  There  was  a  wounded  soldier,  and  the  only  question  was  how  to  take  off  the 
rags  the  raoht  gently,  and  put  on  the  bandage,  and  administer  the  cordial.  And 
when  a  soul  comes  to  God,  he  does  not  ask  where  you  came  from,  or  what  your 
ancestry  was.  Healing  for  all  your  wounds.  Pardon  for  aU  your  guilt.  Comfort 
lor  all  your  doubles.     {Dr.  Talmage.) 


OHAP.  T.]  8T.  MATTHEW. 


CHAPTER   V. 

VzRss.  1-2.  And  taught  them. — The  Disciples: — ^I.  Wato  they  are,  not  the  rich, 
gay,  self-asserting,  satisfied.  II.  Their  peculiar  felicity.  1.  Secure.  2.  Manifold. 
8.  Ever-eDlarging.  III.  Their  beneticent  infijOenck.  1.  One  effect  of  such  a 
character  is  to  provoke  resistance.  2.  But  there  comes  out  a  more  pleasing  effect, 
'•  salt."  "  light."  3.  Is  your  character  such  as  the  Saviour  describes  7  {Sermons  by 
the  Monday  Club.)  The  Preacher: — Jesus  Christ  was  every  way  ennobled  and 
qualified  for  the  work  of  the  ministry.  I.  Christ  was  an  intelligent  preacher. 
He  (1)  had  tha  spirit  without  measure  (John  iii.  34) ;  (2)  Knew  how  to  speak  a  word 
««  due  season,  when  to  humble,  when  to  comfort.  He  (3)  understood  what  doctrine 
would  best  suit  with  them  ;  as  the  husbandman  can  tell  what  sort  of  grain  is  proper 
for  such  a  soil.  II.  Chi  ist  was  a  powerful  preacher.  He  (1)  spake  with  authority ; 
(2)  could  set  men's  sins  before  them,  and  show  them  their  very  hearts.  (3)  H» 
preached  to  the  conscience ;  (4)  breathed  as  much  zeal  as  eloquence ;  He  often 
touched  upon  the  heart-strings.  III.  Christ  was  a  successful  preacher.  1.  He 
had  the  art  of  converting  souls.  2.  Many  believed  on  Him.  IV.  Christ  was  a 
lAWFUL  preacher.  (1)  He  had  His  unction  from  His  Father,  bo  (2)  His  mission. 
(Thomas    Watson.)  Tlie    Pulpit: — Christ   expounds    on    the   mount.      From 

whence  observe  that  Christ's  ministers,  according  to  His  pattern,  must  embrace  every 
opportunity  of  doing  good.  I.  Theib  commission.  (1)  God  hath  entrusted  them 
as  ambassadors.  As  an  ambassador  waits  for  a  day  of  audience,  and  then  faithfully 
and  impartially  delivers  the  mind  of  his  prince,  so  (2)  Christ's  ministers,  having  a 
commission  delegated  to  them  to  negotiate  for  souls,  should  be  glad  when  there  is  a 
day  of  audience,  that  thpy  may  (3)  impart  the  mind  and  will  of  Christ  to  His  people. 
II.  Their  titles.  1.  God'Bseedi-men  (1  Cor.  ix.  11).  Therefore  they  must  upon  all 
occasions  use  the  blessed  seed  of  the  Word.  2.  Stars:  therefore  they  must  shine  by 
word  and  doctrine,  in  the  firmament  of  tbe  Church.  3.  Christ  calls  them  the  light 
of  the  world  (Matt.  v.  14),  therefore  they  must  be  always  giving  forth  their 
lustre.      (Ibid.)  The  occasion: — I.  Christ's  ministers  must  catch  at  all  occa- 

sions of  doing  good  to  others,  iu  regard  of  the  work  they  are  about,  and  that  is, 
saving  of  souls.  1.  The  soul  is  a  flower  of  eternity,  here  in  the  bud,  in  heaven 
fully  ripe  and  blown.  2.  It  is  one  of  the  richest  pieces  of  embroidery  God  ever 
made  ;  the  understanding  bespangled  with  light ;  the  will  invested  with  liberty ;  the 
affections,  like  musical  instruments,  tuned  with  the  finger  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3. 
The  soul  is  Christ's  partner,  the  angels'  familiar.  Oh,  how  zealously  industrioua 
Bhould  Christ's  ministers  be  to  save  these  souls  1  II.  Christ's  ministers,  ieeing  the 
multitude  must  ascend  the  mount,  because  bo  many  emissaries  of  Satan  wait  to 
subvert  souls.  1.  Ministers  must  not  only  be  pastors,  but  prsBliatores  ;  in  one  hand 
holding  the  (1)  bread  of  life,  and  feed  the  flock  of  God ;  in  the  other  hand  they 
must  hold  the  (2)  sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  fight  against  error.  III.  Christ's  minis- 
ters should  wait  for  all  opportunities  of  soul  service.  (1)  Never  did  pUot  meet  with 
«o  many  euroclydons  and  cross  winds  in  a  voyage  aa  the  (2)  spiritual  pilots  of 
God'B  Church  do,  when  they  are  transporting  souls  to  heaven,  (Ibid.)  The 
Sermon  : — I.  Some  hearers  have  bad  memories  like  leaking  vessels ;  aU  the  preeiona 
wine  of  holy  doctrine  poured  in,  runs  out  presently.  Ministers  cannot  find  a  truth 
so  fast  as  others  can  lose  it.  1.  How  many  truths  have  they  been  robbed  of  which 
might  have  been  so  many  death-bed  cordials  I  (2)  If  the  Word  preached  slides  so 
fa«t  out  of  the  memory,  ministers  had  need  go  oftener  up  the  preaciiing  mount,  that 
at  least  some  truth  may  abide.  II.  The  ears  of  many  hearers  are  stopped  with  cares 
ol  the  world,  that  the  Word  preached  will  not  enter.  (1)  If  a  man  be  in  a  mill, 
though  you  speak  never  so  loud  to  him,  he  doth  not  hear  you  for  the  noise  o  Itho  mill. 
(2)  We  preach  to  men  about  matters  of  salvation,  but  the  mill  of  worldly  businesa 
makes  such  a  noise  that  they  cannot  hear.  (3)  Therefore  ministers  need  often  ascend 
the  mount,  and  lift  up  their  voices  like  a  trumpet,  that  the  deaf  ear  may  hear  what 
tha  Spirit  saith  to  the  Churches.  III.  Others  have  a  stone  in  their  hearts.  Ministers 
must,  if  possible,  pierce  the  heart  of  stone.  When  the  earth  is  sun-scorched,  it  is  so 
hard  and  crusted  together  that  a  shower  of  rain  will  not  soften  it ;  there  must  bo 
shower  after  shower  before  it  will  be  moist  or  fertile.  So  the  hardened  heart  oft 
needs  precept  upon  precept.  Our  doctrine  must  distil  as  dew,  &o.  (Deut.  xxxii.  2). 
They  that  are  teachers  shall  shine — not  as  lamps  or  tapers,  but  as  stars ;  not  as  planets, 
but  fixed  stars  in  the  firmament  of  glory  for  ever.  (Ibid.)  Introductory: — L 
The  US.USTBI0U8  PEBSONAaB  introduced  to  us.     1.  He  is  wonderful  in  Person.    2. 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l. 

His  extraordinary  condescension.  3.  His  deep  humiliation.  4.  The  work  He  cama 
to  accomplish.  II.  The  interesting  objects  which  attract  His  attention.  "  The 
multitudes,"  &c.  Many  circumstances  rendered  them  interesting.  1.  They  were 
God's  creatures.  2.  They  were  of  the  human  race,  3.  They  were  endowed  with 
rational  faculties.  4.  They  were  immortal  creatures.  5.  They  were  the  creature* 
He  came  to  save.  HI.  The  line  of  conduct  which  our  Lord  pursued.  1.  "  He 
went  up  into  a  mountain ;  "  convenient  for  Him,  and  free  from  noise.  2.  "He  sat 
down."  The  priests  of  the  Mosaic  economy  sat  down  to  deliver  their  instructions. 
8.  He  opened  His  mouth  and  taught."  (1)  What  did  He  teach  ?  Purity  of  worship; 
pure  morality.  (2)  How  did  He  teach  ?  With  simpUcity ;  with  authority ;  vrith 
tenderness.  Give  attentive  ear  to  all  our  Lord  has  taught ;  be  doers  of  the  Word. 
{■I.Jordan.)  Christ  a  Teacher: — I.  The  CHAKACTERof  Jesus  as  a  Teacher.  Greater 
than  the  prophets  or  the  angels.  He  possessed  infinite  knowledge  and  wisdom, 
holiness  and  truth,  goodness  and  love,  condescension  and  patience.  He  enforced 
and  ratified  all  by  Divine  power  and  authority.  II.  The  subjects  of  His  instructioni. 
They  were  all  important,  chiefly  practical,  perfect  and  abiding.  HI.  The  claims  of 
Christ  as  a  Teacher.  Profound  reverence,  intense  attention,  highest  gratitude, 
prompt  obedience.  {Types  and  metaphors.)  A  concise  view  of  the  beatitudes  ;— 
They  all  agree  in  three  things.  1.  They  are  aU  spiritual.  2.  They  are  all  unpopular, 
3.  They  are  all  present.  (F.  Wagstaff.)  I.  Happiness.  Nine  of  these  verses 
begin  with  "  blessed."  The  meaning  of  that  word.  Jesus  came  to  bring  happiness 
(Lake  ii.  14).  «'  How  to  be  happy  "  is  everybody's  question.  Jesus  answers  it  in  these 
"  beatitudes."  II,  True  happiness  is  within.  Not  in  pleasure,  wealth,  &c.  III, 
This  happiness  is  endowed  with  many  promises.  IV.  This  happiness  may  continoh 
IN  adverse  CIRCUMSTANCES  (vers.  10-12).  V.  Such  happiness  is  diffusive  (vers. 
13-16).    {W.  O.  Simpson.)       The  Christian  character: — I,  Christian  characteb,  ob 

THE  PROPER  disposition  FOB  ChRIST'S  DISCIPLES.  II.  ThE  INFLUENCE  WHICH  SUCH 
CHARACTER  IS  SURE  TO  EXERT.  III.  ThE  PERSECUTIONS  WHICH  SUCH  CHARACTEBS 
MUST    EXPECT   TO    MEET    WITH.       IV.      ThE     EFFORT     WE     MUST     MAKE     TO    SECURE     THB 

EXERTION  OF  GOOD  INFLUENCE.  Lcam  (1)  That  the  world  may  honour  the  strong 
and  self-asserting,  but  Christ  honours  the  meek ;  (2)  that  only  the  penitent  and  the 
humble  can  receive  forgiveness ;  (3)  that  those  who  are  forgiven  will  want  to  be 
made  pure  and  righteous  ;  (4)  that  they  must  not  wonder  if  earnest  piety  brings  out- 
Ward  persecution ;  and  (5)  that  if  we  have  won  any  graces  and  virtues  we  must 
earnestly  watch  over  them,  and  nourish  them,  lest  they  should  be  lost. 

Ver.  3.  Poor  In  spirit. — Poor  in  spirit: — I.  Examine  the  character  here  spoken 
of.  1.  We  should  not  confound  the  poor  in  spirit  with  the  poor  in  worldly  ctrcum- 
Btances,  2.  We  are  not  to  associate  the  mean-spirited  with  the  poor  in  spirit.  3. 
We  are  not  to  understand  that  the  poor  in  spirit  are  poor  in  spirituality.  Poorness 
of  spirit  involves — (1)  Humility;  (2)  Contentment;  (3)  Submission;  (4)  Gratitude. 
II.  In  what  their  blessedness  consists.  1.  Theirs  are  the  privileges  of  the  Church  on 
earth  ;  reconciliation ;  illumination ;  communion  ;  joy.  2.  The  felicities  of  the 
Church  in  heaven.  (J.  Jordan.)  The  blessedness  of  the  poor  in  spirit : — I.  By 
the  poor  in  spirit  are  meant  those  who  have  been  convinced  of  their  spiritual 
POVERTY.  All  without  Christ  are  wretched,  blind,  naked,  poor.  They  are  sensible 
of  their  wants  ;  the  higher  their  attainments,  the  deeper  their  humiliation.  Have 
high  thoughts  of  Christ.  We  are  not  to  understand  the  poor  in  this  world ;  not  the 
poor-spirited  or  cowardly  in  the  service  of  Christ ;  not  the  excessively  timid  and 
poor-spirited.  II,  In  what  does  their  blessedness  consist  ?  Bfy  whom  was  this 
assurance  giren  ?  By  Him  who  is  the  source  of  all  blessings.  They  are  heirs  of 
the  kingdom  of  peace,  righteousness,  and  joy,  (D.  Bees.)  Poverty  of  spirit : — 1. 
Do  not  misjudge  a  Christian's  expression  of  lowliness,  for  these  are  genuine  expres- 
sions of  poverty  of  spirit.  2.  So  far  as  you  find  restfulness  and  complacency  in 
your  own  attainments,  you  may  doubt  the  reality  of  your  growth,  3,  Poverty  ol 
nature  rather  than  poverty  of  spirit  may  be  revealed  by  ceasoriousness.  4.  The 
Holy  Spirit  alone  can  correct  self-ignorance ;  from  His  illumination  will  result 
genuine  poverty  of  spirit,  {J.  T.  Duryea,  D.D.)  A  few  consideratiotis  which 
vtay  serve  to  cherish  this  spirit : — I.  Let  us  think  much  on  the  character  of  God  af 
shown  to  ns  in  His  Holy  Word.  II.  Let  us  be  careful  to  separate  any  good  inten- 
tions which  we  may  find  springing  up  in  our  hearts  from  ourselves,  and  ascrib* 
them  to  God's  Holy  Spirit.  Ill,  Let  us  be  watchful  against  occasions  of  pride. 
IV.  Another  great  st^p  to  the  attainment  of  humility,  is  to  forgot  those  things 
which  are  behind,  and  press  onward  to  those  before.     V-  We  must  be  ever  looking 


CHiP.  V.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  45 

et  the  Cross.  (H.  Alford,  M.A.)  The  hlpssedness  of  the  poor  in  spirit: — 1.  The 
promises  of  the  gospel  beloag  to  them.  2.  They  enjoy  the  means  of  grace.  3.  In 
«ihe  Christian  conflict  the  humble  man  has  all  the  advantage.  (Ibid.)  The 
poor  in  spirit: — I.  Some  things  which  must  be  rejected  as  not  intended 
by  Christ.  It  is  not  a  mere  peculiarity  of  temperament — not  the  obsequiousnesa 
and  meanness  often  associated  with  poverty — not  the  simple  fact  of  being  poor — 
not  voluntary  rehgious  poverty.  II.  The  featoees  of  spiritual  poverty.  1.  The 
conditions :  In  a  spiritual  sense  all  are  poor.  2.  The  state  of  mind — poor  la 
tpirit,  implying  great  humbling — difficult  of  attainment,  so  repugnant  to  the  flesh, 
80  opposed  to  our  fancied  excellence.  III.  The  blessino  promised.  It  fs  the 
spirit  m  which  the  kingdom  is  to  be  rsceived  (Matt,  xviii.  1-5).  Is  the  spirit  of  the 
Master  (Phil.  ii.  1-12).  Blessed  with  all  the  titles  and  riches  of  the  kingdom 
(James  ii.  .5).    Is  the  essence  of  a  filial  spirit.     (IF.  Barker.)        Blessedness  is  the 

Eerfection  of  a  rational  creature ;  it  is  the  whetstone  of  a  Christian's  industry ;  the 
eight  of  his  ambition ;  the  flower  of  his  joy ;  the  desire  of  all  men.  I.  Let  as 
BO  deport  ourselves  that  we  may  express  to  others  that  we  do  believe  a  blessedness 
to  come,  by  seeking  after  an  interest  in  God,  and  that  our  union  with  God  and  the 
chief  good  makes  us  blessed.  II.  Let  us  proclaim  to  the  world  that  we  believe  in 
blessedness  to  come,  by  living  blessed  lives  ;  walk  as  become  the  heirs  of  blessed- 
ness. Let  us  lead  blessed  lives,  and  so  declare  plainly  that  we  seek  a  country 
(Heb.  xi.  14).  {Thotnag  Watson.)  You  may  as  well  expect  fruit  to  grow  without  • 
root,  as  the  other  graces  without  this;  till  a  man  be  poor  in  spirit  he  cannot  mourn. 

1.  Till  we  are  poor  in  spirit  we  are  not  capable  of  receiving  grace.  1.  God  doth 
first  empty  a  man  of  himself,  before  He  pours  in  the  precious  wine  of  His   grace. 

2,  None  but  the  poor  in  spirit  are  within  Christ's  commission.  H.  Till  we  are 
poor  in  spirit,  Christ  is  never  precious.  (1)  Before  we  see  our  own  wants  we  never 
see  (2)  Christ's  worth.  (3)  He  that  wants  bread,  and  is  ready  to  starve,  will 
have  it,  whatever  it  cost ;  bread  he  must  have,  or  he  is  undone ;  (4)  So  to  him  that 
is  poor  in  spirit,  that  sees  his  want  of  Christ,  how  precious  is  the  Saviour  I  IIL 
Till  we  are  poor  in  spirit  we  cannot  go  to  heaven.  (1)  The  great  cable  cannot  go 
through  the  eye  of  the  needle,  but  let  it  be  untwisted  and  made  into  small  threads, 
then  it  may.  (2)  Poverty  of  spirit  untwists  the  great  cable;  (3)  Makes  a  maa 
little  in  his  own  eyes,  and  now  an  entrance  shall  be  made  unto  him.  (Ihid.) 
I.  He  that  is  poor  in  spirit  is  weaned  from  himself.  1.  The  vine  catcheth 
hold  of  everything  that  is  near,  to  stay  itself  upon.  There  is  some  bough  or 
other,  a  man  would  be  catching  hold  of  to  rest  upon ;  how  hard  it  is  to  be 
brought  quite  off  himself.  II.  He  that  is  poor  in  spirit  is  a  Christ-admirer.  I. 
He  sees  himself  woimded,  and,  as  the  wounded  deer  runs  to  the  water,  so  he  thirsts 
for  the  water  of  life.  2.  "Lord,"  saith  he,  "give  me  Christ,  or  Idle."  lU.  He 
that  is  poor  in  spirit  is  ever  complaining  of  his  spiritual  estate.  1.  He  ever  com- 
plains, "  I  want  a  broken  heart,  a  thankful  heart."  2.  He  mourns  he  hath  no 
more  grace.  IV.  He  that  is  poor  in  spirit  is  lowly  in  heart.  1,  Submissive.  3. 
He  blushcth  more  at  the  defects  of  his  graces,  than  others  do  at  the  excess  of  their 
eins.  V.  He  that  is  poor  in  spirit  is  much  in  prayer.  1.  Ever  begging  for 
spiritual  alms.  2.  Will  not  away  from  the  gate,  till  he  have  his  dole.  VI.  The 
poor  in  spirit  is  content  to  take  Christ  upon  His  own  terms.  1.  Sees  himself  lost 
without  Christ.  2.  WilUng  to  have  Him  upon  His  own  terms.  VII.  He  that  is 
poor  in  spirit  is  an  exalter  of  free  grace.  1.  He  blesses  God  for  the  least  crumb 
that  falls  from  the  table  of  free  grace.  2.  He  magnifies  mercy,  and  is  thankfoL 
{Ihid.)  Poverty  of  spirit: — Christ  begins  with  this,  and  we  must  begin  here 
if  3ver  we  be  saved.  Poverty  of  spirit  is  the  foundation  stone  on  which  God  lays 
the  superstructure  of  glory.  There  are  four  things  may  persuade  Christiana 
to  be  poor  in  spirit : — I.  This  poverty  is  your  biches.  1.  You  may  have  the 
world's  riches,  and  yet  be  poor.  2.  You  cannot  have  this  poverty,  but  you  must 
be  rich.  3.  Poverty  of  spirit  entitles  you  to  all  Christ's  riches.  II.  This  poverty 
is  your  NOBrLiTT.  1.  God  looks  upon  you  as  persons  of  honour.  2.  He  that  ia 
■vile  in  his  own  eyes,  is  precious  in  God's  eyes.  3.  The  way  to  rise  is  to  faU.  4. 
God  esteems  the  valley  highest.  III.  Poverty  of  spiiit  doth  sweetly  quiet  thb 
BOUL.  (1)  When  a  man  is  brought  of  himself  to  rest  on  Christ,  what  a  (2)  ble£*8ed 
calm  is  in  the  heart  I  IV.  Poverty  of  spirit  paves  a  causeway  for  blessedness.  1, 
Are  you  poor  in  spirit?  You  are  blessed.  (Ibid.)  The  kingdom  far  the  poor  in 
tpirit.  Here  is  comfort  to  the  people  of  God.  I.  God  hath  provided  them 
with  a  kingdom.  1.  A  child  of  God  is  oft  so  low  in  the  world  that  he  hath  not  a 
foot  of  land  to  inherit ;  he  is  poor  in  purse,  as  well  as  poor  in  spirit.     2.  Here  ia  a 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

fountain  of  consolation  opened.  3.  The  poorest  saint  who  hath  lost  all  hia  golden 
fieeee  is  heir  to  a  kingdom.  II.  This  kingdom  excels  aU  the  kingdoms  and 
principalities  of  the  world.  III.  The  hope  of  this  kingdom,  eaith  Basil,  should 
carry  a  Christian  with  courage  and  cheerf  alness  through  all  his  afflictions  ;  and  it  is 
a  saying  of  Luther's  "  The  sea  of  God's  mercy,  overflowing  in  spiritual  blessings, 
ghould  drown  all  the  sufferings  of  this  life."  IV.  What  though  thou  goest  now  in 
rags  I  Thou  shalt  have  thy  white  robes.  What  though  thou  art  fed  like  Daniel, 
with  pulse,  and  hast  coarser  fare  1  Thou  shalt  feast  when  thou  comest  to  the 
kingdom.  Here  thou  driakest  the  water  of  tears;  shortly  thou  shalt  drink 
the    wine  of  paradise.    Be  comforted   with  the  thoughts  of  a  kingdom.    {Ibid.) 

I.  Who  ABE  MEANT  by  the  poor  in  spirit?  To  the  pour  in  spirit,  or  those  that 
possess  a  sphit  of  poverty,  the  text  annexes  a  blessedness,  and  promises  a  reward. 

II.  What  are  the  teopeb  viktues  of  a  poor  and  low  estate,  such  as  every  man, 
whether  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  is  bound  to  endeavour  after  ?  (1)  Humility ; 
(2)  Patience ;  (3)  Contentment ;  (4)  Trust  and  hope  in  God.  {Bialiop  0/spring 
Blackall,  D.D.)  Virtues  taught  by  a  state  of  poverty  of  spirit  are  : — 
(1)  Industry.  They  that  want  nothing  think  it  needless  to  labour  ;  (2)  Tem- 
perance; (3)  Frugality;  (4)  Contempt  of  the  world.  (Sir  William  Davies, 
Bart.,  D.D.)  Neither  indigence  nor  wealth  in  icself  has  the  least  connec- 
tion with  real  religion.  I.  Poverty  of  spirit  consists  in  a  deep  conviction  o» 
oaiLT  and  depravity,  before  a  pure  and  holy  Being.  (1)  By  the  entrance  of  God's 
Word  into  the  mind,  and  the  (2)  triumph  of  His  grace  in  the  soul,  we  become 
"poor  in  spirit."  (3)  When  conTiction  flashes  in  the  conscience  of  a  sinner, 
when  he  sees  the  (4)  number  of  his  sins,  (5)  strength  of  his  corraptions,  and  (6)  weak 
ness  of  his  resolutions,  then  this  disposition  is  implanted  in  him.  Already  he  ba- 
the beginning  of  blessedness  in  his  breast.  II.  Poverty  of  spirit  consists  in 
HUMILITY  through  every  stage  of  the  Christian's  pilgrimage.  1.  It  commences 
with  a  deep  sense  of  sin,  guilt,  and  desert  of  punishment.  2.  It  is  the  vital 
principle  of  the  believer's  spiritual  constitution.  3.  It  grows  with  his  grace.  4. 
Increases  with  the  increase  of  his  knowledge  in  God.  5.  As  he  becomes  a  father 
in  Christ,  he  will  become  a  little  child  in  his  own  estimation.  6.  The  most 
eminent  Christian  is  the  most  humble.  7.  His  humiUty  exalts  him,  and  makes 
him  great.  III.  Poverty  of  sphit  includes  contentment  with  the  allotments  of  Provi- 
dence. 1.  It  is  opposed  to  the  restlessness  of  ambition,  and  the  haughtinesfc 
of  pride.  2.  It  turns  away  from  that  "  covetousness  which  is  idolatry."  3.  It 
does  not  eagerly  and  improperly  det-ire  the  honours  and  riches  of  this  world.  4. 
"  Having  food  and  raiment,"  it  has  learned  to  be  contented  therewith.  Such  an 
elevation  of  soul  should  be  acquired,  and  such  a  spirit  of  cheerful  contentment 
should  be  cultivated  by  all  who  have  taken  on  them  the  Christian  name.  (J.  E,  Good.) 
There  may  be  pride  in  poverty  as  well  as  in  wealth. — There  was  a  story  in  old 
times  told  of  a  severe,  cynical  philosopher,  visiting  the  house  of  one  who  was  far 
his  superior  in  geniu»  as  in  modesty.  He  found  the  good  philosopher  living  in  a 
comfortable  house,  with  easy-chairs  and  pleasant  pictures  round  him,  and  he  came 
in  with  his  feet  stained  with  dust  and  mud,  and  said,  as  he  walked  upon  the 
beautiful  carpets,  "  Thus  I  trample  on  the  pride  of  Plato."  The  good  philosopher 
paid  no  attention  at  first,  but  returned  the  visit,  and  when  he  saw  the  ragged 
furniture  and  the  scanty  covering  of  the  floor  of  the  house  in  which  the  other 
ostentatiously  lived,  he  said,  "I  see  the  pride  of  Diogenes  throagh  the  holes  in  his 
carpet."  Many  a  one  there  is  whose  pride  is  thus  seen  by  his  affectiug  to  be 
without  it;  many  a  one  whose  poverty,  whose  modesty  in  spirit,  can  best  be 
appreciated  by  seeing  how  the  outward  comforts  and  splendour  of  life  can  be  used 
by  him  without  payiug  any  attention  to  them.  (Dean  Stanley.)  Poverty  oj 
spirit  conducive  to  prayer.  Never  pauper  pleaded  more  at  your  gate  for  soma 
gift  of  charity  than  he  does.  And  because  he  has  nothing  but  what  he  receives, 
therefore  he  is  always  asking.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Yer.  4.  Tlxey  that  motim. — The  mmimert  who  are  not  entitled  to  the  hlemng$ 
here  named : — I.  Those  who  indulge  the  soiTow  of  discontent.  II.  The  inordinate 
■orrow  for  worldly  losses.  III.  Sorrow  for  wounded  pride.  IV.  A  despairing  spirit 
as  to  their  acceptance  with  God.  Those  who  are  blessed : — 1.  There  is  a  mourning 
arising  from  a  sense  of  having  offended  God.  2.  Those  who  mourn  under  the 
afiSicting  dispensations  of  God's  providence.  8.  A  few  words  to  those  who  enjoy 
worldly  contentment :  you  are  no  mourners.  4.  May  God  give  us  grace  to  mourn 
BO  as  to  be  comforted.     [U.  Atford,  M.A.)        Spiritual  mourning  : — 1.  What  we 


ST.  2IATTHEW.  47 


are  to  undeestand  bi  the  mousning  mentioned.  1.  It  is  not  the  mourning  of  a 
melancholy  disposition.  2.  It  is  not  sorrow  over  temporal  distress.  3.  It  is  not 
sorrow  in  adversity.  4.  It  is  not  sorrow  because  of  disappointed  hopes.  It  arises 
purely  from  religion.  II.  What  are  the  causes  of  this  mourning?  1.  Sin  is  on« — 
(1)  Because  it  dishonours  God  ;  (2)  Because  it  cleaves  to  himself .  (3)  The  prevalence 
of  sin  causes  him  to  mourn  (4)  because  of  the  punishment  it  shall  receive.  2. 
Another  cause  of  his  mourmng  is  the  absence  of  spiritual  joys.  3.  Another  cause 
is  the  imperfect  and  afflicted  state  of  the  Church.  III.  The  import  of  the  ORAcroua 
PBOMisB  made  by  the  Saviour.  1.  Spiritual  mourners  shall  be  comforted  by  an 
assurance  of  their  personal  interest  in  Christ.  2.  By  the  assurance  that  the  causes 
of  their  present  mourning  shall  be  removed.  3.  By  the  expressico  of  Divine  appro- 
bation. 4.  If  the  Christian  be  thus  comforted  here,  what  must  be  hia  comfort  in 
heaven?  To  conclude.  1.  How  mistaken  is  the  world  in  its  decisiongi  It  8up> 
poses  the  mourner  miserable ;  he  only  has  joy.  2.  Are  yoa  a  spiritual  mourner  ? 
(eT'.  Jordan.)  The  blessed  moumert : — I.  Their  ohabacteb.  We  do  not  say  that 
piety  is  never  clothed  in  the  garb  of  sorrow.  The  things  which  excite  grief  in  the 
ungodly  cause  it  in  the  godly.  But  while  the  sorrow  is  common,  they  do  not  mourn 
in  the  same  spirit.  Sorrow  for  sin  chiefly  meant  in  the  text :  no  source  of  sorrow 
equal  to  this.  Mourn  for  the  sins  of  others ;  their  own  small  attainment  in  grace. 
1.  Their  sorrow  is  sincere.  2.  It  is  bitter,  not  superficial.  3.  It  is  godly.  4. 
They  mourn  in  faith.  II.  Theib  blessedness,  1.  They  may  think  that  they  are 
far  from  being  in  a  blessed  state.  2.  By  whom  shall  they  be  comforted  T  By  God 
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  3.  How  shall  comfort  be  imparted  to  them  ?  By 
clear  views  of  Christ  and  of  His  grace,  &c.  4.  By  what  means  does  God  usually 
comfort  the  mourners  ?  Prayer,  worship,  work,  converse,  sacrament.  (X).  Bees.) 
The  blessedness  of  sanctified  sorrow : — I.  What  that  moubninq  is  which  Chbist 
THUS  PBONOUN0E3  BLESSED.  Not  every  kind  of  mourning.  There  is  the  sorrow  of 
the  world  that  worketh  death : — 1.  Such  is  the  mourning  that  springs  from  a  bad 
source.  From  pride  or  discontent.  2.  Such  is  the  mourning  that  is  the  expression 
of  a  bad  spirit.  But  (1)  Blessed  are  they  who  mourn  for  themselves ;  (2)  Wlio 
mourn  for  their  Christian  brethren;  (3)  Who  mourn  for  the  Church;  (4)  Who 
mourn  for  the  world.  II,  What  is  the  blessedness  of  that  comfort  which  thk 
Eedbeueb  heub  assures  cs  is  attached  to  this  MOURNiNe.  1.  It  is  present  and 
positive.  2.  There  are  comparative  and  contrasted  blessings  connected  with  this 
sorrow ;  the  situation  of  such  is  less  dangerous  than  that  of  others.  3.  It  is  less 
equivocal  than  that  of  others.  "  Wliom  the  Lord  loveth  He  ohasteneth."  4.  This 
blessedness  is  peculiar  to  themselves.  (Dr.  T.  Raffles.)  Zion's  mourners  com' 
fyvrted : — Administration  of  Divine  comfort  to  the  subjects  of  godly  contrition,  the 
benevolent  purpose  of  Messiah  (Isa.  Ixi.  3;  Luke  iv.  18).  Immediately  on  entering 
I  [is  ministry  the  prediction  was  accomplished.  I.  The  mourners  addressed.  The 
nature,  cause,  and  evidences  of  their  sorrow.  IL  The  consolation  promised. 
Spiritual,  seasonable,  abundant,  gracious  (2  Chron.  ixx.  9  ;  Isa.  Iv.  7-9  ;  Hosea  vi. 
1;  Zech.  L  3,  4;  Luke  xv.  7-10,  xvii.  21,  24,  32).  {Anon.)  L  The  mourning 
intended.  Not  murmuring,  natui-al  sorrow,  or  grief,  but  the  sorrow  connected  with 
sin — "  godly  sorrow  " — the  mourning  in  the  house  of  affliction,  and  mourning  in 
Zion — sighing  over  the  abominations  of  the  people,  Ac  II.  The  blessing  promised. 
The  sorrow,  whatever  its  nature,  shall  not  overwhelm.  The  comfort  is  certain.  (W, 
Barker. )  L  What  is  the  sorrow  that  is  blessed  ?  Not  the  vulgar  sorrow  that 
•very  man  feels,  &c.  But — 1.  Sorrow  at  the  recollection  and  the  sense  of  sin — for  sin 
rather  than  for  the  consequences — secret  sins — sin  seen  in  the  light  of  Christ's  coon- 
tenance — "  godly  sorrow."  2.  Sorrow  because  of  the  sins  that  we  see  around  us 
(Jsr.  ix.  18 ;  Psa.  cxix.  36).  Sins  of  the  world,  and  sins  of  the  Church — inconsis- 
tency, &c.  3.  Sorrow  because  of  the  little  progress  of  Christianity.  4.  That  we 
are  able  to  do  so  little.  6.  Sorrow  that  makes  one  sometimes  long  to  be  "  absent 
from  the  body,"  &o.  II.  They  who  sorrow  thus  shall  be  comfobted.  There  is  a 
comfort  in  such  sorrow,  as  well  as  beyond  it.  Such  sorrow  is  blessed  in  its  enda« 
ranee,  and  at  the  close  of  it.  It  is  Divine,  complete,  unalloyed  comfort.  {Dr.  J, 
Cumming.)  The  mourmng  here  intended  is  that  which  arises  from  the  due 
consideration  of  our  own  sins,  and  the  sins  of  others.  L  Such  was  the  godly  sorrow 
of  David  (Psa.  li.  4).  1.  The  same  kind  was  that  of  the  woman  who  "  was  a 
sinner,"  and  whose  conversion  is  briefly  related  by  St.  Luke  (chap.  vii.).  2.  Peter 
mourned  when  his  Lord  looked  on  him  after  his  cruel  denial.  He  went  oat  and 
"wept  bitterly."  3.  Such  was  the  sorrow  of  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  vii.  11).  IL 
The  generous  spirit  of  the  Christian  deeply  mourns  the  sins  of  others.     1.  Thus 


18  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  v. 


saith  the  pious  Vmg  of  Israel :  "  I  belield  the  transgressors,  and  was  grieved,"  <tc. 
2.  Such  was  tb.e  lauipntation  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  ix.  1,  2).  3.  The  most  perfect  illus- 
tratiuu  of  holy  sorrow  is  seen  in  our  Lord  (Luke  xix.  41,  42).  (J.  E.  Good.) 
The  mourning  which  will  entitle  a  man  to  blessedness  hath  these  qualifications  : — 
I.  It  is  SPONTANEOUS  and  free.  1.  It  must  come  as  water  out  of  a  spring,  not  as  fire 
from  flint.  2.  Tears  for  sin  must  be  like  the  myrrh  which  drops  from  the  tree 
freely,  without  cutting  or  forcing.  II,  It  is  spiritual,  that  is  when  we  mourn  for 
Bin  more  than  suffering.  We  must  mourn  for  sin  as  it  is  (1)  An  act  of  hostility 
and  enmity  that  (2)  affronts  and  resists  the  Holy  Ghost ;  (3)  An  ingratitude,  in  ita 
unkinduess  against  God ;  (4)  A  privation  that  keeps  good  things  from  us,  and  hinders 
our  communion  with  God.  III.  It  sends  the  sodl  to  God.  When  the  prodigal  son 
repented,  he  went  to  his  father.  IV.  It  is  for  sin  in  pabticdlae.  There  must 
be  a  particular  repentance  before  we  have  a  general  pardon.  V.  It  is  with  hope. 
Believing  that  though  our  tears  drop  to  the  earth,  our  faith  must  reach  heaven. 
VI.  It  is  JOINED  WITH  SELF-LOATHING.  VII.  It  must  be  PURiFTiNO.  Our  tears  rnust 
make  us  more  holy.  The  waters  of  holy  mourning  are  like  the  river  Jordan,  wherein 
Naaman  washed,  and  was  cleansed  of  his  leprosy.  VIII.  It  must  be  joined  with 
HATRED  OF  SIN.  We  must  not  only  abstain  from  sin,  but  abhor  it.  The  dove  hatea 
the  least  feather  of  the  hawk ;  a  true  mourner  hates  the  least  motion  to  sin.  IX. 
It  is  JOINED  WITH  RESTITUTION.  If  We  have  eclipsed  the  good  name  of  others,  we  are 
bound  to  ask  them  forgiveness ;  if  we  have  wronged  them  by  unjust,  fraudulent 
dealing,  we  must  make  them  compensation.  X.  It  must  be  speedy.  XI.  It  must 
be  CONSTANT.  The  waters  of  repentance  must  not  overflow  in  the  morning,  at  the 
first  hearing  of  the  gospel ;  and  at  mid-dny,  in  the  midst  of  health  and  prosperity, 
grow  cold  and  be  ready  to  freeze.  It  must  be  a  daily  weeping,  a  daily  mourning. 
{Thomas  Watson.)  Spiritual  comforts  are  pure.  They  are  not  muddied  with 
guilt,  nor  mixed  with  fear — they  are  the  pure  wine  of  the  Spirit ;  what  the  mourner 
feels  is  joy,  and  nothing  hut  joy.  The  comforts  God  gives  His  mourners  are — I. 
Sweet.  The  love  of  God  shed  into  the  heart  is  said  to  be  better  than  wine  (Cant. 
i.  2).  II.  They  are  holt.  Divine  comforts  give  the  soul  more  acquaintance  with 
God.  III.  They  are  satisfyino.  They  fill  the  heart  and  make  it  run  over.  IV. 
They  are  powerful.  Strong  cordials.  1.  They  strengthen  for  duty.  2.  Support 
tinder  affliction.  V.  They  are  ABiDiNf> ;  abound  in  us,  and  so  abide  ever  with  ns. 
Worldly  comforts  are  still  upon  the  wing,  ready  to  fly.  The  comforts  of  the  Spirit 
are  immortal  and  eternal.  Oh,  how  rare  and  superlative  are  these  comforts  I 
[Ibid.)  Monrners  comforted : — I.  The  gbiep  which  is  here  specified.  It  will  be 
proper: — 1.  To  ascertain  its  cause.  (1)  He  is  led  to  view  the  immense  debt  of 
obedience  due  to  the  blessed  God  as  the  Sovereign  Ruler  of  the  universe.  (2)  Thr 
awful  consequences  attending  the  non-payment  of  this  debt.  (3)  His  utter  inability 
to  make  restitution.  2.  To  ascertain  its  character,  (1)  It  is  voluntary  and  sin- 
cere ;  not  forced  or  artificial.  (2)  It  is  deep,  not  superficial.  (3)  It  is  evangelical  and 
spiritual.  (4)  It  is  characterized  by  a  hatred  and  an  abandonment  of  sin.  U.  The 
consolation  with  which  it  is  associated.  "  They  shall  be  comforted."  This  intimates 
certainty  as  well  as  the  futurity  of  the  comfort.  But  some  may  ask — 1.  What  is  this 
consolation  7  It  arists  from  the  satisfaction  Christ  has  made ;  none  so  rich,  free,  and 
gatisfying  as  this.  2.  Whence  does  this  comfort  proceed  ?  From  the  free  favour  of 
God.   3.  How  is  this  comfort  applied  ?  It  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.   (R.  May.) 

Ver,  5,  The  meek. — Christian  meekness  : — L  A  general  idea  ok  this  Cheistias 
viRTua.  It  is  not  that  miLlness  of  temper  which  is  natural  to  some  people,  fbia 
amiable  disposition  is  manifest  (1)  In  the  closet ;  (2)  In  the  family ;  (3)  In  the 
Church  ;  (4)  In  the  sanctuary ;  (5)  In  the  world.  II.  Eeasons  why  we  should 
attf-nd  to  the  cui-TivATioN  of  this  virtue.  1.  In  order  to  be  conformed  to  the 
example  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  In  order  to  refute  the  calumnies  of  the  infidel,  8. 
In  obedience  to  the  Scriptures,  III,  The  inheritance  which  is  connected  with  its 
possession.  1,  The  meek  shall  inherit  the  present  earth,  and  be  happy  in  it,  2. 
They  shall  inherit  the  new  earth.  {J.  Jordan.)  Benedictions,  or  the  blessed  life  : 
— I.  What  constitutes  a  meek  spirit  ?  Not  a  natural  quietness  of  character — 
amiabh  ness.  A  meek  spirit  is  a  spirit  of  goodwill  and  clemency :  is  placid  and 
salm  amidst  the  vexations  and  cares  of  life  (1  Peter  iii.  4) ;  is  tractable  and  submis- 
Bive  ;  forbearing  and  forgiving  ;  bows  to  the  rod  of  affliction.  II.  The  blessedness 
of  this  spirit.  It  is  an  evidence  of  our  union  to  Christ — a  unity  with  the  spirit  of 
the  noble  sufferers  and  Tnart>^rs  of  the  past :  enjoy  the  benefits  of  Dinne  provi- 
dence— "  inherit  the  earth,"  in  a  mystic  sense,  far  superior  to  worldly  possessions ; 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW. 


enjoy  a  superior  measure  of  the  Spirit  of  God  :  shall  in  the  end  literally  enjoy  the 
earth.     (W.  Barker.)        There  is  a  twofold  meekness — towards  God  and  towards 
man.     Towards  God  imijlies  two  things.     I.  Submission  to  His  will.     1.  Carrying 
ourselves  calmly,  without  murmuring,  under  the  dispensations  of  Providence.     2. 
Let  God  do  what  He  will  with  me,  I  will  submit.    II.  Flexibility  to  His  Word.    1. 
He  is  spiritually  meek  who  conforms  himself  to  the  mind  of  God,  and  doth  not 
quarrel  with  the  instructions  of  the  Word,  but  the  corruptions  of  his  heart.     2. 
How  happy  it  is  when  the  Word  which  comes  with  majesty  is  received  with  meek- 
nesB.     Meekness  towards  man  consists  in  three  things.     I.  Bearing  of   injuries. 
II.  Forgiving  of  injuries.     III.  Recompensing  good  for  evil.     (Thomas  Wats&n.) 
I.  Conditions  and  cibcumstances.     1,  In  prosperity  a  meek,  quiet,  and  humble 
spirit  is  not  puffed  up.     2.  Does  not  esteem  himself  better  because  of  his  position. 
3.  Looks  upon  the  good  things  he  possesses  as  a  gift  from  God.    4.  Not  as  the  reward 
of  his  own  merit.     5.  Not  as  the  purchase  of  his  own  industry.     He  wiU  consider 
that  as  much  as  he  excels  others  in  these  outward  gifts  of  fortune,  so  much  they 
may  excel  him  in  the  inward  gifts  of  grace,  in  knowledge,  in  wisdom,  in  piety,  and 
in  virtue.     II.     1.  In  adversity,  being  of  a  meek  and  humble  spirit,  he  will  be 
contented  with  his  condition.     2.  Easy  and  quiet  under  all  misfortune  and  afflio. 
tion.     3.  Will  not  envy  those  who  are  in  a  more  flourishing  condition  :  rather  will 
rejoice  thereat.     4.  Though  in  want  or  pain,  he  will  be  glad  that  others  are  at  ease. 
5.  Would  rather  be  miserable  alone,  than  have  sharers  in  his  misfortune.     6.  Will 
gladly  accept  and  thankfully  acknowledge  help  and  relief  from  others.    III.  A  meek 
man  will  behave  himself  in  relation  to  God,  in  a  humble  spirit.     1.  Willing  to 
be  instructed  by  God.     2.  Yielding  a  ready  belief  to  all  Divine  revelations.     3. 
Cheerfully  obedient  to  Divine  command.     4.  With  prompt  submission  of  self  to  the 
wisdom  and  will  of  God.     5.  Patiently  enduring  inflictions  and  dispensations  of 
God's  providence  towards  him.      IV.    Meekness  in  relation  towards  men  con- 
sists in  (1)  Owning  the  authority  and  dominion  of  our  superiors ;    (2)  In  acknow- 
ledging the  equality  of  our  equals  ;  (3)  In  thoughtfulness  and  care  for  our  inferiors  ; 
(4)  In  being  free  from  malice  towards  those  who  have  wronged  us.      V.  Blessed 
are  the  meek.     1.  In  that  they  have  command  over  their  passions.     2.  In  that 
they  possess  valour  and  fortitude.     3.  In  that  they  have  everlasting  peace  of  mind. 
{Bishop  Ofspring  Blackall,  D.D.)        Christian  meekness : — I.  It  is  the  fruit  of  that 
humbleness  of  spirit  and  sorrow  for  sin  of  which  the  preceding  beatitudes  speak. 
(1)  It  flows  from  Christian  humility  and  (2)  penitential  sorrow.     It  is  (3)  acqui- 
escence with  God's  ways ;  (4)  Resignation  to  His  wiU ;  and  (5)  Subjection  of  the 
mind  and  judgment  to  the  revelation  He  has  made  of  His  character  and  graoe.    II. 
It  is  not  only  meekness  in  relation  to  God,  but  also  meekness  in  relation  to  man. 
(1)  It  is  kindness  to  adversaries  ;  (2)  Gentleness  to  foes  ;  (3)  Submission  for  the 
sake  of  peace,  on  all  occasions  where  principles  are  not  required  to  be  compromised, 
or  the  conscience  violated ;  (4)  It  is  a  principle  of  Christianity ;  and  (5)  the  exis- 
tence of  vital,  solid  religion  in  the  heart.    (/.  E.  Good.)        The  chief  adversaries  of 
meekness  : — 1.  That  irritableness  which  comes  from  untrained  or  overspent  nerves. 
2.  Pride  is  an  indefatigable  enemy  of  meekness.     3.  Conscience  is  a  great  adver- 
sary, as  the  world  works,  of  meekness ;  it  flnds  conscience  in  its  way.     (H.  W, 
Peecher.) 

Meiikness  not  insensibility. — There  is  no  discord  possible  on  the  bassviol  to  % 
string  that  does  not  exist,  or  that  has  not  been  brought  to  any  tension.  [Ihid.) 
Meekness  more  effective  than  severity. — Behold  the  barren  field.  Everything  sleeps 
or  is  dead.  Call,  now,  to  the  winds  in  January.  Call  now,  to  the  sheeting  snows 
in  February  to  redeem  the  field  and  the  forest,  and  all  their  violence  falls  short. 
Call  for  nature's  rudest  forces,  that  walk  the  earth  invisible  in  rugged  power,  or 
storms  and  winds,  and  what  change  can  violence  work  upon  the  dead  field  and  the 
waking  forests  Set  there  is  a  prophecy  of  silence  in  the  south,  and  there  ara 
winds  that  wander,  run  before  the  coming  sun.  Now  the  morning  comes  earlier 
and  the  evening  lingers  later.  Now  milder  heavens;  now  come  birds,  singing 
victory  ;  more  light,  longer  days,  gentler  heat,  and,  behold,  death  is  slain  and  June 
is  here,  and  in  her  lap  all  falls.  The  storms  ca  no  longer  touch,  nor  frosts  destroy. 
And  80  shall  be  the  advancing  forces  of  love  and  meelmess,  but  not  in  January  nor 
in  February,  nor  in  the  March,  in  which  the  world  is  now  living,  but  in  June  and 
summer,  {iiid.)  Meekness  generally  successful. — Look  at  it.  A  very  proud 
father  has  a  son.  He  naturally  governs  him  ith  rigour  and  peremptoriness.  He 
finds  out  that  the  boy  has,  in  his  visitation  ,  aUied  himself  prematurely  with  a 
family  with  which  it  is  very  desirable  there  should  not  be  a  connection.   On  hearing 

4, 


£ni  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

of  it  he  rages  and  atorma ;  and  his  wife  says  to  him,  "  My  dear,  don't  you  know  that 
it  you  undertake  to  ot)pose  this  thing  in  that  way,  you  will  do  more  harm  thaa 
good  ?  Don't  you  know  that  if  you  are  violent  with  the  boy,  you  will  only  ratify 
him  in  his  determination  ?  "  He  recognizes  that  fact,  and  calms  down.  He  goes 
to  the  boy  and  says  pleasantly,  "Well,  ray  son,  how  is  it  with  you?  I  hear  that 
you  have  been  visitinp;."  "  Yes,"  says  the  boy,  "  I  have."  "  Well,  I  am  very  glad 
of  it;  where  have  you  been?"  "In  Mr.  So-and-So's  family."  '•  Ah  1  there  are 
many  excellent  things  in  that  family.  I  suppose  you  have  become  acijuainted  with 
the  young  people?  "  "  Tes,  sir."  "  And  it  is  very  natural  that  young  people  should 
become  attached  to  each  other."  So  he  goes  on  with  the  conversation  in  a  spirit 
of  sweetness  and  gentleness,  till,  by  and  by,  he  has  brought  the  young  man  round, 
and  drawn  him  away  from  these  dangerous  gronn  Is  and  connections.  (Ibid.) 
Anthony  Blanc's  meeknexs. — Anthony  Blanc,  one  of  Felix  Neff's  earher  converts, 
was  very  earnest  in  winning  soula  to  Christ.  The  enemies  of  the  gospel  were  angry 
at  his  success,  and  used  alike  scoUs  and  threats  against  him.  One  night,  as  he  was 
returning  home  from  a  religious  meeting,  he  was  followed  by  a  man  in  a  rage,  who 
struck  him  a  violent  blow  on  the  head.  "  May  God  forgive  and  bless  youl  "  was 
AjQthony's  quiet  and  Christian  rejoinder.  "  Ah  1 "  replied  his  assailant,  furiously, 
"if  God  does  not  kill  you,  I'll  do  it  myself!  "  Some  days  afterwards  Anthony  met 
the  same  person  in  a  narrow  road,  where  two  persona  could  hardly  pass.  "  Now  I 
shall  be  struck  by  him  again,"  ha  paid  to  himself.  But  he  was  surprised,  on 
approaching,  to  see  this  man,  once  so  bitter  towards  him,  reach  out  his  hand,  and 
say  to  him,  in  a  tremulous  voice,  "  Mr.  Clauo,  will  you  forgive  me,  and  let  all  be 
over  ?  "  Thus,  this  disciple  of  Christ,  by  gentle  and  peaceful  words,  had  made  a 
friend  of  an  enemy.  Inheritors, — A  poor  Cliristian  man,  illustrating  this  text,  said, 
"  I  went  through  my  lord's  park,  and  the  great  house  looked  to  grand.  Well,  I 
said,  *  BieES  the  Lord,  it  t«  a  tine  house.'  I  didn't  envy  it,  bless  the  Lord!  but  I 
seemed  so  to  enjoy  the  great  house.  I  said,  *  That's  mine,  surely ;  I  enjoy  it,  I  do.' 
Then  the  sheep  looked  so  nice,  and  the  cattle  and  the  horses ;  and  I  said,  *  Bless  tha 
Lord  1  they  are  all  my  Father's,  and  they  are  all  mine.'  I  didn't  want  to  have  them, 
but  I  did  enjoy  them  so.  And  tbe  trees,  and  the  grass,  and  the  plantations,  all 
looked  so  beautiful,  I  appeared  to  enjoy  them  so.     I  said,  '  Lord,  they  are  all  Lord 

'8 ;  but  they're  all  mine,  too.' "      And  so  they  were.      Well  indeed  would  it 

have  been  for  thoir  proprietor,  an  unconverted  man,  had  he  been  capable  of 
enjoying  them  in  the  same  sanctified  manner.  A  missionary  in  Jamaica  was  onca 
questioning  the  little  black  boys  on  the  meaning  of  this  text,  and  asked,  "  Who  are 
the  meek  ?  "  A  boy  answered,  "  Those  who  give  soft  answers  to  rough  questions." 
(Anecdotes.)  How  different  from  the  teaching  of  Christ  is  that  of  the  great 
apostle  of  infidelity — David  Hume!  "Nothing,"  says  the  latter,  "carries  a  man 
through  the  world  like  a  true,  genuine,  natural  impudence."  The  religionof  a  man 
whose  morality  is  loose  like  this,  could  scarcely  assume  any  other  character  than 
that  of  an  unblushing  scepticism  and  licentiousness. 

Ver.  6.  They  which  do  hunger  and  thirst. — Righteousness  detired : — I.  A  few 
I'EATnBEB  OF  THE  DISPOSITION  hcre  commcuded.  The  term  righteousnesg  is 
variously  used.  1.  Sometimes  it  signifies  rectitude.  2.  Sometimes  impnted 
righteousness.  3.  Sometimes  personal  righteousness.  But  here  it  means — (11  A 
death  unto  sin ;  (2)  A  renunciation  of  the  world ;  (3)  A  deliberate  choice  of  God. 
II.  Trace  this  disposition  to  its  legitimate  sooece.  III.  Attend  to  the  gracious 
STATEMENT  made  respecting  the  possession  of  this  disposition.  1.  It  implies  that 
their  desires  shall  be  satislied.  2.  It  implies  a  plenitude  of  satii<faction.  3.  The 
text  implies  the  stability  of  the  promise,  that  this  satisfaction  is  sure.  To  conclude 
— 1.  Is  the  disposition  possessed  by  us  ?  2.  Have  you  an  ardent  desire  for  righteous- 
ness. (J.  Jordan.)  A  test  of  heavenly  citizenship : — L  An  objkct  of  Christian 
DE8IHE — righteousness.  This  is  conformity  to  God's  will.  God  is  righteous. 
1.  Personal  purity.  2.  It  also  takes  the  form  of  doing  riglit,  II.  This  object  is  a 
HATTEB  OF  DESIRE.  1.  The  dcsire  for  righteousness  is  present  more  or  less  in  most 
men.  2.  The  attention  is  not  drawn  to  its  possession,  but  to  the  desire  for  it  HL 
Thk  ATTAINMENT  OF  THIS  OBJKCT.  Thcy  shall  havo  righteousness.  1.  The  desire 
for  righteousness  is  met  by  the  actual  presence  of  sin.  Jesus  died  that  sin  might 
be  removed.  2.  The  desire  for  righteousness  is  met  and  apparently  hindered  by 
the  moral  feebleness  of  our  moral  nature.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  him.  TV. 
The  possession  of  this  objkct  is  happiness,  (If.  Butcher.)  I.  The  tastness 
AND  INTENSITY  of  tho  religious  life.     Hunger  and  thirst  are  primitive  appetites; 


CKAP.  y.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  51 

they  aovsr  life.  II.  The  glory  of  the  religious  life.  We  assimilate  the  strength  of 
what  we  feed  on.  III.  The  pboqressiveness  of  the  religious  life.  IV,  The  »atis- 
FACTION  of  the  religious  life.  (T.  T.  Slu-rlock,  B.A.)  Heart-cravings : — 1.  Man 
may  be  measured  by  his  desires.  2.  Righteousness  a  supreme  object  of  dpsire.  3. 
The  desire  is  the  measure  of  the  supply.  4.  A  real  desire  culminates  in  action, 
hunger  drives  to  work.  {G.  Elliot.)  The  want  of  spiritual  appetite  : — 1.  Desira 
is  a  condition  and  prophecy  of  religions  attainments.  2.  This  law  of  desire 
explains  our  spiritual  poverty.  3.  This  want  of  appetite  for  righteousness  is  the 
curse  of  mankind.  {Am.  Horn.  Monthly.)  Longing  for  righteousness  : — 1.  He 
■who  would  have  the  blessing  promised  in  the  text,  must  want  righteousness — as  a 
hungry  man  wants  food.  This  tests  the  value  of  our  superficial  professions.  In 
order  to  this  longing  he  must  perceive  the  iutrinsic  worth  of  the  thing  desired.  II. 
What  is  here  mkant  by  righteousness.  1.  It  is  not  the  single  virtue  of  justice  or 
rectitude.  It  implies  the  essence  of  the  thing,  a  state  of  mind  and  heart ;  a  soil 
out  of  which  all  single  virtues  grow.  2.  It  is  not  merely  a  desire  to  see  righteous- 
ness prevailing  in  the  world  at  large.  3.  It  is  a  desire  not  merely  for  doing 
righteously,  but  for  being  righteous.  III.  The  result.  I  fear  some  are  not 
hungering  for  righteousness,  but  for  the  rewards  of  righteousness.  Worldly  good 
cannot  fill  man.  InteUeetual  attainment  cannot.  Goodness  will  satisfy.  There 
is  no  condition  where  we  cannot  be  satisfied  in  the  enjoyment  of  righteousness. 
Goodness  does  not  forsake  a  man.  (E.  H.  Chaplin.)  I.  The  state  or  conditioh 
described.  1.  What  righteousness  is  it  ?  God's  justifying  righteousness.  The 
necessity  for  it  is  deeply  felt.  This  hungering  is  a  special  condition  of  mind,  an 
indication  of  healthy,  spiritual  life.  II.  The  blessedness  of  this  state  of  mind. 
Satisfied  because  it  quenches  the  desire  of  sin.  A  mark  of  the  Divine  favorir. 
Security  and  permanency  of  the  blessing.  Identical  with  that  of  the  glorified  in 
heaven.  {W.  Barker.)  I.  What  is  this  righteousness  7  II.  What  is  rr  that 
LEADS  PBBSONS  THUS  TO  HUNGER  AND  THIRST  7  A  Bcnse  of  insufiieiency  and  dis- 
satisfaction in  all  created  things ;  a  sense  of  guilt ;  a  perception  of  the  utter 
ineflicacy  of  all  human  prescriptions  to  remove  sin  or  supply  righteousness;  a 
discovery  of  that  righteousness  which  is  "  unto  all  and  upon  all  that  believe." 
III.  Those  who  thus  hunger  and  thirst  ask  peonodnced  blesskd.  Because  it  is 
the  evidence  of  a  new  nature — acceptance  with  God.  They  are  drawn  o£f  from  the 
disappointing  and  perplexing  pursuits  of  the  things  of  this  world  ;  they  are  "  filled" 
— satibfied — with  righteousness,  happiness,  and  finally  with  the  likeness  of  God, 
&o.  We  learn  that  real  religion  is  a  matter  of  personal  experience.  {Dr.  J.  Cummiiig.) 
See  here  at  what  a  low  price  God  sets  heavenly  things ;  it  is  but  hungering  and 
thirsting.  I.  Do  but  hunger  and  you  shall  have  righteousness.  (1)  Hunger  less 
after  the  world  and  (2)  more  after  righteousness.  (3)  Say  concerning  spiritual 
things  :  "  Lord,  evermore  give  me  this  bread."  (4)  Hunger  after  that  righteousness 
■which  delivereth  from  death.  II.  If  we  do  not  thirst  here,  we  shall  thirst  when  it 
is  too  late.  (1)  If  we  do  not  thirst  as  David  did  (Psa.  xlii.  2),  (2)  we  shall  thirst  as 
Dives  did,  for  a  drop  of  water.  (3)  Oh,  is  it  not  better  to  thirst  for  righteousness 
while  it  is  to  be  had,  than  to  thirst  for  mercy  when  there  is  none  to  be  had? 
iThonws  Watson.)  AVhat  an  encouragement  is  this  to  hunger  after  righteousness  I 
Such  shall  be  filled.  God  chargeth  us  to  fill  the  hungry  (Iqa.  Iviii.  10).  He  blames 
those  who  do  not  fill  the  hungry  (Isa.  xxxii.  6).  And  do  we  think  He  will  be  slack 
in  that  which  He  blames  us  for  not  doing  ?  God  is  a  fountain.  If  we  bring  the 
vessels  of  our  desires  to  this  fountain.  He  is  able  to  fill  tbcm.  The  fulness  in  God 
is : — L  An  infinite  fulness.  (1)  Though  He  fill  us,  yet  He  hath  never  the  less  Him- 
self. (2)  As  it  hath  its  resplendency,  so  (3)  its  redundancy.  It  is  inexhaustible 
and  fathomless.  U.  It  is  a  constant  fulness.  1.  The  fulness  of  the  creature  ifl 
mutable.  It  ebbs  and  changeth.  2.  God's  fulness  is  overflowing  and  everflowing. 
3.  It  is  a  never-failing  goodness.  III.  God  fills  the  hungry  soul  with— 1.  Grace. 
Grace  is  filling  because  suitable  to  the  soul.  2.  Peace.  Israel  had  honey  out  of 
the  rock  ;  this  honey  of  peace  comes  out  of  the  rock  Christ.  3.  Bliss.  Glory  is 
a  fining  thing.  When  a  Christian  awakes  out  of  the  sleep  of  death,  then  he  shall  be 
satisfied.  Then  shall  the  soul  be  filled  brimful.  (Ibid.)  I.  What  is  here  meant 
BY  biohteoubne<?8.  1.  Actual  and  inherent  righteousness ;  living  a  life  in  sincere 
and  perfect  obedience  to  all  the  laws  of  God.  2.  Imputed  righteousness.  II. 
What  is  it  to  hunofb  and  thirst  after  BiGHTF^fsMsas  ?  1.  To  contend  fjeroely 
and  fight  manf-ally  "gair.si  oar  spiritual  adversaries.  2.  To  desire  ardently  and 
intensely  for  spiritual  sustenance.  3.  To  discharge  our  duty  in  every  point  to  the 
beat  of  our  skill  and  power.    4.  To  willingly  suffer  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  nakedness, 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  -r 

and  the  want  of  anything  necessarj'  for  the  support  and  comfort  of  life,  rather  than 
knowingly  transgress  any  point  of  duty.     (Bishop  Ofspring  Blackall,  D.D.) 

Soul  starvation  a  sad  and  guilty  thing. — The  utter  starving  of  the  soul,  if  wa 
could  see  it  as  we  see  other  things,  would  strike  us  as  one  of  the  saddest  of  things. 
When  the  shepherd,  over  in  New  York,  had  a  house  for  the  reception  of  orphan 
children,  and  on  inspection  it  was  found  that  the  soup  was  very  thin,  that  there 
was  but  little  of  it,  that  the  food  was  most  stingily  dealt  out,  and  that  these 
children  were  gradually  coming  to  be  skin  and  bones  by  starvation  charity,  the 
whole  city  flamed  with  indignation.  They  threw  open  the  door  of  the  cell,  and 
seized  him  by  the  throat,  and  pitched  him  in  ignominiously.  But  look  into  your 
own  soul  and  see  how  the  thiugs  that  are  nearest  to  God  are  shut  up  in  you.  While 
your  awakened  appetites  and  passions  are  fully  clothed,  and  are  walking  up  and 
down  the  palace  of  your  soul,  having  their  own  way,  I  hear  a  faint  cry  in  soma 
remote  chamber  thereof.  It  is  conscience  moaning  and  pleading  for  food ;  and 
I  hear  the  thundering  rap  of  passions  on  the  door  as  they  say,  •'  Hush  I  Be  still  1 
Are  you  never  going  to  sleep?  Will  you  never  die?"  In  another  quarter  I  hear 
the  soul  crying  for  food.  "  Wb&t  ails  you  ?  "  is  the  response  ;  and  a  bone  is  thrown 
in  for  it  to  gnaw  on.  (Beecher.)  Righteousness  many-sided. — It  is  not  merely 
the  single  virtue  of  justice  or  rectitude — in  fact,  no  virtue  is  absolutely  single,  if  w« 
look  at  it  closely.  A  man  cannot  really  have  one  virtue,  and  but  one,  genuine  and 
complete.  Ho  cannot  have  one  without  having  all  virtues  and  all  graces,  for  no  on© 
virtue  or  grace  is  complete  witbout  the  intermiughng  of  the  life  and  reciprocal 
action  of  all  the  rest.  We  make  a  great  mistake  if  we  suppose  otherwise.  There 
have  been  men  who  could  play  delightful  music  on  one  string  of  the  violin,  but 
there  never  was  a  man  who  could  produce  the  harmonies  of  heaven  in  his  soul  by  a 
one-stringed  virtue.  Can  a  man  be  thoroughly  and  strictly  honest,  and  at  the 
game  time  be  a  selfish  man  ?  Can  he  be  temperate.  Suppose  a  man,  for  instance, 
pursuing  a  course  of  virtue,  a  course  of  temperance,  or  of  rectitude,  has  the 
promise  that  he  shall  be  wealthy,  and  that  he  shall  have  long  hfe — shall  make  a 
fortune  and  shall  be  respected.  This  is  all  very  good ;  but  what  is  the  essence  oi 
all  this  ?  It  is  in  being  righteous ;  that  is  the  great  blessing.  So  that  if  you  have 
a  long  life,  it  is  a  righteous  hfe  ;  and  if  you  have  wealth,  it  is  righteous  wealth,  as 
you  make  a  righteous  use  and  dis^position  of  it.  With  this,  any  condition  is 
blessed ;  without  it,  no  condition  is  blessed.  So  the  essence  of  all  promises  is  in 
thp  possession  of  this  intrinsic  righteousness.  (E.  H.  Chaplin.)  Moral  hunger 
a  developing  energy. — Now,  the  same  law  prevails  in  the  mind.  That  is  to  say, 
outward  activity  grows  from  some  sort  of  inward  uneasiness  or  impulse.  Hunger 
existing  in  the  body  works  outwardly,  first,  into  that  industry  which  supplies  it, 
and  then  enlarges  gradually,  and  inspires  a  more  complex  indiistry.  And  so  almost 
all  of  life  in  its  upper  sphere  proceeds  from  a  kind  of  hunger  which  exists  in  the 
soul.  Some  yearning,  or  longing,  or  action,  or  some  faculty  developing  itself  and 
working  to  produce  its  appropriate  gratification — this  is  the  analogue ;  and  the 
character,  as  formed  by  the  faculties,  answers  to  the  industrial  creations  produced 
by  sensations  of  hunger  and  thirst  in  the  body.     (Beecher.) 

Ver.  7.  The  merciful. — Christian  mercy  : — I.  What  is  Christian  MEBcyf  1, 
Its  nature.  2.  Its  objects.  3.  Its  author.  4.  Its  design.  II.  How  is  it  exeu- 
PLiFiED  ?  1.  In  the  forgiveness  of  enemies.  2.  In  various  acts  of  kindness.  3.  In 
deep  concern  and  effort  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  III.  What  is  thk  blessino 
which  Christian  merct  insures?  1.  He  will  have  mercy  shown  him  from  the 
subjects  of  his  bounty.  2.  A  merciful  Providence  will  attend  the  merciful  Chris- 
tian. 3.  Mercy  shall  be  shown  him  at  the  last  day.  IV.  A  few  observationb  to 
excite  toc  to  cherish  a  merciful  disposition.  1.  The  more  you  abound  in  mercy, 
the  more  you  are  conformed  to  the  precepts  of  the  Scriptures.  2.  The  more  you 
abound  in  mercy,  the  more  will  yon  resemble  God.  3.  The  more  we  abound  in 
mercy,  the  more  eminently  we  appear  to  possess  the  spirit  of  Christ.  (J.  Jordan.) 
The  hUfsing  of  mercifulness : — I.  What  is  the  character  of  this  mercifulness?  It 
IS  a  quality  exercised  between  man  and  man,  independent  of  written  law,  and  which 
is  not  so  much  certain  acts  of  forgiveness  as  a  temper  of  the  soul.  It  is  a  temper 
which  makes  him  who  has  it  not  so  much  sorry  that  he  has  been  injured,  but  sorry 
that  the  injurer  should  have  the  heart  to  do  the  wrong.  All  memory  of  wrong 
fades  from  him.  II.  The  reward.  Christ  did  not  mean  a  man  to  be  merciful  for 
the  sake  of  obtaining  mercy,  but  as  a  necessary  result  he  would  obtain  it.  Mercy 
ia  the  reward  of  mercy.     (S.  A.  Brooke.)        The  sin  of  cruelty  to  animals : — 1.  It  is 


CHAP.  V.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  6J 

inconsistent  with  any  just  idea  of  the  place  assigned  to  man  upon  earth,  and  of 
the  power  granted  to  him  over  the  other  creatures,  who  occupy  the  same  scene  with 
himself.  2.  It  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  feelings  and  graces  of  character  which 
ought  to  belong  to  all  who  profess  the  Christian  faith.  3.  It  has  a  manifest  tend- 
ency to  pervert  the  entire  moral  nature  of  him  who  indulges  it.  4.  It  is  seen  to  ba 
odious  when  we  consider  that  the  creatures  against  whom  it  is  directed  are  those  to 
whom  man  is  most  indebted  for  valuable  service.  {A.  Goldie.)  I.  What  is  im- 
plied in  being  merciful,  and  to  whom  does  this  character  properly  belong  •  II. 
What  is  the  blessedness  promised  ?  Ill,  The  obligation  we  are  under  to  be  merci- 
ful. (Joseph  Benson.)  The  very  first  grace  that  grows,  hke  a  beautiful  spring 
flower,  on  the  ground  of  righteousness,  is  the  grace  of  mercy,  or  compassion.  I. 
What  is  mercy,  or  compassion  ?  It  is  sorrow  at  the  suffering  of  a  fellow-creature, 
rational  or  irrational ;  and,  along  with  that  sorrow,  an  earnest  desire,  if  possible, 
to  relieve  it.  It  does  not  ask  the  question,  "  Is  the  sufferer  of  my  nation,  sect, 
party,  or  Church ;  does  the  man  deserve  relief  ? "  It  simply  asks  the  question, 
**  Does  he  suffer  ?  "  We  are  to  go  farther  and  to  pity  the  sufferer  as  a  sinner,  and 
to  show  mercy  to  him  simply  because  he  is  a  sinner.  This  mercy  is  frequently 
enjoined  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  always  represented  as  the  characteristic  of  the 
loftiest  nature.  This  grace  is  obligatory  upon  all.  In  order  to  exercise  it,  let  ua 
think  of  the  mercy  we  have  received.  II.  The  benediction  pronounced  upon  it. 
Conscious  joy.  Special  benedictions  (Isa.  Iviii.  6).  Blessed  because  they  are  God- 
like. "  They  shall  obtain  mercy  " — from  others  in  this  world,  aad  from  God,  even 
in  this  world,  and  at  '*  that  day."  (Dr.  J.  Cumming.)  Let  me  exhort  you  to 
deeds  of  mercy,  let  your  fingers  drop  with  the  myrrh  of  liberality,  sow  your  golden 
seed,  and  ye  shall  reap  an  abundant  harvest.  I,  In  Christ :  labour  that  your 
persons  may  be  in  Christ.  1.  The  best  works  not  springing  from  faith  are  lost. 
2.  That  fruit  is  most  sweet  and  genuine  which  is  brought  forth  in  the  Vine  (John 
XV.  14).  3.  Out  of  Christ  all  our  alms-deeds  are  but  the  fruit  of  the  wild  olive ; 
they  are  not  good  works,  but  dead  works.  II.  For  Christ :  for  His  sake,  that  yon 
may  testify  your  love  to  Him.  Love  mellows  and  ripens  our  alms-deeds,  it  makes 
them  a  precious  perfume  to  God.  III.  All  works  of  mercy  are  to  be  done  in 
humility.  As  the  silkworm,  while  she  weaves  her  curious  works  hides  hersell 
within  the  silk,  and  is  not  seen,  so  we  should  hide  ourselves  from  pride  and  vain- 
glory. (Thomas  Watson.)  I.  Are  we  wanting  in  this  giace  of  mercy  ?  Let  us  com- 
pare ourselves  with  God.  God's  mercy  is  changeless,  ours  is  fitful.  God's  m«rcy 
is  provident  and  thoughtful,  ours  capricious  and  thoughtless.  II.  How  maj  we 
hope  to  have  this  mercy  supplied  to  us?  In  the  redemption  of  the  fallen  world  by 
fche  Son  of  God.  This  thoughtful,  universal,  and  provident  mercy  ia  unblurred  by 
A  single  line.  III.  Are  we  merciful  in  judgment  of  others  ?  In  our  speech  ?  Da 
we  not  take  pleasure  in  sharp  criticism  ?  Are  we  merciful  in  consideration  for 
others?  Are  we  merciful  employers?  (Dr.  Chalmers  Smith.)  The  exercise  ol 
mercy  chiefly  consists  of  two  things.  L  To  prevent  any  evil  or  mischief  which  wa 
apprehend  our  neighbour  to  be  in.  (1)  By  abstaining  from  all  acts  of  cruelty  or 
unmercifulnsBS  towards  anybody  or  creature  ;  (2)  By  using  our  dominion  or 
authority  over  others  with  tenderness  and  moderation ;  (3)  By  considering  our 
neighbour's  case  as  our  own.  II.  To  endeavour  to  deliver  others  from  difficulties, 
or  at  least  to  ease  others  of  their  burdems.  (1)  By  warning  our  neighbour  ;  (2)  By 
friendly  admonition.  Thus  preventing  our  neighbour  falling  into  evil  or  mischief ; 
(3)  To  comfort  others  in  sickness,  sorrow,  reproach,  or  disgrace ;  (4)  To  disperse 
slanders  and  aspersions ;  (5)  To  help  the  needy,  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked, 
and  take  care  of  the  poor.     (Bishop  Ofspring  Blackall,  D.D.) 

Mercifulness  a  quality  of  the  entire  man. — Mercifuluess,  then,  is  a  quality  of  the 
whole  nature;  a  certain  soft,  sweet,  tender,  gentle,  gracious  atmosphere  in  which  the 
vhole  man  lives  and  breathes ;  in  which  he  continually  acts  toward  injury  and 
wrong;  and  under  its  warm  and  sunny  rays  injury  and  wrong  melt  away  day  by 
day,  like  icebergs  that  come  floating  down  into  the  tropical  stream.  And  those 
are  blest  who  have  it.  They  live  in  soft  sunshine  of  their  own  making,  and  in  it 
all  the  simple  charities  of  life,  which  are  like  the  common  flowers  that  adorn  and 
make  sweet  the  woods  and  fields,  flourish  until  the  whole  world  rejoices  in  the  life 
of  those  who  live  by  mercy.  And  their  speech  is  deUghtful  as  the  songs  of  birds, 
and  their  daily  acts  Uke  the  soft  murmur  of  such  streams  as  gently  flow  tbrongh 
meadows.  In  all  this  inward  beauty  of  soul  they  are  blest  indeed,  for  mmrcg 
clesses  him  who  gives  it.     (S.  A.  Brooke.) 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATO  [«hap.  ▼, 

Ver.  8.  The  pure  in  heart. — Purity  of  heart ; — I.  Purity  of  heart  dkiiands  oub 
ATTENTION.  1.  It  implierf  a  cliange  of  heart.  2.  It  implies  tliat  the  faculties  of  the 
soul  are  purified.  3.  It  implies  the  purity  of  the  alif-ctious.  4.  It  iiLpJies  the 
purity  of  t.he  thoughts  and  desires.  6.  It  leads  to  purity  of  worship.  6.  It  leads 
to  purity  of  life.  II.  The  blessedness  peomiskd  to  the  pure  in  heart.  1.  What 
is  denoted  by  seeing  God,  2.  This  vision  wiU  constitute  the  blessedness  of  the  pure 
in  heart.  (J.  Jordan.)  The  blessednesn  of  the  pure  in  heart : — L  Inquire  into 
THE  MEAXiNO  OF  PORiTT  OF  HEAKT.  1.  The  words  Carry  us  into  the  inner  regions 
of  man's  being.  At  lirst  sight  they  only  suggest  the  absence  of  the  impure.  But 
there  is  no  purity  apart  from  the  absolute  authority  of  God  in  the  affections.  Man 
is  not  made  by  negatives,  II.  Pority  of  heap-t  gives  the  vision  of  God.  The 
phrase  "  see  God  "  does  not  refer  to  any  manifestation  of  His  glory  visible  to  the 
eye  of  sense.  It  is  to  the  far  deeper  sight  of  the  soul  that  Christ  refers.  Your  best 
friend  is  not  seen  by  the  eye  of  the  body  ;  you  see  him  spiritually,  his  qualities  of 
mind  and  heart.  1.  None  but  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  Him,  It  is  useless  to  tell 
the  selfish  about  the  beauty  of  unselfishness  ;  you  might  as  well  tell  the  blind  about 
the  glory  of  colour.  2,  That  to  the  pure  in  heart  the  full  glory  of  the  Divine  nature 
reveals  itself.  God  is  light  and  love.  These  are  seen  by  the  pure  soul.  III.  Thb 
VISION  IS  its  own  exceeding  blessedness.  1.  It  is  blessed  because  to  feae  God 
siitisfies  the  longings  of  the  heart.  2.  Because  it  clothes  life  in  glory.  3.  Because 
it  is  the  dawning  of  immortal  hope.  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  I.  Let  ua  try  to  ascer- 
tain what  this  purity  is  which  is  here  so  extolled.  It  was  in  Adam  by  nature — it 
is  in  us  by  grace,  &o.  In  us  it  is  as  seed  cast  into  the  soil,  &c.  It  is  a  living  prin- 
ciple, ever  powerful,  ever  resisted,  yet  never  beaten,  growing  daily  in  aspirations  and 
likeness,  until  it  is  made  perfect  by  seeing  Christ  as  He  is,  when  we  shall  be  like 
Him,  because  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  Constantly  enjoined.  Is  true  beauty. 
The  qualification  for  heaven.  The  Holy  Spirit  its  author.  The  heart  its  seat. 
Manifest  in  the  outer  life.  Will  ever  be  ready  to  disclose  itself  to  God  in  prayer. 
II.  Such  persons  are  blessed.  In  having  ti.ia  characteristic.  Evidence  of  being 
amongst  the  people  of  God.  To  them  all  tJiinffs  are  pure.  "  Shall  see  God" — ^in 
life's  trials,  life's  prosperity,  providential  dealings,  in  all  creation,  in  the  sacred 
page,  in  ordinances,  and,  above  all,  in  glory — transforming,  satisfving,  joyful. 
"Create  in  me,"  &q.  (Dr.  J.  Gumming.)  By  the  *'  heart "  we  are  to  understand 
the  inward  part  of  man,  comprehending  the  mind  and  soul  with  all  their  faculties 
and  affections,  purposes  and  inclinations,  the  secret  recesses  into  which  mortal  eye 
cannot  penetrate.  I.  The  foliage  and  branches  are  of  the  same  kind  with  the  stock 
that  bears  them.  1.  Before  we  can  bring  forth  good  fruit  we  must  be  renovated. 
2.  There  may  be  the  semblance  of  purity  in  the  life  when  there  is  no  real  principle 
of  holiness  in  the  heart.  II.  Purity  is  (1)  the  mind  renewed,  the  (2)  disordered 
spirit  restored,  and  (.3)  conformed  to  the  "  image  of  God,"  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness.  III.  From  the  definition  of  the  principle  there  are  three  things  which  it 
includes.     1.  Frank  and  genuine  sincerity  in  opposition  to  dissimulation  and  deceit. 

2.  Spiritual  worship  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  formal.  3.  A  holy  and  heavenly 
mind,  in  opposition  to  one  that  is  polluted  and  sensual.  (.7,  E.  Oood.)  1.  A 
great  privilege  proposed  by  our  Saviour  to  His  followers.  "  They  shall  see  God  " — 
in  this  life  and  in  heaven.  II.  The  qualification  required  for  this  enjoyment — 
purity  of  heart.  Nature  and  necessity  of  heart-puiity,  1.  Try  your  hopes  o! 
heaven  by  this  rule,  2,  Follow  after  purity — heart  and  life,  (Henry  Grove.) 
See  here  what  is  the  beauty  that  sets  off  a  soul  in  God's  eye  :  purity  of  heart.  I. 
Thou  who  art  never  so  beautiful,  art  but  a  spiritual  leper,  till  thou  art  pure  in  heart. 
1.  Therein  God  sees  His  o\vn  picture  drawn.  2.  Holiness  is  a  beam  of  God.  II. 
Thou  who  art  pure  in  heart  hast  the  angel's  glory  in  thee,  and  the  embroidery  and 
workmanship  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  thee.  lU.  The  pure  heart  is  God's  paradise, 
where  He  delights  to  walk ;  it  is  His  lesser  heaven.  The  dove  delights  in  the 
purest  air ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  descended  in  the  likeness  of  a  dove,  delights  in 
the  purest  soul.  How  may  this  raise  the  esteem  of  purity  1  This  is  a  beauty  that 
never  fades  !  (Thomas  Watson.)  I.  Purity  of  heart  stands  in  direct  opposition 
to  that  external  affectntion  of  purity  which  is  the  offspring  of  hypocrisy,  1.  Actions 
are  the  outward  symbols  or  expressions  of  virtue  and  vice,  not  virtue  and  vice  them- 
selves. 2.  Actions  when  separated  from  their  motives  are  indifferent,  but  it  is  the 
disposition  of  benevolence  by  which  the  mind  is  actuated  in  which  the  virtue  lies. 

3,  Words,  like  actions,  when  separated  from  their  motives,  are  indifferent ;  but  itig 
the  inward  malignity  of  soul  from  wliicli  the  wonls  prccted,  in  which  the  vice  con- 
usts.     1.  The  form  of  purity,  like  that  of  godliness  without  its  pov.-er,  is  only  a 


BHAP.  v.]  ST    MATTHEW.  55 

delusive  counterfeit.  6.  All  external  services  and  sacrifices  are  of  no  value  v^ithout 
this  internal  purity.  II.  Purity  implies  the  absence  of  moral  grossness.  Whatever 
is  defilsd  is  essentially  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  purity.  (1)  By  the  law  of  nature 
clouds  darken  the  face  of  the  sky,  fogs  and  vapours  stagnate  and  corrupt  the  air. 
(2)  By  the  law  of  conscience  and  religion,  moral  blots  and  corruptions  stain  the 
beauty  of  the  soul,  and  cast  a  shade  upon  its  brightness.  III.  Purity  is  an  active 
and  vigorous  disposition,  which  incessantly  prompts  the  soul  in  which  it  resides,  to 
(1)  admire  what  is  amiable  ;  (2)  To  approve  what  is  excellent ;  (3)  To  rehsh  what 
is  delicate  ;  (4)  To  pursue  what  is  refined.  Purity  is  the  only  way  to  blessedness — 
purity  is  blessedness  itself.     {David  Lamont,  D.D.) 

The  man  of  heart  blessed, — So  came  these  peaceful  words  of  Jesus  :  Blessed,  not 
tJie  man  offeree,  but  the  man  of  heart.  (E.  J.  Haynes.)  A  pure  heart  uses  God's 
creatures  xoitlwut  injury.  — ^We  stood,  the  day  we  left  home  to  begin  life  for  ourselves, 
amid  all  the  "  creatm'es  "  of  God,  as  stands  the  druggist's  clerk  on  the  first  morn- 
ing  of  his  apprenticing,  not  knowing  which  is  sweet,  or  sour,  or  would  kill,  or  would 
make  alive  ;  aye,  and  with  a  perverted  impulse  for  the  wrong  use  of  all.  Behold 
that  tree  which  nods  at  the  church  window.  Sometimes  there  is  too  much  moisture 
in  the  air ;  sometimes  too  much  heat ;  poisons  are  at  its  root,  its  leaf,  its  stock. 
Yet  Bo  "  pure  "  is  the  tree,  bo  does  it  follow  just  God's  law,  that  it  chooses  and  uses, 
not  abuses,  but  fructifies  by  all.  So  amid  all  nature  will  be  the  really  pure  in 
heart ;  not  that  pure  heart  is  all-wise,  but  it  is  so  in  harmony  with  God's  law,  so 
far  as  it  is  instructed,  that  it  uses  all  things  according  to  the  Creators  intention. 
How  ?  Tor  beauty,  purity,  peace,  and  joy.  (Ibid.)  A  pure  heart  is  blessed  in  the 
feeling  of  security. — He  says,  "  I  am  not  conscious  of  any  desire  within  which  shall 
go  half-way  to  meet  the  allurements  of  sin ;  no  little  rivulets  of  half -indulgence  which 
have  eaten  the  sand  from  under  my  walls."  Oh,  how  weak  is  guilt,  hcv  strong  ia 
purity  1  I  have  seen  the  hawk  flap  out  of  the  top  of  tall  hemlocks  at  my  coming  in 
the  pasture.  *'  "Why,  hawk,  I'll  not  shoot  you  ;  it  is  but  a  waUiing-stick  I  carry  in 
my  hand."  "  Ah  1  yes,  but  I  think  it  may  have  a  ball  in  it."  And  he  sails  high 
above  the  village  steeple.  "  Nay,  hawk,"  says  the  steeple,  "  I'll  not  hurt.  I'm  but 
the  finger  pointing  to  your  Maker."  '•  Ah  1  but  I  think  you  are  a  trap. "  He  even 
parts  company  with  the  harmless  sparrow,  for  the  spAiTow  "  may  be  a  snare."  Not 
so  the  dove.  It  Uves  in  the  cornice  of  men's  dwellings,  and  nods  good  morning  to 
the  children  in  the  chamber  crib ;  it  touches  the  foot  of  the  housemaid  as  she  shakes 
her  cloth  of  crumbs ;  it  rests  up  in  the  Eteei)les  of  old  churches,  and  the  Sabbath 
bell,  far  fiom  being  a  fright,  is  but  the  signal  for  the  cooing  chorus  to  begin.  The 
man  of  pure  heart  is  blessed  with  peaceful  self-respect.  He  is  not  happy  who  cannot 
respect  himself.  And  no  man  can  respect  himself  who  is  living  in  more  or  less  con- 
stant communion  with  bad  thoughts  and  evil  pictures  of  imagination.  Suppose  we 
grant  that  we  are  not  altogether  responsible  for  our  thoughts,  but,  by  the  compli- 
cations of  daily  Ufe,  before  we  know  it  we  have  planned  a  sin  ;  or,  by  Satan's  foes 
beleaguered,  we  are  thrust  upon  by  pictures  of  iniquity.  Still  my  proposition  ia 
true,  that  no  such  Ufe  could  be  a  happy  one.  Could  the  master  of  a  strong  house 
be  at  peace,  even  if  bolts  and  bars  and  granite  strength  kept  all  his  foes  at  bay ;  if^ 
ever  and  anon,  the  mob  thrust  the  death's  head  at  his  windows  ?  Aye,  more,  could 
he  respect  himself  if,  now  and  then,  as  impure  hearts  do,  he  showed  a  face  for  parley, 
or  cautiously,  yet  surely,  invited  one  of  the  red-shirted  horde  within,  to  see  how  he 
looked  near  by  ?  The  sunflower  might  say  of  wasps,  and  hornets,  and  bees  :  "  Why 
do  they  pester  me,  and  so  hang  about  ?  "  and  the  wasps  would  reply :  "  You  enter- 
tain us,  sir ;  you  have  what  we  love."  And  so  the  judge  within  man,  true  to  hi« 
heaven-given  instinct,  makes  rej)ly  to  him  pestered  by  bad  thoughts :  "  There's 
something,  sir,  about  you  that  these  buzzards  love  I  "  I  saw  by  Lake  Leman  the 
old  castle  of  Chillon.  Up  above,  the  royal,  tapestry -hung  apartments  of  the  Duk» 
of  Savoy  and  his  gay  bride ;  down  below,  the  dungeon  where  Bonnivard  wa.. 
chained ;  where  creeping  things  crawl  forth  to  ogle  at  the  visitors,  and  instruments 
of  torture  are ;  and  I  wondered  if  nevar,  in  some  scene  of  revelry  above,  the  groans 
of  martyrs  rose  to  stir  the  arras  on  gorgeous  walls.  There  are  those  we  meet  in 
social  life,  the  rooms  of  whose  souls  which  are  open  to  friends  are  fair  as  a  palace. 
But  alas  I  who  shall  tell  us  of  the  secret  kept  unseen  ?  Not  so  pure  heart.  I  do 
not  pretend  to  say  that  ever  on  this  earth  we  are  freed  from  all  solicitations  of  evU ; 
but  there  is  many  a  bouI  so  "  blessed  "  that,  when  winged  thoughts  of  sin  come  fly- 
ing to  the  windows,  God's  angel  rises  up,  and  draws  the  shutters  to  ;  when  disturbing 
thoughts  of  hate,  revenge,  avarice,  and  pride  draw  near,  God's  angel  meets  them  at 
the  outer  gate,  and  bids  them  all  begone.  {Ibid.)       Pure  heart  is  "  blest "  in  his  re- 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

latioTV<  with  his  fdlow-man.  Pure  Heart  is  blest  because  he  knows  no  envy  of  another"* 
success,  jealousy  at  another's  praise.  Dear,  simple  old  heart.  It  never  occurs  to  him 
that  there  is  any  less  of  sunamer's  sun  for  him  because  ft  million  others  bask  in  ita 
beams.  O  King  Great  Heart !  thyself  no  man's  enemy,  thou  thinkest  no  man  thine, 
but  dost  beam  upon  the  world  hke  the  October  sunset  upon  the  harvest  fields.  "  He 
shall  see  God."  How?  Thus.  Mozart  and  his  friend,  the  royal  huntsman,  went 
forth  arm-in-arm  to  the  fields.  Tbe  wind  came  up  heavily  through  the  copse  of 
trees.  "Lookl"  says  the  hunter,  "it  will  startle  a  hare  I"  "  Listen  I  "  saya 
Mozart,  "  what  a  diapason  from  God's  great  organ  ! "  A  lark  rose  on  soaring 
wing,  with  its  own  sweet  song.  "  Look  I  "  says  the  gamester,  "  what  a  shot  1  " 
"  Ah  1  "  says  M  zart,  "  what  would  I  give  could  I  catch  that  thrill  I  "  There  be 
dull  souls  who  cannot  see  nor  hear.  Are  they  sick?  "Ohl  what  misfortune  ! " 
Are  they  bereaved  ?  "  Some  enemy  hath  done  this  1 "  Are  they  well  and  prosperous? 
"  Good  luck  1 "  Not  so  Pure  Heart.  He  can  see  God's  hand  in  every  sorrow  chas- 
tening for  good ;  God's  face  in  every  blessing  ;  God's  smile  in  the  morning  light,  the 
blossoming  harvest,  and  the  evening  shade.  His  heart  is  attuned.  {E.  J.  Haynes.) 
Vision  of  God  in  heaven  : — I.  God  is  a  pure  Spirit,  and  invisible.  It  cannot  be  with 
our  bodily  eyes  that  we  shall  see  Him.  II.  They  shall  see  Him.  This  word  expresses 
immediate  intuition  of  what  is  plainly  offered  to  view.  Now  we  see  through  a  glass, 
darkly.  Wilt  thou  see  God's  wisdom,  power,  love,  hohness,  glory?  1  This  is  an 
appropriating  vision.  2.  It  is  an  assimilating  vision.  3.  It  is  a  satisfving  vision.,  III. 
How  excellent  the  soul  of  man  which  is  capable  of  such  feUcity  1  IV.  If  such  be  the 
nature  of  the  future  blessedness,  then  a  change  of  heart  is  requisite  to  enable  us  to 
enjoy  it.  V.  What  gratitude  do  we  owe  to  that  God  who  has  provided  such  a 
felicity  for  His  children.  VI.  What  a  source  of  consolation  under  the  aiflictions  of 
life.  VII.  This  subject  calls  us  to  mourn  for  the  folly  of  the  children  of  men,  who 
for  toys  barter  away  glory  and  immortality.  {H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  Tliey  shall  see 
God  : — 1.  In  the  work  of  creation.  2.  In  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel.  3.  In  the 
dispensation  of  Providence.  4.  In  the  day  of  judgment.  5.  In  heaven  for  ever. 
(J.  C.  Edwards,  M.A.) 

Purity  an  unmixed  motive. — A  thing  is  pure  when  there  is  nothing  in  it  out  of 
harmony  with  its  nature.  Water  is  pure,  air  is  pure,  when  they  contain  only  their 
constituent  elements,  and  in  the  right  proportion.  Gold  is  pure  when  it  has  been 
separated  by  fire  from  all  foreign  matter.  The  diamond  is  pure,  the  cr>  stal  is  pure, 
when  there  is  nothing  in  them  which  binders  the  refraction  and  reflection  of  hght. 
It  is  thus  with  the  heart,  which  is  the  emotional  part  of  the  soul.  It  is  pure,  when 
it  loves  only  that  which  it  ought  to  love.  (The  Abbe  Bazitain.)  Spiritual  sight 
conditioned  by  purity  : — 1.  It  may  be  easily  understood  that  impurity  of  heart 
hinders  tbe  soul  from  seeing  God.  Under  the  power  of  perverse  affections  the  mind 
Bees  nothing  aright — nothing  in  its  just  relations  and  proportions.  Least  of  all  can 
the  mind  thus  blinded  in  its  highest  faculties  see  God  aright ;  it  gets  no  inspiring 
and  attractive  perception  of  His  glory.  As  earthly  vapours,  condensed  into  clouds 
and  darkening  the  world  with  storms,  hide  fi'om  the  outword  sense  the  beauty  and 
glory  of  the  visible  heaven,  so  sensual  passions,  grovelling  affections,  aud  the  do- 
minion of  sin  in  the  soul,  all  the  habits  of  an  impure  and  uubeUeving  mind,  inter. 
vene  as  with  impenetrable  clouds,  to  shut  off  from  the  view  and  reach  of  the  spiritual 
faculties  the  grand  realities  of  that  upper  sphere,  where  the  eternal  relations  of  duty 
Ere  and  where  God  is.  2.  This  is  further  illustrated  by  remembering  distinctly  that 
the  normal  or  right  state  of  the  mind — the  state  in  which  its  faculties  and  suscepti- 
bilities are  properly  adjusted  in  relation  to  each  other  and  in  relation  to  their  objects 
—is  just  what  our  Saviour  means  by  purity  in  heart.  As  the  normal  condition  of 
the  eve  is  not  when  the  optic  nerve  is  paralysed  or  otherwise  diseased,  nor  when 
the  surface  is  covered  by  a  film,  nor  when  inflammation  or  a  mote  under  the  eyelids 
makes  the  light  painful,  but  only  when  all  obstruction  or  disease  is  absent,  so  the 
normal  condition  of  the  mind,  as  m;ide  for  the  knowledge  of  things  invisible  and 
eternal,  is  not  when  its  sensibilities  are  perverted  by  selfishness,  not  when  sin 
reigns  within,  but  only  when  the  heart  is  pure.  We  may  now  inquire.  What  is  the 
blessedness  of  thus  seeing  God  ?  1.  To  see  God  is  to  see  the  central  light  which 
reveals  the  order  and  beauty  of  the  universe.  The  unity  of  all  created  things  is 
found  only  in  their  relation  to  God's  power,  to  His  love  and  wisdom,  to  His  plan 
and  government.  2.  To  see  God  is  to  si^e  the  fountain  of  all  blessedness.  Such 
intuition  of  God's  glory  is  identical  with  the  peace  of  God  that  passeth  all  nnder- 
■tanding.  3.  Such  an  intuition  of  God  as  this  promise  assures  to  the  pure  in  heart 
is  that  for  which  the  soul  was  created.  It  is  the  soul's  chief  end,  and  therefore  it  if 
the  highest  blessedness  of  which  the  soul  is  oapable.     (L.  Bacon.) 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  57 

Ver.  9.  The  peacemakers. — Peacemakers : — I.  How  great  a  blessing  ib  peace.  1.  It 
is  the  preserver  of  life.  2.  It  is  the  preserver  of  prosperity.  3.  It  is  the  preserver  of 
happiness.  4.  They  are  not  easily  offended.  5.  If  offended  they  are  not  irrecon- 
cilable. 6.  They  exert  themselves  to  reconcile  contending  parties.  7.  Their  great 
effort  is  to  reconcile  sinners  to  God.  II.  The  reward  which  awaits  them.  1. 
They  are  the  children  of  God  by  regeneration.  2.  By  adoption.  3.  By  their  relation- 
ship  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  4.  They  shall  be  acknowledged  as  the  children  of 
God.  (J.  Jordan.)  Peacemakers: — I.  The  principles  of  the  peacemakers. 
They  are  heavenly  :  this  seen  fmm  the  Great  Peacemakers — the  God  of  Peace  ;  the 
Prince  of  Peace ;  the  Spirit  of  Peace.  All  the  Divine  Persons  are  active  for  peace. 
Many  things  operate  to  disturb  this  peace.  II.  The  WAt  in  which  they  abb 
shown.     1.  To  compose  differences  which  may  exist  between  ourselves  and  others. 

2.  By  striving  to  bring  others  to  a  knowledge  of  Jesus,  that  they  may  know  the  true 
peace.  3.  In  the  endeavour  to  make  peace  between  others.  (IF.  Reeve.)  The 
peacemaker : — I.  He  must  understand  what  things  have  the  capacity  of  agreement. 
II.  He  must  understand  the  true  cause  of  disagreement.  III.  He  must  take  a  deep 
interest  in  the  contending  parties.  IV.  He  must  obey  the  Divine  call  for  inter- 
position. V.  He  must  believe  that  God  has  made  provision  for  pacifying  the  world, 
{Caleb  Morris.)  Peacmakers : — L  View  God  as  a  Peacemaker.  1.  He  is  a  Lover 
of  peace.     2.  He  is  a  Maker  of  peace.     II.  Delineate  Christians  as  peacemakers. 

I.  They  love  peace.  2.  They  make  peace.  3.  They  promote  peace.  III.  Theib 
blessedness.  1.  They  are  pronounced  God's  children.  2.  They  have  the  inward 
happiness  of  self-approval.  3.  They  look  forward  to  being  rewarded  by  God.  (T.  G. 
Horton.)  I.  Before  they  can  become  true  peacemakers  and  be  entitled  to  this 
beatitude,  they  must  seek  and  obtain  inward  peace  for  themselves  (Eph.  ii,  13-17). 

II.  It  then  becomes  their  duty  to  promote  peace  and  restore  it  where  lacking — be- 
<;ween  man  and  God,  and  man  and  man — in  the  Church,  iu  the  community,  in  the 
world  at  large.  III.  The  means  to  be  employed.  To  obtain  peace  for  ourselves 
and  lead  others  to  its  possession,  we  must  use  the  means  of  grace.  To  reconcile 
man  to  mao,  we  must  set  an  example  of  peace  (Rom.  xii.  IS).  IV.  Then  we  shall  be 
blessed.  1.  In  the  enjoyment  of  peace  (John  xiv.  27 ;  Jas.  iii.  18).  2.  In  being  known 
as  the  children  of  G<»d,  &o.  (L.  O.  Thompson.)  The  world  is  full  of  peace- breakers. 
Peacemakers  : — I.  In  the  family.  II.  In  society.  IH.  In  the  Church.  IV.  In  the 
I'tate.  (J.  Mackay,  B.D.)  This  is  the  seventh  step  of  the  golden  ladder  which 
l.?ads  to  blessedness.  The  name  of  peace  is  sweet,  and  the  work  of  peaee  a  blessed 
«'ork.  1.  The  peace  a  godly  man  seeks  is  not  to  have  a  league  of  amity  with 
sinners,  though  we  are  to  be  (1)  at  peace  with  their  persons,  yet  we  are  to  have  war 
v'ith  their  (2)  sins.  (3)  Grace  teacheth  good  nature ;  we  are  to  be  civil  to  the  worst, 
I  ut  not  twist  into  a  cord  of  friendship  ;  that  were  to  be  brethren  in  iniquity.  II. 
We  must  not  so  far  have  peace  with  others  as  to  endangpr  ourselves.  1.  If  a  man 
hath  the  plague,  we  will  be  helpful  to  him  and  send  him  our  best  receipts,  but  we 
are  careful  not  to  suck  his  infectious  breath.  2.  So  we  may  be  peaceable  towards 
all — nay,  helpful.  3.  Pray  for,  counsel,  and  relieve  them,  but  let  us  take  heed  of  too 
much  familiarity,  lest  we  suck  their  infection.  4.  We  must  so  make  peace  with 
men  that  we  do  not  break  our  peace  with  conscience.  HI.  We  must  not  so  seek 
peace  with  others  as  to  wrong  truth.  1.  Peace  must  not  be  bought  with  the  sale  of 
truth.     2.  We  must  so  seek  the  flower  of  peace  as  not  to  lose  the  pearl  of  truth, 

3.  Truth  is  the  most  orient  gem  of  the  Church's  crown.  IV.  We  must  not  let  any 
of  God's  truth  fall  to  the  ground.  1.  We  must  not  so  be  in  love  with  the  golden 
crown  of  peace  as  to  pluck  off  the  jewels  of  truth.  2.  Eather  let  peace  go  than  truth. 
{Thomas  Watson.)  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers : — I.  1.  Tl  ey  that  are  desirous  to 
preserve  peace  among  their  neighbours.  2.  They  that  av«id  and  endeavour  as 
mach  as  they  can  to  discourage  and  prevent  in  others  tho_'«  practices  which  are 
the  usual  meins  of  raising  quarrels  and  contentions  among  men.  3.  They  who 
avoid  backbiting,  tale-bearing,  slander,  detraction,  and  the  likt.  H.  1.  The  peaceful 
man,  if  there  be  any  dissension  already  begun  among  them,  vrill  «? doavour  to  incline 
parties  to  coolness  and  moderation.  2.  If  his  neighbours  will  \i\.i  be  subdued  by 
his  good  words  and  entreaties,  he  can  at  least  in  a  great  measure  j»lla>  the  dissension, 

III.  By  promoting  peace  we  (1)  do  a  work  pleasing  to  God,  (2)  and  fur  which  we  shfkD 
receive  abundant  reward.  (Bishop  Ofspring  Blackall,  D.D.)  Childt^eK  of  God  ;— 
Peacemakers  are  the  children  of  the  Most  High.  I.  By  eternal  generation:  so 
Christ  is  the  natural  Son  of  His  Father  (Psa.  ii.  7).  II.  By  creation :  so  the  »ngels 
are  sons  of  God  (Job  i.  6,  xxxviii.  7).  When  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and 
all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.    IIL  By  participation  of  dignity :  bo  kingb  and 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {chap,  w, 

nilers  are  said  to  be  chiLbren  of  the  High  God  (Psa.  viii.  2,  6).  IV.  By  visible  pro- 
ff  Rsion :  8o  God  hath  many  children.  Hypocrites  forge  a  title  of  Bonsbip  (Gen. 
vi.  2).  V,  By  real  sanctilication :  so  the  faithful  are  particularly  and  emiuentiy 
the  children  of  God.  (Thomas  Watson.)  Let  us  carry  ourselves  as  becomes  the 
children  of  God.  I.  In  obedience.  (1)  Obey  God  out  of  love ;  (2)  readily ;  (3) 
every  command  of  His.  II.  In  humility.  Look  in  the  glass  of  God's  Word,  and  see 
therein  our  sinful  spots.  III.  In  speech.  1.  Grace  must  be  the  salt  that  seasons  our 
words,  2,  Sobriety  must  govern  our  actions.  Error  is  a  spiritual  intoxication.  IV, 
In  fidelity.  Faithful  in  all  things.  V.  In  sedulity.  We  must  labour  in  a  calling : 
God  will  bless  our  diligence,  not  our  laziness.  "VI.  In  magnanimity.  1.  Must  do 
nothing  sordidly,  2.  Must  not  fear  the  faces  of  men,  but  be  brave-spirited  as 
Nehemiah.  VII.  In  sanctity.  HoUness  is  a  diadem  of  beauty.  In  this  let  us 
endeavour  to  imitate  our  heavenly  Father.  VIII.  In  cheerfulness.  Why  do  the 
childi'en  of  God  walk  so  pensively  ?  Are  they  not  heirs  of  heaven  t  IX.  Let  us 
carry  ourselves  as  the  children  of  God  in  holy  longings  and  expectations.  Children 
are  still  longing  to  be  at  home.  There  is  bread  enough  in  our  Father's  house. 
Ob,  how  we  should  ever  be  longing  for  home  I  (Ibid.)  There  is  a  fulness 
of  meaning  in  the  term  as  it  stands  in  the  Scripture,  which  includes  both  the  effort 
to  make  peace,  and  the  disposition  of  the  mind  towards  it.  I.  A  man  may  be 
officially  or  otherwise  employed  in  composing  a  difference  that  exists  between  two 
families  or  two  individuals,  without  possessing  the  spirit  and  disposition  of  peace 
which  the  word  includes.  (1)  No  one  can  be  the  peacemaker  of  the  text  without 
he  (2)  possesses  a  peaceable  and  conciliatory  disposition.  II.  Tbe  duty  combines 
the  attempt  to  reconcile  men  to  God,  through  the  peace-speaking  blood  of  the  cross, 
with  the  effort  to  heal  the  breach  of  friendship  which  has  been  made  among  indi- 
viduals. (1)  This  of  all  labours  is  the  most  noble  and  Divine.  (2)  We  overlook  the 
most  essential  part  of  making  ppace  if  we  confine  our  endeavours  to  the  composing 
of  differences  among  men,  while  we  (3)  pass  by  multitudes  around  us  who  are 
"contending  with  their  Maker."     (J.    E.    Good.)  The  peacevuiker: — I.    Da- 

6CBIBE  the  peacemaker.  1.  He  is  a  citizen.  2.  He  is  a  neighbour.  3.  He  is  a 
Christian.  II.  Declare  his  blessedness.  1.  He  is  blessed  of  God.  2.  He  is  one 
of  the  children  of  God.  3,  Thoy  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God.  IIL  Set  the 
peacemaker  to  wokk.     (C  H.  Simrgeon.) 

How  the  Rev.  John  Owen  restored  peace  between  the  Rev.  Robert  Hall  and  the  Rev. 
Charles  Simenn. — A  pleasing  instance  of  a  successful  effort  to  restore  peace  is  re- 
lated in  the  hfe  of  the  Eev.  John  Owen.  The  Eev.  Charles  Simeon  and  the  Eev, 
Eobtrt  Hall  were  offended  with  each  other,  and  in  their  anger  declined  intercourse. 
After  several  friends  had  tried  to  restore  peace,  and  failed,  Mr.  Owen  wrote  the 
onder-meutioned  lines  on  two  cards,  and  then  left  one  at  the  house  of  each  persoa:— > 

"  How  rare  that  task  a  prosperous  issue  finds, 
WTiich  seeks  to  reconcile  discordant  miuds ! 
How  many  scruples  rise  to  passion's  touch  ! 
!J7iis  yields  too  little,  and  that  asks  too  much. 
Each  wishes  each  with  other's  eyes  to  see: 
And  many  sinners  can't  make  two  agree  ; 
What  mediation,  then,  the  Saviour  showed. 
Who  singly  reconciled  us  all  to  God !  " 

The  first  man  who  read  the  lines  was  so  strongly  impressed  by  them  that  h»  hastened 
from  his  house  to  call  immediutely  upon  his  offended  friend ;  the  friend  had  also 
read  the  lines,  and,  being  affected  by  them,  had  done  the  same,  and  the  offended 
persona  met  each  other  in  the  street.  A  reconciliation  instantly  took  place — a 
reconciliation  which,  it  is  beUeved,  was  never  interrupted  or  regretted  by  either  of 
those  useful  and  highly  esteemed  men. 

Ver.  10.  Persecuted  for  righteousness. — Persecution'. — I.  In  what  relioiodb 
TERSECDTioN  CONSISTS.  1.  Negative  persecution  which  falls  short  of  violence.  2. 
Domestic  persecution.    3.   Private  persecution,     4,    Public  persecution.    II,  Thi 

FOLLY   AND  WICKEDNESS   OF   THOSE   WHO   INFLICT   PEKSECUTION.        1.    It   is   Contrary   tO 

•ound  reason.  2.  It  is  contrary  to  sound  policy.  3.  It  is  contrary  to  Scripture.  4. 
Persecution  for  righteousness  is  virtually  aimed  at  Christ.  III.  The  hapiiness  o» 
THOSE  WHO  ENDURE  IT.  1.  They  are  furnished  with  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  sin- 
cerity of  their  religion.  2.  They  are  blessed  in  the  enjoyment  of  tho3e  consolatioiui 
which  are  generally  administered  under  circumstances  of  persecution.   S.  They  largely 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  59 

ehare  the  sj'mpathy  of  the  children  of  God.  4.  They  are  encircled  with  high  associa- 
tions, "  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which  were  before  yoa."  5.  They  are  blessed 
in  extensive  usefulness.  6.  Great  reward  in  heaven.  7.  Let  U3  be  thankful  that 
we  are  happily  exempted,  in  a  great  measure,  from  the  evil  of  persecution.  8.  Let 
us  not  go  out  of  our  way  to  provoke  persecution.  9.  Support  those  who  suffer 
persecution.     (E.  Clayton.)  I.    The  nature  of  true  religion.     1.  Its  principles. 

These  are  spiritual — unpopular — present.  Not  something  without  a  man,  but 
within.  Not  of  earth,  but  from  above.  They  are:  poverty  of  spirit,  docility  of 
mind,  intense  aspirations  after  God,  purity  of  heart.  2.  Its  practice.  Penitential 
sorrow,  mercy,  peaceableness,  endurance.  II.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  possess 
true  religion.  They  have  peace,  true  satisfaction.  They  enjoy  aU  spiritual  blessings, 
they  are  children  of  God — then  aU  things  are  theirs.  1.  Have  you  in  possession 
the  Tprinciplefi  ot  true  religion  ?  2.  Do  you  daily  reduce  them  to  practice*  (Good 
Seed  for  ihe  Lord's  Sowers.)  Persecution  for  righteousness' sake.  I.  What  perse- 
cution IS.  It  is  more  than  aSiiction.  It  is  cruel  and  unjust.  II.  The  subjects 
OF  PEBSECUTiON.  Muuy  suffer  for  their  own  pecuUarities.  TII.  The  promise 
belonging  to  it — "  Great  is  your  reward  in  heaven."  (IF.  Reeve,  M.A.)  Persecution. 
I.  The  PEitSECUTioNS  WHICH  ATTEND  THE  FOLLOWERS  OP  CHEisr.  1.  It  is  Been  In 
marked  disrespect.  2.  In  the  Christian's  company  being  avoided.  3.  In  ridicule 
and  slander.  II,  The  causes  of  persecution.  1.  The  degenerate  state  of  the 
world.  2.  The  influence  which  Satan  exercises  over  the  minds  of  men.  3.  The 
conduct  of  Christians  in  the  world.  III.  The  manner  in  which  we  are  called  to 
Buffer  persecution.  "  Rejoice,"  &c.  1.  Because  the  term  of  our  suffering  at  moat 
san  be  but  short.  2.  Because  we  suffer  in  a  righteous  cause.  3.  Because  we  have 
the  most  illustrious  example.  4.  Because  if  we  suffer  with  Clirist  we  shall  also 
reign  with  Him.  IV.  The  encouragement  afforded.  1.  So  persecuted  they  the 
Prophets.  2.  They  possess  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  3.  Great  is  their  reward  in 
heaven.  (-7.  Jordan.)  I.  The  grounds  of  persecution.  II.  The  times.  1.  In 
heathen  lands.  2.  When  its  professors  are  despised,  and  in  a  minority.  3.  When 
their  doctrines  strongly  clash  with  reigning  maxims  and  controUiog  interests.  IIL 
The  WA1S.  1.  Eeviling.  2.  Slandering.  3.  Injuring.  4.  Destroying.  IV.  The 
extent.  1  Upon  property.  2.  Upon  relatives.  3  Upon  good  name.  4.  Upon 
life.  V.  The  rewards.  (L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  blessedne>'S  of  persecution.  I. 
The  fact  that  true  spiritual  Christianity  exposes  to  persecution.  1.  See  this 
illustrated.  2.  The  form  of  the  persecution.  Eeviling,  injm-ious  treatment, 
slander.  3.  The  ground  of  it.  Because  righteous.  4.  The  source  of  it.  Enmity 
against  Go<l.  II.  To  view  persecution  as  a  ground  of  rejoicing.  1.  As  an 
attestation  of  Christian  guodness.  2.  It  connects  you  with  the  Prophets.  3.  It 
brings  great  reward  in  heaven.  Expect  persecution ;  bear  it ;  profit  by  it.  (T.  G. 
Horton.)  I.  True  godliness  is  usually  attended  with  persecution.  1.  Christ 
died  to  take  the  curse  from  us,  not  the  cross.  2.  Piety  will  not  shield  us  from 
suffering.  3.  The  way  to  heaven,  though  full  of  roses  in  regard  of  the  comforts  of 
the  holy,  is  full  of  thorus  in  regard  of  persecutions.  4.  Before  Israel  reached 
Canaan,  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  they  must  go  through  a  wilderness  of 
serpenta  and  a  Red  Sea.  5.  So,  the  children  of  God  in  their  passage  to  the  Holy 
Land,  must  meet  with  fiery  serpents  and  a  Red  Sea  of  persecution.  II.  Christianity 
is  sanctity  joined  with  suffering.  1.  Saints  carry  Christ  in  their  hearts,  and  tha 
cross  on  their  shoulders.  2.  Christ  and  His  cross  are  never  parted.  3.  It  is  too 
much  for  a  Christian  to  have  two  heavens — one  here  and  one  hereafter.  4.  What 
is  the  meaning  of  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet  of  hope,  the  breastplate  of 
p:;ticnce,  but  to  imply  that  we  must  encoiviter  witJi  sufferiLigs?  III.  Was  Christ's 
head  crowned  with  thorns,  and  do  we  think  to  be  crowned  with  roses  ?  1,  If  wa 
are  God's  gold,  it  is  not  strange  to  be  cast  into  the  fire.  2.  Persecutions  are 
pledges  of  God's  love,  badges  of  honour.  3.  In  the  sharpest  trial  there  is  sweetest 
comfort ;  God's  fanning  His  wheat  is  but  to  make  it  purer.  (Thoma*  Watkon.)  L 
What  is  persecution  ?  1.  An  abuse  of  power  employed  to  the  harm  of  another, 
with  something  of  eagerness,  pursuit,  and  perseverance.  2.  No  mortal  is  so  weak, 
so  wholly  destitute  of  power,  but  that  be  has  wherewithal  to  be  some  way  or  other 
upon  the  offensive  ;  so  there  is  no  one  in  his  turn  is  not  some  way  or  other  capable 
of  persecution.  3.  The  meanest  vassals  upon  earth  can  have  the  insolence  to  say, 
"  With  our  tongue  we  will  prevail !  our  lips  are  our  own,  who  is  lord  over  us  ?  "  II. 
Persecution  fob  righteousness'  sake.  Men  may  be  said  to  suffer  persecution 
lor  righteousness'  sake  when  they  suffer  for  doing  the  duties  of  their  stations, 
not  in  those  acts  cdone  which  respect  the  faith  and  worship  of   God  (thougi) 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

these  more  especially),  but  throughout  the  whole  stage  of  Christian  virtue,  as 
princes,  maj;istrates,  subjects,  or  Christians.  1.  When  a  prince  is  made  uneasy 
by  potent  factions  in  the  government,  when  designs  for  public  good  are  directly 
opposed,  or  artificially  frustrated,  then  is  he  persecuted.  2.  When  a  magis- 
trate finds  a  weight  thrown  in  the  scales  of  justice,  and  the  furious  power  of 
pfirties  bears  heavy  on  his  hands,  then  is  he  persecuted.  3.  When  a  faithiul  sub- 
ject's good  deeds  are  lessened  and  undervalued  or  skillfully  ascribed  to  ill  ends  :  in 
a  word,  whenever  he  suffers  in  his  goods  or  good  name  for  adhering  unmovably  to 
an  even  course  of  duty,  then  is  he  persecuted.  4.  When  a  man's  sobriety 
and  conscientiousness  are  traduced  as  precisenesa ;  his  firm  adherence  to  well-estab- 
lished principles,  as  stiffness,  bigotry,  and  narrowness  of  mind ;  his  moderation 
disputed — then  is  he  persecuted.     {Lancelot  Blackburn.)  Persecution,  in  tht 

Scriptural  use  of  the  term,  is  evil  treatment  on  a  religious  account.  I.  It  is  the 
infliction  of  an  injury,  or  the  withholding  of  a  right,  because  the  person  thus  perse- 
cuted renders  what  he  regards  a  duty  to  his  God.  1.  Every  person  who  suffers  in 
his  name,  person,  or  family,  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  what  he  considers  to  be  his 
duty  to  God,  and  who  is  actuated,  (2)  not  by  a  spirit  of  pride,  or  affected  singularity, 
but  by  a  (3)  commendable  regard  to  Divine  authority,  and  a  (4)  sincere  intention  of 
promoting  the  mterests  of  Christianity,  and  the  good  of  man,  is  "  persecuted  for 
righteou'^ness'  sake."  II.  There  are  other  modes  of  persecution.  1.  The  carnal 
mind  in  its  "  enmity  against  God  "  has  devised  crafty  and  cruel  schemes  for  the 
vexation  and  embarrassment  of  the  servants  of  Christ.  (1)  There  is  persecution 
by  speech.  (2)  "Men  shall  revile  you."  (J.  E.  Good.)  Mean  things  dig- 
nified.— It  is  said  of  Joan,  Countess  of  Shrewsbury,  that  in  the  midst  of  court 
festivities,  she  let  her  garter  fall  unawares  ;  and,  upon  her  blushing  at  the  accident, 
the  king  took  it  up  in  his  hand,  whereat  the  nobility  smiled.  "  Well,"  said  the 
lung,  "I  will  make  this  an  honourable  ornament  ere  long."  Upon  that  came  the 
Order  of  the  Knights  of  the  Garter,  the  garter  thus  becoming  an  ornament  of  the 
highest  order.  If  man  can  put  honour  on  such  mean  things,  then  God  much  more. 
He  ennohleth  repi'oaches,  and  sanctifieth  afflictions  to  His  children,  and  maketh  the 
sufferings  of  His  sei'vants  as  so  many  ensigns  of  heavenly  nobility.  If  men  had 
hut  the  true  skill  of  Christianity,  they  would  be  ambitious  of  the  crown  of  martyr- 
dom, and  look  upon  it  as  a  blessed  thing  when  men  speak  all  manner  of  eyil  of 
them.     {Spencer.) 

Ver.  11.  For  My  sake. — For  My  sake : — The  supreme  and  commanding  claims 
implied.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "  for  my  sake."  All 
intelligent  creatures  act  from  some  consideration  or  other — for  the  "  sake  "  of 
something.  At  the  root  of  the  life  we  are  living  there  is  a  strong  and  dominant 
reason ;  or,  if  not  one,  several  that  sway  us  in  turn.  Motive  in  every  action — 
money,  pleasure,  «fec.,  regard  for  others.  So  that  the  principle  which  is  contained 
in  the  text  is  by  no  means  new  or  exceptional,  but  is  as  old  and  as  wide  as  the 
world.  Comes  before  us  in  its  highest  and  most  glorious  application.  The  claims 
involved.  We  have,  then,  here — I.  A  person.  II.  A  unique  person.  III.  A  unique 
person  who  claims  to  be  Lord  of  our  life.  What  are  we  to  do  for  the  sake  of  Christ  t 
To  labour  and  suffer.  {Dr.Mellor.)  For  My  sake.  1.  There  is  a  self-assertion  here, 
which  is  justified  by  the  character  and  position  of  the  speaker.  2.  All  beings  capable 
of  love  and  hatred  must,  if  placed  together,  act  with  direct  regard  to  each  other,  and 
they  will  do  many  things  for  each  other's  sake.  I.  What  is  the  nature  of  jesds* 
CLAIMS  f  1,  Jesus  claims  work  for  ITis  sake.  2.  We  owe  to  Jesus  Christ  patient 
endurance  of  suffering  for  His  sake.  3.  Jesus  claims  cheerful  and  generous  pifts 
for  His  sake.  4.  Jesus  claims  attachment  to  life,  with  a  readiness  to  die,  for  His 
sake.     6.  Jesus  claims  the  devotion  of  ourselves  to  Him.     U.  Souk  of  the  means 

BY  WHICH  WE  MAY  STIB    UP    OURSELVES    TO    RECOGNIZE    THESE    CLAIMS    MORE    CORDDlLLT. 

1.  Distinct  ideas  of  the  person  of  Christ  are  essential  to  our  being  moved  by  con- 
siderations which  originate  in  Himself.  2.  Frequent  meditation  upon  the  service 
He  bus  rendered.  3.  In  order  to  this  we  need  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
{S.  Martin,  D.D.)  The  words  bring  before  us  the  relation  of  the  Christian  to  hii 
living  and  loving  Lord.  I.  Let  us  seek  clearer  views  of  the  influence  of  Christian 
motive.  Christ  has  certain  peculiar  and  special  claims  on  ns.  There  is  the 
authority  of  His  Godhead.  The  love  of  His  incarnation  and  death.  II.  Let  us  get 
a  jaster  estimate  of  its  ranoe.  1.  It  bears  on  our  efforts  after  personal  holiness. 
i.  On  the  Christian's  work  for  others.  3.  It  extends  to  the  enduring  of  suffering  for 
conscience'  sake.     4.  It  applies  to  the  sacrifices  we  are  required  to  make.     This 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  61 

pnnciple  possesses  a  testing  power  to  reveal  whether  or  not  we  are  what  we  profess 
to  be  as  followers  of  Christ.     {Dr.  W.  M.  Taylor.) 

Ver.  12.  Great  Is  your  reward. — The  reward  of  the  saints  : — I.  Consider  its 
PRECI0USNBS9.  It  Is  shown — 1.  By  remembering  who  bestows  it.  2.  It  is  in  heaven. 
3.  It  meets  and  satisfies  the  yearning  of  the  saints  here.  4.  It  exceeds  onr  power 
to  measure.  5.  It  is  connected  veith  recognition  of  service.  6.  It  is  freed  from  all 
admixture  of  sorrow.  7.  It  is  carefully  prepared  for  us.  8.  It  is  certain.  9.  It  is  the 
highest  elevation.  II.  Consider  it  as  a  legitimate  motivk  xo  action  (Heb.  x.  35,  xi.  26). 
TTT,  Concluding  eeflections.  1.  The  saints'  great  reward,  not  in  this  life.  2.  They 
have  an  ever-brightening  prospect.  3.  God's  desire  to  stimulate  us  to  a  better  hfe 
by  revealing  to  us  the  great  reward.     4.  A  support  in  trial.     (J,  W.  Hussey,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  Salt  of  the  earth. — The  elect  of  God : — I.  Here  is  Christ's  sablime 
DEFINITION  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE,  and  of  those  who  compose  His  Church.  The 
Church  exists  for  the  world's  sake  more  than  for  its  own.  Christ's  disciples 
are  to  be  saviours  of  others.  II.  Is  not  this  the  docteine  of  election  as  cur 
Saviour  understood  it  ?  God's  people  are  chosen,  not  for  their  own  comfort,  but 
to  show  men  the  beauty  of  the  Diviue  life,  and  to  raise  them  to  the  same  level. 
III.  It  is  qdalitt  moeb  than  quantity  that  does  God's  work  in  the  world.  All 
history  and  progress  are  at  bottom  the  life-story  of  the  chosen  few.  IV.  It  should 
be  one  great  object  of  our  prayer  and  effort  to  keep  up  the  moral  and  spibitual 
STANDARD  OF  THE  ELECT  FEW.  (J.  G.  Greenhough,  M.A.)  The  purification  of 
society : — 1.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  should  seek  to  prevent  the  corruptiot 
of  literature.  2.  They  should  seek  to  prevent  the  corruption  of  public  amuse 
ments.  3.  They  should  seek  to  prevent  the  corruption  of  parochial  and  poUtioa"^ 
life.  4.  They  should  seek  to  prevent  the  corruption  of  commercial  life.  {G.  W 
McCree.)  The  great  calling  of  the  disciples  of  Christ : — 1.  Salt  is  intended  Ut 
nourish  :  it  is  an  article  of  food.  The  godly  must  nourish  the  earth  spiritually. 
2.  Salt  is  intended  to  preserve.  3.  Salt  has  also  a  consuming  power.  There  Li 
something  sharp,  biting,  and  aggressive  in  it.  Laid  on  a  wound  it  is  painful.  The 
Christian  often  pains  men  to  heal  tbem.  {T.  Christlieb,  D.D.)  Salt  without 
savour: — Thes9  words  must  have  seemed  ridiculously  presumptuous  when  they 
were  first  spoken.  I.  The  high  task  of  Christ's  disciples  as  here  set  forth. 
This  metaphor  involves  two  things :  a  grave  judgment  as  to  the  actual  state  ol 
society,  and  a  lofty  claim  as  to  what  Christ's  followers  can  do  for  it.  It  is  corrupt ; 
you  do  not  salt  a  living  thing.  It  is  the  power  and  obligation  of  the  good  to  arrest 
corruption  by  their  own  purity.  The  example  of  Christian  men  is  not  only 
repressive,  it  ought  to  tempt  forth  all  that  is  purest  in  the  people  with  whom  they 
come  into  contact.  Salt  does  its  work  by  being  brought  into  close  contact  with 
the  thing  which  it  is  to  work  upon.  It  does  its  work  silently,  inconspicuously, 
gradually.  II.  The  graj^  possibility  of  the  salt  losing  its  savour.  It  is  evident 
that  there  is  the  obliteration  of  the  distinction  between  the  salt  and  the  mass  into 
which  it  is  inserted.  Is  there  any  difference  between  your  ideal  of  happiness  and 
the  irreligious  one?  III.  The  solemn  question.  Is  there  a  possibility  of  be- 
salting  the  saltless  salt,  of  restoring  the  lost  savour  ?  These  words  not  to 
be  pushed  to  the  extreme.  IV.  The  certain  end  of  tub  saltless  salt.  Yoa 
cannot  put  it  upon  the  soil ;  there  is  no  fertilizing  virtue  in  it.  You  cannot  even 
fling  it  into  the  rubbish  heap ;  it  will  do  mischief  there.  Pitch  it  out  into  the 
road ;  it  will  stop  a  cranny  somewhere  between  the  stones  when  once  it  is  well 
trodden  down  by  men's  heels.  That  is  all  it  is  fit  for.  God  has  no  use  for 
it ;  man  has  no  use  for  it.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  I.  The  world  as  consti- 
tuting the  particular  sphere  of  the  Christian's  influence.  Moral  state  of  the 
world  at  large,  and  that  portion  in  particular  where  our  influence  is  most 
felt.  How  insensible  are  we  of  it,  &c.  II.  Illustrate  and  apply  this  interesting 
and  impoitant  truth.  Explain  the  metaphor.  All  true  believers  in  Jesus  are  de- 
nominated the  "  salt  of  the  earth,"  because  all  that  is  Divine  and  holy  and  precious 
exists  in  them,  and  in  them  only.  The  moral  influence  of  the  Christian,  as  it  it 
exerted,  applies  to  the  Church  in  its  collective  capacity.  III.  The  decay  of  the 
inner  life,  as  manifested  in  the  impaired  vigour  of  Christian  influence,  figura- 
tively set  forth  by  the  "salt  that  hath  lost  its  savour,"  and  its  consequent 
unprofitableness.  The  salt  may  again  be  salted — the  inner  life  may  be  revived. 
(Dr.  0.  Winslow.)  Christians  called  salt : — The  ideal  of  an  active  and  eflaoient 
Christian  character.    It  is  like  salt.     How  ?    I.  In  its  constituent  elements.    A» 


62       .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

salt  is  made  up  of  chlorine  and  sodinm  chemically  nnifed,  so  a  Christian  character 
is  composed  of  faith  and  works  in  union,  {a)  As  chlorine  f;as  is  a  deavlly  poison 
by  itself,  so  f.iiih  T.ithout  works  killeth.  {b)  As  the  metal  aoilium  is  destitute 
alone  of  the  saving  quality  of  salt,  so  works  without  faith  are  destitute  of  merit 
to  save  the  soul,  (c)  As  the  chemical  union  of  the  two  elemeuls  forms  a  third 
Bubsiiince,  with  a  new  and  useful  quality,  so  faith  and  works,  when  united,  give 
life  and  eflicieucy  to  Christian  character.  II.  In  its  effects,  (a)  As  salt  prevents 
corruption  and  decny  in  animal  and  vegetable  matter,  so  Christian  character 
is  the  antidote  of  vice  in  the  individual  and  in  society.  (5)  As  salt  prdmotea 
digestion,  and  thus  prevents  d^!s^dIy  disease,  so  Christian  character  enables  the 
Boul  to  digest  and  profit  by  the  various  dispensations  of  Providence.  (c)  As 
salt  renders  palatable  otherwise  distasteful  food,  so  a  Christian  character 
sweetens  life's  disappointments,  and  changes  its  crosses  into  crowns.  (P.  S. 
Davis.)  There  are  three  ideas  suggested  by  the  representation  in  the  text, 
I.  The  first  is  insipidity,  ob  tastelessness.  (1)  Tiiis  is  the  case,  truly,  where  the 
savour  of  the  gospel  does  not  prevail.  (2)  There  you  will  find  no  (3)  moral 
bf-anty,  no  (4)  fruits  of  benevolence  and  mercy.  (5)  How  insipid  the  uear 
delights  even  of  the  family,  the  sanctufiry,  and  the  senuestered  recesses  of  the 
closet,  if  there  be  no  manifes'aticus  of  His  love,  or  indications  of  His  presenos, 
to  the  spiritual  and  regenerate  heart.  II.  The  second  idea  is  follt  and  ignok.4Nce, 
1.  True  religion  is  wisciom.  2.  Wickedness  is  folly.  3.  Wicked  men  are  as 
unwise  as  they  are  offensive  to  God.  4.  True  piety  is  an  evidence  of  a  well- 
seasoned  and  enlightened  mind.  III.  The  third  idea  is  tendenct  to  decay. 
(1)  Mortality  is  the  law  of  nature.  (2)  All  hasten  to  corruption.  Tiie  figure 
denotes  (3)  moral  corruption.  (4)  When  health  has  left  the  physical  fi'ame,  we 
say  it  is  diseased ;  (5)  when  life  has  fied,  we  say  it  is  dead.  (C)  We  use  the 
same  figure  and  language  to  describe  the  dreadiui  disorJers  of  the  immortal 
Boul.  (7)  When  the  principle  of  love  to  God  does  not  govern  all  its  faculties, 
we  say  they  are  tiuder  a  moral  distemper.  (8)  If  the  Divnie  Spirit  breathes  not 
the  "  breath  of  life  "  into  it,  we  eay  it  is  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  (J.  E. 
Good.) 

Salt  used  in  the  baptismal  service. —  The  Latin  Churob,  m  its  materialibtio 
fashion,  employs  actual  salt  in  the  baptismal  service.  The  priest  puts  it  into  the 
mouth  of  the  person,  adrdt  or  infant,  who  is  baptized.  It  is  an  unauthorized  cere- 
mony ;  but  it  is  a  sort  of  traditiouHl  witness  to  the  obligation  lying  on  ail  Christiana 
to  have  in  themselves  that  which  salt  miglit  symbolize.  {Dr.  D.  Fraser.)  Salt 
and  sunlight. — A  Roman  proverb  coujiles  mnligiit  and  salt  together  as  the  two  things 
which  keep  the  world  alive  and  sweet.  Homer  calls  it  Divine ;  Plato  tlie  »abstance 
dear  to  the  gods;  Pythagoras  spoke  of  it  as  the  emblem  of  righteousness,  and  our 
common  phraseology,  following  the  Greek  and  Latm  winters,  has  cho.^en  it  as  the 
symbol  of  wit  and  wisdom,  of  all  that  gives  grace  to  speech,  refinement  to  thought, 
pungency  to  writing,  and  individuality  to  character,  '^he  idea,  then,  which  the 
metaphor  on  the  Saviour's  lips  suggests  is  that  His  disciples  are  the  noble  and 
indisi'ensable  element  in  tho  world ;  they  sweeten,  jmrify,  and  enrich  its  work,  its 
thoughts,  its  social  intercourse,  its  joys,  its  laws  and  hterature.  They  save  it  from 
eonuption,  decomposition,  and  moral  death.  The  great  sea  of  life,  like  the  sea  which 
wasiiesoixr  shores,  would  beeon^e  putrid  without  it.  (</.  G.  Gree)ihough,JI.A.)  In- 
Huence  workimj  from  the/no  to  the  many. — Do  you  remember  Arnold  of  Eugby'a 
famous  sixth  form?  Re  brought  the  boys  who  composed  that  hist  class  into  closer 
intercourse  with  himself,  and  gave  them  his  choicest  leaciiinKS,  that  he  mitjht  make 
them  models  of  honour,  purity,  sobriety,  and  godliness ;  strong  with  the  sense  of 
duty,  dignified  by  the  thought  of  their  responsibility,  so  that  they  might  give  a 
healthy  tone  to  the  whole  school,  and  that  from  them  might  flow  a  continual  stream 
of  puiifjing,  elevating  influence.  "If  I  have  confidence  in  my  sixth  form,"  said 
Arnold,  '*  I  would  not  exchange  my  place  for  the  loftiest  position  in  the  world." 
They  were  the  salt  of  the  school,  as  Christ's  disciples  are  to  be  the  salt  of  the  earth. 
Saltless  salt. — Maundrell,  who  visited  the  lake  at  Jebbiil,  tells  us  that  he  found 
Halt  there  which  had  entirely  "  lost  his  savour,"  and  the  same  abounds  among 
the  d^brii  at  Usduni,  and  in  other  localities  of  rock-salt  at  the  south  end  of  the 
Dead  Sea.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  salt  of  this  country,  if  left  long  in 
contact  with  the  ground,  does  become  insipid  and  tasteless.  From  the  manner 
in  which  it  is  gathered,  much  earth  and  other  impurities  are  necessarily  col- 
lected with  it.  Not  a  little  of  it  is  so  impure  that  it  cannot  be  need  at  all,  and 
Buoh  salt  soon  etHoresces  and  turns  to  dust — not  to  fruitful  soil,  however.     It  is 


CHAP,  v.]  ET.  MATTHEW. 


not  only  "good  for  notting,"  but  it  actually  destroys  all  fertility  wherever  it  ifl 
thrown;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  it  is  cast  into  the  street,  to  be  "trodden  under 
the  toot  of  men."  {W.  M.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Common  salt. — Common  salt,  the 
chloride  of  sodium,  is  an  extremely  abundant  substance  in  narure.  It  is  found  in 
almost  inexhaustible  deposits  as  rock-salt  in  various  parts  of  the  world  :  from  stch 
deposits  arise  brine  springs,  which  are  strongly  impregnated  with  salt ;  and  the 
water  of  the  ocean,  as  well  as  that  of  various  inland  seas,  hold  it  in  solution  in 
inconceivable  amount.  From  these  various  sources  salt  is  prepared  for  use  as  an 
indispensable  condiment  in  human  food,  and  as  a  raw  material  in  several  mjst 
important  and  extensive  chemical  manufactures.  In  the  United  Kingdom  great 
deposits  of  rock-salt  occur  in  the  new  red  sandstone  strata  in  Cheshire  and  Wor- 
cester. .  .  .  The  total  amount  of  salt  produced  in  the  United  Kingdom,  during  1876, 
was  2,273,2;')6  tons,  of  which  154,538  tons  were  in  the  form  of  rock-salt.  In  the 
same  year,  854,538  tons,  of  a  value  of  £529,547,  were  exported;  British  India, 
the  United  States,  and  Bussia,  being  the  countries  to  which  it  waa  sent.  {Globe 
Encyclopcedia.) 

Ver.  14.  Te  ar©  the  light  of  the  world. — Christiant  the  light  of  the  vorld : — 
The  Church  can  diffuse  light.  1.  By  reflection.  2.  By  di.spersing  it.  (J.  H. 
Evans,  M.A.)  The  Church  of  Christ  tlie  light  of  the  world  : — I.  These 
WORDS  AS  THEY  PRocii.uM  THE  Eedeemer.  1.  These  words  proclaim  the  moral 
gramieur  of  His  sentiments.  2.  They  show  the  Divine  wisdom  of  His  doc- 
trine,  3.  The  prophetic  grasp  of  His  language.  II.  These  words  ab  thet 
BPEciFY  THE  CHRISTIAN.  1.  Here  is  a  distinction  of  persons — ♦*  Ye."  2.  A 
disrinotion  of  principle — "liglit."  3.  A  distinction  of  efficacy — "light  of  the 
world."  III.  These  words  as  thet  illustrate  the  world.  1.  The  world  is  dark 
in  reference  to  God.  2.  The  world  is  dead,  Christianity  its  salt.  {R.  Mont- 
gomcry,  21. A.)  Christians  the  light  of  the   world : — I.  "Vindicate   the   troth 

here  asserted.  1.  The  world  is  dark.  2.  A  contrast  to  the  gloom — of  a  principle, 
the  antagnnibt  of  this  moral  darkness.  Believers  are  "the  light  of  the  world." 
(1)  As  in  their  own  souls  they  possess  Christ.  (2)  As  in  their  life  and  labour 
they  exhibit  Clirist.  II.  Apply  this  truth  to  the  case  before  us.  1.  In  the 
way  of  privilege.  2.  In  the  way  of  duty  and  obligation.  (F.  Goode,  M.A.)  I. 
Expi^ain  the  symbol.  1,  Light  an  emblem  of  purity,  2.  Knowledge.  3.  Action. 
t.  Unity.  5.  Benevolence.  II.  Enforce  the  doctrine.  1.  The  test  of  disciple- 
»hip.  2.  The  criteiion  at  the  judgment.  (W.W.Wythe.)  I.  The  world's  moraIi 
DARKNESS  IMPLIED.  JesuB  kiicw  all  the  attainments  of  the  earth,  and  He  could 
epprt-ciate  their  excellency  and  beauty  too ;  .  .  .  but  nothing  of  all  this  could 
cast  light  on  the  deepest  problems  that  agitate  the  human  heart — what  must  I  do 
to  be  saved?  Beneath  the  surface  of  all  this  beauty  ...  we  find  lurking  the 
most  revolting  immorality.  It  is  the  light  of  Christianity  that  solves  the  deepest 
questions  and  answers  the  most  anxious  inquiries  of  mankind.  The  object  of 
light  is  to  disclose  what  would  be  otherwise  unseen.  This  light  discloses  God,  the 
way  to  heaven,  &e.  This  holy  hght  possesses  a  peculiar  character,  which  the  light 
of  mere  science,  literature,  or  secular  knowledge  has  not  and  cannot  have.  And 
since  its  dawn,  even  those  bright  things  that  were  proposed  as  substitutes  for  it, 
this  light  has  seized  and  made  handmaids  to  it.  Science  and  religion  need  not 
be  divided.  II.  Christians  are  the  bearers  of  Tfiis  light  into  all  the  ends  ow 
THE  WORLD.  Kindled  from  the  Sun,  they  are  to  go  forth  and  cast  their  light  upon 
the  world  Our  mission  is  to  enlighten  the  sphere  in  which  we  are  placed,  &q. 
(Dr.  J.  Gumming.)  Keep  the  light  bright  or  you  will  hear  of  it.— I  read  some- 
where of  a  traveller  at  Calais  going  one  dark  and  stormy  night  to  the  lighthouse 
there.  Whilst  standing  looking  on,  the  keeper  of  the  house  boasted  of  its  bril. 
liancy  and  beauty,  observing  there  were  few  such  lights  in  the  world  beside. 
The  traveller  said,  thoughtlessly  it  may  be,  "  What  if  one  of  these  buinera 
ehould  go  out  to-night?"  "What!"  said  the  keeper,  "go  out,  sir?  Oh,  sir," 
said  he,  "  look  at  that  dark  and  stormy  sea.  You  cannot  see  them,  but  there  ara 
ships  passing  and  repassing  there  to  every  point  of  the  compass.  Were  the  light 
to  go  out  Lom  my  inattention,  in  six  months  news  would  arrive  from  every 
part  of  the  coast,  that  such  ships  and  crews  were  lost  through  my  neglect! 
No,  no  I  God  forbid  that  such  a  thing  should  ever  occur.  I  feel  every  night  aa 
I  look  at  my  burner  as  if  all  the  eyes  of  all  the  sailors  of  the  world  were  looking 
at  my  lights,  and  watching  me  I "  If  such  was  his  care  of  lights,  the  extinction 
of  which  4!ould  lead  only  to  temporal  catastrophes,  oh  1  what  should  be  ours  1    L 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Ichap.  t. 

The  true  disciple's  position  and  calling.  His  position  is  like  that  of  a  city  set  on  a 
hill,  eminently  conspicuous ;  he  "  cannot  be  hid,"  and  he  ought  not  to  try  to  be  hid. 
His  calling  is  from  the  elevated  position  he  occupies,  to  sbed  light  upon  the  whole 
world.  II.  The  qualifications  needed  by  Christ's  disciples  for  a  right  discharge  of 
the  duties  of  their  position  and  calling  (vers.  3-10).  III.  The  rewards  of  a  right  dis- 
charge of  our  duties  as  true  disciples.  The  hatred  of  men,  the  esteem  and  love  of 
men,  the  unspeakable  blessedness  of  seeing  others  led  by  our  influenceto  worship  God 
(ver.  16 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19),  the  approval  of  God  (ver.  9),  everlasting  blessedness  (vers. 
8,  8,  12;  Eev.  xxi.  10).  (The  Preachers'  Monthly.)  These  words  are  descriptive 
of: — I.  The  genuine  Christian's  character — "light."  II.  The  Christian's  place 
and  functions.  III.  The  Church's  respousibility.  {Jat.  Stewart.)  Example  u 
the  source  of  the  Christian's  most  powerful  influence  on  the  world.  In  analyzing 
that  power  there  are  three  or  four  elements.  I.  It  is  the  most  successful  method  of 
illustrating  truth  and  imparting  instruction.  II.  It  is  a  demonstration  of  the 
practicability  of  religious  life,  as  well  as  the  truthfulness  of  Christianity,  and  the 
most  successful  method  of  remoNing  objections  to  it.  III.  It  attracts  attention. 
IV.  It  is  the  most  successful  method  of  reivjroving  wrong-doing.  V.  It  is  also  the 
most  successful  way  of  winning  the  esteem  of  the  world.     (Christian  Age.) 

Christian  example  a  converting  agency.— Vfhen  Lord  Peterborough  lodged  for  a 
season  with  Fenelon,  Archbishop  of  Cambray,  he  was  so  delighted  with  his  piety 
and  virtue,  that  he  exclaimed  at  parting,  •*  If  I  stay  here  any  longer,  I  shall  become 
a  Christian  in  spite  of  myself."  (Anecdotes.)  Christian  example  an  argument  of 
weight. — A  yuuug  minister,  when  about  to  be  ordained,  stated  that  at  one  period  of 
his  life  he  was  nearly  an  infidel.  "  But,"  said  he,  "  there  was  one  argument  in 
favour  of  Christianity,  which  I  could  never  refute — the  consistent  conduct  of  my 
own  father."  (IMd.)  I.  Christian  profession.  To  let  our  light  shine  is,  un- 
doubtedly, to  make  a  Christian  profession.  This  implies  that  the  true  light  has 
been  kindled  in  us.  This  Christian  profession  should  be  made  in  union  with  the 
Church  of  Christ.  II.  Christian  consistenct.  If  the  light  which  you  let  shine  in 
your  profession  be  the  true  light,  there  will  be  good  works  to  be  seen.  The  lowest 
requirement  of  Christian  consistency  is  the  absence  of  every  evil  work — the  least 
immorality  vitiates  the  entire  profession.  Tliis  Christian  consistency  requires  non- 
conformity  to  the  world,  and  the  good  works  of  an  active  Christian  life.  Ill 
Christian  influence.  This  will  be  the  result  of  Christian  consistency.  Our  Heavenly 
Father  shall  be  glorified  by  the  influence  for  good  we  thus  exert  over  the  minds  of 
those  who  see  our  good  works.  They  will  ascribe  to  God  the  power  by  which  we 
have  been  made  what  we  are.  They  will  recognize  the  truth  and  Divinity  of  Christ'i 
reUgion,  and  many  will  be  thus  led  to  embrace  it  for  themselves.  How  does  the 
matter  stand  between  our  profession  and  our  conduct  ?  ( W,  S.  Dewstoe.)  God 
glorified  by  our  good  works : — I.  Remove  a  difficulty  which  may  have  arisen 
from  an  apparent  inconsistency  between  our  text  and  the  words  of  our  Lord  in  a 
■ubsequent  part  of  His  discourse.  In  the  sixth  chapter  our  Loid  gives  cautions 
against  ostentation  in  rellpion.  ••  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  alms  before  men," 
It  may  appear  from  this  that  secrecy  is  necessary  to  prayer  and  almsgiving ;  bot 
that  it  is  not  the  lesson  inculcated,  is  evident  from  the  tenor  of  Scripture.  Solo- 
mon prayed  before  an  assembly.  Daniel.  With  regard  to  almsgiving,  the  Psalmist 
speaks  of  it  as  properly  exciting  the  esteem  of  men.  ♦'  He  hath  dispersed  abroad," 
&o.  The  prohibition  is  of  religious  acts  from  a  wrong  motive,  *'  that  tliey  may  b« 
seen  of  men."  The  reproof  of  ostentation  does  not  apply  when  the  motive  is  nUeady 
good.  On  the  contrary,  many  advantages  may  arise  to  the  cause  of  religion  from 
the  exhibition  of  piety.  A  Christian  that  burns  with  holy  love  to  God  cannot  be 
unnoticed.  II.  How  can  men,  the  creatures,  be  said  to  olorify  the  Creator  t  " 
God  is  the  eternal  fountain  of  all  honour  and  glory,  therefore,  strictly  speaking, 
cannot  be  dishonoured  ;  He  cannot  but  be  glorified,  because  to  be  Himself  is  to  be 
infinitely  glorious.  God  is  glorified  by  our  repe  tance— faith — charity.  (II.  Hughes, 
M.A.)  Glorifying  God : — And  yet  He  is  plea.sed  to  say  that  our  sins  dishonour 
Him,  and  that  our  obedience  glorifies  Him.  Just  as  the  glorious  orb  of  day,  prying 
into  the  recesses  of  rocks  and  valleys,  receives  from  the  glassy  lake  and  the  limpid 
stream,  and  from  every  bright  object,  beautiful  reflections  of  himself,  though 
nothing  could  be  seen  at  all  w  ithout  his  own  light ;  so  God,  contemplating  the  race 
of  man,  though  he  finds  among  us  nothing  but  what  He  Himself  enablea  us  to 
exhibit,  discovers  in  every  heart  that  is  faitliful,  in  every  heart  that  ia  pure,  in  every 
heart  that  is  holy,  merciful.and  kind,  beautiful  representations  of  His  own  sublime 
perfections,  and  tbieee  He  is  pleased  to  call  glorifications  of  Himself,  though  they 


CHAP.  V.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  6S 

are  made  so  only  by  His  own  gracious  acceptation,  {Ibid.)  The  light  of  Chris- 
tian example  : — 1.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  with  a  lamp  is  to  light  it.  (5od  alone 
can  light  you  ;  teachers  may  polish.  2.  The  next  thing  to  do  with  a  lamp  is  to  set 
it  where  it  may  be  seen  and  give  light.  3.  A  lamp  must  be  fed  with  oil,  or  it  will 
not  keep  alight.  4.  A  lamp  must  be  trimmed  if  it  is  to  give  a  good  light.  {H.  J. 
Wilmot  Buxton.)  I.  That  religion,  if  it  exists,  cannot  be  concealed.  II. 
That  where  it  is  not  manifest  in  the  life,  it  does  not  exist.  III.  That  professors 
of  religion,  who  Uve  like  other  men,  give  evidence  that  they  have  not  been 
ren^-wed.  IV.  That  to  attempt  to  conceal  or  hide  our  light  is  to  betray  our 
trust,  and  hinder  the  cause  of  piety,  and  render  our  hves  useless.  V.  That 
good  actions  will  be  seen,  and  will  lead  men  to  honour  God.  (Dr.  A. 
Barnes.)  The  Candle : — I.  Consider  the  lighting.  1.  A  Divine  work.  2. 
A  separating  work.  3.  A  personal  work  to  every  man  who  is  the  subject  ol  it. 
4.  A  work  which  needs  sustaining.  6.  It  consecrates  a  man  entirely  to  the 
service  of  light-giving,  II.  Consider  the  placing.  I.  Negative.  2.  Positive.  III. 
The  SHINING.     (G.  fl.  Spurgeon.)         The  Lamp  and  the  Buahel : — I.  A  word  about 

THE    GREAT    CONCEPTION    OF    A    CHRISTIAN    MAN'S   OFFICE    WHICH    18    SET   FORTH  IN  THIS 

METAPHOR.  "Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  Then  our  Lord  goes  on  to  explain 
what  kind  of  a  light  it  is  to  which  He  would  compare  His  people — the  light  of  a 
lamp  kindled.  Cliristian  men  individually,  and  the  Christian  Church  as  a  whole, 
shine  by  derived  light.  Before  the  incarnation  Christ  was  the  light  of  men  ;  also  \ 
the  historic  Christ  is  the  source  of  all  revelation.  Light  signifies  knowledge  and  I 
moral  purity.  II.  The  certainty  that  ir  we  are  light  we  shall  shine.  The 
nature  and  property  of  light  is  to  radiate.  All  earnest  Christian  conviction  will 
demand  expression  ;  and  all  deep  experience  of  the  purifying  power  of  Christ  upon 
character  will  show  itself  in  conduct.  '  HI.  This  obligation  of  giving  hght  is  still 
further  enforced  by  the  thought  that  that  was  Christ's  vert  purpose  in  all  that 
He  has  done  with  ds  and  tor  us.  It  is  possible  for  good  men  to  smother  and 
shroud  their  light.  We  can  bury  the  light  of  the  Word  under  cowardly  and  in- \ 
different  silence.  IV.  Let  tour  light  shine.  Candles  are  not  lit  to  be  looked  at, 
but  that  something  else  may  be  seen  by  them.  Men  may  see  God  through  our 
works.  (.4.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  If  you  are  not  warming  tfie  world,  the  world  it 
chilling  you.  If  you  take  a  red-hot  ball  out  of  a  furnace  and  lay  it  down  upon  a 
frosty  moor,  two  processes  will  go  on — the  ball  will  lose  its  heat  and  the  surrounding 
atmosphere  will  gain.  There  are  two  ways  by  which  you  equalize  the  temperatiu-e 
of  a  hotter  and  a  colder  body,  the  one  is  by  the  hot  one  getting  cold,  and  the  other 
is  by  the  cold  one  getting  hot.  If  you  are  not  warming  the  world,  the  world  is 
freezing  you.  Every  man  influences  all  about  him,  and  receives  influences  from 
them,  and  if  there  be  not  more  exports  than  imports,  he  is  a  poor  creature  at  the 
mercy  of  circumstances.  {Ibid.)  No  light  apart  from  Christ : — A  sunbeiim 
has  no  power  to  shine  if  it  be  severed  from  the  sun  than  a  man  has  to  give 
light  in  this  daik  world  if  he  be  parted  from  Jesus  Christ.  Cut  the  current  and  the 
electric  light  dies,  slacken  the  engine  and  the  electric  arc  becomes  dim,  quicken 
it  and  it  bums  bright.  {Ibid.)  The  duty  of  letting  our  light  shine  before 
men : — I.  How  Shine.  Because  Christ  has  put  light  into  His  people,  he  does  not 
intend  it  io  be  hid.  II.  Wht  Shine.  Not  to  be  seen  of  men.  The  Christian  mus* 
show  that  he  is  earnest  about  religion.  Habitual  holiness  is  required.  There  must 
ti  a  proper  control  of  the  temper.  He  must  shine : — 1.  As  a  member  of  society  he 
must  be  blameless.  2.  As  a  subject  he  must  be  orderly.  3.  As  a  member  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  he  must  show  good  will,  4.  As  a  neighbour  he  must  be  accom> 
modating.  6.  As  a  father  he  will  have  proper  regard  for  the  spiritual  good  of  his 
children,  6.  As  a  son  he  will  show  the  excellence  of  his  principles.  7.  As  a  master 
bis  Christian  character  must  shine.  8.  As  a  servant  he  will  be  obedient.  9.  He  must 
keep  within  the  Umits  of  his  proper  place.  {E.  Cooper.)  The  importance  of  good 
example  : — Some  suppose  that  they  need  not  set  a  shining  Iight,but  keep  from  great 
irregularities.  1.  The  world,  though  corrupt,  is  very  sensible  of  what  Christian 
practice  ought  to  be.  2.  The  withholding  of  a  good  example  may  be  more  fatal  to 
religion  than  positive  irregularities,  because  the  turpitude  of  the  latter  destroys 
their  power  of  seduction.  3.  The  scandal  is,  not  to  see  rehgion  opposed  by  un- 
believers, but  that  Christians  dare  not  maintain  their  rehgion  with  zeal  and  proclaun 
it  as  their  greatest  honour  and  glory.  4.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  Christians  only  to 
ourselves,  we  must  be  so  before  God  and  men.  5.  We  are  naturally  incUned  to 
imitation.  6.  Not  only  the  honour  but  the  progress  of  religion  depend  upon  your 
examples.    The  greatest  praise  we  can  bestow  upon  a  religion  is  to  practise  it.    (S. 

6 


£8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ». 

Partridge,  M.A.)  Christiam  the  light  of  the  world : — I.  The  positive  injunction 
that  Christians  are  to  do  all  in  their  power  to  secure  that  theie  light  shall  shr^k 
AS  beiohtlt  as  possible.  1.  This  is  to  be  done  by  the  position  we  take  np.  2.  By 
the  character  which  we  form.  3.  By  the  exertions  which  we  make  for  the  conver- 
sion of  our  fellow  men.  II.  Look  at  the  negative  side  of  this  injunction,  which 
requires  that  we  kemovb  EVEaTTEiuQ  which  tends  to  hide  oe  obscure  the  jjqwi. 

1.  We  should  pet  rid  of  that  undue  reserve  which  keeps  the  real  character  from 
being  as  powerful  an  influence  for  good  as  otherwise  it  might  be.  2.  We  should 
svoid    all    self -display.      {W.    M.    Taylor.)         Christian    ConsisteTicy : — I.  Tna 

PRIMABY   AND   SECONDAET  PURPOSE  OF   THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.       1.   Thc  glory  of  God.      2. 

The  well-pleasing  of  men.  II.  The  means  by  which  this  wiTNESs-BEAEisa  mat  bb 
THE  MOST  effectually  DONE.  1.  Light  is  derived,  and  therefore  humble.  2.  Light 
is  self-evident  and  consistent.  3.  Then  the  light  is  a  joyoue  and  happy  sort  of 
thing.  (W.  M.  Punnhon.)  Christians  the  light  of  the  world: — I.  Thbib  cha- 
racter. Ail  others  are  in  darkness.  Goshen  only  has  light :  Christians  once  dark  ; 
but  have  received  light.     1.  The  word  light  impUes  a  saving  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

2.  Holiness  of  heart  and  life.  3.  Happiness.  II.  Their  doty.  Christians  ar© 
made  what  they  are  to  attract  the  world.  Must  use  their  blessings  for  the  good  of 
others,  their  knowledge,  holiness,  and  happiness.  III.  Their  motive.  1.  That 
they  may  see  your  good  works,  not  yourselves,  but  your  actions.  Three  things  are 
necessary  to  render  a  work  good.  (1)  It  must  be  done  under  the  influence  of  faith 
in  Christ.  (2)  From  love  to  God  (3)  with  a  view  to  His  glory.  2.  That  they  may 
glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  {D.  Rces.)  Spiritual  modesty  : — What 
are  the  limits  of  lawful  showing  of  our  deeds,  so  that  we  may  not  break  the  law 
which  bids  us  be  secret?  1.  The  passage  read  to  the  end  will  remove  the  diffi- 
culty suggested.  "  Take  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  alms  before  men  to  be  Been 
of  them."  Secrecy  in  good  deeds  is  not  absolute,  but  relative  ;  not  jiositive,  and 
for  its  own  sake,  liut  in  order  to  exhibit  the  vitiating  effect  of  ostentation.  2. 
And  so  the  text  seems  to  offer  the  antidote  to  its  own  difficulty.  «'  And  glorify  your 
Father  which  is  iu  Heaven."  Your  good  works  may  be  seen,  and  ought  to  be  seen, 
but  to  God's  glory,  and  not  your  own.  Not  to  let  our  works  be  seen  when  they 
ought  to  be  seen  would  be  to  desert  our  Lord,  This  rule  may  serve  for  some 
external  direction  in  this  perplexed  case.  Let  the  separate  deeds  be  hidden,  accord- 
ing to  the  precept  of  the  sixth  chapter ;  let  the  general  design  of  goodness  be  known, 
according  to  the  text.  But  the  principle  guide  in  cases  like  these  is  not  to  be  found 
so  much  in  an  external  rule  as  in  a  spiritually  e7ilightened  diHcrimirmtion,  which 
feels  instinctively  when  is  the  time  for  secrecy  and  when  for  publicity.  How 
dangerous  to  our  Christian  modesty  everything  must  ba  which  takes  off  from  the 
delicacy  of  our  natural  modesty.  1.  Do  not  fear  that  you  incur  any  danger  of 
ostentation  in  performing  visibly  such  religious  observances  as  your  parents  or 
tewjhers  direct.  2.  Be  real,  let  all  be  really  addiessed  to  God.  3.  Be  consistent. 
4,  Be  modest  in  other  things.  These  rules  will  aid  spiritual  modesty,  ((f. 
iioberhy,  D.C.L.)  Lustrous  Christians  : — 1.  Every  man  has  a  light  peculiar  to 
himself.  2.  There  is  a  right  way  of  shedding  light.  3.  Men  are  to  see  the  works, 
not  the  worker.  4.  Men  are  affected  by  what  they  see.  (TV.  W.  Wythe.)  A  good 
life    the  great  means  of  glorifying   God: — I.  The  fact  that  there   is  a  light 

POSSESSED    BY    CHRISTLANS    WHICH  PECULIARLY  BELONGS  TO  THEM.       It  is  with  borrOWed 

rays  that  the  Christian  at  anj'  time  illuminates  others.  II.  The  duty  or  christians 
TO  EXHIBIT  theie  LIGHT  IN  A  GODLY  CONVERSATION.  "  See  your  good  works. "  III. 
The  end  with  a  view  to  which  the  exhibition  takes  place.  "  Glorify  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven."  {W.  Curling,  M.A.)  The  beauty  of  moral  qualities: — I. 
The  moral  qualities  enjoined  in  Christianity  are  in  the  highest  degree  natural — not 
artificial  or  secondary.  The  human  mind  was  constructed  so  that  every  faculty  in 
its  organization  tends  to  produce  good  qualities.  It  is  better  adapted  to  good  than 
bad.  The  bad  is  something  interposed  between  the  original  creative  design  and 
the  execution.  Irreligion  is  artiticial.  II.  There  is  a  moral  constitution  by  reason 
of  which  Christian  qualities  seem  admirable  to  men.  The  eye  was  not  made  any 
mere  for  beauty  in  the  outward  world  than  a  man's  moral  nature  was  made  for 
beauty  in  the  moral  world.  Men  oppose  light  and  yet  light  is  pleasant  to  them. 
III.  It  is  upon  this  state  of  facts  that  Christ  ordained  that  men  should  carry  their 
moral  faculties  up  to  the  highest  degree  of  excellence.  IV.  The  success  of  ths 
gospel  was  made  to  depend  not  ou  preaching,  but  upon  living  men.  "V.  The  im- 
pressions which  a  Church  makes  on  the  moral  consciousness  of  the  community  in 
which  it  lives  is  a  fair  test  of  its  life  and  power.     IH.  W.  Beecfur.)       I.  The  holy 


•HAP.  V.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  «7 

and  exemplary  livea  of  Christians  will  naturally  attract  the  eyes  of  unbelievers. 
By  so  doing  will  engage  them  in  some  serious  reflections  upon  the  Christian  religion. 
n.  The  holy  and  exemplary  lives  of  Christians  provoke  men  to  a  curious  observa- 
tio-  md  examination  of  them,  and  also  of  the  grounds  and  principles  from  which 
they  proceed.  III.  The  holy  and  exemplary  lives  of  Christians  will  be  a  sure  means 
of  recommending  them  to  the  tavour  and  esteem,  love  and  frieudship,  of  unbelievers  ; 
and  consequently  a  Bure  means  of  gaining  opportunities  of  conversing  famiUarly 
with  them,  insinuating  truth  into  them,  and  making  them  willing  and  easy  to 
roseive  it.  IV.  The  holy  and  exemplary  lives  of  Christiana  will  bo  powerfully 
represent  to  unbelievers  the  reasonableness  and  excellency  of  the  Christian  relip;ion, 
as  well  as  the  usefulness  and  advantage  of  it,  towards  the  present  and  future 
happiness  and  well-being  of  mankind,  that  they  will  be  led  to  examine  into  the 
grounds  of  it.  Hence  it  appears  that  we  ought  frequently  to  coutemplate  the 
examples  of  good  men,  out  of  which  there  are  so  many  and  so  great  advantages  to 
be  drawn.  We  should  learn  in  them  to  see  our  own  faults,  and  to  mend  them. 
{Sir  William  Dawes,  Bart.,  D.D.) 

Christian  example  leads  to  the  discovery  of  Christian  sympathy, — When  the 
Eaglish  minstrel  went  to  seek  for  his  master  of  the  Lion  Heart,  he  played  every- 
where the  monarch's  "favourite  tune,  and  was  at  length  rewarded  by  hearing  its 
notes  sent  feebly  back  to  him  from  the  prison  wherein  Kichard  was  confined.  In 
like  manner,  if  wherever  you  go  you  would  sound  out  the  music  of  your  Christian 
experience,  other  hearts  would  respond  to  the  melody,  and  your  joy  would  be 
redoubled.  Christian  example  must  be  free  from  incondstency . — The  visitor  to  a 
lighthouse  is  struck  with  the  perfect  cleanness  of  everything  about  the  lantern  or 
the  lamps.  The  silver  reflectors  are  burnished  to  the  brightest  purity,  and  every 
funnel  and  glass  are  absolutely  without  a  spot.  There  must  be  nothing  to  mar  the 
brilliancy  of  the  light.  So  in  us  there  should  be  nothing  of  evil  to  draw  away 
man's  eyes  from  the  light  and  fix  them  upon  our  impeifections.  That  there  is  light 
in  us  at  all  makes  it  all  the  more  important  that  we  should  keep  ourselves  pure, 
^ou  may  have  a  window  all  covered  with  dust,  and  spun  over  with  the  cobwebs  of 
spiders,  that  have  not  been  disturbed  for  years,  and  the  passer-by,  in  the  darkness, 
will  take  no  note  of  its  impurity.  But  so  soon  as  you  put  a  light  behind  it  you 
thereby  reveal  its  filthiness  to  every  beholder.  In  the  same  way  the  evil  deeds 
of  opfn  and  avowed  unbelievers  are  taken  no  notice  of  by  the  world,  for  there  is  no 
light  behind  them.  But  so  soon  as  a  man  becomes  connected  with  Christ  and  His 
Church,  the  light  that  is  within  him  will  be  sure  to  make  manifest  his  inconsis- 
tencies to  all  around.  God,  not  self,  the  end  of  Christian  example. — The  purpose 
of  letting  our  light  shine  is,  that  God,  not  ourselves,  may  be  glorified.  In  looking 
at  a  painted  window,  we  think  more  of  the  artist  and  his  picture  than  of  the  light. 
And  there  are  many  who  put  such  devices  on  the  window,  through  which  the  light 
of  their  characters  shines,  that  no  beholder  is  ever  moved  to  think  of  God.  The 
best  style  in  writing  is  that  which  gives  the  thought  with  such  transparency  that  the 
reader  sees  nothing  else ;  and  that  is  the  noblest  Christian  character  which  shows 
the  most  of  Christ.  When  I  was  a  lad,  in  my  native  town,  I  knew  a  painter  there 
whose  favourite  works  were  all  portraits  of  himself,  taken  in  different  costumes ; 
and  one  of  England's  most  famous  poets  produced  a  series  of  writings,  in  which  his 
moody,  misanthropic  self  was  ever  the  central  figure.  So  there  are  Christiana 
among  us  who,  while  letting  their  light  shine,  contrive  to  paint  themselves  upon 
tko  glass  of  the  lamp  in  which  it  is  enclosed.  Their  song,  like  that  of  the  cuckoo, 
is  a  constant  repetition  of  their  own  name,  and  the  listener  is  wearied  with  its 
iteration.  Let  it  not  be  so  with  us.  Let  Christ  be  all  and  in  all.  It  was  Michael 
Angelo  who,  according  to  the  beautiful  illustration  of  a  Boston  preacher,  placed  hia 
candle  so  m  his  pasteboard  cap  that  his  own  shadow  miuht  not  fall  upon  his  work. 
Let  our  song  be  like  that  of  the  skylark,  as  he  rises  with  dewy  breast  from  his  lowly 
earth-couch,  singing  as  he  soars,  until,  unseen  in  the  deep  blue  above,  he  rains  a 
shower  of  melody  on  the  listening  earth.  It  matters  not  though  we  be  unseen,  if 
but  the  light  be  clear;  for  then  we  are  fulfilling  the  command.  (IF,  M.  Taylor.) 
Christ  shines  info  the  world  through  the  lives  of  His  people. — Do  you  ever  pause  to 
think  out  how  it  is  that  our  streets  are  nightly  lighted  up  ?  By  that  discovery,  to 
which  we  have  been  so  long  accustomed  that  we  have  ceased  to  reckon  it  wondsr- 
ful.  A  great  central  storehouse  of  coal-gas  is  accumulated,  and  with  that  all  the 
lamps  are  connected  by  a  hidden  system  of  pipes,  so  that  each  is  supplied  with  the 
necessary  quantity  ;  and,  as  the  result,  we  can  thread  our  way  thioughthe  intricate 
places  of  the  city  as  easily,  if  not  as  safely,  by  night  as  by  day.     The  city  is  lit  by 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.fi 

lamps,  and  yet  it  is  the  gas  that  lightens  it.  Both  statempnts  are  tme.  The  gas 
would  be  unavailable  without  the  lamps;  the  lamps  would  be  uselpss  without  the 
gas.  Now,  similarly,  Christ  is  the  hidden  source  and  centre  of  the  world's  enlighten- 
ment ;  bat  Christians,  united  to  Him  by  the  spiritual  tubing  of  faith,  draw  off  from 
Him  that  influence  by  which  they  are  enabled,  each  in  bis  own  place  and  in  his 
own  measure,  to  dispel  some  portion  of  the  darkness  by  which  they  are  sur- 
rounded. (Ibid.)  Christians  must  he  receptive  of  light  :  —  Our  measure 
of  light  will  depend  greatly  upon  the  clearness  and  sensibility  of  our  spiritual 
percpptive  and  receptive  capacitie=!.  All  the  glass  in  the  optical  instruments, 
whether  they  are  intended  for  scientific  purposes,  or  for  ordinary  use,  should  be 
free  from  dross.  {S.  Slocombe.)  Work  entailed  b)j  Christ  on  His  people  : — 1.  A 
reflector  of  spiritual  hght.  2.  A  reproducer  of  this  light.  3.  A  prism,  ana- 
lytically solving  this  moral  light,  and  exhibiting  its  beauties  of  colour. 
(Ibid.)  Christian  example  not  tra>n!tent : — Be  not  a  flashing  meteor,  exciting 
transitory  curiosity  with  thy  blaze  of  profession.  Men  more  reaiey  to  sntne 
socially  than  morally: — Persons  who  are  not  averse  to  make  all  the  show  they 
can  in  social  life  are  wonderfully  sensitive  about  any  disclosure  of  spiritual  con- 
viction or  feeling.  {Dr.  D.  Eraser.)  The  light  to  reveal  the  work,  not  the 
worker : — It  is  thus  that  his  own  sun  works  daily  in  the  heavens :  who  dares  look 
at  the  snn  when  he  so  shines  as  to  fill  the  earth  with  all  the  beauty  of  summer  T 
We  turn  our  eyes  up  to  him  and  he  rebukes  us  with  darts  of  fire;  he  says,  *'  Look 
down,  not  up ;  look  at  the  works,  not  the  worker."  So  we  may  feast  our  eyes 
upon  a  paradise  of  flowers,  and  get  much  of  heaven  out  of  it,  but  the  moment  we 
venture  to  say,  "  Who  did  this— where  is  he  ?  Show  me  the  worker,"  the  sun 
answers  us  with  a  rebnke  of  intolerable  light.  (Br.  Parker.)  Hidden  light  dies. 
— If  he  persists  in  this  selfishness,  his  penalty  is  sure.  The  light  that  is  in  him  will 
wax  dim  and  incur  great  risk  of  going  out,  because  it  is  shut  up,  and  not  set  to  burn 
on  the  lamp-stand,  where  tbe  fresh  air  may  reach  and  feed  the  flame.  (D.  Eraser, D.D.) 
Wanted,  much  wayited,  bright  Christians  I  {Ibid.)  The  figure  of  the  house-lamp 
suggests  domestic  Christianity;  that  of  the  conspicuous  city  the  more  pubho  and 
collective  duty  of  Christians.  {Ibid.)  Shine  by  expressed  conviction  : — I  do  say 
that  if  the  fountain  never  rises  into  the  sunlight  above  the  dead  level  of  the  pool 
there  can  be  very  little  pressure  at  the  main  ;  that  if  a  man  has  not  the  longing  to 
speak  his  religious  convictions,  these  convictions  must  be  feeble.  {A.  Maclnren, 
D.D.)  The  pui  ity  of  example  the  primary  care  of  the  Christian : — Tlie  lighthouse- 
keeper  takes  no  pains  that  the  ships  tossing  away  out  at  sea  may  behold  the  beam 
that  shines  from  his  lamp,  but  all  that  be  does  is  to  feed  and  tend  it.  That  is  all 
you  and  I  have  to  do — tend  the  light,  and  do  not  like  cowards  cover  it  up. 
Modestly  but  yet  bravely  carry  out  your  Christianity,  and  men  will  see  it.  Do  not 
br>  as  a  dark  lantern,  burning  with  the  shades  down  and  illuminating  nothing  and 
nobody.  {Ibid.)  A  good  example  a  rebuke  of  evil : — A  good  man  or  woman  re- 
veals the  ugliness  of  evil  by  showing  the  beauty  of  holiness.  {Ibid.)  Missionaries 
the  light  of  the  world.  Look  at  the  primitive  Schwartz,  at  the  devoted  Brainerd, 
at  the  zealous  Corrie,  and  many  others ;  Oh  I  how  Godlike  was  their  employ. 
These  were  "  burning  and  shining  lights  "  in  the  darkness ;  these  displayed  the 
glory  of  the  Sa^aour's  love  and  power  to  save,  in  the  very  midst  of  Satan's  empira, 
{F.  Goode,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  But  to  fulfil — The  moral  law  eternal  and  immutable : — I.  Neoativklt 

that  Christ  did  nut  come  to  destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets.     This  may  be  illus- 

trated  as  follows.  1.  If  the  cause  be  immutably  good,  the  operation  and  effects 
must  be  the  same  ;  especially  if  the  cause  be  infinitely  wise  ;  all  this  is  evident  froni 
the  Word  of  God.  If  any  persons  declare  that  the  moral  law  is  altered,  to  be  con- 
sistent, they  must  also  suppose  that  the  Divine  nature  is  altered.  2.  The  law  of 
God  is  perfect,  the  ceremonial  law  was  imperfect.  The  moral  law  being  perfect,  the 
impress  of  the  Divine  image,  it  cannot  be  done  away.  U.  The  great  end  that  odb 
Lord  had  in  vtew  with  respect  to  the  moral  law — *'  to  fulfil."  He  undertakes  this 
important  work  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness.  He  was  obedient  to  the  moral  law 
in  His  childhood.  Sufferings  were  necessary  as  well  as  active  obedience.  Our  Lord 
set  forth  the  spirituality  of  the  moral  law,  and  could  not  after  that  set  about  to 
destroy  it.  {W.  Kemp.)  Jesus  Christ  the  moral  legislator  : — I.  He  fulfilled  the  law 
by  spiritualizing  it.  II.  He  fulfilled  the  law  by  developing  it.  III.  He  fulfilled  the 
law  by  generalising  it  and  making  it  universal.  1.  Breaking  down  class  distinctions. 
2.  He  abolished  national  distinctions  in  morality.     8.  He  abolished  sex  distinction* 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  69 

in  morality.     (J.  C.  Jones.)        The  mission  of  Christ  in  relation  to  the  moral  law. 

I.    To   EXPOUND   ITS    SPIKITUALITY.       II.    To  EMBODY  ITS  PRINCIPLES.       III.    To    HONOUR 

ITS  BREACH.  1.  It  had  been  broken  iu  the  practice  of  man,  and  He  came  to  atone 
for  it.  2.  It  had  beau  broken  in  the  estimation  of  man,  and  He  came  to  show  him 
its  glory.  IV.  To  secure  its  fulfilment.  1.  By  the  presentation  of  a  sufficient 
motive.  2.  By  the  impartation  of  Divine  power.  (T.  Baron.)  I.  The  greatness  of 
the  assumption  here  made  by  Christ.  Christ  accepts  the  prophecies  of  the  Old 
Testament  as  Divine,  and  points  to  Himself  as  their  fultilment.  II.  These  words 
of  Jesus  reveal  the  historical  continuity  of  Christianity.  III.  These  words  teach 
ns  the  permanent  authority  of  the  moral  princiiile^  of  the  Jewish  law.  Nothing 
that  is  moral  can  be  destroyed.  We  do  not  need  the  light  of  stars  when  the  sun 
has  risen;  but  the  stars  are  shining  still.  {G.  S.  Barrett.)  Christ's  relation  to 
the  law : — I.  Mark  the  position  our  Saviour  occupied,  as  forming  a  key  to  the  whole 
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  II.  The  meaning  of  these  words.  1.  Christ  fuldlled 
the  law  in  His  teaching.  He  completed  it.  2.  Christ  fultilled  the  law  by  His  own 
personal,  unbroken  obedience.  3.  Christ  fulfilled  the  law  by  His  sufferings  and 
death.  {W.  G.  Barrett.)  Positive  religion: — I.  In  a  critical  age,  that  has  so 
many  errors  to  be  destroyed,  reason  acquires  a  destructive  habit;  against  this  habit 
one  must  guard,  lest,  instead  of  being  a  light  to  guide  us,  reason  becomes  only 
mildew  to  blight  a  world  once  beautiful.  II.  The  soul  grows  great,  useful,  and 
happy,  not  by  what  it  denies,  but  by  what  it  cordially  affirms  and  loves.  III.  Should 
you  not  all  seek  union  with  some  positive,  active,  trusting  Church  ?  Let  the  Church 
you  seek  be  broad,  but  not  broad  in  its  destructiveness,  but  in  its  soul,  hopes,  and 
charity  ;  not  broad  by  the  absence  of  God,  but  by  His  infinite  presence  ;  not  broad 
like  the  Sahara,  in  its  treeless,  birdless,  dewless  sands ;  not  broad  like  tlie  Arctic 
Sea,  in  perpetual  silence  and  ice,  but  broad  like  an  infinite  paradise,  full  of  all 
verdure,  fruits,  music,  industry,  happiness,  and  worship;  wide  enough  for  all  to 
•ome.     (D.  Swing.) 

Destruction  the  law  of  increase. — Christ  certainly  did  come  to  destroy  the  law  and 
the  prophets — the  outside  of  them.  He  knew  perfectly  well,  if  He  had  foresight, 
that  they  would  be,  as  they  have  largely  been,  swept  away;  but  He  said,  "That 
which  these  externalities  include — the  kernel,  the  heart — I  came  to  fulfil.  It  was 
not  the  morality  and  spirituality  for  the  sake  of  which  Moses  and  the  prophets  had 
written  that  were  to  be  destroyed.  Even  a  crab  knows  enough  once  a  year  to  get 
rid  of  its  shell  in  order  to  have  a  bigger  one  :  it  is  the  sectary  that  does  not  know 
it  1  Men  think,  if  you  disturb  beliefs,  creeds,  institutions,  customs,  methods, 
manners,  that  of  com'se  you  disturb  all  they  contain  ;  but  Christ  said,  "  No  ;  the 
very  way  to  fulfil  these  things  is  to  give  them  a  chance  to  open  a  larger  way."  A 
bud  must  be  destroyed  if  you  are  going  to  have  a  flower.  The  flower  must  be 
destroyed  if  you  are  going  to  have  a  seed.  The  seed  must  die  if  you  are  going  to 
have  the  same  thing  a  hundred-fold  increased.  (Beecher.)  Law  tends  to  enlarge 
iUelf. — So  all  institutions  that  carry  in  themselves,  not  merely  external  procedure, 
but  methods  of  truth,  justice,  and  righteousness,  must  of  necessity,  if  they  foUow 
the  ages,  dig  their  own  graves.  A  law  that  can  last  a  thousand  years  is  a  law  that 
is  inefficacious.  A  law  that  is  active,  influential,  fruitful,  destroys  itself.  It  is  not 
laiga  enough.  It  produces  a  state  of  things  among  men  which  requires  that  the 
law  itself  bhould  have  a  larger  expression  and  a  different  application.  (Ibid.) 
Ajb  a  painter  laying  fresh  colours  upon  an  old  picture.     {Hacket.) 

Ver.  19.  Break  one  of  these  least  commandments. — The  perilous  harmfulness  oj 
little  sins : — Man  is  set  free  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  but  not  from  its  authority. 
I.  Let  us  consider  these  minor  violations  of  the  moral  law  as  they  are  considered 
IN  RELATION  TO  THE  LAWGIVER  HiMSELP.  The  Icast  commandmeut  has  the  same 
authority  as  the  greatest.  Little  sins  will  soon  acquire  all  the  gigantic  proportions 
of  the  greatest.  It  is  no  parados  to  say,  that  little  sins  are  peculiarly  offending  in 
the  sight  of  God,  because  they  are  Uttle  ;  in  other  words,  because  we  run  the  risl 
of  offending  Him  for  what  on  our  own  showing  we  care  very  Uttle  about,  and  from 
which  we  only  expect  an  insignificant  return.  It  would  aggravate  the  venality  of  a 
Judge  that  the  bribe  was  so  paltry.  The  least  sin  is  aggravated  by  the  small  degree 
of  temptation  by  which  it  is  accompanied.  II.  The  awful  danger  of  these  littlb 
BINS  IN  REGARD  TO  OURSELVES.  Little  sins  Icave  men  hardly  conscious  that  they  have 
broken  God's  law ;  great  sins  stir  up  piercing  thoughts.  See  the  peril  of  little  sins, 
as  they  are  sme  to  draw  greater  ones  after  them.  It  is  fool's  sport  to  play  with 
firebrands.    The  multiplication  of  little  sins  show  how  we  need  the  merit  of  aa 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj    ▼. 

Uifinite  atonement,     {D.  Moore,  M. A.)         We  learn: — I,  That  all  the  law  of  God  i« 
binding  on  Christians  (Jas.  ii.  10).     II.  That  all  the  commands  of  God  should  b« 
preached  in  their  proper  place  by  Christian  ministers.    III.  That  they  who  pretend 
that  there  are  any  laws  of  God  so  small  that  they  need  not  obey  them,  are  unworthy 
of  His  kingdom.     IV.  That  true  piety  has  respect  to  all  the  commands  of  God,  and 
keeps  them  (Psa.  cxix.  64).     (Dr.  A.  Barnes.)        I.  Christ  does  not  hereby  authorise 
ns  to  suppose  any  of  His  commandments  to  be  little,     ibe  meaning  is — anything 
contained  unr'.er  or  inciudrd  in  tliem,  though  seemingly  small  to  us;  as  anger, 
Bcornful  speaking,  and  reviling  is  the  sin  of  murder.     II.  As  little  in  it,  as  he 
accounts  of  thfin  :  that  is  nothing  ;  they  shall  bo  excluded.     (1)  Observe  the  danger 
of  vacating   God's  commands.      (2)  In   any  respect.      (3)  In  any  one  instanea. 
(Thomas  Adam.)        A  little  sin  indicative  of  a  carnal  disposition : — That  an  act  in 
itself  inconsiderable,  may  indicate  the  existing  state  of  feeling  as  clearly  as  ona 
that  is  more  palpable.     As  the  motion  of  a  leaf  shows  the  quarter  from  which  the 
wind  blows  as  ceitainly  as  the  agitated  branches  of  an  oak,  so  you  may  gather  any 
one's  di.'-like,  though  he  does  not  strike  you,  or  abuse  yon,  or  attempt  insidiously  to 
destroy  your  reputation.     Only  let  him  receive  you  with  coldness,  and  liis  disafiec- 
tion  is  as  indir^putablo  as  if  it  were  manifest  in  angrj'  assault.  ...  Is  it  not  evi- 
dent that  the  man  who  has  brought  himself  to  the  perpetration  of  one  fraud,  h»« 
broken  down  the  only  security  against  the  perpetration  of  a  score.     He  who  can  be 
the  oppressor  of  a  few,  wants  only  the  means  to  become  the  despot  of  an  empire. 
(C7.  Williams.)         Avoid  the  least  sin : — If  we  would  save  the  big  ship,  let  us  stop 
the  small  leak.     If  we  would  save  the  palace  from  flaujea,  let  us  put  out  the  spark. 
(Newnian  Hall.)        Tlie  great  evil  and  danger  of  Utile  sins : — I.  What  is  meant  by 
the  "  LKAST  COMMANDMENT."    It  must  not  be  understood  as  if  one  commandment 
were  less  neces^siuy  to  be  obeyed  than  another ;  God's  commands  are  all  alile 
necessary.      1.  They  are  all  enjoined  by  the  same  authority.      2.  They  are  all 
necessary  to  be  performed  in  order  to  eternal  life.     But  when  Christ  speaks  of  the 
least  commandment,  He  alludes  (1)  to  the  corrupt  doctrine  of  the  Scribes  distin- 
guishing God's  commands  into  small  and  great.     (2)  Those  commandments  which 
aregi'eat  in  respect  of  the  Lawgiver,  may  yet  be  least  in  comparison  with  other  com- 
mands of  the  same  law,  which  are  indeed  thought  gi-eatest.     This  inequality  arises 
from  the  inequality  of  the  objects  about  which  they  are  concerned,  our  duty  to  God 
or  man.     Sometimes  it  ai'ises  from  the  latitude  that  any  command  hath  in  it,  to 
our  thoughts,  words,  or  actions  ;  a  thought  is  said  to  be  less  than  an  action.     XL 
What  is  meant  by  "  being  least  in  tee  kingdom  or  eeaven."    Either  the  king- 
dom of  grace,  the  Church,  heaven.     Little  sins  carry  great  guilt  and  bring  heavy 
condemnation.     1.  This  nppeai'S  in  that  the  least  sin  is  a  most  high  affront  and 
provocation  of  tlie  great  God.     2,  It  is  a  violation  of  a  holy  and  strict  law.    3. 
What  a  complicated  evil  every  sin  is,  that  the  commission  of  the  least  makes  you 
guilty  of  the  greatest.     4.  The  authority  of  the  great  God  seems  more  to  be  despised 
by  the  commission  of  small  sins  than  by  the  commission  of  great.     6.  Little  sins 
do  greatly  deface  the  image  of  God  in  the  soul.    In  curious  pictures,  ft  little  scratch 
is  a  great  deformity.     6.  Little  sius  have  in  them  ordinarily  less  of  temptation,  and 
therefore  more  of  v/ilfulness.     7.  Little  sins  do  maintam  the  trade  and  com-se  of 
sinning.     IlL  The  evil  and  danger  of  little  sius  hath  been  made  apparent :  I  shall 
add  farther  proofs  of  their  aggravated  gdilt.     1.  Little  sins  usually  are  the  des- 
troy ing  sins.     2.  Small  sins — what  they  want  in  weight,  nsually  make  up  in  num- 
ber.   A  ship  may  Lave  a  heavy  burden  of  sands,  as  well  as  of  millstones;  and  may 
be  as  soon  sunk  with  them.     3.  It  is  very  ditiicult  to  convmce  men  of  the  great 
evil  and  danger  of  little  sins.     4.  The  allowance  of  the  least  sin  is  a  certain  sign  of 
a  rotten  heart.     6.  Little  sins  usually  make  way  for  the  vilest.     (1)  The  devil, 
by  his  temptations,  nurses  up  younghng  sins,  till  they  arrive  at  full  stature.     (2) 
Natural  corruption  is  of  a  growing  nature.     6.  Little  sins  are  the  greatest  provoca- 
tions ;  murder  is  a  reproach  to  all ;  unbelief  does  not  provoke  public  scandaL     7. 
Damnation  for  little  sins  will  be  most  intolerable — here  for  such  little  sins  1     IV. 
Application  :   1.  If  httle  sins  have  so  much  danger,  what  shall  we  think  of  great 
impieties?    2.  Then  beholil  a  fearful  shipwreck  of  all  the  hopes  of  formalists.     8. 
What  abs<dute  need  we  stand  in  of  Christ.     4.  What  cause  we  have  to  bemoan 
and  humble  ourselves  before  God.     5,  Pray  for  a  tender  conscience.     6.  Ecep  alive 
reverent  thoughts  of  God.     7.  Get  a  more  thorough  sense  of  the  spirituality  of  the 
law.     {lip.  Hopkins.)         Little  sins  accnmulate : — The  devil  cannot  expect  always 
to  receive  such  returns  of  great  and  cjying  impieties  :  but  yet,  when  he  keeps  the 
Btock  of  corruption  going,  and  drives  on  the  trade  of  sinning  by  lesser  sins,  bcUev^ 


IHAP.  T,]  ST.  MATTHEW.  71 

it,  corrnption  will  be  on  the  thriving  hanrl,  ani  yon  mav  jo^row  rich  in  gnilt,  and 
treasure  np  to  yourselves  wrath  against  the  clay  of  wrath,  by  adding  those  that 
yoa  call  little  sins  unto  the  heap.  [Ihid.)  Great  advancement  made  in  sin  by 
little  starjes : — If  Satan  prevails  with  ng  to  go  with  him  one  step  out  of  our  way, 
we  are  in  daupfr  to  i^top  nowliere  tiU  we  come  to  the  height  of  all  profanenesa  :  ha 
will  raaks  us  take  a  seconti,  anvl  a  third,  and  so  to  travel  on  to  destruction  ;  for  each 
of  these  is  b\it  one  step:  the  last  step  of  sin  is  but  one  step,  as  well  as  the  first; 
and  if  the  devil  prevail  with  us  to  take  one  step,  why  should  he  not  prevail  ^vith  us 
to  take  the  last  step  as  well  as  the  first  step,  seeing  it  is  but  one  ?  Your  second 
sin  no  more  exceeds  your  first,  than  yonr  first  doth  your  duty;  and  so  of  the  rest. 
{Ibid.)  Little  sins  are  often  united  with  great,  which  togetltcr  sweep  the  soul  to 
destruction : — As  you  see  in  rivers,  the  natural  course  of  them  tends  to  the  sea  ;  but 
the  tide,  jcining  with  them,  makes  the  current  run  the  swifter  and  the  more  forcibly : 
Bo  ia  it  with  sin.  Little  sins  ate  the  natural  stream  of  a  man's  life ;  that  do  of 
themselves  tend  hell-ward,  and  are  of  themselves  enough  to  carry  the  soul  down 
silently  and  calmly  to  destruction :  but,  when  greater  and  grosser  sins  join  with 
them,  they  make  a  violent  tide,  that  hurries  tho  soul  away  with  a  more  swift  and 
rampant  motion  down  to  hell,  than  little  sins  would  or  could  do  of  themselves. 
{Ibid.)  The  need  of  a  sensitive  consci"nce : — A  tender  conscience  is  like  the  apple 
of  a  man's  eye :  the  least  dust  that  gets  into  it  afidicts  it.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  Totir  lig'titeousnesa  shall  exceed. — An  erceeiJing  righteousness : — I. 
What  is  the  nature  of  the  righteourness  God  accepts  from  us  ?  It  is  a  righteousness 
in  excess  of  the  most  scrupulous  moralist.  1.  A  Christian  righteousness  exceeds 
a  natural  or  Jewish  in  that  it  is  positive  and  not  negative.  2.  All  other  righteousness 
does  the  orders  of  God :  this  does  His  will.  Here  lies  the  greater  i)arfc  of  the 
Christian's  obedience — in  doing  what  he  knows  will  pl'^ass,  though  it  was  never 
laid  down.  3.  The  motive  is  different.  4.  As  the  moving  power  is  within,  so  the 
righteousness  is  first  an  inward  righteousness.  5.  No  wonder  that  such  an  inner 
righteousness  when  it  is  wrought  out,  goes  very  deep,  and  soars  very  high.  It  does 
not  calculate  how  little  it  can  do  for  Gud,  but  how  much.  6.  The  righteousness  of 
Christ  is  the  excieeding  righteousness ;  in  this  only  can  we  stand  before  a  holy  God. 
{J.  Vaughan,M.A.)        Righteousjiess,    1,  What  is  that  bighteotjsnkss  which MtrsT 

FAIL  IF  EfiLIED  ON  FOR  ENTR.VNCE  TO  THE  KINGDOM   OF   HEAVEN.       Much   In   it   that  Wag 

good  but  only  external.  It  was  heart-deficiency.  II.  The  riohteodsnebs  which 
WILL  OF  NECESSITY  BE  EFFKCTTJAL.  Exceed  it — 1.  In  regard  to  its  source.  2.  In 
its  quality.  (1)  It  must  be  spiritnal.  (2)  It  must  be  evangelical  righteousness; 
not  by  the  works  of  the  law.  (3)  It  must  be  a  moral  righteousness,  possessed  as 
well  as  imputed.  (4.)  It  must  be  an  essential  righteousness,  as  essential  as  the  air 
we  breathe.  Address  those  whose  righteousness  does  not  come  up  to  the  standard 
of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees ;  those  who  are  trusting  in  the  righteousness  cf  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees ;  those  who  through  grace  have  found  the  effectual  righteous- 
ness. ((?.  Fisk,  LL.B.)  The  Pkarisee^s  righteousness  excelled  by  that  of  the 
Christian  : — I.  It  must  differ  from  that  of  the  Pharisee.  1.  The  seat  of  righteous- 
ness. Both  Pharisee  and  Christian  look  alike  in  their  conduct ;  the  latter  from  the 
heart,  2.  The  right.oasness  of  the  Pharisee  is  limited  by  the  narrow  rule  of 
sectarianism,  that  of  the  Christian  is  wide  as  the  Word  of  God.  8.  The  righteousneaa 
of  the  Pharisee  is  at  fault  in  its  source.  Its  beginning  and  end  is  self.  Christ  is 
our  lighteousness.  II.  It  excels.  1.  In  the  object  of  its  faith.  2.  In  enabling 
tho  Christian  to  reach  heaven.  (W.  D.  Harxcond.)  The  Christianrighteov-<ness  ; — 
The  sense  it  which  it  must  surpass  them  : — I.  In  kind,  II.  In  sriuiT,  1.  Net  of 
mere  outw;;rd  zeal  for  the  law,  but  of  inward  conformity.  2.  Not  of  servile  fear, 
hut  of  fil.  ■  'onfideiu'o.  3,  Not,  of  re'igious  pride,  but  of  devout  humility.  III.  In 
AIM,  not  t  be  seen  of  men.  1.  This  will  rectify  our  judgment  of  righteousness. 
S.  Anim&iic  our  pursuit  of  righteousness.  3.  Brighten  our  prospect  of  righteousness 
(2  Tim.  iv,  8),  {Preb.  Griffith,  M.A.)  Necessity  of  evangelical  righteousness  : — L 
The  nature  of  that  righteou.sness  which  distinguished  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
Was,  according  to  God's  law,  extensive,  connected  with  great  devotion,  self-denial, 
liberality,  and  zeal.  II.  The  nature  of  that  righteousness  necessary  to  our  entering 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Ours  must  "  exceed  "  theirs  in  its  origin,  nature,  extent,  end, 
effects.  The  revelation  of  this  righteousness  is  given  in  God's  blessed  Word.  It  is 
obtained  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  made  unto  us,  ♦*  wisdom,"  &c. 
The  purity  of  the  Divine  law,  Sec,  render  this  righteousness  necessary.  (Dr.  Bums.) 
Ooipel  righteousness : — I.  Thb  bigmtkottskkss  of  the  Pharisees.    1.  Orthodox.    8> 


r2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ». 

Popnlar.    3.  Moral.    4.  Zealous.    II.  Its  defectiyeness.    1.  Superstiiioan.    2.  Ser- 
vile.    III.   The  righteousness  commanded.     1.  Personal.     2.  Through  faith.     S. 
Originating  in  love.     (W.  \V.  Whythe.)         Love  more  than  regard  for  a  mere  rule  :—~ 
Now,  no  man  can  develop  atruemanliood  who  does  not  love  the  things  which  he  does. 
No  man  ever  does  anything  that  marks  him  as  masterly  except  it  be  done  by  a  certain 
inspiration  into  which  the  whole  soul  enters.    A  man  that  paints,  hating  his  businesa, 
never  is  an  artist,  and  never  can  be  one.    A  man  that  is  a  teacher,  and  hates 
teaching,  making  drudgery  of  it,  can  never  be  an  inspirational  teacher.     A  man 
that  is  a  true  workman  in  any  sphere  must  work  by  a  stimulation  which  cornea 
from  the  actual  enthusiasm  of  loving  the  thing  done.    A  man  that  obeys  moral 
laws  without  loving  them  is  like  a  man  who  walks  within  the  walls  of  a  penitentiary. 
—i^ieecher.)         Tlie  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.     I.  What  it  was.     It 
consisted  in — 1.  A  speculative  knowledge  of  the  truth  and  doctrines  of  religibn. 
2.  A  scrupulous  observance  of  the  forms  of  religion.    3.  A  freedom  from  scandalooi 
sins.     II.  Its  defectiveness  and  insufficiency.     1.  The  righteousness  here  spoken 
of  is  insufficient  for  justification.     2.  It  is  insufficient  as  the  evidence  of  a  justified 
state.     It  fell  short  in  three  respects.     (1)  It  was  altogether  external.     (2)  It  was 
partial  in  its  requirements.     (3)  It  left  its  followers  under  the  unrestrained  influence 
of  spiritual  pride.     3.  How  delighted  wo  should  be  that  our  righteousness  doe$ 
exceed  that  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.     {E.  Cooper.)        Morality  the  gate  to 
ypiritvality  : — There  are  several  kinds  of  religion.     1.  There  is  the  religion  of 
simple  technical  observances.     2.  There  is  a  religion  of  conduct,  or  morality.     8. 
IThere  is  the  rehgion  of  spirituality :  this  contemplates  God  and  ignores  man's  needs. 
4.  There  is  the  religion  of  morality  and  spirituality.     Eight  conduct  springing  from 
right  motives.     Let  us  look  at  the  nature  and  value  of  morality.     I.  Morality  may 
be  defined  as  conformity  to  the  laws  of  our  condition.     The  laws  of  the  body,  the 
law  of  fellowship,  civil  laws.     II.  The  advantages  of  morality.     1.  It  is  the  gateway 
of  spirituality.    2.  All  the  things  that  come  within  the  range  of  morality  are  good 
in  themselves.     3.  It  has  a  tendency  to  educate  men.     4.  When  men  try  to  place 
themselves  in  conformity  to  the  law  of  morals  they  put  themselves  in  a  line  in  which 
they  will  be  illumined  and  carried  to  a  higher  Christian  experience.     5.  We  must 
not  suppose  that  morality  is  a  substitute  tor  the  higher  forms  of  religion.     6.  It 
must  not  be  a  mask  for  self-indulgence.     7.  Morality  relates  especially  to  this  life, 
but  religion  to  eternity,  as  fully  realized  in  immortal  existence.    Mere  morality  doe$ 
not  go  far  enough : — A  man  builds  him  a  house  two  stories  high  ;  but  money  fails, 
and  he  does  not  put  on  any  roof.     What  is  he  going  to  do  now  7    Live  in  it  f    He 
cannot  live  in  it.     It  is  good  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  good  for  what  ?     Until  somebody 
can  put  a  roof  on  it,  and  close  it  in,  it  is  not  good  to  live  in.     Honesty  is  a  good 
thing.     Kindness  and  neighbourliness  are  good  things.     Care  for  the  laws  of  life  is 
a  very  good  thing.     If  this  was  all  of  our  life,  if  these  external  and  bodily  relation- 
ships represented  the  sum  total  of  all  our  existence,  all  that  we  should  want  would 
bt  morality.     But  we  live  again,     (if.   W.  Beecher.)        A  shipmaster  wants  to 
anchor.     He  throws  out  his  anchor,  and  puts  out  his  cable,  and  comes  within  about 
twenty  feet  of  the  bottom.     It  is  not  any  longer.     What  is  it  good  for?     It  is  good 
as  far  as  it  goes ;  but  it  does  not  go  far  enough  to  touch  the  bottom,  and  therefors 
it  is  not  good  for    anything.     (Tbid.)         Exceeding    the    righteousness    of   tJte 
Pharitees : — What  is  it  to  enter  the  kiiigdom  of  heaven  ?     It  involves  leaving  the 
kingdom  of  evil.     There  is  no  admission  to  it  without  righteousness.     I.  Dehcribb 
THE  righteousness  OF  THE  PHARISEES.     1.  They  wcro  celebrated  for  their  knowledge. 
As  Scribes,  they  were  acquainted  with  the  Scriptures.     2.  In  religious  matters  they 
•were  particular  and  earnest.     Always  at  temple,  earnest  at  prayer.     3.  They  were 
wonderfully  generous.     They  gave  tithes  of  all  they  possessed.    4.  They  were  held 
in  high  esteem  by  their  fellow-countrymen.     5.  Can  you  hope  to  excel  them  ?    Out 
of  Ciirist  you  cannot.    II.  How  then  is  it  possible  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
HEAVEN?     Two  ways:  1.  By  works.     2.  By  faith.     No  thoroughfare  along  the  first 
way.  In  nature's  loom  we  cannot  weave  a  better  righteousness.  Christ's  righteousnesa 
exceeds ;  as  the  sunlight  exceeds  the  glimmer  of  the  glow-worm.  {Thomas  Spurgeon.) 
Th*  measure  of  righteousness : — I.  The  S<ribes  represent  those  who  are  formalista 
in  the  treatment  of  God's  Word.     II.  The  Pharisees,  the  formalists  in  religious 
life.     {Dean  Alford.)        Faith  in  Christ  the  only  way  of  righteousness. — Will  yon  try 
to  imagine  that  just  in  front  of  you  there  is  roaring  the  great  cataract  of  Niagara f 
Now,  there  are  two  ways  of  getting  over  the  cataract.     "  What  are  they  ?  "  aslu 
one.     Well,  do  you  see  that  thin  airy  looking  bridge,  which  in  the  distance  aeema 
like  a  spider's  web,  which  has  been  flung  atliwart  the  torrent?    That  is  the  suspen 


CHAV.  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  7S 

eion  bridge  of  Niagara,  and  that  is  one  way  across,  and  the  best  way,  too.  There 
is  another  way — the  way  that  poor  foolhardy  Captain  Webb  went — right  through 
the  breakers.  You  may  say  that  he  did  not  get  across.  No  ;  but  it  was  his  fault 
that  he  went  that  way,  for  it  was  not  a  way  after  all.  And  there  are  two  ways  to 
cross  fhe  cataract  of  sin  and  the  avalanche  of  God's  wrath.  One  way  is  the  bridge 
of  salvation  which  God,  in  mercy,  through  the  blood  and  sacrifice  of  Christ,  has 
flung  right  across  the  mighty  stream.  Its  buttresses  are  eternal  power  and  ever- 
lasting love,  and  feeble  as  it  looks  it  is  strong  enough  to  bear  creation.  There  is 
another  way,  and  there  thou  shalt  battle  with  the  flood  thyself,  and  stem  the  breakers 
in  thine  own  strength,  and  dash  thyself  against  the  stones,  and  sink  to  rise  no  more. 
Any  man  in  his  senses  would  choose  the  simplest  path,  the  way  that  everybody  else 
goes.  (r.  Spiirfjeon.)  Well  to  have  a  standard  of  self-measurement. — I  have  some- 
times seen,  at  athletic  sports,  how,  when  one  has  jumped  the  long  jump,  an  opponent, 
another  competitor  in  the  jump,  will  come  and  look  how  far  his  rival  has  jumped, 
and  mark  the  place ;  and  I  see  him  go  away,  with  rather  dejected  head,  as  he  sees 
what  his  rival  has  accomplished,  and  wonders  whether  he  can  do  as  much,  and 
wonders  much  more  whether  he  can  exceed  that  wondrous  jump.  Now,  I  want  to 
show  you  how  far  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  jumped ;  and  then  I  have  to  tell  you 
that  you  have  to  jump   farther  than  they   did.      (Ibid.)  The  "  kingdom  of 

htaven,"  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  Gospels,  designates  that  spiritual  society 
which  Jesus  came  on  earth  to  found.  The  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  was  at  fault  because  they  placed  righteousness  in  what  a  man  does, 
irrespective  of  what  he  is,  and  though  practising  many  things  which  might  be 
called  virtues,  yet  they  did  so  from  outward  considerations.  The  results  springing 
from  these  false  principles  were :  I.  Divorce  of  rehgion  from  common  life.  IL 
Overlaying  of  the  spirit  of  God's  law  by  the  letter.  III.  Ostentation  in  the  per- 
fqrmanee  of  their  so-called  religious  duties,  and  uncharitable  judgment  of  others. 
Pharisaism  is  a  form  of  righteousness  that  is  not  extinct  among  us.  {Dr.  W. 
M.  Taylor.)  Here  we  have  two  things  to  consider :  I.  What  was  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  ?  II.  How  far  that  is  to  be  exceeded  by  the 
righteousness  of  Christians.  I.  (1)  The  Pharisees  obeyed  the  commandments  in  the 
letter,  not  in  the  spirit.  They  minded  what  God  spake,  but  not  what  He  intended  ; 
they  were  busy  in  the  outward  work  of  the  hand,  but  not  careful  of  the  affections 
and  choice  of  the  heart.  This  was  just  as  if  a  man  should  run  on  his  master's 
errand,  and  do  no  business  when  he  came  there.  (2)  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees 
placed  their  rigliteousness  in  negatives ;  they  would  not  commit  what  was  forbidden, 
but  they  cared  little  for  the  included  positive,  and  the  omissions  of  good  actions  did 
not  much  trouble  them.  (3)  They  broke  Moses's  tables  into  pieces,  and  gathering 
up  the  fragments,  took  to  tnemselves  what  part  of  duty  they  pleased,  and  let  the 
rest  alone.  II.  (1)  When  it  is  said  our  "righteousness  must  exceed  that  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,"  we  must  do  all  that  lies  before  us,  all  that  is  in  our  hand ; 
the  outward  work  must  be  done,  and  it  is  not  enough  to  say  "  my  htart  went  right, 
but  my  hand  went  aside."  (2)  Our  righteousness  must  exceed  thilt  of  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,  by  extension  of  our  obedience  to  things  of  the  same  signification. 
Whatever  ministf-rs  to  sin,  and  is  the  way  of  it,  it  partakes  of  its  nature  and  its 
curse.  (3)  Christ's  commandments  extend  our  duty,  not  only  to  what  is  named, 
and  what  is  not  named  of  the  same  nature  and  design,  but  that  we  abstain  from  all 
Buch  things  as  are  like  to  sins.  Of  this  there  are  many.  All  violences  of  passion, 
prodigality  of  our  time,  doing  things  unworthy  our  birth  or  profession,  aptness  to 
go  to  law,  misconstruction  of  the  words  and  actions  of  our  brother,  easiness  to 
believe  evil  of  others,  willingness  to  report  the  evil  we  hear,  indiscreet  and  importune 
standing  for  place,  and  other  things  prohibited  by  the  Christian  and  royal  law  of 
charity.  {Jeremy  Taylor.)  1.  It  was  a  righteousness  of  the  outward  letter 
rather  than  of  the  inward  spirit.  They  washed  their  hands,  but  not  their  hearts. 
2.  Another  defect  in  their  righteousness  was  its  narrowness  and  partiality.  God's 
commandment  is  exceeding  broad ;  condemns  anger  as  well  ss  murder.  3.  It  con- 
tented itself  too  much  with  mere  abstinences  and  negatives.  4.  They  mutilated 
the  law's  proper  unity,  reversed  the  principle  that  failure  in  one  point  makes  guilty 
of  all,  and  considered  it  enough  to  keep  the  law  in  general.  5.  It  leaned  more  on 
the  blood  in  the  veins  than  on  thorough  obedience  in  the  life.  They  were  of  Jacob. 
6.  Their  greatest  defect  was  their  self-sufficiency.  {J.  A.  Seist,  D.D.)  A  man 
$hould  not  be  content  with  morality  when  spirituality  is  possible. — A  man  should  not 
live  in  a  hovel  when  he  can  live  in  a  house.  A  man  is  not  content  to  hve  iu  a  house 
when  he  can  live  in  a  mansion.     And  no  man,  I  think,  would  live  in  a  mansion 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

when  he  coniH.  live  in  a  palace.  So  no  man  is  living  rightly  or  honourably  whe 
demands  of  himself  no  more  than  morality  requires.     (Beccher.) 

"Vers.  21,  22.  Ar^y  with  his  brother. — "Thon  shalt  not  kill."  Are  yon  Bure 
you  do  not?  How  has  Christ  dc'cided  the  point?  He  tells  us  plainly  that  if  we 
have  (1)  any  malice;  (2)  hatred;  (3)  ill-will;  {4)  scornful  arger  against  our  brother 
we  are  guilty  of  &  bieach  of  this  commandiuent.  (5)  God  wiil  accept  nothing 
at  our  hanus ;  no  won-hip.  no  service  that  we  can  pay  Him,  if  we  are  not  recon- 
ciled to,  and  at  peace  with  all  the  world.  Not  outwardly  only,  but  in  heart  and 
Boul.     {Thomas  Adum.)  Unjustifiable    anger: — I.  Thk   bin   which  oue  Lord 

HERE    CONDEMNS.        II.     ThE    GUILT    OF     THIS      L'.V JUSTIFIABLE     AMOER.         I.     CaUSeleSS 

anger  has  iu  it  the  nature  of  murder.  2.  Evideiit  from  the  greatness  of  the 
punishment.  III.  Thk  duty  of  avoiding  such  angek.  1.  In  order  that  we  may 
render  acivptable  service  to  God — "  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar."  2.  That 
we  may  avoid  the  doom  of  those  who  are  implacable.  We  learn  from  this  how 
spiritual  is  the  law  of  God  ;  also  the  utter  worihlessness  of  human  righteousness. 
{E.  Bay  ley,  BI.A.)  liestraint  of  hasty  temper  possible. — La  Fontaine,  chaplain 
of  the  Prussian  army,  once  preached  an  earnest  sermon  on  the  sin  and  folly 
of  yielding  to  a  hasty  temper.  The  next  day  a  Major  of  the  regiment  accosted 
him  in  no  very  good  humour,  saying  :  "  Well,  sir  I  I  think  you  made  use  of 
the  prerogative  of  your  office  to  annoy  me  with  some  very  sharp  hits  yesterday." 
*'  I  oertaiiily  thought  of  you  while  I  was  preparing  the  sermon,"  the  chaplain 
answered,  "but  I  had  no  intention  of  being  personal  orshai'p."  ••  Well,  it  is  of  no 
use,"  said  tlie  Major,  **I  have  a  hasty  temper,  and  I  cannot  help  it.  I  cannot  control 
it;  the  thiug  is  impossible."  The  following  Su'Mlay  La  Fontaine  preachpd  on  seii- 
deception,  and  the  vaiu  excuses  which  men  arn  accustomed  to  make.  "Why,"  said 
he,  "  a  mm  will  declare  it  is  impossible  to  control  his  temper,  when  he  very  well 
knows  that  were  the  same  provocation  to  happen  in  the  presence  of  his  sovereign, 
he  not  only  could,  but  would  control  himself  entirely.  And  yet  he  dares  to  say  that 
the  continual  presence  of  the  King  of  kings  imposes  upon  him  neither  restraint  not 
fear."  The  next  day  the  preacher  met  the  olQcer  again,  who  said,  humbly,  **  You 
were  right  yesterday,  chaplain.  Hereafter,  whenever  you  see  me  in  the  danger  o! 
falling,  remind  me  uf  the  King." 

Vers.  23,  24.  Ee  reconciled  to  thy  brother. — Mutual  eoneiliation: — I.  Tliatawor. 

shipper  of  God  mny  be  in  a  state  of  discord  in  reference  to  his  brother.  II.  That 
public  worship  rightly  used  is  one  of  the  means  to  detect  and  remove  this  wrong 
affection.  It  leads  to  reflection.  III.  Conciliation  is  of  superior  value  even  tc 
public  worship.  IV.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  brethren  to  be  immeihately  conciliated. 
{Caleb  Morris.)  I.  In  order  to  worship  God  acceptably,  we  must  do  justice  to  our 
fellow-men.  Our  worship  will  not  be  acceptable,  unless  we  do  all  we  can  to  live 
peaceably  with  others.  II.  It  is  our  doty  to  seek  reconiiiliation  with  others  when 
we  have  injured  them.  HI.  This  should  be  done  before  we  attempt  to  worship  God. 
This  is  often  the  reason  why  God  does  not  accept  our  offerings,  and  we  go  empty 
away  from  our  devotions.  We  do  not  do  what  we  ought  to  do  to  others ;  we  cherish 
improper  feehngs,  or  refuse  to  make  proper  acknowledgments,  and  God  will  not 
accf-pt  such  attf-nii't-^  to  worship  Him.  (Dr.  A.  Barnei^.)  I.  Observe  the  word 
brother.  1.  Bo  God  teaches  thee  to  call  every  one.  2.  Think  with  what  tenderneca 
and  love  thou  (juglitest,  and  perbaps  wouldst  bt-have  to  him,  if  he  really  were  such. 
11.  i)oes  not  Christ  llimselt  call  the  Scribes  and  riiarisres  fools  ?  Truly;  but  with 
Divine  compusniuu,  to  rouse  i.lieui  Lu  a  coiisldeiaiiuu  ui  iheir  slate.  (1)  The  sin  is  in 
the  aug^r,  tb.e  scorn,  (2)  the  pride  of  heart  iu  one  sinner  towards  another.  III. 
Nothing  will  be  acctpicd  from  thee  in  this  disposition.  1,  Agrte  with  thy  brother. 
2.  The  loss  of  an  hour  may  be  the  loss  of  thy  soul.    (Thomat  Adam.) 

Ver.  26.  Agree  with  thine  adversary. — Reeonciliation  with  Ood: — 1.  Man  by  hlg 
sin  has  made  God  his  adversary.  2.  God  has  opened  a  way  by  which  sinnera, 
though  they  have  thus  grossly  offended,  may  be  brought  back  into  a  state  of  recoH' 
oiliation  with  Him.  3.  To  show  you  that  it  is  man's  duty  and  interest  to  avail 
himself  of  the  opportunity  of  coming  into  agreement  with  God.     I.  Who  abk  thb 

PERSONS  THAT  MAV  KIOIITLY  APPLY  TO  THEMSELVES  THE  MOTIVES  BY  WHICH  1  SHALL  CBOI 

THE  BUSINESS  OF  AOKKKMENT  \viTH  GoD.  God  is  the  adversary  of  any  child  of  Adam 
who  has  not  availed  himself  of  pardon,  the  man  ef  private  virtue  as  well  as  hi« 
profligate  neighbour.     II.  Motives  by  which  this  businroS  is  uboes  upon  yoo.    L 


CHAP,  v.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  7i 

Consider  what  it  is  I  am  endeavouring  to  enforce  upon  your  attention.  No  trifle, 
agreement  with  God,  2.  What  would  be  the  blessings  that  would  result  if  you  were 
thus  reconciled  to  God.  3.  What  will  be  the  consequences  if  you  are  not  recon- 
ciled f  4.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  interest  others  take  in  your  reconciliation  with 
God.     III.  Begin ^'HAT  beccncilution  iiimediatelt — '*  Whiles  thou  art  in  the  way.** 

1.  God  is  now  waiting  to  corue  to  agrfctment  with  yon,  2.  What  reason  have  you 
to  advance  why  you  should  not.  S.  Consider  the  uncertainty  of  life.  4.  All  the 
opportunities  of  agreement  are  confined  to  this  present  Ufe.  5.  The  results  that  in 
another  world  will  follow  a  want  of  reconciliation  with  God  in  this,  are  indescribably 
dreadfuL  6.  The  punishment  will  be  inevitable  and  eternal.  {J.  A.  James,  D.D.) 
Agree  with  thine  adversary  quickly : — 1.  The  Lord  warns  us  to  make  our  Christian 
pc&ce  in  time.  2.  To  take  care  that  our  Bacramental  offering  of  charity  and  for- 
giveness be  not  delaj'sd.  S.  Lest  our  adversary  be  no  more  in  the  way  with  us ; 
lest,  among  the  many  partings  of  this  world,  we  lose  sight  of  him  for  ever.  4.  And 
that  on  the  gxound  of  God's  awful  judgment.  5.  For  to  Him  the  unreconciled 
quarrels  of  this  world  must  be  referred.  6.  He  will  exact  the  uttermost  farthing  of 
His  own  incalculable  debt  from  those  who  have  been  unkind  and  miiorgiving  to  theif 
fellow-servants.    (6.  Moberley,  D.C.L.) 

Ters.  27-28.  In  his  heart.  The  heart  or  will  is,  in  man,  the  eeat  of  virtue  or  vice. 
L  Actions  must  be  our  invariable  touchstone  of  truth  whilst  we  sojourn  in  this 
Btate  of  imperfect  knowledge  and  comparative  obscurity,  where  expression  is  the 
only  avenue  to  sentiment,  and  action  the  only  publisher  of  intention.  II.  Actions 
are  the  only  public  representatives  of  our  private  sentiments.  1.  So  many  channels 
through  which  the  heart  discharges  its  flow  of  various  passions.  2.  So  many 
mirrors  by  the  reflection  of  which  the  internal  dispositions  of  the  soul  become 
externally  visible.  Ill,  Actions  viewed  in  a  moral  light  are  to  the  soul  what  (1) 
streams  are  to  the  fountain ;  (2)  branches  are  to  the  root.  Branches  have  no 
existence  but  what  they  derive  from  the  root.  Streams  have  no  existence  but  what 
they  derive  from  the  fountain.  Actions  have  no  moral  existence  bat  that  which 
they  derive  from  the  heart.  When  God  judges  mac,  the  heart  is  the  rule  of 
judgment.      1.  The  heart,  the  source  of  these  actions,  is  to  Him  uncovered 

2.  The  heart,  having  the  principle  of  religion  so  strong  aa  to  prevent  an, 
unlawful  enjoyment,  will  likewise  be  sufficiently  strong  to  prevent  an  unlawful 
resolution.  3.  The  depraved  heart  is  before  God  of  the  same  criminality  as  the 
depraved  life,  and  exposes  us  to  the  same  punishment  from  God.  Let  us  therefore 
eternally  renounce  every  inclination  inconsistent  with  religion  and  reproachful  to 
humanity.    Let  us  cultivate  purity  of  heart.     (David  Lamont,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  Thy  right  band  oGend.  L  Kather  than  anything,  though  ever  so  dear 
and  precious  to  thee,  should  hinder  thee  in  thy  Christian  progress,  or  prove  a  means 
of  snaring  thy  soul  and  body,  absolutely  and  totally  forego  it.  1.  Whatsoever 
opposes  God  in  the  heart,  or  keeps  Him  out  of  it,  must  be  abhored  and  cast  cmt ; 

3.  All  sin  and  temptation  must  be  resisted,  and  the  outward  act  of  any  sin  raust 
be  avoided.  3.  For  some  temptations  are  against  my  retu'emeut,  against  my 
prayers,  against  my  possession  and  enjoyment  of  Christ,  against  peace  in  life, 
comfort  in  death,  against  time,  eternity,  and  all  my  hopes.  (Tfu)ma$  Adam.) 
Strange  conduct  of  a  Land-Crab. — One  of  the  most  useful  pioneer  evangelists 
ot  the  Samoan  mission  was  Teava,  who,  after  many  years  of  active  service, 
returned  to  Earotonga.  Though  very  feeble  and  bent  with  age,  his  place  in  the 
eanctuaiy  was  never  vacant ;  and  he  was  ever  ready  with  a  word  of  exhortation.  Oa 
ose  occasion  he  said,  "Ihave  been  meditating  tliis  morning  upon  our  Lord's 
words :  '  If  thy  right  hand  offend  thee,  cut  it  off,  and  cast  it  from  thee  :  for  it  is 
profitable  for  thee  that  one  of  thy  members  should  perish,  and  not  that  thy  whole 
body  should  be  cast  into  hell.'  When  I  laboured  at  Tutuila  I  often  felt  rebuked  by 
the  strange  conduct  of  a  large  species  of  land-crab,  called  there  the  *  maU'o,'  here 
the  '  tupa.'  It  bores  deep  into  the  soil,  the  holes  sometimes  extending  a  consider- 
able distance.  At  night  this  crab  loves  to  make  its  way  to  the  sea,  for  the  purpose 
of  laving  itself  in  the  salt  water  and  drinking  it.  Now  it  sometimes  happens  that, 
when  hurrying  through  the  tall  grass  and  fern,  some  of  its  legs  become  defiled  by 
contact  with  filth.  So  great  is  the  vexation  of  this  crab  at  its  mishap,  that  it 
delays  its  march  to  the  sea  in  order  to  wrench  oft  the  offending  legs  1  One  may 
sometimes  meet  a  mutilated  individual  hobbling  along  without  two  or  three  of  ite 
legs — a  self-inflicted  punishment  1    In  some  rare  instances  it  has  been  known  to 


f5  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  foHAj.  ^ 

■wrench  off  all  its  eight  legs  to  escape  defilement.  It  is  then  content  to  drag  itself 
over  the  ground  with  considerable  difficulty  by  means  of  its  nippers,  until  it  reachei 
its  hole,  where  it  hides  until  the  legs  partially  develop  themselves  again,  though  not 
of  their  original  length  and  beauty."  •'  Were  we,"  added  Teava,  "  as  willing  to  part 
with  our  favourite  sins  as  this  '  mali'o'  crab  is  with  its  defiled  Umba,  there  would  be 
little  doubt  of  our  reaching  heaven  I  This  is  what  our  Lord  means  by  oar  cutting 
off  our  right  hand,  and  casting  it  from  us."  How  may  beloved  lusts  be  discovered 
and  viortijied  ? — I.  Explication.  1.  That  we  ourselves  must  engage  in  the  morti> 
fying  of  our  lusts.  It  is  not  enough  to  cry  to  God,  and  be  idle.  2.  That  we  must 
be  willing  in  this  as  in  other  duties.  3.  It  is  not  said,  "  If  thine  eye  offend  thee, 
observe  it  more  than  ordinarily,"  but  "  pluck  it  out."  4.  It  must  be  renounced  for 
ever — "  cast  it  from  thee."  II.  Observations.  1.  That  the  eye  and  hand  are  use- 
ful parts  of  the  body  of  man.  2.  That  offences  are  from  ourselves.  3.  That  sin  is 
to  all  intents  and  purposes  our  own.  I.  Why  sin  is  expressed  in  Scbiptobe  by 
PARTS  AND  MEMBERS  OF  OUR  BODY.  1.  The  whole  mass  of  corruption  in  Scripture  ia 
called  "  the  old  man,"  and  "  the  body  of  sin  "  (Rom.  vi.  6).  2.  As  the  natural  body 
makes  use  of  its  several  parts  in  work,  so  corruption  makes  use  of  several  lusts,  3. 
Sin  is,  according  to  some,  conveyed  into  the  soul  by  means  of  the  body.  4.  Cor- 
ruption shews  itself  by  the  sinful  actions  of  the  body,  and  therefore  may  have  its 
denomination  by  the  parts  of  it.  II.  That  every  man  hath  his  pabticdlab  iniquity. 

III.    How  it  comes    to  pass  that   particular   persons   HAVB   their   PABTICUUIB   8IN8. 

1.  Men  have  particular  temperaments,  and  therefore  sins  suitable  to  their  constitu- 
tions. 2.  There  are  distinct  and  peculiar  periods  of  times  and  ages  that  incline  to 
peculiar  sins.  3.  Men  have  distinct  and  particular  callings  that  incline  to  parti- 
cular sins.  4.  Men  have  distinct  and  particular  ways  of  breeding  and  education, 
and  upon  that  account  have  particular  sins.  IV.  The  use  and  application. 
1.  Examination :  how  this  sin  may  be  discovered — (1)  By  the  love  the  sinner  bears 
it ;  (2)  The  sin  which  distracts  us  in  holy  worship  is  our  beloved  sin  ;  (3)  It  may 
be  kno\vn  by  its  commanding  power  over  other  sins ;  (4)  The  sin  that  conscience 
doth  most  chide  for ;  (5)  It  may  be  known  by  being  impatient  of  reproof ;  (6)  It 
makes  a  man  notoriously  partial  in  his  own  case ;  (7)  It  may  be  known  by  the  fair 
pretences  that  the  sinner  hath  for  it ;  (8)  The  sin  which  a  man  wishes  were  no  sin ; 
(9)  The  sin  we  think  of  first  in  the  morning  and  latest  at  evening  ;  (10)  The  sin 
which  most  infests  us  in  our  solitudes ;  (11)  The  sin  we  are  willing  to  endure 
greatest  hardship  for.  2.  Press  upon  you  the  mortification  of  your  beloved  sin ; 
(1)  Seek  holy  courage  and  resolution  against  it ;  (2)  Let  your  repentance  be  against 
it ;  (3)  Beware  of  those  things  that  occasion  it ;  (4)  Pray  to  God  that  thou  mayest 
not  fall  into  that  condition  favourable  to  it ;  (5)  Learn  to  suspect  things  that  are 
delightful;  (6)  Labour  to  act  that  grace  that  is  contrary  to  thy  beloved  sin; 
(7)  Keep  watch  over  thy  heart ;  (8)  Get  respect  to  all  God's  laws  ;  (9)  Lay  hold  OD 
God's  strength.  V.  Motives.  1.  Eight-eye  sins  are  the  greatest  hindrances  to 
the  soul's  closing  with  Christ.  2.  They  are  a  great  trouble  to  the  soul  afterwards. 
8.  It  ia  a  choice  evidence  of  regeneration.     {B.  Needier,  B.C.L.) 

Vers.  33,  34.  Swear  not. — I.  Profane  swearing  is  always  the  evidence  of  a  de- 
praved heart.  IL  No  man  is  believed  any  sooner  in  common  conversation  because  h« 
swears  to  a  thing.  III.  It  is  no  mark  of  a  gentleman  to  swear.  IV.  Profaneness 
does  no  man  any  good.  It  is  degrading,  &o.  V.  God  will  not  hold  the  profane 
swearer  guiltless.  There  is  not  in  the  universe  more  cause  of  amazement  at  God's 
forbearance.  (Dr.  A.  Barnes.)  I.  It  is  mean  to  swear.  II.  It  is  rude  to  swear. 
III.  Swearing  is  the  sign  of  an  empty  head.  IV.  Swearing  is  wicked.  (^J.  N» 
Norton.)  In  order  to  keep  us  at  the  greatest  distance  from  all  profanation  of 
the  sacred  name,  Christ  warns  us  here  to  avoid  oaths  of  every  kind.  (1)  Except 
in  cases  of  necessity.  (2)  How  trifling  soever  they  may  seem  to  us.  (3)  Aa 
implying  an  appeal  to  God  contrary  to  the  reverence  we  owe  Him,  and 
to  that  simplicity  of  speech  which  becomes  those  who  fear  Him.  II.  Let 
the  general  probity  of  your  character  and  known  regard  to  the  truth  be  such 
that  your  bare  word  may  be  credited.  Whether  it  is  or  not,  resolve  to  go 
no  farther,  for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these,  cometh  of  evil,  (Thomas 
Adam.)  The  lawfulness  and  obligation  of  oaths  : — I.  This  precept  does  not  ab- 
solutely forbid  all  use  of  oaths.  An  oath  is  a  solemn  appeal  to  God,  as  a  witness  of 
the  truth  of  what  we  declare,  and  of  our  sincerity  in  what  we  promise.  Oaths 
are  assertory  and  promissory.  1.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  Scripture  to  use  general 
eipressions,  which  are  to  be  understood  in  a  qualified  sense.     2.  From  thp  reasons 


CHAP.  7,]  ST.  MATTHEW.  77 

of  the  charge  and  other  passages  of  Scripture.  Oaths  are  necessary  in  civil 
Bociety :  they  are  of  Divine  institution  ;  St.  Paul  used  them ;  God  swears  by  Himself, 
II.  Christ  Condemns — 1.  Perjury.  2.  Customary  swearing  in  common  conversa- 
tion. 3.  As  we  may  not  use  the  Divine  name  wantonly  so  neither  may  we  swear  by 
any  of  God's  creatures.  4.  He  forbids  all  rash  imprecations.  6.  All  scoffing  at 
religion,  contempt  of  the  writings  of  God,  and  all  sporting  with  Scripture.  Profane 
language  is  a  sure  evidence  of  a  bad  disposition  of  mind.  It  tends  to  produce 
greater  hardness  and  to  extinguish  all  reverence  :  it  is  most  pernicious  in  its  eouse- 
quences ;  it  is  unreasonable  yet  infectious ;  it  heaps  guilt  upon  the  soul. 
{J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  I.  The  Christian  law  in  regard  to  oaths  (Lev.  xiz.  19 ; 
Num.  XXX.  2).  n.  The  Christian  law  of  retaliation.  III.  Practical  lessons.  The 
Bin  of  perjury  is  said  to  be  growing  appallingly  frequent.  Whilst  technical  vows 
are  no  longer  in  harmony  with  the  liberty  of  the  new  dispensation,  still  the  spirit  of 
the  vow  by  which  one  dedicates  himself  to  Divine  service  ts  as  sacred  and  as  useful 
as  ever.  Avoid  using  expressions  that  are  in  the  nature  of  an  oath  without  having 
its  technical  form.  Outright  profanity  is  a  terrible  sin,  as  useless  as  it  is  hardening. 
What  a  confession  of  man's  proneness  to  lie,  is  his  habitual  appeal  to  God  as  a 
witness  of  the  truth  1  The  law  of  retaliating  love  laid  down  by  Christ  shows 
Him  to  be  the  one  and  supreme  Teacher.     {J.  S.  Doolittle,  D.D.)        Language  : — 

1.  Language  should  be  the  simple  expression  of  the  heart.  2.  Christianity 
seeks  to  simplify  human  communications.  3.  Exaggerated  expressions  lead 
to  an  untrue  life.  4.  Christ's  law  of  speech  will  regulate  our  sopial  interconrse. 
(TF.  W.  Why  the.)  Profane  Swearing  : — This  sin  is  awfully  prevalent.  I.  The  kx- 
CU8E8  usually  made  for  it.  Ignorance,  custom,  example,  surprise,  passion,  confirma' 
tion  of  what  is  said,  meaning  no  harm,  inconsistencies  of  professor's,  &c.  (2  Sam. 
xii.  14 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  20 ;  Eom.  ii.  24 ;  2  Peter  ii.  2).  II.  The  evil  consequences 
of  it.  Destroys  the  little  remains  of  the  fear  of  God.  Leads  to  the  disobedience 
of  all  His  commands.  Such  a  horrid  example  to  others,  especially  to  the 
young,  &c.  III.  The  powerful  arguments  against  it.  God  hears.  He  is  holy 
and  jealous.  Before  His  bar  the  swearer  must  appear.  He  is  able  to  punish, 
and  declares  He  will  (2  Kings  xix.  22,  28;  Isa.  xxxvii.  23,  36,  38;  Ezek. 
XX.  27,  33;  xxxv.  12-14).  (A.  Tucker.)  The  Sin  of  Swearing: — I.  Explain 
THE    SIN    IN    QUESTION.     1.    One  branch  of    this  sin  is   cursing  and  swearing. 

2.  Another  branch  is  the  familiar  introduction  of  oaths  into  common  coa- 
versation.  8.  A  mingling  religious  language  in  our  common  discourse  without  any 
corresponding  feelings  in  our  heart.  II.  Its  aggravated  guilt.  1.  It  is  • 
gratuitous  sin.  2.  It  is  a  wUful  sin.  3.  It  is  a  presumptuous  sin.  III.  Tits 
AWFUL  STATE  OF  THOSE  WHO  PRACTISE  THIS  BIN.  1.  Awlul  because  God  has  de- 
nounced His  vengeance  against  them.  2.  It  is  a  state  of  fitness  for  destruction. 
8.  It  is  a  sure  sign  of  an  unregenerate  condition.  {E.  Cooper.)  Profane  excla- 
mations. — Charlie  Harold,  speaking  to  his  grandmother  about  something  he  did 
not  like,  exclaimed,  '*  By  thunder  I  "  "  Hush  1  "  said  the  old  lady,  "  you  must  not 
swear,  my  dear.  Don't  you  know  that  Jesus  said,  •  Swear  not  at  all  I*"  " Did 
He  ?  Weil,  I  didn't  know  it  was  swearing  to  say  •  By  thunder,'  or  *  By  golly.*  Is  it, 
grandma  ?  "  "  All  such  expressions,  my  dear,  in  which  '  by  *  is  used,  partake  of  the 
nature  of  swearing,  and  a  boy  who  wishes  to  be  good  will  never  let  them  fall  from 
his  lips."  Charlie  sat  silent  for  several  minutes,  in  grave  thought,  and  then  said, 
•'Grandma,  what  makes  the  newspaper  swear  every  morning?"  "  Does  it,"  in- 
quired the  old  lady,  looking  over  the  top  of  her  spectacles  with  curious  eyes.  "  Yea, 
it  says,  *By  telegraph.'  "  The  old  lady  could  not  help  laughing,  but  she  explained 
to  Charlie  the  difference  between  an  exclamation  such  as  •'  By  thunder,"  used  to 
give  emphasis  to  a  remark,  and  an  incomplete  sentence  such  as  "By  telegraph." 
The  little  boy  determined  that  he  would  not  offend  in  this  way  again,  and  I  have 
told  you  the  story,  hoping  that  you  may  make  the  same  wise  rule.     {J.  N.  Norton.) 

Keep  from  Swearing. — A  lad  in  Boston,  rather  small  for  his  years,  worked  in  an 
office  as  en-and  boy  for  four  gentlemen  who  did  business  there.  One  day  the  gentle- 
men were  teasing  him  a  little  about  being  so  small,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Yon  never 
wll  amount  to  much,  you  never  can  do  much  business,  you  are  too  small."  The 
little  fellow  looked  at  them.  "  Well,"  said  he,  •'  as  small  as  I  am,  I  can  do  some- 
thing which  none  of  you  four  men  can  do.''  ♦*  Ah,  what  is  that  f  "  said  they.  "  I 
don't  know  as  I  ought  to  tell  you,"  he  replied.  But  they  were  anxious  to  know, 
and  urged  him  to  tell  what  he  could  do  that  none  of  them  were  able  to  do.  "Jean 
keep  from  swearing  I  "  said  the  Uttle  fellow.  There  were  some  blushes  on  foor 
manly  faces,  and  there  seemed  to  be  very  little  anxiety  for  further  information  oo 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ichaf.  ▼. 

the  point.  Swear  in  the  Gaelic  tongue. — A  lady  travelliog  from  Edinburgh  to 
Glas^{ow  was  much  annoyed  by  a  young  officer's  conversation  in  the  carriage  being 
interspersed  with  oaths.  She  sat  uneasy  till  she  could  no  longer  keep  silence, 
"  Sir,"  she  said  to  the  officer,  "can  you  talk  in  the  Gaelic  tongue  ?"  To  this  he  re- 
plied in  the  affirmative,  seemingly  with  great  pleasure,  expecting  to  have  some  con- 
versation with  the  lady  in  that  dialect.  She  then  politely  requested  that  if  h* 
wished  to  Bwear  any  more,  it  might  be  in  that  language,  as  the  practice  of  swearing 
was  very  offensive  to  herself  and  the  rest  of  the  company.  The  officer  was  con- 
founded at  this  reproof,  and  no  more  oaths  were  heard  from  him  daring  the 
remainder  of  the  journey.  The  tongue  and  the  temper: — 1.  The  language  of 
irreverence.  2.  The  language  of  retaliation.  3.  The  language  of  revenge.  (Ser- 
mons  by  Monday  Club.) 

Ver.  43. — ^Love  your  enemies. — Forgiveness  of  injuries : — ^The  duty  of  forgive- 
ness does  not  forbid  resentment,  but  the  excess  or  abuse  of  it.  I.  Such  resentment 
in  excess  is  wrong,  for  anger  produces  auger  ;  revenge,  malice,  and  that  without 
limit :  an  aggravation  of  misery ;  and  such  resentment  is  a  painful  remedy  to  him 
who  suffers  from  it,  and,  if  not  a  remedy,  it  becomes  an  unmixed  evil :  the  gratifi- 
cation of  this  passion  is  never  innocent  except  when  necessary.  II.  Love  to  our 
enemies  is  a  duty  ;  for  it  is  part  of  the  law  of  general  benevolence,  which,  however, 
admits  resentment,  though  not  the  abuses  of  it.  Eesentment  is  consistent  with 
good- will.  To  love  our  enemies  is  not  rant,  unless  benevolence  is  so ;  but  is  as 
reasonable  as  the  opposite  is  mischievous.  III.  Eefiections  adapted  to  beget  and 
Btrengthen  the  temper.  Self-love  is  apt  to  magnify  things  amiss  in  others  and 
lessen  them  in  ourselves.  So  ia  anger.  Moderation,  therefore,  is  only  common 
sense,  trying  to  ascertain  the  truth ;  and  is  perfectly  reasonable.  The  origin  of 
wrong  done  is  not  generally  malice,  but  some  passion  in  itself,  and  within  proper 
limits,  allowable.  The  object  of  our  resentment  is  himself  a  sufferer,  and  therefore 
a  fit  object  of  compassion.  We  ourselves  need  forgiveness,  and  a  forgiving  disposi- 
tion is  essential  to  it.  (Bishop  Butler,  D.C.L.)  Man's  nature  is  to  be  judged, 
not  as  to  whetlier  it  is  best  in  the  abstract,  but  on  a  comparison  with  his  circum- 
stances. Here  we  have  to  consider — I.  The  natueb  of  the  emotion.  Sudden  and 
deliberate.  Sudden  anger  is  an  instinct,  excited  by  violence  or  harm,  not  necessarily 
a  wrong,  and  the  end  of  this  passion  is  the  resistence  or  prevention  of  violence. 
Deliberate  anger,  or  resentment,  is  a  passion,  excited  by  virrong  or  injury  undeserved. 
Hence  called  indignation,  which  is  not  malice,  and  is  stronger  the  more  nearly  the 
injury  affects  ourselves.  The  sense  of  wrong  is  essential  to  it,  as  is  plain  from  the 
circumstances  which  aggravate  the  feeling.  II.  The  end  for  which  the  emotion  is 
implanted :  to  prevent  or  remedy  injury.  III.  The  abuses  of  the  emotion  of  resent- 
ment. Sudden  :  passion,  peevishness.  DeUberate  :  resentment  against  such  as  inno- 
cently injure  us ;  obstinacy  in  resisting  evidence  of  innocence.  Though  liable  to 
abuse,  the  emotion  is  important,  as  a  balance  against  the  weakness  of  pity,  and  in 
punishing  crime.  Hence  fresh  proofs  of  the  reality  of  virtue,  which  has  certain 
emotions  on  its  side,  and  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  who  makes  an  in- 
stance of  them,  even  the  emotion  of  resentment.  (Ibid.)  The  Christian's  duty 
to  prisoners  : — Never,  perhaps,  does  guilty,  suffering  humanity  assume  a  form  more 
likely  to  be  overlooked  or  despised  by  the  world  at  large  than  in  the  person  of  the 
imprisoned  convict.  But  Christians  may  be  justly  expected  to  regard  him  with  pity 
— may  be  justly  expected  to  make  prompt  and  vigorous  exertions  to  promote  hif 
welfare.  This  I  argue  :  L  From  the  character  of  Christians.  Disinterested  bene- 
volence. Deep  sense  of  personal  guilt  which  they  maintain.  Efficacy  of  Divine 
grace  to  work  a  radical  change.  II.  From  the  means  of  usefulness  they  are  able  to 
employ.  III.  The  commands  of  Jesus  Christ.  IV.  The  Providence  of  God, 
{Beriah  Green.)  In  wJiat  manner  are  you  to  repress  the  rising  of  improper 
dispositions : — 1.  Remember  your  ovra  feelings.  2.  The  evil  in  the  city  is  permitted 
by  God.  3.  Recollect  the  unwearied  patience  of  God.  4.  The  treatment  the 
Saviour  endured.  5.  This  wiU  not  make  a  Christian  mean-spirited ;  were  there  any 
in  the  palace  of  Nebuchadnezzar  that  showed  such  greatness  of  soul  as  Daniel  T  (E. 
Irving, )  1.  The  supreme  art  of  life,  above  all  other  arts,  is  the  art  of  living  to- 
gether justly  and  charitably.  2.  To  get  on  with  men  will  constitute  the  most  per- 
sistent aim  within  the  Christian  disposition.  (H.  W.  Beeclier.)  On  forgiveness 
of  injuries  and  against  revenge : — This  law  reasonable :  I.  If  we  consider  thh 
KiTTJBE  or  THB  ACT  here  required,  which  is  to  love — the  most  natural,  easy,  and 
delightful  of  all  the  affections ;  whereas  ill-will  and  revenge  are  troublesome  ard 


CHAP,  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  ff 

vexatious  passions.  The  devising  of  mischief,  accomplishment  of  it,  and  reflection 
npon  it  are  uneasy.  II.  If  we  consider  the  qualification  of  the  object — our  enemy. 
The  two  great  foundations  of  love  are  relation  and  likeness.  Men  alike  and  related 
in  essential  nature.  The  hatred  of  an  enemy,  if  we  make  a  right  use  of  it,  may 
prove  of  greater  advantage  to  us  than  the  civihties  of  our  best  friend ;  is  better  and 
lesfl  dangerous  than  the  flatterer.  Beooaciled  enemies  often  prove  our  best  friends. 
III.  If  we  consider  the  excellekce  and  generosity  of  the  thins  itself.  It  is  the 
mo.it  perfect  act  of  the  most  perfect  of  all  graces — in  spite  of  provocation.  IV.  The 
Pebjection  and  pbevalenct  of  the  examples  which  the  gospel  proposeth  to  ns  to 
allure  to  this  duty.  1.  The  example  of  God  Himself.  2.  The  example  of  Jesua 
Christ.  It  is  objected  that  the  bearing  of  injuries  like  this  invites  more.  1.  Few 
BO  bad  as  to  make  bo  barbarous  a  return  for  generosity.  2.  Christ  never  intended 
that  our  goodness  should  be  void  of  all  prudence.  Learn :  1.  Let  ns  be  careful  how 
wo  make  enemies,  if  it  be  thus  difficult  to  love  them.  2.  How  great  ought  onr  kind- 
ness to  be  to  others.  3.  The  excellence  of  Christian  religion  which  hath  carried  our 
duty  so  high.  4.  The  humanity  of  the  Christian  religion.  {T.  Tillotson.)  Prayer 
for  enemies : — I  wonder  how  many  prayers  yon  ever  sent  up  for  those  that  hate  you  ?  I 
think  it  did  not  take  the  top  of  one  sheet  in  the  angel's  record-book  to  put  down  all 
the  prayers  that  you  ever  made  for  men  that  hate  you.  {Beecher.)  Difficult  to  for- 
give a  sneakintf  enemy  : — When  a  large  house-dog  comes  out  with  an  announcement 
of  himself,  a  man  knows  what  he  has  got  to  meet :  but  when  one  of  those  little  nasty 
Spitz  dogs  that  don't  bark  at  all,  but  run  behind  and  nip,  you  don't  know  whether 
to  run  or  to  stand  still,  whether  to  fight  or  to  give  it  up.  An  enemy  that  is  an  enemy 
outwardly  and  openly,  and  strikes  fair  blows,  can  be  met ;  but  whisperers,  backbiters, 
mean  folks  that  follow  you,  and  nip  you,  and  sneak  in  and  out  of  the  fence  to  save 
themselves,  we  do  not  know  how  to  deal  with  ;  and  yet  we  are  commanded  to  pray 
for  them.  {Ibid.)  The  marrow  of  the  gospel: — 1.  The  teaching  of  the  New 
Te?*ament  is  that  love  is  the  only  religion.  2.  It  teaches  that  love  is  a  com- 
prehensive disposition.  3.  There  is  no  worship  of  God  which  is  an  equivaleut  or 
substitute  for  love.  "  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar."  4.  No  man  can  love 
God  except  through  the  practice  of  loving  men.  6.  Love  carries  with  it  a  double 
capacity,  of  perceiving  an  ideal  excellence,  and  of  loving  men  who  represent  the 
opposite.  Love  goes  out  to  men,  not  according  to  their  righteousness,  but  according 
to  their  needs.  G.  True  gospel  love  is  a  love  that  re-creates  men.  (Ibid.)  Love  a 
universal  disposition : — A  man  does  not  love  according  to  Scripture,  simply  because 
he  can  count  well,  and  say,  ••  I  love  that  person,  that  one."  That  is  not  it.  What 
kind  of  a  candle  would  that  be  which,  being  set  on  your  table,  only  shone  on  par- 
tioolar  things — on  this  book,  on  that  vase,  on  that  mirror,  on  that  picture,  and  no- 
where else.  A  candle  is  put  upon  a  candlestick,  that  it  may  give  light  to  all 
in  the  house.  Love  must  leave  nothing  out.  {[bid.)  Love  attracted  by  need 
rather  than  by  character : — Is  your  heart  a  physician  to  cure  men  that  need  curing, 
no  matter  who  they  may  be  ?  {Ibid.)  Love  is  sometime.^  severe  in  its  methods  :— 
Love  is  like  the  old  surgery,  which  took  blood,  that  the  fever  might  go,  and  that  life 
might  come.  Love  is  no  poor  moonshiney,  pale  light,  caring  for  nothing.  Love  is 
a  revelator ;  it  discriminates  between  right  and  wrong.  It  likes  the  right  and  hates 
the  wrong,  and  helps  mr-n  out  of  the  wrong  into  the  right.  (Ibid.)  ^  Love  severe 
in  order  to  salvation  : — The  mother,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  is  unwilling  to 
Binge  the  child's  hair  or  scourge  its  skin,  because  she  loves  it  so,  yet,  if  there  is  some 
conflagration,  and  she  sees  that  the  way  of  life  is  through  the  flame,  with  wild 
strength  she  bears  the  child  through  in  her  bosom,  though  it  be  burned  in  every 
part.  Such  is  her  love  for  the  child  that  she  would  rather  sea  it  wounded  than  see 
it  perish.  (Ibid.)  The  enemies  of  Louis  XII.  of  France.— There  is  a  story  told 
of  Louis  XIL  of  France.  He  had  many  enemies ;  and  when  he  succeeded  to  the 
throne,  he  caused  a  list  of  these  to  be  drawn  up,  and  marked  against  each  of  their 
names  a  large  black  cross.  When  this  became  known,  the  enemies  of  the  king  fled, 
because  they  thought  it  was  a  sign  that  he  intended  to  punish  them._  The  king, 
hearing  of  their  alarm,  recalled  them,  and  gave  them  an  assurance  of  his  good  will, 
•aying  that  he  had  placed  a  cross  beside  their  names  to  remind  him  of  the  Cross 
that  brings  pardon  to  all ;  and  he  urged  them,  by  his  own  example,  and  especially 
by  the  example  of  Him  who  pi-ayed  for  His  enemies,  to  go  and  do  likewise.  Sir 
Eardley  Wilmofs  advice. — A  gentleman  who  had  filled  many  high  stations  in  public 
life,  with  the  greatest  honour  to  himself  and  advantage  to  the  nation,  once  went  to 
Sir  Eardley  Wilmot  in  great  anger  at  a  real  injury  he  had  received  from  a  person  high 
in  the  political  world,  which  he  was  considering  how  to  resent  in  the  most  effectual 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ▼, 

manner.  After  relating  the  particulars  to  Sir  EarJley,  he  asked  if  he  did  not  think 
it  vrould  be  manly  to  resent  it?  "  Yes,"  said  Sir  Eardley,  "  it  wonld  doubtless  be 
manly  to  resent  it,  but  it  would  be  Godlike  to  forget  it."  This  the  gentleman  de- 
clared had  such  an  instantaneous  effect  upon  him,  that  he  came  away  quite  another 
man,  and  in  temper  entirely  altered  from  that  in  which  be  went. 

Ver.  44.    But  I  say  unto  you. —  The  imperatives  of  Jesus : — I.  Thr  bamob  arb 

EXTENT  OF  jEsus'  iMPEBATrvE  SPEECHES.  He  kceps  Up  to  His  own  superior  level  of 
command  upon  all  occasions  and  before  all  men.  Men  like  us  only  assume  without 
offence  an  imperative  mood  in  certain  relations  of  life.  Christ  did  before  the  Rulers, 
before  the  Roman  power.    II.  The  nature  and  significance  op  THEes  relationb 

OF  LIFE,  AND  THOSE  ELEMENTS  OF  HUMAN  NATURE,  OVER  WHICH  JESUS  QUIETLY  AS- 
SUMED MASTERY.  1.  The  miracles  of  Christ  not  the  greatest  of  His  wonderful  works ; 
a  greater  assumption  of  power  to  exercise  authority  over  the  higher  principles  and 
laws  of  our  human  nature,  than  to  claim  authority  over  winds  and  waves.  2.  With 
what  calm  consciousness  of  right  Jesus  assumes  this  authority — which  belongs  to 
God  alone — over  human  hearts.  3.  The  nature  or  right  of  this  supremacy  of  the 
Christ.  (1)  One  ever-present  illustration  of  what  Jesus  is  to  this  universe  we  have 
within  UB  in  conscience.  Hence  you  have  a  means  of  understanding  the  authority 
of  Christ.  (2)  It  reappears  in  the  law  of  love.  He  is  the  righteousness  of  God 
with  man.  4.  We  should  bring  obedience.  5.  Do  we  not  need,  all  of  us,  to  be 
most  thoroughly  commanded  by  something  higher  and  better  than  ourselves?  We 
fall  from  our  own  possibilities,  and  need  a  command  to  step  forth  like  princes  to 
our  high  calling.  (Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  The  authority  of  Jesus  over  human 
nature  and  history  resemhlen  the  lordship  of  the  sun  over  the  earth: — The  world  feela 
it  from  centre  to  circumference;  every  fruitful  field  rejoices  in  it,  and  this  earth 
would  be  indeed  worthless  and  dark  without  it ;  but  we  can  only  make  guesses  kt 
the  riddle  of  its  gravitation  and  its  light ;  and  while  any  child  knows  that  it  is,  ^ be 
wisest  can  only  declare  in  part,  in  very  little  part,  how  it  is.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  47.  Wliat  do  ye  more  7 — Christian  benevolence  : — I.  What  eats  we  mere 
than  others?  1.  You  have  forgiveness  of  sins.  2.  Peace  with  God.  S.  Fellowship 
with  God.  4.  You  have  in  expectation  a  perfect  deliverance  from  evil  contact  with 
sin.  5.  You  have  in  expectation  the  resuiTection  of  your  bodies.  II.  What  do  ye 
more  than  others  ?  1.  The  first  obligation  is  to  be  thankful.  2,  The  second  obli- 
gation is  to  be  boastful :  "  My  soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord."  3.  To  b« 
loving  towards  all  men,  but  especially  towards  the  household  of  faith.  4.  We 
must  do  more  than  others  because  more  has  been  done  for  us,  and  more  is  expected 
of  us.     (11.   McNeile.)  Christian    service  : — I.  The    question    is   soggestiwb 

OF  duty.  For  whom  ?  (1)  More  for  themselves.  (2)  For  their  families.  (3)  For 
their  neighbours.  (4)  For  their  country.  (5)  For  the  world.  By  what  means  f  Jly 
use  of  their  tongue,  pen,  purse.  For  what  reasons?  (1)  Because  they  know  moie. 
(2)  Because  they  have  received  more.  (3)  Because  they  enjoy  mere.  (4)  Because 
they  profess  more.  (5)  Because  they  expect  more.  (6)  Because  they  are  responsible 
for  more.  II.  The  question  implies  doubt.  (J.Morgan,)  The  superiority  of  th* 
Christian: — I.  On  what  ground  this  superiority  may  be  challenged.  More  is  re- 
quired of  Christians  because  more  is  done  for  them,  expected  of  them,  can  be  ac- 
complished by  them,  has  been  realized  by  them.  II.  The  works  and  evidences  thai 
this  superiority  should  assume.  They  will  always  have  recourse  to  a  higher  standard 
and  motives  than  others.  By  an  unfeigned  attachment  to  the  cause  of  Christ. 
They  must  openly  commit  themselves  to  the  cause  and  interest  of  the  Church.  Am 
to  the  estimate  they  form  of  the  world.  In  a  strict  observance  of  all  reUgious  ordi- 
nances.  By  engrafting  in  all  their  ordinary  virtues  those  which  are  extraordinary. 
III.  To  what  PRACTICAL  PURPOSE  the  enforcement  of  the  subject  may  be  applied?  It 
is  often  requisite  to  ask  Christians  what  they  do  because  a  considerable  odium  at- 
taches itself  to  evangelical  doctrine.  There  is  greater  evil  in  hollow  friendship  than 
open  hostility ;  they  are  prone  to  coldness  and  neglect.  (Dr.  R.  W.  Hamilton.) 
I.  Explain  why  as  Christians  we  ought  to  do  more  than  others.  Because  we  under- 
lie special  obligations — are  endowed  with  supernatural  strength,  acknowledge  a  higher 
standard  of  duty — burdened  with  a  heavier  responsibility.  II.  Inquire  whether  we 
do  more  than  others.  For  our  own  souls,  our  families,  the  Church,  our  race  ?  (O. 
Brooks.)  The  superior  ohli/iations  of  Christians : — While  all  men  are  under  one 
•overeign  law,  some  by  voluntary  profcf-sion  bring  themselves  an  additional  account- 
ableneaa.     We  must  not  compare  ourselves  with  the  worst  of  men.    On  looking  oo 


CHAV.  v.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  81 


others  and  forming  judgments,  we  may  specify  toints  op  admonitobt  compakison. 
1.  They  will  observe  and  feel  a  very  limited  sense  of  responsibility.  2.  They  will 
observe  the  lamentably  small  effects  of  admitted  truth.  3.  A  different  sensibility  to 
the  evils  which  affect  mankind.  4.  What  good  things  they  do  not  that  they  might. 
We  must  beware  of  the  sad  tendency  there  is  to  the  "  less  "  in  any  good  thing,  instead 
of  the  "  more."  Consider  the  extent  of  what  there  is  to  be  done  ;  where  we  should 
have  been  if  there  had  not  been  persons  in  every  age  to  "  do  more  "  thaa  others,  such 
as  Wicliff,  Luther,  Ac. ;  consider  how  we  talk  of  imitating  eiceilent  examples.  Thos* 
who  desire  to  do  more  than  others  must  not  be  discouraged  by  the  disposition  that 
will  show  it?elf  to  depreciate  and  obstruct.  This  obligation  is  increased  by  the  fact 
that  others  do  less  than  they  ought.  In  this  comparison  with  others  we  must  have 
regard  to  the  motive  which  leads  us  to  exceed  them,  and  also  respecting  the  equity 
IN  THE  MODE  OF  MAKING  THE  COMPARISON,  We  must  bcwaro  of  scemiug  to  be  ad- 
mired and  set  off  in  invidious  comparison.  There  must  be  no  motive  of  self-merit. 
A  word  on  the  equity  of  the  co'uparison.  1.  Let  there  be  a  jealous  watchfulness  on 
the  propensity  to  magnify  ourt  and  to  diminish  theirs.  2.  The  others  with  whom 
the  comparison  is  made  may  have  more  difficulties  than  we  are  aware  of.  3.  Those 
of  larger  means  are  not  to  consider  themselves  as  doing  more,  unless  according  to 
that  proportion.  4.  A  man  must  not  compare  his  most  against  another's  least.  5. 
Our  Lord  when  on  earth  did  more  than  all  other  men.  (./,  Foster.)  A  call  to 
holy  living : — I.  The  grounds  foe  expecting  mose  from  Christians.  1.  They  pro- 
fess more.  2.  True  Christians  are  more  than  others.  3.  It  is  certain  the  true 
Christian  can  do  more  than  others,  he  has  the  Holy  Spirit  within  him.  4.  They 
have  more.  5.  They  are  looking  for  more  than  others.  11.  MATTEEg  in  which  we 
MAT  NATURALLY  LOOK  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  TO  DO  MORK  than  Others.  1.  To  sot  a  moie 
godly  example.  2.  A  more  exact  performance  of  the  Divine  will.  8.  To  excel  all 
others  in  gentleness.  4,  In  purity.  6.  In  truthfulness.  6.  In  forbearance.  7.  In 
love  to  mankind.  HI.  Reasons  for  doing  more  than  others.  1.  By  our  fruits  we 
are  to  be  known.  2.  Works  are  to  be  evidence  at  last.  3.  By  them  the  months  of 
gainsay  era  are  stopped.     4.  God  is  glorified.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  48.  Perfect. — I.  What  is  not  to  be  understood  by  this  reqoirement,  or  what 
Christian  perfection  is  not.  Not  perfection  of  knowledge,  freedom  from  temptation, 
conflict,  &c.  II.  What  is  the  perfection  here  required?  Perfect  obedience  to  the 
law  of  God.  III.  That  this  perfection  i^i  a  duty.  For  God  requires  it.  IV.  That 
It  is  attainable.  It  is  commanded — God  wills  it ;  it  is  promised ;  it  is  the  object  for 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  promised  and  given,  &c.  Answer  objections.  (Professor 
Finney.)  The  moral  perfections  of  God  : — I.  God  is  perfectly  wisb.  Wisdom 
implies  right  use  of  knowledge,  and,  lies  in  the  will  as  well  as  in  the  anderstanding. 
He  acts  wisely  whose  will  is  directed  by  right  reason.  Practical  improvement  we 
■hould  make  of  the  wisdom  of  God.  1.  We  should  be  hereby  excited  to  seek  wis- 
dom (Prov.  iv.  5,  7).  2.  We  should  ask  wisdom  of  God  to  direct  us  in  our  ways. 
8.  It  becomes  us  to  resign  to  His  will  and  acquiesce  in  His  appointments.  IL  God 
is  PERFECTLY  GOOD.  His  Other  attributes  are  rendered  engaging  to  us  by  His  good- 
ness. How  extensive  the  Divine  goodness  (Psa.  cxlv.  9,  16).  Is  God  perfectly  good  ? 
1.  Then  aU  our  powers  ought  to  be  awakened  to  bless  His  name.  2.  Then  how 
hateful  should  sin  be  to  us.  3.  Then  we  ought  to  be  careful  to  practise  goodness. 
III.  God  is  PERFECTLY  HOLY.  This  denotes  the  transcendent  excellence  of  His 
nature,  wliile  He  is  infinitely  distin  u  -hed  from  all  other  beings.  Then  we  sbonld 
follow  after  holiness.  IV.  God  is  perfectly  just.  Justice  is  commonly  distin- 
guished into  commutative  and  distributive,  the  former  in  an  equal  exchange  of 
benefits ;  this  can  have  no  place  in  our  dealings  with  God,  Distributive  justice, 
which  ought  to  be  exercised  by  rulers  towards  their  subjects,  consists  in  the  equal 
distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments.  God  cannot  be  awed  by  any  power  to 
pervert  judgment.  The  judgments  of  God  cannot  be  fathomed  at  present.  Is  God 
just  f  1.  This  should  awaken  in  us  holy  awe.  2.  It  is  of  great  concern  to  os  guilty 
creatures  to  be  found  in  Jesus  Christ,  having  on  His  righteousness.  V.  God  is  truth. 
1.  Then  we  must  embrace  whatever  God  has  revealed  to  us.  2.  The  reasonable- 
ness of  reUance  on  God's  promises.  Conclude  : — 1.  It  should  yield  ns  satisfaction 
that  such  a  perfect  B-ing  as  God  is  governs  the  world.  2.  We  should  in  our  con- 
templations of  Him  have  a  strict  regard  to  the  harmony  of  His  attributes.  3. 
Blessed  are  they  who  upon  good  grounds  can  call  this  perfect  Being  their  Fathei 
and  God.    {S.  Price.) 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  n. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Veb.  1.  Alms  before  men. — Almsgiving : — I.  The  duty  to  which  otm  Lo&d 
BKFEKS,  The  word  in  the  first  verse  rendered  "  alms  "  is  in  some  ancient  copies 
rendered  righteousness  ;  in  the  second  verse  it  means  charitable  gifts.  Our  duty  to 
give  of  our  goods.  The  gift  of  alms  a  deed  of  justice  as  well  as  of  mercy ;  the  poor 
have  a  just  claim  on  the  abundance  of  the  rich.  II.  The  evils  to  be  avoided  ni 
ITS  discharge.  1.  We  are  to  avoid  the  desire  of  human  applause.  2.  We  are  to 
avoid  giving  an  ostentatious  notoiiety  to  deeds  of  beneficence.  It  is  the  empty 
vessel  that  cannot  be  touched  without  telling  it.  III.  The  mannek  in  which  deei>8 
OF  righteousness  and  CHARirr  ARE  TO  BE  PERFORMED.  1.  Modcsty.  2.  With 
a  cheerful  respect  to  the  Divine  precepts.  3.  We  must  aim  at  the  advancement  of 
the  honour  of  God.  4.  Act  from  Christian  compassion  and  fellowship.  6.  We 
must  depend  on  Divine  assistance,  and  ascribe  the  praise  of  all  to  Him  who  enabloi 
us  to  live  to  His  glory.  IV.  The  akgumknt  stated  bt  oub  Lord.  1.  The  futility 
of  ostentatious  displays  of  piety.  2.  The  promise  annexed  to  their  right  perform- 
ence.  3,  How  jealous  should  we  be  of  the  principle  from  which  we  act.  4.  Never 
presume  on  eternal  life  from  the  works  of  the  law.  (J.  E.  Good.)  Purity  of 
motive  in  religion : — When  Mrs.  Judson  read  the  Lord's  "  Sermon  on  the  Mount "  to 
the  first  Burman  convert,  he  was  deeply  afft^cted.  "  These  words,"  said  he,  "  take 
hold  on  my  very  heart ;  they  make  me  tremble.  Here  God  commands  us  to  do 
everything  that  is  good  in  secret ;  not  to  be  seen  of  men.  How  unlike  our  religion 
is  this !  When  Burmans  make  offerings  they  make  a  great  noise  with  drums  and 
cymbals,  that  others  may  see  how  good  they  are.  {Anecdotes  of  the  Aborigines.) 
Secret  philanthropy  :— Loud,  ostentatious,  and  unprofitable,  it  was  like  the  brawling, 
noisy,  foaming,  frothy  torrent,  which,  with  a  rock  for  its  bed  and  barrenness  on  its 
banks,  makes  itself  seen  and  heard.  How  different  genuine,  gracious  piety  I 
Affluent  in  blessings  but  retiring  from  observation,  it  has  its  symbol  in  the  stream 
that  pursues  a  silent  course,  and,  flashing  out  in  the  light  of  day  but  here  and  there, 
but  now  and  then,  is  not  known  but  by  the  good  it  does — the  flowers  that  bloom  on 
its  banks,  and  the  evergreen  verdure  which  it  gives  to  the  pastures  through  which 
it  winds  on  its  quiet  path.  {Dr.  Guthrie.)  Silent  philanthropy  : — Alms  should 
be  like  oil,  which,  though  it  swim  aloft  when  it  is  fallen,  yet  makes  no  noise  in  the 
falling  ;  not  like  water,  that  sounds  when  it  lights.     (HaU.) 

Ver.  2.  Their  reward. —  Having  one's  reward : —  I.  A  pbopotjkd  truth  about 
HUMAN  NATURE — man  works,  for  revmrd.  II.  There  is  a  euggestoJ  contrast — "  their 
reward."  In  God  all  the  noblest  aspirations  of  men  are  met.  III.  A  sentencb 
whict  the  Divine  Speaker  passes  upon  some  of  the  men  of  the  time.  "  They  have 
their  reward. "  They  have  it  altoi^ether.  Irony,  pathos.  Theji_  reward  was  tran- 
sient, worthless,..  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  all  good  works  done  publicly 
forfeit  God's  approval  hereafter.  {Canon  Liddon.)  Their  reward : — Ostentations 
piety  has  its  own  remuneration.  There  is  real  happiness  in  other  things  besides 
goodness.  There  is  pleasure  in  wrong-doing;  quarrelsome,  destructive,  lazy, 
gluttonous  men  find  a  certain  kind  of  enjoyment  in  these.  There  is  pleasure  in  the 
love  of  praise  and  pride.  But  that  is  all  their  reward.  The  gospel  points  out  the 
great  life  that  lies  beyond;  it  charges  man  to  nse  bimseli  in  this  life  that  he  maj 
gain  the  higher.    {Beecher.) 

Ver.  6.  Aiid  when  then  prayest. — Nim  things  pertain  to  the  Tcnotoledge  of  true 
prayer: — I.  To  know  what  pbateb  is.  11.  How  mant  sorts  of  praybb  thebb 
BE.  III.  Thk  necessity  of  pbateb.  Four  things  provoke  us  to  pray.  1.  God's 
eommandment.  2.  Sin  in  us.  3.  Our  weak  nature.  4.  Subtilty  of  the  enemy. 
IV.  To  whom  we  ought  to  prat.  V.  Bt  whom  wb  should  prat.  VI.  Wherb 
TO  PRAT.  VII.  What  to  prat.  VIH.  The  bxcellenot  of  pbatbb.  IX.  What 
WE  MUST  DO  THAT  OUR  PRATERS  MAT  BE  HEARD.  {John  Bradford.)  Secret  prayer : 
— L  Let  us  notice  the  improper  mannkr  in  whtch  the  Pharisees  prksbktkd  theib 
SUPPLICATION  to  God.  1.  They  were  presented  in  an  improper  place.  2.  It  was 
sinful  in  its  object.  3.  It  was  worthless  as  to  its  issue.  II.  The  opposite  methop 
WB  ARS  commanded  TO  ADOPT.  1.  The  hallowed  work  in  which  we  are  to  engage. 
S.  The  place  to  which  we  are  to  retire.  (1)  An  exclusion  of  company;  (2)  A  with- 
drawment  from  secular  affairs.     3.  The  approbation  which  shall  be  given.     HI.  A 


CHAP.  VI.]  ST.  Matthew.  8S 

tEW   CONSIDEBATIONS   TO   ENGAGE    TOU    TO    THB    DISCHARGE   OF  THIS   IMPORTANT   DUTY. 

1,  The  Divine  command.  2.  The  example  with  which  we  are  furnished  in  the 
sacred  writings.  3.  The  necetsity  of  secret  prayer.  4.  The  advantages  of  private 
devotion.  5.  The  vital  connection  with  our  publio  usefulness.  (J,  E.  Good.) 
Private  prayer : — 1.  It  is  a  test  of  a  man,  what  he  is  when  alone  with  God.  2. 
Observe  the  personal  words,  so  endearing.  3.  It  implies  that  you  go  to  the  closet 
lor  the  purpose  of  prayer,  you  are  to  separate  yourself  from  all  outer  things.  4. 
Take  with  you  Fatherly  views  of  God.  5.  A  Father  likes  to  hear  everything  ;  Ho 
Bevor  refuses  a  secret.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  Enter  tuto  thy  closet. — Private  prayer : — L  The  natubb  of  prayer,  n. 
The  KIND  of  prayer  prescribed — "  Enter  into  thy  closet."  III.  The  object  of  prayer — 
»»  Thy  Father."  IV,  The  reward  promised — "Eeward  thee  openly."  (J.  Pollock.) 
Closet  prayer ;— I.  The  duty.  II.  The  place.  III.  The  Spirit.  IV.  The  object. 
V,  The  profit  of  prayer.  (T.  Whitelato,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  secret  prayer  : — To 
press  this  I  offer  the  following  motives  : — 1.  It  is  expressly  commanded  of  God.  3. 
Are  not  the  vows  of  God  upon  you  for  the  performance  of  it  ?  3.  Were  ye  not 
baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  to  worship  them,  and 
that  in  all  parts  of  worship,  of  which  prayer  is  a  principal  one  ?  4.  Have  not  some 
of  you  been  admitted  to  the  Lord's  tabic,  when  ye  professed  to  renew  your  l)aptismal 
engagements  J  6.  Have  ye  not  secret  sins,  secret  wants,  and  fcecret  temptations  t 
And  shall  ye  not  have  secret  prayers  adapted  to  each  7  {Thomas  Boston.)  Secret 
prayer : — I.  The  duty  of  secret  prayer.  AH  the  force  of  a  command.  It  is  more  by 
example  than  by  precept  that  this  duty  is  enforced  in  Scripture.  la  essential, 
because  we  have  wants  which  can  be  presented  before  God  in  no  other  way.  No 
times  are  specified  for  the  performance  of  this  duty.  II.  The  proper  mode  and 
SEASONS  of  secret  prayer.  If  possible,  a  place  to  which  we  may  retire  and  be  alone 
with  God.  Set  times.  The  appropriate  seasons — early  morning,  evening,  times  of 
perplexity,  &o.  III.  The  rewards  and  advantages  of  secret  prayer.  Furnishes  the 
best  test  of  piety.  What  is  the  "  open  reward  "  ?  Are  you  obeying  the  command  ? 
(Dr.  A.^arnes.)  Secret  prayer :  I.  Directions.  1.  The  place.  As  solitary  as 
possible.  2.  The  Being.  Ho  is  in  secret — invisible — omniscient.  Realization  of 
the  Divine  presence.  3.  The  spirit — filial,  11.  Encouragements.  1.  From  the 
relation  which  He  sustains.  2.  From  the  prerogative  which  He  exerts.  He  sees 
the  suppliant.  3.  From  the  reward  which  He  bestows,  present  and  future.  ( Various. ) 
I.  The  duty  and  necessity.  II.  The  employments  and  enjoyments.  III.  The  many 
advantages.  IV.  The  lamentable  cons_equeuce3  of  neglecting  secret  devotion.^ 
(Studien.)  Secret  prayer :  I.  It  is  a  doty.  1.  Because  it  is  commanded.  2. 
Because  indispensable  to  the  religious  life  of  the  soul.  II.  It  is  a  privilege.  1. 
Because  it  is  communion  with  God.  2.  Because  it  is  priceless  and  seasonable.  It 
is  not  like  the  Eoman  Porta  Santa,  which  is  opened  but  once  in  twenty-five  years, 
with  grand  ceremonies,  conducted  by  the  highest  dignitaries  of  the  Church.  III.  Its 
practice  is  commexded  to  us.  1.  By  example  of  Christ.  2,  By  the  observance  of 
eminent  saints.  IV.  Its  object.  1.  To  be  alone  with  God.  2.  To  oultivale  heart- 
religion.  3.  To  obtain  needed  supplies  of  grace.  V.  Its  beneeits.  1.  Its  privacy 
promotes  meditation  and  heart- scrutiny.  2.  It  favours  the  confession  of  such  sins 
as  are  individual.  VI.  Applications.  1.  A  command  aU  followers  of  Christ  will 
obey.  2.  S«jme  local  "  inner  chamber  not  necessary."  Every  man  can  build  a 
chapel  in  his  breast.  (Ainericari  Homiletic  Montldy.)  1  he  secret  life  of  the 
Christian  the  most  important : — The  root  that  produces  the  beautiful  and  flourishing 
tree,  with  aU  its  spreading  branches,  verdant  leaves,  and  refreshing  fruit,  that  which 
gains  for  it  sap,  life,  vigour,  and  Iruitfulness,  is  all  unseen ;  and  the  farther  and 
deeper  the  roots  spread  beneath,  the  more  the  tree  expands  above.  Christians  I  if 
you  wish  to  prosper,  if  you  long  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  stiike  your 
roots  wide  in  private  prayer.  (Salter.)  The  silent  influences  of  secret  prayer  the 
most  productive  : — As  the  tender  dew  that  falls  in  the  silent  night  makes  the  grass  } 
and  herbs  and  flowers  to  fiouriph  and  grow  more  abundantly  than  great  showers  of  ' 
rain  that  fall  in  the  dav,  so  secret  prayer  will  more  abundantly  cause  the  sweet 
herbs  of  grace  and  holiness  to  grow  and  flourish  in  the  soul,  than  all  those  mora 
open,  publio  and  visible  duties  of  religion,  which  too,  too  often  are  mingled  and 
mixed  with  the  sun  and  wind  of  pride  and  hypocrisy.  (Brooks.)  Closet  prayer 
$ecret  in  mode  as  well  as  in  place  : — Not  like  the  hen  who  goes  into  a  secret  place  to 
Uy  her  egg,  but  by  her  cackling  tells  %U  the  house  where  she  is,  and  what  th«  it 
doing.     {&umall.) 


; 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vt 

Vers.  7,  8.  But  when  ye  pray. — Prayer  forbidden ; — I.  Let  us  endeavour  ta 
explain  the  natobe  of  the  evils  here  forbidden.  1.  Vain  repetitions.  2.  Much 
■peaking.     3.  Undue  length.    11.  The  reason  on  which  the  admonition  is  founded. 

I.  The  condition  supposed — a  needy  one — hence  they  pray.  2.  The  privilega 
afforded — we  may  ask  for  supplies.  3.  The  omniscience  declared.  4.  The  argu- 
ment which  this  perfection  of  the  Almighty  supphes.  Hence  prayer  like  the 
heathen  unnecessary.  (J.  E.  Good.)  Brief  prayers  best: — Precious  things  lie  in 
email  compass.  .  .  .  Not  length  but  strength  is  desii-able.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
vial  made  of  gold  ia  more  precious  than  a  braztn  urn,  or  an  earthenware  pitcher. 
{T.  R,  Stevenson.)  On  prayer: — Let  all  examine  themselves  as  to  whether  they 
have  prayed  aright,  and  whether  their  prayers  have  done  thera  good.  I.  Abe  toob 
MINDS  MADR  MORE  BPiRiTtJAL  by  your  prayers  to  God,  the  Father  of  Spirits  f  1. 
Are  you  raised  above  the  petty  concerns  of  this  world  ?  2.  Do  you  feel  your  soula 
enlarged  in  universal  love  and  charity  ?  3.  Can  you  trust  God  more  confidently? 
4.  Do  youi-  prayers  make  you  more  just  and  merciful  ?  II.  Closely  examine  your- 
selves, every  one  of  you,  as  to  whether  touh  prayers  give  you  a  taste  of  bcoh 
PLEASURE  IN  OOD,  and  in  hohnesa  and  goodness,  as  to  make  you  desire  to  be  better 
acqn  .inted  with  them.  1.  Is  your  care  for  this  world  daily  suppressed  and 
deadened  ?  2.  Are  your  thoughts  at  rest  in  God,  and  in  His  love  7  3.  Are  your 
hearts  set  upon  rectifying  all  disorders  in  your  souls  ?  4.  Is  it  the  highest  boon  we 
can  ask  of  God,  that  we  may  be  thoroughly  and  universally  good  ?  Then  it  ifl 
certain  our  prayers  have  been  truly  devout,  and  highly  acceptable  to  God  ;  which  if 
we  do  not  yet  feel,  let  it  not  discourage  but  quicken  our  spirits  to  more  frequent  and 
fervent  prayer.     {Symon  Patrick,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  Our  Father  which  art  In  heaven. — The  Divine  Father : — L  In  what  sensb 
God  IS  A  Father.  1.  With  relation  to  Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God  :  so  the  first  Per- 
son is  called  the  Father,  as  He  is  the  fountain  of  the  Deity.  2.  With  respect  to  us : 
for  the  first  Person  is  not  only  the  Father  of  Christ,  but  our  Father.  We  share 
with  Christ  in  all  His  relations  :  as  God  was  His  God  by  covenant,  so  He  is  our 
God.  II.  By  CREATION  God  is  a  Father.  To  establish  the  relation  of  a  Father, 
there  must  be  a  communication  of  life  and  likeness.  A  painter  that  makes  an 
image  or  picture  like  himself,  he  is  not  the  father  of  it ;  for  though  there  be  like- 
ness, yet  no  life.  III.  What  advantage  have  we  in  prayer  from  this  common  inte- 
rest, or  general  respect  of  God's  being  a  Father  by  virtue  of  creation  ?  1.  This 
common  relation  binds  us  to  pray  to  Him.  All  things  which  God  hath  made,  by  a 
secret  instinct  they  are  carried  to  God  for  their  supply.  2.  It  draweth  common 
benefits  after  it.  Christ  saith  where  God  hath  given  a  life,  He  will  give  food.  3. 
It  giveth  us  confidence  in  the  power  of  God.  The  Creator  who  made  you  out  of 
nothing  can  keep  and  preserve  life  when  you  have  nothing.  IV.  How  will  God 
PERFORM  THE  PARTS  OF  A  FATHER  ?  1.  lu  allowing  US  full  leave  to  come  to  Him  in 
all  our  necessities.  2.  In  supplying  all  our  wants  (Isa.  xlix.  16).  3.  In  pitying  our 
miseries.  Many  times  we  forget  the  duty  of  children,  but  God  will  not  forget  the 
mercy  of  a  Father.  4.  In  disciplining  us,  and  treating  us  with  much  indulgence, 
wisdom,  and  care.  A  father  takes  a  great  deal  of  pains  in  forming  his  child, 
fashioning  its  manners  and  behaviour :  so  God  doth  with  His  children.  5.  In 
providing  able  guardians  for  His  children.  None  so  attended  as  God's  children  are. 
They  have  a  guard  of  angels  to  watch  over  them.  6.  In  laying  up  an  inheritance 
for  them.  (Thomas  Manton,  D.D.)  Our  Father: — I.  That  we  should  in  our 
prayers  consider  and  acknowledge  the  universality  of  God's  power  and  goodness. 

II.  That  we  should  not  in  our  conceit  proudly  and  vainly  appropriate  or  engross  the 
regard  of  God  unto  ourselves,  but  remember  that  our  brethren  have  an  equal  shara 
with  us  therein.  III.  That  in  all  our  devotions  we  should  be  mindful  of  those  com- 
mon bands  which  knit  us  together  as  men  and  Christians.  (1)  The  band  of  nature 
and  humanity  ;  (2)  The  more  strict  ties  of  common  faith  and  hope ;  of  (3)  mani- 
fold relations  unto  God  that  made  us,  and  (4)  our  Saviour  that  redeemed  us,  and  the 
(5)  Holy  Spirit  that  animateth  us  and  oombineth  us  in  spiritual  union.  IV.  That 
we  should  bear  such  hearty  goodwill  and  charitable  affection  toward  others  as  not 
only  to  seek  and  desire  our  own  private  and  particular  good,  but  that  of  all  men. 
(1)  Especially  of  all  good  Christians  who,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  are  (2)  God's  children 
and  (o)  our  brethren,  (haac  Barrow,  D.I).)  Lessons  of  the  Paternoster: — L 
The  Divine  Fatherhood.  II.  Christian  sonslnp.  III.  Human  brotherhood.  What 
great  lessons  in  such  little  compass.  (2'.  Spencer.)  Our  Father  \phich  art  in 
heaven ; — 1.  In  prayer  we  address  One  who  sustains  the  relationship  of  Father  to 


CELO-.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  88 

US.  2.  In  prayer  we  direct  our  thoughts  to  One  who  is  above  us.  3.  In  prayer  we 
confess  that  we  form  members  of  one  family.  4.  In  prayer  we  depend  upon  and 
ronfide  in  God  as  children.  {F,  Edwards,  B.A.)  God  a  Father  : — L  The  cha- 
BACTEK  in  which  God  is  represented  as  approachable  in  prayer.  The  common 
Parent  of  all  men,  the  bouutiful  supplier  of  their  wants.  His  people's  covenant 
God  and  Father  in  Christ.  II.  The  privilege  which  this  title  imports.  Eelation- 
ship,  access,  protection,  direction,  expectations.  III.  The  duty  connected  with 
this  privilege.  To  pray  to  Him,  to  glorify  Him,  reverence,  trust,  submit,  love  Him, 
and    look    for    His    coming.     (Dr.    Cope.)  The  Invocation: — I.  The  Divine 

Fatherhood.     II.  The  Fatherhood  of  God  by  creation.     III.  The  Fatherhood  of 
God  by  REDEMPTION.     IV.  The  blessings  involved  in  the  Divine  Fatherhood.     1. 
Love.    2.  Sustenance.      3.  Protection.      4.  Education.     5.  Discipline.     6.  Conso- 
lation.     7.  Intercourse.      8.  Inheritance.      V.  Universal    brotherhood    in   the 
Divine  Fatherhood.    We  pray  for  others ;  we  share  in  the  prayers  of  others.     This 
brotherhood  extends  to  the  various  conditions  of  social  life.     It  embraces  nations. 
What  a  bond  to  our  otherwise  dissevered  humanity  is  this  word  "our."    YI.  The 
Majesty  of  the  Father.     These  were  added  that  there  may  not  be  anything  earthly 
in  our  conception  of  the  heavenly  majesty  of  God.     "In  heaven  "  : — (1)  It  is  sug- 
gestive of  dignity ;    (2)  power ;    (3)  knowledge ;    (4)  purity  ;    (5)  mystery ;    (6)  con- 
etancy  ;  (7)  nearness.      VII.  Practical  lessons  :    1.  Filial  confidence.     2.  Rever- 
ence.   3.  Gratitude.     4.  Eesemblance.    5.  Assurance.     6.  Hope.     7.  Prayerfulness. 
(Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)         The  Paternity  of  God : — In  our  nature  are  quenchless 
at  actions.     These  call  for  somethicg  more  than  God  the  Creator,  the  Euler.   1.  We 
should  recognize  that  God  is  our  Father,  in  order  that  we  may  have  right  views  of 
r«  igion.     2.  It  is  important  to  realize  the  truth  of  God's  paternity,  because  of  its 
consolations.     3.  This  truth  furnishes  us  with  the  profoundest  motives  to  obedi- 
ence.    (E.  H.  Chaplin.)  The  invocation  : — I.  From  the  title  Father  we  know 
that  God  is  a  Person.    II.  Our  Father  belongs  to  God  as  the  Father  of  all  mankind. 
II {.  God  is  our  Father  through  Jesus  Christ.     IV.  In  teaching  us  to  pray  "Our 
Fi.ther,"  Jesus  would  remind  us  of  our  brotherhood.     1.  The  fellowship  that  knita 
together  God's  elect.     2.  It  is  a  word  of  love  that  takes  in  all  men.     V.  Which  art 
in  heaven ,  means  Father  in  perfection.  1.  Perfection  of  love.   2.  Perfection  of  help. 
8.  Perfection  of  nearness  and  observation.     4.  Perfection  of  homeliness.     (Dr.Stan- 
f(^d.)        The  doctrine  of  the  invocation  : — 1.  God  is  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  in  Him  the  Father  of  all  who  believe  in  the  Saviour.     2.  Jesus  is  the 
foBtbom  among  many  brethren,  Head  of  the  Church,  the  centre  of  union.      In  Him 
we  say  "  Our  Father."    3.  Jesus  has  opened  to  us  heaven  ;  and,  risen  with  Christ, 
w«s  seek  the  things  which  are  above,  we  pray  to  our  Father  in  heaven.    4.  We  say 
t)>  \x  Father,  because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  unto  us,  as  the  Spirit  of  adoption. 
|*r.  Saphir.)         The  spirit  of  the  invocation : — I.  The  mlial  spirit.      1.  It  rests 
h,  >on  the  Fatherhood  of  God  as  the  source  of  all  blessings.     2.  It  is  a  childUke 
4  drit,  earnest,  unsuspicious,  submits  to  disciphue  in  faith.  3.  As  a  spirit  of  dignity 
k  .d  perfection.     4.     A  spirit  of  separation  from  the  world.     IL  The  bbotheblt 
spirit.    III.  The  heavenly  spirit.    All  spiritual  blessings  are  treasured  up  for  us  in 
heaven.     Our  storehouse  can  never  fail.     (Ibid.)         In  heaven: — 1.  Power.     2. 
Authority,     3.  Omnipresence.     4.  Wisdom  unsearchable.     6.  Mercy  unspeakable. 
(Downcmie.)        Our  Father : — 1.  A  revelation.     2.  When  faith  says  "  Father,"  love 
says  "  Our."    3.  Contrast  between  earth  and  heaven.     4.  We  can  speak  to  our 
Father  in  heaven,    and  yet  be  audible.     (Dr.  C.  J.  Vaughan.)         The  opening 
address: — I.  The  views  here  furnished  of  the  chabacteb  oy  God.     1.  The  title 
"  Father  "  belongs  to  God  essentially  :  as  part  of  His  nature  He  must  be  the  Parent 
of  all  being.    We  are  indebted  to  Him  not  only  for  life,  but  for  likeness;  Ho  made 
as  partakers  of  a  spiritual  nature.    II.  The  affections  and  emotions  these  views  of 
the  Divuie  character  are  fitted  to  inspire.    1.  Admiring  gratitude.    2.  Confidence 
and  tmst.    3.  Submission.     4.  Contentment.     5.  Reverent  awe.     6.  Parity  and 
elevation  in  our  desires.    7.  We  should  remember  that  our  inheritance  is  "in 
heaven."     (D.  Moore,  M. A.)  The  filial  spirit  of  the  Lord's  Prayer: — 1.  Christ 
confirms  the  fact  of  God's  Paternity.     2.  Christ  was  also  the  personal  and  visible 
representation  of  the  Father.     3.  Christ  also  reveals  the  Paternal  character  of  God- 
4.  Christ  also  revealed  the  Paternal  heart  of  God.     Father  : — 1.  It  is  the  language 
of  the  believing  heart.    2.  It  is  the  language  of  filial  love.     8.  It  is  the  language 
of  the  spirit  of  adoption  in  prayer.     4.  The  filial  spirit  exhibited  not  less  in  times 
of  trial  than  in  seasons  of  communion.     (Dr.  O.  Winslow.)        **  Our  Father"  :— 
The  catholic  spirit  of  the  Lord's  Prayer.     The  Paternal  relation  involves  the  fra« 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ti, 

ternal ;  no  engagement  so  uniting  as  prayer.  Considerations  for  fraternal  union :— . 

1.  The  equality  of  love  with  which  the  Father  regards  all  His  family.  2.  The  sam« 
spirit  of  adoption  dwells  alike  in  all  the  children  of  God.  3,  That  our  Father  is 
bringing  us  all  to  one  parental  and  eternal  home.  4.  This  topic  belongs  esseutinUy  to 
practical  Christianity.  5.  How  uniting  this  truth  upon  the  family  institution. 
{Ibid.)  ''Which  art  in  hea.ven."  The  celestial  spirit  of  the  Lord's  Prayer :—» 
In  ascribing  locality  to  God  we  must  not  forget  that  He  is  everywhere.  How  appi'o- 
priate  heaven  as  the  dwelling-place  of  God.  1.  Heaven  is  a  glorious  place.  2.  It 
is  a  holy  place.  3.  It  is  a  happy  place.  4.  It  is  a  prepared  place.  Practical 
lessens :   1.  We  are  instructed  to  look  up,  the  whole  soul  should  be  in  the  ascent. 

2.  To  teek  heavenly  blessings.  {Ibid.)  The  Fatherhood  of  Qod,  and  tJie  brother • 
hood  of  man : — Prayer  a  most  exalted  privilege — connected  with  the  richest  bless- 
ings ;  but  is  liable  to  abuse.  1.  Christ  admonishes  His  disciples  to  avoid  the 
ostentatious  formalities  of  the  Pharisees.  2.  To  avoid  the  vain  tautologies  ol  4ha 
heathen.  This  is  to  be  our  model  prayer: — 1.  Simplicity.  2.  Brevity.  I.  The 
Fatherhood  of  God.  1.  By  an  act  of  creation.  2.  By  an  act  of  adoption.  8.  God 
is  in  heaven.  II.  The  brotuerhood  of  men.  1.  The  whole  human  race  oonstituteg 
one  family.  They  belong  to  different  classes,  climes,  ages ;  all  sprung  from  one 
Father.  2.  All  Christians  constitute  one  family.  (J.  Morgan.)  The  Paternal 
relationship  of  God  to  us  : — 1.  It  confers  noble  privileges  (1  John  iii.  1 ;  Eom.  viii. 
7 ;  P'^a.  cxiii.  5 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  8).  2.  Such  a  name  and  title  we  could  never  have 
dared  to  take  upon  us  had  not  God  permitted.  3.  This  is  no  barren  title  (Rom.  i. 
21 ;  Isa.  xlix.  14,  15  ;  Ixiii.  16).  4.  This  first  word  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  designed 
to  give  us  access  with  confidence  to  God  (Eph.  iii.  12  ;  Psa.  Ixxxi.  10).  5.  This 
BonsLip  has  its  duties.  {F.  C.  Blyth,  M.A.)  Children  worthy  of  the  Divine 
Father: — It  is  recorded  of  Alexander  the  Great  that  to  one  who  bore  his  name  he 
gave  this  admonition,  "  Eemember  thy  name  is  Alexander ;  "  implying  that  such  a 
remembrance  would  keep  him  from  doing  anything  that  would  stain  and  tarnish, 
and  so  render  him  unworthy  to  hold  it.  The  title  of  Father  enables  us  to  under- 
stand God : — Luther  was  one  day  catechising  some  country  people  in  a  village  in 
Saxony.  When  one  of  the  men  had  repeated  these  words,  '•  I  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,"  Luther  asked  him  what  was  the  meaning  of  "  Almighty  "  ?  The 
countryman  honestly  replied,  •*  I  do  not  know."  "  Nor  do  I  know,"  said  the  cate- 
chist,  "  nor  do  all  the  learned  men  in  the  world  know;  however,  you  may  safely 
beheve  that  God  is  your  Father,  and  that  He  is  both  able  and  willing  to  save  and 
protect  yourself  and  all  your  neighbours."  Fatherhood  indicative  of  Person- 
ality : — You  never  say  Father,  to  a  force;  Father,  to  a  law;  Father,  to  a  mist; 
Father,  to  a  mile,  nor  to  infinite  millions  of  miles  in  a  line  ;  "  Father  "  is  not  the 
name  for  Thought  apart  from  the  Thinker,  nor  for  Friendship  apart  from  the 
Friend  ;  nor  for  a  Link,  though  the  first  link  in  a  long  chain  of  grand  phenomena. 
If  we  mean  more  than  a  figurative  father,  we  mean  by  that  word  a  living  Person. 
(Dr.  Stanford.)  The  Lord's  Prayer  an  intercession  for  others  as  well  as  for  our- 
selves : — it  was  a  law  among  the  Pkomans  that  no  one  should  approach  the  Emperor's 
tent  at  night,  under  penalty  of  death.  One  night,  however,  a  soldier  was  found 
near  the  royal  tent,  holding  in  his  hand  a  petition  which  he  meant  to  present  to 
his  master  :  and  thereupon  he  was  sentenced  to  death.  But  the  Emperor,  hearing 
voices,  and  asking  what  was  amiss,  and  hearing  that  a  soldier  had  intruded  within 
the  forbidden  bounds  to  present  a  petition,  and  that  they  were  about  to  deal  with 
him  according  to  the  law,  said — "  If  the  petition  be  for  himself,  let  him  die  ;  but 
if  for  another,  spare  his  life."  It  was  found  that  it  was  for  two  of  his  fellow- 
soldiers  that  he  had  come  to  intercede,  who  had  been  taken  asleep  while  they  were 
posted  on  the  watch.  The  Emperor,  well  pleased,  commanded  that  he  should  escape 
death,  and  that  they  also  should  escape  punishment.  The  look  of  the  soul  evfr 
toward  its  heavenly  home : — It  is  related  of  Cicero  when  be  was  banished  from  Italy, 
and  of  Deniosthones  when  he  was  banished  from  Athens,  that  thoy  wept  every  time 
they  looked  towards  their  own  country,  so  great  was  their  love  for  their  fatherland, 
and  so  keen  their  desire  to  return  thither  :  so  should 'our  soul  long  after  our  home 
above.  Which  art  in  heaven : — I.  The  residence  of  God.  Heaven  is  the  seat  of  Uia 
government ;  the  region  of  bolinese  and  enjoyment ;  the  abode  of  angels  and  saints. 
II.  His  stupendous  concerns.  Arranging  all  the  affairs  of  the  universe ;  re- 
ceiving the  homage  of  the  celestiwl  inhabitants  (Rev,  iv.  2)  ;  issuing  His  com. 
mands  and  executing  His  thr«atenings ;  attending  to  the  supplication  of  Hii 
people;  protecting  His  Cburch"  (Zech.  ii.  6).  HI,  The  influknce  of  thb  bob- 
iECT  tJpoN  ouB  MIND.     HumiUty,  reverence,  epidtual  desires,  confidence,  expect*- 


CHAP.  Ti.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  8| 

tion,  joy,  [Dr.  Cope.)  Looking  up  to  God  "  in  heaven," showeth  us : — (1)  Pi'ayel 
is  an  act  of  the  heart,  not  of  the  Ups.  It  is  not  the  sound  of  the  voice  which  can 
enter  into  the  cars  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  but  sighs  and  groans  of  the  Spirit.  .  .  . 
The  commerce  and  communion  of  spirits  is  not  hindered  by  local  distance.  (2)  The 
work  of  prayer  is  to  lift  up  the  heart  to  God ;  to  withdraw  the  heart  from  all 
created  things,  that  we  may  converse  with  God  "  in  heaven."  {Thomas  Manton, 
D.D.)  Which  art  in  heaven: — I.  Our  Saviour,  to  oppose  narrowness  of  opinion, 
requires  as  to  pray  to  our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  showing  by  this,  that  oar 
petitions  have  equal  access  to  Him  from  all  places.  IL  This  acknowledgment  of 
our  Father  in  heaven,  shows  His  great  kindness  in  suffering  us  to  approach  Him. 
Though'  distant  in  station,  and  unprofitable  in  our  service.  HI.  By  calling 
God  our  Father  we  express  the  greatness  of  those  blesbings  wa  have  received ;  and 
by  professing  this  our  Father  to  be  in  Jieaven,  we  own  the  great  dignity  of  the 
person  that  hath  conferred  them  upon  us ;  and  the  sense  of  both  these  together 
will  naturally  prepare  our  hope,  reverence,  and  attention,  to  send  up  the  following 
prayer.     (Thomas  Mangey.) 

Hallowed  be  Thy  name. — How  and  when  may  God's  name  he  tanetified  f — (1) 
Upon  us,  by  the  righteous  executions  and  judgments  of  His  providence  ;  (2)  By  us, 
in  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions ;  in  our  hearts,  and  life.  Not  only  when  we 
speak  of  the  name  of  God,  but  when  we  think  of  it ;  (3)  When  in  straits,  difficulties 
and  dangers  ;  (4)  "When  we  speak  of  the  Lord  with  reverence ;  (5)  In  our  actions 
(6)  In  our  worship  ;  (7)  In  ordinary  conversation.  Let  this  be  your  care,  and  Idj 
these  be  your  directions  in  hallowing  and  sanctifying  the  Lord's  name.  1.  Be 
holy.  2.  Study  His  name  if  ye  would  sanctify  it.  8.  Submit  to  His  providence 
without  murmuring.  4.  Live  to  public  ends.  Allure  others,  and  recommend  God 
to  them.  5.  Be  fully  sensible  when  God's  name  is  dishonoured  by  yourselves 
and  others ;  not  enduring  the  least  profanation  of  it.  {Thomas  Manton,  D.D.) 
Hallowed  be  Thy  name  : — As  to  the  substance  of  this  particular,  we  may  consider, 
that  sanctity  implying — I.  A  Discrimination  ;  II.  A  distance ;  III.  An  exaltment 
in  nature  or  use  of  the  thing  which  is  denominated  thereby,  {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.) 
The  Sanctijication  of  Jehovah's  name : — I.  The  objects  of  the  petition.  The 
name  of  God  denotes  His  titles,  perfections,  Ac.  To  hallow  His  name  denotes — A 
reverential  acknowledgment  of  God ;  profound  veneration  for  His  Being,  attributes, 
ordinances,  word,  &c. ;  sanctification  of  Him  in  thought,  word,  and  action ;  the 
diffusion  of  His  name  through  the  world ;  removal  of  the  causes  which  prevent 
His  name  from  being  hallowed.  II.  The  sins  deprecated.  A  thoughtless  and 
irreverent  use  of  His  name ;  appeals  to  God  in  common  conversation ;  perjury. 
III.  The  grounds  on  which  this  petition  rests.  God  is  jealous  of  the  glory  of  Hia 
name  ;  He  has  commanded  it  to  be  reverenced  ;  punishment  is  annexed  to  a  violation 
of  that  command.  {Dr.  Cope.)  Hallowed  be  Thy  name  : — 1.  This  prayer  is  a  con. 
fession  of  our  ignorance.  2.  It  is  a  suppUcation  for  knowledge.  3.  It  is  an 
acknowledgment  of  our  sin.  4.  It  is  an  entreaty  for  hohness  in  ourselves.  6.  It 
ought  to  be  increasingly  comprehe:i  si  ve.  (F.Edwards,  B.A.)  The  first  petition  : 
— I.  The  PLACE  of  this  petition.  II.  The  meaning  of  the  petition.  III.  What  is 
involved  in  this  petition.  1.  Honour  to  Jesus,  as  revealing  the  name  of  the  Father. 
2.  Appropriate  thoughts  of  God.  3.  Suitable  emotions  towards  God.  4.  Rever- 
ential use  of  the  name.  6.  Confession  of  the  name.  6.  Private  and  public  worship 
of  the  name.  7.  Observance  of  special  institutions:  sacraments.  8.  Subjection 
to  the  name.    9.  Making  known  the  name.    IV.  Reasons  for  offering  this  petition. 

1.  The  welfare  of  the  world.  2.  For  tha  good  of  ourselves.  3.  For  the  glory  of 
God.  {Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  The  first  petition  : — I.  What  do  wk  mean  bi 
a  HE  N4.ME  OF  THE  Fathee.  1,  His  name  is  the  expression  of  Himself  through 
the  language  of  nature.  2.  It  includes  the  further  expression  of  Himself  through 
the  medium  of  inspued  words.  3.  His  name  is  perfectly  expressed  in  the  language 
of  the  Incarnation.  II.  How  can  wb  hallow  it  ?  1,  In  the  language  of  the 
Old  Testament  to  hallow  a  thing  is  to  set  it  apart  ceremonially,  as  a  thing  sacred. 

2.  Hallowed  be  Thy  name  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  us.  3.  By  ooi 
trust.  4.  In  the  spirit  of  our  prayers.  5.  In  our  Uves.  6.  In  our  language.  7. 
In  Thy  Church  by  the  ascription  to  Thee  alone  of  honours  due.  8.  In  the  over- 
throw of  idolati-y.  (Dr.  Stanford.)  Hallowed  be  Thy  name  : — I.  In  breathing 
this  prayer  we  ask  that  God  would  hallow  His  own  name,  or  cause  it  to  be 
hallowed.  It  is  not  the  tribute  which  we  pay  to  mere  power  and  magnitude.  Natur« 
appears  in  forms  of  greatness ;  we  do  not  reverence  her.    Nor  do  we  reverenot 


RS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

mere  kindness.  A  full  knowledge  of  God  is  necessary  in  order  to  hallow  His  name. 
To  avoid  superstition.  Terror  is  not  reverence.  Some  view  the  Divine  Being 
as  too  good-natared  to  punish ;  the  guilt  of  sin  is  not  felt.  By  this  theory  God'a 
name  is  Hcknowledged,  but  not  hallowed.  II,  We  can  also  pray  that  we  and  aui 
MEN  may  hallow  THE  NAME  OF  GoD.  We  should  consecrato  ELis  name — 1.  On 
our  lips.  2.  In  our  lives.  3.  In  our  hearts.  (E.  H.  Chaplin.)  Thefunda- 
nuntal  petition: — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  name  of  God?  God  has  revealed 
His  name — 1.  In  creation.  2.  In  Israel.  3.  In  His  Law.  4.  In  the  Bacrihces. 
6.  In  the  names  of  His  servants.  Elijah  means,  Jehovah  is  my  strength.  6.  In 
the  face  of  Jesus.  H.  Hallowed  be  Thy  name.  All  the  works  of  God  glorify  Hifl 
name.  The  petition  implies — (1)  The  desire  to  know  God's  name ;  (2)  To  treat 
it  as  a  reality ;  (3)  To  rf joice  in  it ;  (4)  To  separate  it  from  onr  corrupt  thoughta 
and  desires ;  6.  To  regard  it  as  inviolable  in  its  rmity ;  (6)  That  we  be  mani- 
festations of  God.  (7)  This  prayer  is  universal ;  there  is  no  health  for  the 
nation  or  family  but  by  the  knowledge  of  God's  name.  {Dr.  Saphir.)  Tli* 
reverential  spirit  of  the  Lord's  prayer : — This  petition  takes  precedence  in  the 
Lord's  prayer:  all  things  must  resolve  themselves  into  a  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  glory.  1.  God's  name  is  Holy  (Lev.  xxii.  2).  2.  He  is  jealous  of  it 
fEzek.  xxxix.  25).  3.  God  notices  the  hallowing  of  His  name  by  His  people 
(Matt.  ii.  5).  4.  God  has  hallowed  His  own  name  (1)  in  His  revealed  word;  (2) 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  (3)  in  His  dealings  with  His  saints.  How  is  God'a 
name  to  be  hallowed  ?  We  cannot  make  it  more  holy,  yet  may  hallow  it  (1)  By  a 
deepening  sense  of  its  holiness  ;  (2)  By  bringing  it  into  the  daily  exercise  of  faith  ; 
(3)  By  a  meek,  submissive  spuit,  under  the  discipline  of  our  Father's  correcting 
hand  ;  (4)  By  a  full  trust  in  the  name,  Person,  work  of  Jesus.  (Dr.  0,  Wiiulow^ 
The  first  petition : — This  prayer  directory  for  the  matter  and  order  of  our  desires. 

1.  What  we  should  include  in  this  prayer.  1.  Just  and  worthy  apprehensions  of 
the  Divine  character  and  attributes.  2.  That  fresh  accesf^ions  of  glory  may  be 
constHntly  accruing  to  that  name  from  the  Person  and  work  of  Christ.  3.  That 
in  eveiything  which  pertains  to  God,  due  regard  may  be  had  to  the  sanctities  of 
His  holy  nature.  4.  To  emphasize  the  utterance  of  the  sacred  name  by  some  act  of 
mental  worship.  5  A  reverent  observance  of  His  ordinances.  II.  What  we  may 
LE.sEN  from  this  petition.  1.  That  in  all  onr  prayers,  regard  must  be  had  to  cer- 
tain fixed  principles  of  moral  government.  2.  The  law  of  subordination  accord- 
ing to  which  we  are  to  frame  our  desires.  3.  He  may  not  allow  praise  to  be  given 
to  any  other  name.  {D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  Holy  name: — I.  The  name.  II. 
The  HOLY  name.  Who  so  worthy  of  honour :  (1)  He  is  the  God  of  Nature ;  (2) 
of  Providence ;  (3)  of  Grace ;  (4)  of  Glory.  (5)  The  redeemed  saints  in  glory 
honour  and  venerate  Him  ;  the  angelic  host  worship  Him.  (6)  The  other  Persona 
in  the  adorable  Trinity  honour  Him — "He  shall  glorify  Me."  HI.  How  can  we 
honour  Jesus  ?     1.  By  giving  Him  the  first  place  in  our  thoughts  and  affections. 

2.  By  a  reverential  use  of  all  the  appellations  by  which  He  is  distinguished  from 
all  oth^r  beings.  3.  By  solemn  and  grateful  acts  of  worship.  4.  By  keeping  holy 
the  Sabbath  day.  5.  By  living  hulily  before  our  fellow  men.  6.  By  praising,  and 
recommending  Him  to  all  who  dwell  aroond  as.     {J.  Morgan.) 

Ver.  10.  Thy  kingdom  come. — The  coming  of  ChrisVt  kingdom: — 1.  Greater 
than  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  is  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  Amidst  all  the 
breaking  up  of  human  kingdoms  men  seek  one  that  will  abide.  3.  This  is  a 
kingdom  founded  not  by  external  might  but  by  moral  goodness.  4.  The  king- 
dom of  God  is  God's  first  primeval  thought.  5.  The  kingdom  of  God  has  made 
out  a  history,  6.  The  way  of  its  coming  is  an  inner,  a  spiritual,  a  moral  one.  7. 
His  kingdom  comes  in  time  till  it  will  one  day  come  gloriously  in  eternity.  {Dr. 
Lutliardt.)  Importance  of  pnnjer  for  the  conversion  of  the  world  : — I.  In  the  fact 
that  Christ  directs  His  discipl'-s  to  make  it.  U.  In  the  good  influence  it  exerts  over 
those  who  ofier  it  in  sincerity  and  in  earnest.  III.  In  the  encouragement  it  affords 
those  who  have  consecrated  themselves  to  labour  in  person  for  that  object.  IV. 
Prayer  is  the  only  means  of  bringing  down  God's  blessiii^r  upon  us.  {J.  Doolittle.) 
Thy  kingdom  come : — 1.  This  prayer  reminds  us  that  there  is  another  kingdom 
besides  God's  kingdom  established  in  the  world.  2.  It  suggests  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  the  establishment  of  God's  kingdom.  3.  It  expresses  our  acqni<Hcence  in  all 
things  by  which  the  desired  result  may  be  secured.  4.  It  leads  us  to  anticipate  that 
the  ascendancy  desired  will  be  gained  only  slowly.  6.  It  impregnates  the  fature 
with  hopefulness.     6.  It  necessitates  the  cultivation  of  a  missionary  spirit      (F. 


CHAP.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  89 


Edwards,  B.A.)  Christ's  kingdom  : — I.  DESCBtBB  this  kingdom.  This  kingdow 
supposes — 1.  A  kingdom,  and  who  is  the  King  of  this  kingdom.  2.  The  kingdom 
ot  Christ  is  wholly  Divine  in  its  rise  and  progress.  3.  This  kingdom  supposes  a 
Bceptre  of  dominion.  It  is  a  sceptre  of  invincible  strength.  4.  This  kingdom  ia 
destined  to  be  universal.  II.  What  is  included  in  the  prayeb  of  the  Chcbch 
FOB  its  advancement.  1.  It  is  not  yet  fully  come.  2.  That  this  kingdom  may  coma 
in  the  world,  we  ought  to  pray  that  this  kingdom  may  come  in  the  Church.  4. 
We  ought  to  pray  that  this  kingdom  may  come  in  our  hearts.  III.  But  if  we  pbat 
FOR  IT,  THIS  intimates  THAT  WE  MUST  DESIRE  ITS  COMING.  1.  And  Can  it  be  otherwlse 
than  an  object  of  desire  to  you,  if  you  love  Christ.  2.  This  prayer  intimates  that 
you  should  labour  for  its  advancement.  3.  You  should  hope  for  the  universal 
coming  of   this  kingdom.     (J.  Brown.)  I.  The  nature  op  the  kingdom.     1. 

Spiritual  in  its  nature.  2.  Tranquil  in  its  government.  3.  Abundant  in  its  im- 
munities.  4.  Perpetual  in  its  duration.  II.  The  immediate  consequences  of  its 
BEING  COME.  III.  The  MEANS  TO  EFFECTUATE  IT.  (The  Pulpit.)  The  arrival  of 
Christ's  reign: — I.  ReveijATion  favours  largeness  of  views.  It  tmfolds  a  sphere 
composed  of  vast  circles.  It  attempts  to  extend  our  contemplations  over  the  whole 
earth.  God's  kingdom  is  everywhere.  II.  We  should  let  our  religious  contkh- 
PLATI0N8  EXPAND  TO  THE  LIMITS  OF  THE  EARTH.  What  a  mortifving  dimiuutiveneM 
in  our  widest  views  of  the  same.  III.  Theeb  are  some  consolatory  truths  to 
BELIEVE  this  awful  VIEW  OF  THE  WORLD.  What  revealed  religion  has  done  and  ia 
doing.  The  prophetic  vision  of  its  future  achievements.  The  absolute  certainty 
that  Christianity  is  the  grand  expedient  for  renovating  the  state  of  man.  IV.  Con- 
siderations TO  induce  the  active  co-operation  of  all  Christians.  The  good 
dnsigned  to  be  diffused  is  heavenly.  Its  progress  is  at  present  most  marvelloua, 
God  looks  with  greatest  complacency  upon  the  missionary  toil.  (The  Evangeliit.) 
*'  Thy  kingdom  come : — I,  This  kingdom  shows  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  il 
always  used  in  the  singular  number,  showing  that  there  is  but  one  Church,  where- 
Bc  ever  dispersed  through  the  world.  (1)  It  reminds  us — that  we  have  but  one  God, 
o)»e  faith,  and  one  baptism ;  (2)  That  the  several  parts  of  it,  however  distant  in 
ir  terests,  judgment,  or  affection,  yet  are  but  many  members  of  one  body.  II.  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  not  yet  fully  come  from  the  narrow  extent  of  Christianity. 
(1)  It  cannot  be  said  to  come  till  all  nations  have  received  and  submitted  to  it ;  (2) 
Until  it  hath  been  preached  to  all  the  world.  III.  This  kingdom  is  not  yet  comb, 
rpoM  THE  want  of  DUE  OBEDIENCE  IN  THE  MEMBERS.  (1)  A  govemment  caunot  be 
Bsid  to  be  perfect — where  the  laws  and  constitutions  of  it  have  not  their  due  force  ; 
(2 1  Till  the  power  and  efficacy  of  it  be  more  visible  in  the  orderly  lives  of  ita 
subjects.  IV,  The  kingdom  of  God  cannot  be  said  to  come — till  the  true  members 
OF  IT  receive  their  REWARD  ;  (1)  Till  His  faithful  servants  are  made  sharers  in  it; 
(2 .  Till  the  subjects  of  it  are  fretd  from  hardships  and  oppression.  V.  This  petition 
BBOULD  dispose  US  TO  UNITY.  We  pray  not  here  for  this  or  that  particular 
Cl\urch,  but  for  that  diffusive  universal  one  that  makes  up  Christ's  kingdom. 
(7  homas  Mangey.)  The  second  petition: — I,  The  kingdom.  II.  Thb  way  this 
K1.1GD0M  WILL  COME.  1.  It  wiU  come  by  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  It  will 
come  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  cross.  3.  It  comes  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit.  III.  How  WE  should  pray  for  this.  1.  Each  one  of  us  should  pray  that 
the  kingdom  may  come  in  his  own  heart.  2.  That  it  may  come  Ln  the  world.  (Dr. 
Stanford.)  The  second  petition : — I.  The  kingdom  of  God  spiritual.  Once  thia 
kingdom  was  undisputed  :  angels.  II.  Essential  difference  between  the  kino« 
BOM  OF  God  and  kingdoms  of  the  world.  1.  In  their  ruler.  2.  The  laws.  3. 
The  subjects.  4.  The  objects.  5.  The  methods.  6.  The  extent.  III.  The  oomino 
OF  this  kingdom.  IV.  The  millennial  reign.  V.  Prayer  for  the  coming  of 
THE  KINGDOM.  1.  Not  Unnecessary.  2.  What  the  prayer  includes.  3.  A  test  of 
character.  4.  Personal  concurrence.  5.  Missionary  zeal.  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.) 
The  kingdom  of  grace  icithin  xis  : — 1.  If  the  kingdom  has  to  come  to  us,  we  must  be 
by  nature  outside  it.  2.  We  cannot  go  to  the  kingdom ;  it  must  come  to  us.  3. 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  bring  with  them  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy.  4. 
In  this  kingdom  there  is  dignity  and  liberty.  6.  The  extent  and  comprehensivenesa 
of  this  kingdom  ;  the  whole  heart,  body,  mind.  6.  Antagonistic  :  in  opposition  to 
sin  within  and  around  us.  (Dr.  Saphir.)  The  Messianic  kingdom : — I.  Who  ia 
the  King  ?  1.  Christ  as  Son  of  man.  2.  As  the  Son  of  David.  3.  By  virtue  of  Hia 
Bufferings  and  death.  4  Associated  in  His  reign  are  glorified  saints.  II.  Whbji 
will  this  kingdom  be  established.  III.  The  character  of  this  kingdom.  1.  In  mani. 
tested  power  on  earth.     2.  It  is  spiritual.     (Ibid.)        The  second  petition : — I.  Th« 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

NATURE  of  ths  kingdom  spoken  of.  The  Jews  always  expected  a  ruling  Messimh. 
Pray  for — 1.  The  reign  of  grace  in  the  he^rt.  2.  The  roigu  of  truth  in  the  world. 
3.  The  reign  of  hoUness  and  joy  in  the  life  of  the  world  to  come.  4.  We  pray 
against  all  divided  loyalties.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  prophetical  spirit  of  tlie 
Lord's  prayer: — I.  God  is  a  great  King.  1.  The  kiiig.l(jm  of  nature  is  His.  2, 
The  kingdom  of  providence  is  His.  3.  God's  higher  kingdom  of  grace.  II.  The 
kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  would.  1.  It  is  spiritual.  2.  It  is  prophetical.  {Dr.  0. 
Winslow.^  Thy  kijifjdom  eoine  : — I.  Let  us  observe  the  fact  that  the  consummate 
blessing  is  to  come.  There  is  a  better  era  for  men  to  come.  I  refer  to  this  prospec- 
tive attitude  of  Christianity  because  it  exhibits  two  characteristics  worthy  of  notice. 
1.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  general  working  of  God.  Progress  is  His  law. 
Christianity  is  not  a  fixed  syst(?m.  2.  The  wise  benevolence  of  such  a  position. 
By  proclaiming  a  better  era  it  gives  individuals  and  the  race  the  loftiest  inspira- 
tion of  hope.  II.  Consider  some  indications  of  that  coming.  1.  As  its  coming  ia 
gradual  we  cannot  expect  to  discover  great  advancement  within  any  narrow  scope  ^f 
time.  2.  That  the  kingdom  of  God  is  coming  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  most 
civilized  communities  of  the  world  are  in  a  far  better  condition  now  than  before  the 
advent  of  Jesus,  especially  in  point  of  morality.  III.  The  essentiaIj  nature  of  this 
kingdom.  1.  Con&idered  exkrnally,  it  is  an  historical  fact,  and  has  an  organized 
form.  2.  This  kingdom  is  also  internal,  it  is  spiritual.  3.  As  to  the  advancement 
of  that  kingdom  do  not  let  ua  cherish  conceptions  which  are  calculated  to  discourage 
our  exertions ,  {K.H.Chaplin,)  Thy  kingdom  come  : — God's  kingdom  is  a  kingdom 
of  many  prorinces.  They  are  divided  by  narrow  isthmuses ;  but  over  the  whole 
there  is  a  unity  of  system  and  design,  and  the  same  law  pervades.  There  is  the 
kingdom  of  natm'e,  pro\'idence,  of  grace  in  the  heart  of  man,  in  the  world,  and  in  the 
eternal  glory.  I.  NVhat  is  the  kingdom  of  tue  heart  for  which  we  pray.  1. 
It  does  not  consist  with  the  glory  and  show  of  this  present  life — "  My  kingdom  is 
not  of  this  world."  2.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drliik.  3.  Neither 
does  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  observation.  But  it  is — 1.  Spiritual.  2.  It  is 
free.  No  one  knows  liberty  who  does  not  know  the  kingdom.  3.  It  is  comprehensive. 
It  gathers  up  the  whole  range  of  things  into  a  eysiem.  4.  It  is  exclusive.  The 
heart  grows  so  full  of  God  that  it  can  hold  nothing  else.  II.  H>tve  you  considered 
what  tou  really  mean  when  you  ofTer  this  prayer.  God  hears  and  answers,  perhaps 
by  loss,  bereavement,  isolation :  tlius  the  kingdom  comes  into  the  heart.  {J. 
Vanghan,M.A.)  The  Divine  kingdom  : — I.  The  kingdom  itself.  "We  should  have 
known  nothing  of  it  but  for  revelation.  1.  It  is  not  a  worldly  kingdom.  2.  It  is 
constitut'r-d  in  the  Person  of  the  King  Himself.  3.  It  is  a  peaceable  kingdom.  4. 
The  subsidiary  and  collateral  blessings  which  flow  from  this  kingdom.  6.  It  admits 
of  unlimited  extension.  6.  It  will  be  of  long  duration.  7.  Its  brightness  is  per- 
petually increasing.  II.  Some  grounds  on  which  the  pious  may  pray  and  expect 
TK2  diffusion  OF  THIS  KINGDOM.  1.  We  may  expect  it  from  analogy.  2.  We  may 
expect  it  from  the  symbolical  events  of  Jewish  history.  Moses  was  victorious  over 
Egypt ;  Elijah  over  the  priests  of  Baal ;  Dagon  over  the  ark.  3.  The  figures  and 
representations  of  the  New  Testament.  4.  The  moral  properties  require  that  the 
kingdom  of  God  should  become  glorious.  Providence  produces  great  results  by 
small  means.  So  large  an  agency  as  are  involved  in  the  cross  and  Christianity 
requires  the  result  to  be  vast.  5.  When  we  think  of  the  energy  employed  in  the 
diffusion  of  the  kingdom  our  hopes  arise.  III.  Point  out  some  of  the  encodbagino 
intimations  which  we  have  of  the  coming  of  this  kingdom.  1.  The  facilities 
which  there  are  for  it.  3.  The  union  of  effort.  4.  Thb  success  of  effort.  {Dr. 
Beaumont.)  Nature,  a  prophecy  of  the  unlimited  diffudon  of  the  gospel.  We 
are  warranted  in  such  an  expectation,  I  may  say,  almost  from  arudogy.  WTiy  does 
the  moon  spread  her  horns  ?  Why,  it  is  to  fill  them.  Why  does  the  sun  rise  above 
tlie  horizon  ?  It  is  that  he  may  go  on  his  march  upward  and  onward,  till  he  gains 
Lis  meridian  altitude,  and  pours  his  vertical  glory  on  the  world  below.  Why  is  the 
corn  deposited  in  the  soil  ?  It  is  that  it  may  unwrap,  that  it  may  unfold  itself-^ 
that,  of  that  single  seed  there  may  come  a  tree,  the  branches  of  which  are  for  a 
lodgment  of  the  birds,  and  a  shadow  for  the  beasts  of  the  earth.  Why  does  the  rill 
steal  silently  from  under  the  sod,  wend  its  way  among  the  grass  and  the  pebbles, 
following  its  course  onward  and  onward,  enlarging  its  channel,  rendering  the  fissure 
wider  and  wider  for  itself — till  at  last  that  little  rill  becomes  a  mighty  river,  bearing 
on  its  bosom  the  riches  of  a  nation  and  feeding  a  nation's  agriculture.  {Ibid.) 
The  minsionary  prayer : — I.  The  import  of  this  petition.  1.  What  kingdom  is  this  ? 
It  cannot  refer  to  God's  natu]al  kingdom  ;  all  such  are  His  already.    It  refers  to  His 


CHAP.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  91 

spiritxial.  2.  What  we  are  to  understand  by  the  coming  of  it  7  (1)  Its  advancement 
in  the  hearts  of  its  subjects.  (2)  Its  extension  in  the  world  over  the  hearts  of  the 
ungodly.  (3)  It  includes  the  final  consummation  of  the  kingdom  of  grace  in  glory. 
II.  The  NEED  THAT  EXISTS  FOB  sTiLii  oFFEBiNO  THIS  PKATEE.  1.  It  is  lamentably 
far  from  being  fully  come.  2.  Look  at  the  professing  Church.  III.  Some  of  the 
ENC0UBA.GEMENT8  we  have  to  continue  presenting  this  petition.     1.  Past  Buccess. 

2.  The  character  of  our  weapons  of  warfare.     Truth  has  power  over  the  conscience. 

3.  The  predictions  of  the  Bible.  {J.  Morgan.)  Man  generally  feel  more  interested 
in  the  earthly  than  the  heavenly  kingdom : — It  is  very  sad  to  see  how  excited  and 
absorbed  men  can  be  about  the  politics  of  this  world ;  how,  on  any  subject  of 
national  interest,  such  as  the  progress  of  a  war  or  the  annexation  of  a  territory,  the 
pulse  of  the  nation  will  beat  fast  with  excitement ;  how,  not  only  in  the  council- 
chambers  of  kings  and  the  legislative  assemblies  of  nations,  but  at  every  street-corner 
and  in  every  little  tavern,  men  will  discuss  the  matter  with  eager  interest ;  while  it 
is  almost  iuipossible  to  gather  a  roomful  of  people  to  listen  to  the  records  of  the 
gospel  difficulties,  or  of  the  triumphs  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  {F.  C.  Blythe,  M.A.) 
Subjects  made  by  voluntary  submission,  not  by  geographical  limitation : — Earthly 
kingdoms  claim  all  who  dwell  within  territorial  limits.  A  river,  a  chain  of  hills,  an 
imaginary  line,  mav  determine  the  question  who  are  the  subjects  of  its  rule.  But 
in  this  kingdom  all  are  enrolled  as  subjects  who  voluntarily  submit  to  it,  and  none 
else.  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  The  gradual  progress  of  the  Divine  kingdom: — If  it 
had  seemed  good  in  His  sight,  He  could  have  overturned  the  power  of  Satan  in  a 
short  period  ;  but  His  wisdom  saw  fit  to  accomplish  it  by  degrees.  Like  the  com- 
mander of  an  invading  army.  He  first  takes  possession  of  one  post,  then  of  another, 
then  of  a  third,  and  so  on,  till  by  and  by  the  whole  country  falls  into  His  hands. 
And  as  the  progress  of  a  conqueror  would  be  more  rapid  after  a  few  of  the  strongest 
fortresses  had  surrendered  (inasmuch  as  things  would  then  approach  fast  to  a  crisis, 
to  a  breaking  up,  as  it  were,  of  the  powers  of  the  enemy),  so  it  has  been  with  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,  and  such  will  be  its  progress  before  the  end  of  time.    {A,  Fuller.) 

Thy  will  Tje  done  In  earth. — Doing  God's  will : — I.  What  is  the  petition.  There 
is  the  secret  will  of  God ;  the  providential  will  of  God  ;  the  revealed  will  of  God — 
our  sanctification.  II.  The  measube.  How  do  they  do  the  will  of  God.  1.  From 
love  to  God.  2.  Cheerful  alacrity.  3.  With  zeal  and  energy.  4.  With  humility 
and  reverence.  5.  With  perseverance.  (J.  Hambleton,  M.A.)  Thy  will  be 
done : — 1.  We  are  here  tauyht  to  pray  that  God's  will  may  become  the  standard 
and  rule  of  our  actions.  2,  That  God's  will  may  become  the  regulator  of  our 
wishes  and  pleasures.  3.  That  God's  will  may  become  ours,  and  not  that  it  may 
destroy  ours.  4.  That  God's  will  may  be  ours,  not  fitfully  and  in  part,  but  con- 
stantly and  perfectly.  (F.  Edwards,  B.A.)  The  reign  of  grace  viewed  in  relation 
to  the  work  of  righteousness : — I.  A  fact  assumed,  that  the  will  of  God  is  don& 
BT  ALL  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  HEAVEN  AS  He  Himself  bequires.  The  place,  the  parties, 
the  practice,  must  receive  consideration.  1.  To  determine  the  locality  of  heaven  will 
lor  ever  exceed  the  ability  of  man  on  earth.  2.  We  can,  however,  describe  its  in- 
habitants. 3.  We  have  to  consider  how  they  act.  II.  Establish  the  dootbinb 
IMPLIED.  God  has,  and  will  exercise,  the  same  authority  over  men  on  earth  and 
angels  in  heaven.  1.  Our  first  proof  is  from  the  dictates  of  conscience.  2.  Con- 
firmed from  the  deductions  of  reason.  3.  Clear  from  scripture.  III.  Enfobo  thb 
DUTY.  1.  That  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Creator  is  essential  to  the  welfare  of 
every  intelligent  creature.  2.  It  is  obvious  if  there  had  been  no  sin  there  would 
have  been  no  suffering.  3.  It  is  therefore  evident  that  in  order  to  bo  happy  we 
must  be  in  a  state  of  acceptance  with  God.  (Congregational  Pulpit.)  Thy  will 
be  done : — God's  will  is  to  be  the  guide  and  measure  of  ours.  These  two  standards 
of  God's  will — reason  and  revelation — however  they  may  promote  the  same  end,  yet 
they  are  very  different  in  their  extent.  I.  The  laws  of  Nature  seem  to  regard  only 
(1)  outward  order  and  decency  ;  (2)  strict  justice  in  our  dealings.  (3)  They  aUow 
ns  to  return  like  for  like ;  (4)  oblige  ns  to  no  more  temperance  than  can  keep  the 
faculties  in  good  order.  II.  The  laws  of  the  gospel  require  (1)  inward  purity  and 
holiness  ;  (2)  extensive  charity,  whereby  we  are  to  rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice, 
and  mourn  with  them  that  weep.  (3)  To  do  good  for  evil,  (4)  To  mortify  our 
corrupt  affections,  and  take  up  our  cross  and  follow  our  Saviour.  By  this  short 
view  of  these  two  rules  of  God's  will,  it  appears  that  one  is  more  extensive  than 
the  other,  and  that  we  cannot  be  said  to  fulfil  the  whole  of  that  will  without  mak- 
ing the  gospel  the  immediate  rule  of  it.     (Thomas  Mangey.)        The  necessity  of  a 


9i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

cheerful  obedience  to  the  Divine  will : — I.  Humilitt,  which  corrects  every  arrogant 
thought,  (1)  remiuds  us  of  oui-  demerits,  (2)  convinces  us  that  the  least  blessings  we 
receive  are  greater  than  the  best  of  us  deserve.  II.  Contentment.  (1)  An  easy 
satiKfiiction  with  our  present  share  of  the  bounties  of  providence,  (2)  neither  envy- 
ing the  more  liberal  allotments  of  other  men,  nor  (3)  repines  at  its  own.  III. 
Patience.  1.  Cheerful  submission  to  whatever  pains  and  afflictions  we  are  at 
any  time  called  upon  to  suffer.  2.  Any  troubles  and  trials  we  may  be  called  upon  to 
endure.  IV.  Qdiet  subjection  to  the  (1)  authority,  (2)  full  trust  in  the  goodness, 
the  (S)  wisdom,  and  the  (4)  promises  of  God.  These  are  virtues  of  so  close  an  aflinity 
and  connection,  that  one  of  them  can  hardly  subsist  without  the  other.  All  of  them 
are  necessary  to  form  and  perfect  thnt  resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  for  which  we 
are  taught  here  to  pray.  {John  Rogers,  D.D.)  Our  Father^ s  will : — 1.  The 
Piviue  will  is  more  t)jan  mere  power, — it  is  righteousness,  wisdom,  tenderness.  It 
does  not  fulfil  itself  by  simple  force.  2.  We  should  ascribe  the  sweet  as  well  as  the 
Litter  experiences  of  life  to  the  will  of  God.  3.  We  shall  find  in  the  Father's  will 
bei7ig  as  well  as  doing.  It  will  be  in  all  our  doings  and  desires.  4.  In  doing  the 
father's  will  it  is  manifest  that  many  things  we  have  loved  will  have  to  be  laid 
aside.  6.  The  day  when  this  prayer  has  its  answer  will  be  the  day  of  God's  revenge 
and  victory,  the  revenge  and  victory  of  righteousness  and  love.  {JV.  Hubbard.) 
The  obedience  of  angels  : — 1.  An  angel,  by  his  very  nature,  is  a  servant  doing  God'i 
b<  best.  It  is  a  law  of  his  being ;  with  us  it  is  an  occasional  thing.  2.  They  go 
fr^m  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  hence  their  power  and  joy.  3.  An  angel's 
obedience  is  the  obedience  of  a  happy  being.  Obedience  is  the  fruit  of  happiness. 
4,  It  matters  nothing  to  an  angel  what  the  work  is  which  is  given  him  to  do.  6. 
The  response  to  an  order  is  always  instant.  6.  It  is  always  primarily  to  Christ, 
(J  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Angelic  ohi'dience  universal: — You  would  do  well  to  notice 
thfct  it  matters  nothing  to  an  augnl  what  the  work  is  which  is  given  him  to  do.  It 
nvxy  be  for  a  babe,  or  it  may  be  ifor  a  king ;  it  may  be  for  a  propliet,  or  it  may  be  foi 
a  «5ountry ;  it  may  be  for  one,  or  it  may  be  for  multitudes ;  it  may  be  for  the  holiest. 
o>  it  may  be  for  the  vilest;  it  may  be  to  comfort,  or  it  may  be  to  reprove ;  it  may 
b<i  to  carry  a  promise,  or  it  may  be  to  execute  a  judgment ;  it  may  be  to  deliver,  or 
it  may  be  to  smite ;  it  may  be  to  restrain,  or  it  may  be  to  lead  on.  It  is  just  the 
same  to  him.  It  cannot  be  too  menial  or  too  lofty  ;  it  cannot  be  too  little  or  too 
much.  It  is — Who  has  given  him  to  do  it.  It  is  simple  obedience.  (Ibid.)  The 
third  petition : — I.  The  will  of  God.  II.  God's  potential  will.  III.  God's  peb- 
okPTivE  will  in  relation  to  the  human  will.  IV.  Why  should  God's  will  bb 
BONtE  ?  Because  it  is  God's.  Besides  the  benefits  resulting,  there  is  the  joy  in  the 
very  act  of  performing  His  will.  It  dignifies  the  humblest  lot.  V.  Angelic  natueb. 
T^e  resemblance  of  obedience  sugaests  resemblance  of  nature  ;  angels  only  a  higher 
sjeciesof  man.  VI.  Angelic  obedience.  1.  Angels  do  the  will  of  God  lovingly. 
2  They  do  it  intelligently.  3.  They  do  it  prayerfully.  4.  They  do  all  God's  will. 
5  They  do  it  always.  6.  They  all  do  it,  and  do  it  altogether.  7.  They  do  it  in  the 
p  esence  of  God.  VII.  Passive  obedience.  {N>'wman  Hall,  LL.D.)  The  third 
petition : — I.  What  do  we  mean  by  this  petition  t  1.  That  the  will  of  God  may 
be  done  by  the  will  of  man.  2.  This  is  the  prayer  of  a  renovated  will.  3.  In  this 
prayer  to  our  Father  we  say  with  emphasis.  Thy  will  be  done.  II.  How  shall  we  csb 
THIS  PETITION  ?  1.  Thy  will  be  done  in  obedience  to  orders.  2.  Thy  will  be  done 
in  submis.sion  under  trials.  3.  Thy  will  be  done  by  surrender  to  Thy  guidance.  4. 
Thy  will  be  done  in  the  use  of  means  for  Thy  reign  to  come.  (Dr.  Stanford.)  Let 
us  pray  this  prayer : — 1.  Not  in  a  spirit  of  indolent  acquiescenso.  2.  God  lias  a 
will  concerning  our  actions.  3.  God  looks  on  the  heart.  4.  Three  points  revealed 
concerning  the  life  of  angels.  (1)  Their  holiness  ;  (2)  the  vitality  of  their  service  ; 
(3)  the  love.  Their  angelic  obedience  is  distinguished  by  holiness,  diligence,  love. 
(1)  We  must  cast  away  everything  that  defileth.  (2)  We  must  stir  up  the  gift  that 
is  in  us  to  a  lovelier,  a  brighter,  a  more  kindhng  glow.  (3)  Above  all,  by  setting 
ourselves  to  that  which  is  the  very  work  of  heaven — sympathy  and  love.  In 
heaven  there  is  no  disobedience,  no  indolence,  no  selfishness.  (Dr.  C.  J.  Vaughan.) 
Tlie  submissive  spirit  of  the  Lord's  pniyr : — I.  Look  at  God's  will,  in  two  or 
three  of  its  essential  properties.  1.  It  is  universal.  2.  It  is  wise.  8.  It  is 
supreme.  II.  Three  things  contained  in  this  petition.  1.  God's  will  done  in  the 
fulfilment  of  duty.  2.  In  the  endurance  of  trial.  3.  In  the  universal  prevalence  ol 
holiness.  III.  How  is  God's  will  done  in  heaven  7  1.  Harmoniously.  21.  Cheer- 
fully. 3.  Promptly.  IV.  The  blessings  that  flow  from  acquiescence  with  th# 
will  of  God  are  innumerable.    1.  It  secures  our  happiness.    2.  It  secures  our  safety 


cuAP.  vr.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  M 

3.  It  secures  our  satisfaction.  {Dr.  0.  Wimlow.)  The  third  petition  : — I.  As  it 
illustrates  the  great  rule  of  moral  obligation.  The  fitness  of  taking  the  will  of  God 
as  the  pveat  rule  of  human  conduct ;  this  was  brought  out  in  the  first  sin.  II. 
Its  apphcation  to  the  circumstances  of  our  Christian  life  and  chabacteb.  1.  As 
the  will  of  God  embraces  all  beings,  we  as  a  unit-world  in  this  moral  system,  must 
have  our  allotted  part  to  sustain.  2.  We  are  to  say  '•  Thy  will,"  as  opposed  to  the 
will  of  any  other  master.  3.  The  revealed  will  of  God  is  to  be  the  paramount,  ex- 
clusive, ail-determining  law  of  human  conduct.  This  conformity  to  the  will  of  Go<l 
win  be  exhibited  (1)  in  an  attitude  of  pious  Bubmission,  under  all  that  is  hard  to 
bear  in  His  providential  appointments  ;  (2)  in  relation  to  our  spiritual  experiences. 
III.  The  PATTERN  of  all  acceptable  obedience.  1.  In  the  way  of  probation  our  oom- 
pliance  with  the  will  of  God  is  hmited  to  the  present  state.  2.  How  are  we  to  do 
the  will  of  God  f  (1)  In  its  integrity;  (2)  with  delighted  complacency  in  our  obedi- 
ence ;  (3)  nnwearedly.  This  shows  us  with  what  meek  acquiescence  we  should  pray. 
We  have  made  mistakes  enough  by  following  our  own  will.  Let  there  be  no  striving 
to  get  away  from  our  providential  lot.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Thy  will  be  done  on 
earth : — The  same  principle  which  renders  an  angel  a  willing  servant  in  glory  would 
make  him  a  willing  servant  in  this  wicked  state.  He  who  gets  his  copy  most  into 
his  eye,  and  takes  it  into  his  mind,  will  draw  the  straightest  lines.  In  material 
things  it  is  the  glory  of  heaven,  where  God  looks  He  sees  Himself.  The  crystal  stta, 
sheets  of  gold,  gates  of  pearl,  are  made  to  reflect  the  glory  that  shines  upon  them. 
As  we  pass  from  the  material  to  the  intelligent  inhabitants,  the  pattern  becomes 
higher.  1.  When  we  look  upon  ourselves,  what  a  very  disobedient  thing  obedience 
is.  How  men  struggle  to  obey,  and  often  to  escape  obedience.  But  turn  to  the 
angels.  1.  Mark  the  entire  submission  of  their  intellect.  2.  The  absorption  of 
their  will.  3.  The  phabiUty  with  which  they  adapt  themselves  exactly  to  God's 
varying  purposes.  4.  Or  pass  from  the  act  to  the  spirit — "  They  are  beholding  the 
Father's  face."  6.  God's  will  must  be  done  in  the  way  God  wills  it.  («/.  Vaughanp 
M.A.)  Angelic  obedience  tlie  model  for  ours  : — 1.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  oar 
Lord  teaches  us  to  think  a  good  deal  about  the  angels.  2.  Proposing  the  angels  as 
a  model  of  obedience  gives  us  a  most  exalted  notion  of  them  and  their  performattce 
of  God's  will,  3.  In  what  way  are  they  our  models?  (1)  As  pure  and  holy  crea- 
tures. We  must  therefore  imitate  their  purity.  (2)  As  continually  occupied  in  offices 
of  praise  and  adoration  of  God.  We  must  imitate  their  praises  in  our  prayers.  (G. 
Moberley,  D.C.L.)  Resignation  to  the  Divine  will : — I.  Devotion  to  God's  witii 
THE  TRUE  PRINCIPLE  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  Subjectiou  to  the  Divinc  will  has  made  the 
heroes  of  the  past  great.  1.  Obedience  to  God  takes  its  rise  in  God's  revelation  of 
Himself.  2.  It  is  through  acquaintance  with  the  revelation  of  God  we  grow  into 
knowledge  of  His  will,  and  are  guided  in  our  desire  for  its  accomplishment.  8.  The 
revelation  of  God  supplies  the  means  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  will.  It 
£^ves  the  power  of  obedience.  II.  The  example.  (J.  Pillans.)  Constant  obedi- 
ence to  God : — Let  our  obedience  resemble  theirs  ;  let  it  not  be  characterized  by  fits 
and  starts,  with  intervening  relapses  into  indolence ;  not  needing  revivals  out  of 
apathy;  not  dependent  on  novelty  which  must  soon  lose  its  charm,  but  patient  and 
persevering  under  all  changes  and  circumstances ;  not  as  a  mountain  torrent, 
whose  rocky  channel  is  bare  and  sunburnt  when  snows  are  not  melting  and  rains 
do  not  fall,  but  as  a  deep,  broad  river,  ever  flowing  with  fertilizing  tide.  {Newman 
Hall,  LL.B.)  The  will  of  God ;— 1.  The  secret  will  of  God.  2.  The  revealed 
will  of  God.  3.  The  determiniug  will  of  God.  4.  The  prescribing  will  of  God.  6. 
The  providential  will  of  God.  (F.  C.  Blythe,  M.A.)  Thy  will  .-—Not  Satan'i.  2. 
Not  my  will.  {Ibid.)  In  earth  as  in  heaven : — 1.  Thankful  that  we  are  not  yet 
under  the  earth,  but  permitted  to  toil  at  the  work  God  has  given  us.  2.  We  should 
deem  it  a  great  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  do  God's  will,  inasmuch  that  we  are  not 
only  on  the  earth,  but  "  of  the  earth  earthy."  3.  We  are  not  to  wait  till  we  get  to 
heaven  to  do  God's  will.  4.  We  are  not  to  take  any  earthly  standard  as  our  aim. 
6.  The  angels  do  God's  will  zealously,  perfectly,  orderly,  constantly,  cheerfully. 
{Ibid.)  Imitating  angels : — I.  Some  characteristics  or  the  obedience  rendered 
to  God  in  heaven.  1.  Angelic  obedience  is  thorough.  2.  It  is  continuous.  3. 
Prompt  and  lively,  4.  Cheerful  and  loving.  6.  Universal.  IL  Reasons  wht  wb 
SHOULD  SEEK  TO  IMITATE  the  obedience  of  angels.  1.  It  will  be  a  positive  self-injury 
not  to  submit  to  Him.  2.  God  ever  wiUs  our  present  and  everlasting  welfare.  8. 
Perfect  submission  to  the  will  of  God  is  essential  to  our  present  happiness.  4.  It  is 
right,  in.  What  must  be  done  before  the  prayer  op  the  text  can  be  rniXT 
ANSWEUED.     1.  The  Scriptures  must  be  circulated  over  the  entire  globe.     2.  Weals* 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  n» 

need  an  tinction  from  the  Holy  One.  (J.  3Iorgan.)  As  it  h  in  heaven : — 1.  Tb« 
will  of  God  is  perfectly  done  in  heaven  because  it  ia  done  with  the  unbroken,  un- 
interrupted sense  of  the  presence  of  God.  We  must  try  to  look  on  things  as  God 
looks  at  them.  2.  There  ia  in  the  celestial  world  a  wide  diversity  of  gifts  and  opera- 
tions. The  seraph's  fire  is  combined  with  the  cherub's  strength.  3,  There  iB  war 
even  in  heaven  to  carry  out  the  will  of  God  in  casting  out  evil  from  the  world- 
"  Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragon."  Courage,  self-denial,  dis- 
cipline,  are  the  gifts  by  which  victories  are  won.  4.  It  is  a  world  of  spirits — the 
spiritual  unites  and  vivifies  the  whole.  The  hosts  which  really  govern  the  world 
are  the  thoughts  and  consciences  of  men.     6.  It  is  beneticiaL     (Dean  Stanley.) 

Ver.  11.  Our  dally  bread. — Daily  bread : — 1.  That  even  the  wants  of  our  bodies 
are  to  be  su'oonlinated  to  the  purposes  of  religion.  2.  That  our  dependence  upon 
God  for  the  supply  of  our  bodily  wants  ought  to  be  recognized.  3.  That  a  galS- 
ciency  and  not  a  superabundance  of  the  supplies  of  life  ought  to  be  solicited.  4. 
That  uuneedful  anxiety  about  the  future  ought  to  be  condemned.  5.  That  all  selfish 
grasping,  and  ail  unfair  living  upon  others  ought  to  be  avoided.  JF.  Edwardt, 
B.A.)  I.  What  19  HJERE  ASKED.  The  jjoor  of  God's  flock  have  special  interest  in 
this  prayer,  and  the  rich  have  need  of  it.  1.  That  what  they  have  may  be  pre- 
served. 2.  That  they  may  have  true  enjoyment.  3.  That  they  may  suitably  im- 
prove what  they  have.  IL  The  SPiRiTUAii  brkad.  1.  God  alone  can  break  this 
bread  to  you.  2.  You  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (W.  Wilkinson, 
M.A.)  This  is  the  language  of — personal  need,  conscious  dependence,  quiet 
contentment,  childhke  trust,  and  fraternal  sympathy.  IF.  J,  A.)  "  Give  us  this 
day  mir  daily  bread'': — I.  "We  bt-gin  as  nature  promptetb,  with  the  preservation  of 
our  beings  and  ;ives;  whereby  we  become  capable  of  receiving  and  enjoying  other 
good  things.  H.  By  doing  so,  we  also  imply  the  sense  we  have  of  our  total  depen- 
dence upou  God ;  avowing  ourselves  to  subsist  by  His  care  and  bounty.  (1)  Dis- 
claiming all  confidence  in  any  other  means  to  maintain  or  support  us ;  in  (2)  any 
store  we  may  have  laid  up,  or  (3)  estate  we  pretend  to.  Ill,  We  are  taught  our 
duty  of  being  w^illing  coiitinually  to  rely  upon  God.  (1)  We  ask  not  that  God  would 
give  us  at  once  what  may  serve  us  for  ever,  and  put  us  out  of  any  fear  to  want  here- 
after ;  (2)  we  af-k  not  for  that  which  may  suffice  for  a  long  time,  for  many  years, 
months,  or  days ;  but  (3)  that  God  would  give  us  to-day,  or  rather  day  by  day ;  that 
is,  that  He  would  constantly  dippense  what  is  needful  for  us.  IV.  We  must  esteem 
(1)  God's  providence  our  surest  estate;  (2)  God's  bounty  our  best  treasure;  and  (3) 
God's  Fatherly  care  our  most  certain  and  most  comfortable  support.  V.  We  learn 
to  ask  only  for  so  much  as  shall  he  fit  to  maintain  us,  not  for  (1)  rich  or  plentiful 
store ;  not  for  (2)  full  bams  nor  (3)  heaps  of  treasures,  wherewith  to  pamper  our- 
selves ;  but  for  (4)  daily  bread,  a  moderate  provision  then  to  be  dealt  to  us  when  we 
need  it.  (Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread": — Bread, 
by  a  common  and  natural  figure,  signifies  the  necessaries  of  life.  I.  We  are  to  make 
that  the  only  subject  of  our  prayers,  which  rehgion  allows  us  to  desire.  (1)  The 
gospel,  not  the  (2)  insatiate  appetites  of  men,  is  to  be  the  measure  of  their  wants. 
(3)  A  Christian  niust  not  by  prayer  seek  for  an\  thing  which  is  contrary  to  his  holy 
profession  to  enjoy.  II.  This  petition  for  daily  bread  shows  the  true  measure  of 
Christian  philosophy.  1.  It  requires  us  to  restrain  our  wishes  by  our  wants,  which 
are  both  few  and  ea^^ily  supplied.  2.  God  allows  us  to  ask  nothing  of  Him,  hot 
what  we  may  with  purity  desire,  and  with  innocence  enjoy.  3.  Keligion  makes  us 
truly  rich  in  making  us  temperate,  content,  and  independent.  True  happiness  of 
man  cunsisis  nut  in  ihe  extent  of  puKSustiion,  but  in  the  restraint  of  desire.  (Thonuu 
Man))ey.)  Daily  bread: — I.  We  may  ask  fob  tempoeal  things  if  wb  ask  fob 
THEM  lawfully.  It  is  true,  prayers  to  God  for  spiritual  things  are  more  acceptable. 
As  your  child  pleaseth  you  better  when  it  comes  to  you  to  be  taught  its  book,  rather 
than  when  it  comes  for  an  apple.  But  we  may  ask  for  other  things.  1.  For  they  are 
good  and  useful  to  us  in  the  course  of  our  seivice.  2.  Without  them  we  are  exposed 
to  many  temptations.  Prayer  ease th  you  of  a  deal  of  oarking  about  them.  U.  We 
must  ask  for  them  lawfully.  1.  Not  preferring  these  temporal  things  before  His 
favour,  and  the  graces  of  His  Spirit.  2.  In  moderate  proportion.  III.  We  must 
ask  them  with  humility  and  submishion  to  the  will  of  God.  1.  Not  for  ostentation 
and  riot,  that  we  may  hve  at  large  and  at  ease,  but  that  Thy  name  may  be  glorified, 
and  that  we  may  be  supported  in  service.  2.  We  must  not  come  and  challenge  it, 
as  if  it  were  our  due.  3.  We  must  not  use  the  plea  of  merit,  but  of  mercy.  (Tiu/mas 
Manton,  D.D.)       The  fourth  petition : — L  We  put  the  emphasis  on  "  daily  bebad.* 


OHAP.  Tl.]  ST.  MATTHEW. 


1.  Bread  means  that  which  is  needful  to  support  the  life  of  the  body.  1.  That 
which  is  needful  to  support  all  our  life  in  this  world.  3.  Is  piayer  that  we  may 
have  enough.  II.  We  would  now  separate  the  phrase  "  oivb  us  "  that  we  may  think 
over  its  special  meaning.  1.  It  implies  acknowledgment  of  dependence.  2.  We 
know  that  giving  is  His  delight.  3.  We  mean,  give  this,  for  thou  art  oar  Father.  4. 
We  mean,  through  a  blessiog  on  our  own  right  use  of  means.  6.  When  oommon 
means  are  not  within  our  power,  by  means  of  Thine  own.  TTT.  Place  the  emphasis 
on  "  OUB."  We  do  not  ask  for  the  bread  belonging  to  others.  IV.  We  next  dwell 
on  "  THIS  DAT."  V.  This  petition  suggests  a  higheb  petition — for  heavenly  bread. 
(Dr.  Stanford.)  The  fourth  petition : — I.  The  mbanino,  place,  and  bbasonabub- 
HESS  of  this  petition.  II.  The  Giver,  "  our  father."  God  is  the  universal  giver. 
Giving  implies  personality,  thought,  emotion.  III.  The  gift — "daily  bread." 
Beligion  sanctifies  oommon  life.  IV.  The  communiti  of  the  gift.  V.  The  con- 
ditions of  the  gift.  1.  Honesty.  2.  Industry.  VI.  The  pebiod  of  the  gift.  A 
warning  against  covetousncss.    VII.  Peateb  for  the  gift.     1.  It  teaches  humility. 

2.  It  encourages  fiUal  confidence  in  little  things.  3.  It  prompts  to  daily  gratitude, 
{Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  The  daily  gift : — I.  The  giveb,  God  is  the  only  giver. 
He  gives  constantly  and  quietly.  He  gives  simply.  He  delights  in  giving.  U. 
The  GIFT.  All  bread  comes  from  God.  Bread  has  an  eternal  meaning.  HI.  The 
expansion  of  the  gift.  1.  This  httle  word  "  our  "  excludes  every  calling  wtiioh  is 
injurious  to  the  interests  of  our  fellow  men.  2.  We  are  to  think  of  the  poor  and 
needy.  IV.  The  limitation  of  the  gift — "To-day."  1.  Christ  would  have  as  free 
from  anxious  care.  2.  It  teaches  moderation  and  contentment.  3.  Sometimes 
God  tries  the  faith  of  His  people,  and  they  are  in  difficulties  about  their  daily  bread. 
{Dr.  Saphir.)  Daily  bread: — 1.  These  words  show  that  earthly  interests  and 
animal  wants  have  an  appropriate  place  in  our  prayers.  2.  Our  intimate  dependence 
upon  God.  3.  We  virtually  ask  for  ability  and  opportunity  to  obtain  our  daily 
bread.  The  blessing  involved  in  the  very  effort  for  acquisition.  4.  The  relative 
dependence  of  others  upon  us.  5.  Our  wants  are  always  new  "  daily."  {E.  U, 
Chaplin.)  The  dependent  spirit  of  tite  Lord's  prayer : — I.  The  source  of  the  supply. 
II.  How  the  supply  is  granted.  He  grants  strength  of  body  for  toil ;  by  the  won- 
der-working of  His  providence.  III.  God's  b'.essings  are  gifts.  IV.  God  will  have 
us  live  upon  His  bounty  day  by  day.  V.  The  unselfishness  and  sympathy  of  the 
petition — "  give  ««."  VI.  Contentment  with  God's  measure  supplied  is  taught  by 
this  petition :  not  what  we  wish,  but  what  we  need.  {Dr.  O.  Winslow.)  The  fourth 
petition: — L  Certain  suppositions  appear  to  be  made  in  this  petition.  1.  That 
temporal  blessings  are  necessary  for  our  happiness.  2.  That  we  can  look  for  them 
only  as  they  are  the  free  gift  of  God.  3.  It  supposes  our  right  to  this  form  of  good 
to  be  forfeited  and  lost.  IL  The  fobms  of  desibed  good  which  are  to  be  commended 
under  this  clause.  1.  Bread  the  representative  of  all  forms  of  temporal  blessing ; 
a  healthy  mind,  continued  energy,  for  the  duties  of  our  calUng.  2.  The  Divine 
blessing  on  the  gifts  we  have.  Let  us  never  ask  for  bread  without  the  blessing, 
ni.  Practical  lessons.  1.  A  protest  against  our  sumptuous  and  luxurious  Uving. 
2.  Against  all  covetous  and  inordinate  desires.  3.  Against  carefulness.  4.  An 
admonition  to  mercifulness  and  brotherly  love.  5.  Prayer  must  be  a  "  daily  " 
exercise  of  the  Christian  life.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Daily  bread: — I.  It  is  the 
behever's  piety  that  he  seeks  all  his  daily  portion  at  the  hand  of  God.  2.  The  faith 
of  the  prayer.  Hard  to  trust  God  for  temporals.  3.  The  moderation  of  the  prayer — 
(1)  of  time,  (2)  of  matter,  (3)  of  degree.  A  train  of  holy  contemplation  awakened  by 
a  morsel  oj  bread : — Did  the  corn  wave  freely  in  its  beauty  in  the  summer  field  t 
Jast  so  was  Christ  once  in  the  brightness  and  the  expansion  of  His  father's  glory. 
Did  vhe  reaper  put  in  the  sickle,  and  the  free  com  fall  before  the  scythe  t  So,  in  the 
ripeness  of  time  did  the  iron  enter  into  the  soul  of  Jesus,  and  He  laid  prostrate  in 
the  dust.  Was  the  wheat  ground  within  the  mill  ?  So  was  Jesus  ground  under 
the  tremendous  pressure  of  the  world's  sin.  Is  the  one  bread  broken  into  many 
parts  7  So  is  Jesus  the  one  life  of  the  whole  Church.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Prayer 
for  daily  bread : — I.  The  meaning.  1 .  The  principle  of  dependence  is  developed  in 
it.  2.  The  principle  of  moderation.  3.  The  principle  of  tenderness  towards  others. 
II.  The  encouragement  to  go  to  God  for  the  bread  that  perisheth.  1.  It  is  to  HiM 
Father  He  goes.  2.  It  is  to  the  Father  who  gave  us  His  Son.  III.  The  still  biqhbb 
BNcouBAGEMENTB  TO  PBAY  FOB  THE  Brkad  ETERNAL.  1.  From  Considering  the  Bread 
itself.  Here  no  moderation  is  needed.  2.  Here  are  absolute  promises.  3.  Covet 
larger  portions  of  the  Bread.  {J,  H.  Evans.)  Men  recognize  secondary  eause$ 
rather  than  the  Divine  Being  in  the  gift  of  their  daily  bread : — The  Bev.  J.  H. 


&6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

Wilson  of  Edinburgh  relates :  "  One  day  I  asked  the  children  in  our  infant  school, 
'  Who  givis  you  the  bread  you  get  to  your  dinner?'  Almost  every  voice  answered, 
'  My  mothe):'  •  But  who  gave  it  to  your  mother?  *  ♦  The  baker.'  *  And  who  gave 
it  to  the  biiker?  '  '  The  miller.''  •  And  who  gave  it  to  the  miller?  '  '  The  farmer* 
*  And  who  Rave  it  to  the  farmer  ? '  •  The  ground,*  And  only  when  I  asked,  ♦  Who 
gave  it  to  the  ground ? '  did  I  get  the  answer,  ' It  was  God,'"  How  many  children 
of  a  larger  growth,  like  these  infants,  attribute  their  blessings  to  any  second  cauM 
rather  than  to  the  gift  of  their  Father  I  It  is  suitableness,  not  superabundance,  that 
gives  enjoyment : — A  dress  that  fits  is  more  useful  to  the  wearer  than  one  which  ii 
too  large,  though  more  costly.  A  shoe  that  pinches  the  foot  is  no  easier  for  all  the 
gold  lace  upon  it.  (Newman  Hall,  LL.D.)  The  cry  of  the  needy  : — I.  It  is  an 
utterance  of  felt  need.  II.  It  is  an  acknowledgment  of  entire  and  constant  depend- 
ence on  God,  III,  It  is  the  language  of  moderation.  IV.  It  breathes  a  spirit  of 
TRU8TFDLNE88,  V.  The  language  impHes  personal  effort  to  gain  the  bread.  VI.  It 
is  the  language  of  brotherly  anxiety  and  love.  VII.  The  great  end  for  which  all 
bread,  temporal  and  spiritual,  should  be  sought  and  tised — the  promotion  of  God's 
glory.  (J.  Morgan.)  All  good  things  from  God  are  gifts: — One  sharp  winter  day, 
80  rung  a  nursery  tale,  a  poor  woman  stood  at  the  window  of  a  king's  conservator  7, 
looking  at  a  cluster  of  grapes,  which  she  longed  to  have  for  her  sick  child.  S  *e 
went  home  to  her  spinuing-wheel,  earned  half-a-crown,  and  offered  it  to  the  gardei  «r 
for  the  grapes.  Ha  waved  his  hand,  and  ordered  her  away.  She  returned  to  )  w 
cottage,  snatched  the  blanket  from  her  bed,  pawned  it,  and  once  more  asked  t  *e 
gardener  to  sell  her  the  grapes,  offering  him  five  shillings.  He  spoke  furiously  »o 
her  and  was  turning  her  out,  when  the  princess  came  in,  heard  the  man's  passit  %, 
saw  the  woman's  tears,  and  asked  what  was  wrong.  When  the  story  was  told  e  \e 
said,  "  My  dear  woman,  you  have  made  a  mistake.  My  father  is  not  a  merchai  %, 
but  a  king ;  his  business  is  not  to  sell  but  to  give  ;  "  so  saying,  she  plucked  t  ie 
cluster  from  the  vine  and  dropped  it  into  the  woman's  apron.  (Dr.  Stanfori  \) 
Daily  bread: — 1.  Fastidiousneos  about  food  is  condemned  by  this  petition,  so  al«o 
is  sumptuousness  of  apparel.  2.  And  as  moderation  in  our  desires  is  here  com- 
manded, so  is  thankfulness  for  ordinary  beuetits.     (F.  C.  Blyth,  M.A.)        Bread  .'•  - 

1.  The  bread  of  righteousness.  2.  The  Word  of  God  (Matt,  iv.  4).  3.  God  the 
Word  (John  vi.  35).  4.  The  Holy  Eucharist.  (Ibid.)  "  Our "  ,—1.  Such  focd 
as  is  suitable  for  us.  2.  Diligence  in  our  calling.  3.  Necessities  for  us,  superfluitieg 
for  our  brethren,     (Ibid.)        "  Us  ": — 1,  Excludes  selfishness  and  incites  to  charity. 

2,  As  we  eat  with  our  households  so  we  s'nould  pray  with  them,  (Ibid.)  Thi$ 
day : — 1.  Uncertainty  about  the  future  no  excuse  for  recklessness.  2,  Each  neir 
day  ia  a  special  gift  from  God,  in  which  are  contained  all  the  possibilities  of  Hi* 
grace.  3.  What  is  our  whole  lifetime  but  a  day  1  4.  To  any  earthly  friend  we 
should  be  ashamed  thus  frequently  to  ask  a  favour.  (Ibid.)  Contentment : — 
"  Contentment  is  a  jewel  which  turns  all  into  gold,  yea,  want  into  wealth."  Covet- 
ousness  is  a  canker  which  eats  into  the  richest  robes  and  the  costliest  treasures ;  ft 
ctvpsy  which,  the  more  it  drinks,  the  more  it  thirsts.  (Ibid.)  The  wise  man, 
as  he  looks  forth  upon  the  riches  and  luxuries  with  which  the  worldling  loves  to 
»Hf round  himself,  learns  to  say  with  Socrates,  "How  many  things  there  ate  that  I 
do  not  want  1 " 

Ver.  12.  Forgive  us  our  delits. — Forgive  us  our  debts  t — There  ia  a  twofold  debt 
which  man  oweth  to  God,  I.  A  debt  of  dott,  worship,  and  obedience ;  II.  A  debt 
of  PcNisHMENT.  (Thomas  Mauton,  D.D.)  Our  Debts  :— I.  By  this  prayer  we  are 
reminded  of  our  constant  liability  to  sin.  2.  We  are  led  to  separate  between  the 
fact  and  theory  of  forgiveness,  3.  We  are  led  to  regard  forgiveness  as  a  favour, 
and  not  as  a  claim.  4.  We  are  reminded  of  the  only  condition  upon  which  forgive- 
ness can  be  extended  to  us.  5.  We  are  taught  to  comply  with  the  condition  wliich 
is  required.  (F.  Edwards,  B. A.)  *^  Forgive  us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them 
that  trespass  against  iM  " : — I.  We  must  here  take  notice  that  we  are  obliged  to 
go  to  our  devotions  with  chauitt  and  good-will  towards  othsbb.  (1)  To  depose 
all  enmity  before  we  I'ring  our  oblation  to  the  altar  of  God.  (2)  Reserving  no 
spite  or  grudge  toward  any  man,  but  having  a  heart  (3)  clear  of  ill-will;  (4) 
being  in  affection  of  mind  towards  others,  as  we  do  wish,  hope,  and  pray  that  God 
woMld  be  toward  us.  II.  It  is  implied  on  God's  part,  that  He  vouchsafes  pabdou 
ONLY  DPON  these  TERMS  ;  yca,  more,  that  He  doth  truly  promise  pardon  upon  our 
performing  this  condition.  (1)  It  also  implies  a  consent  on  our  part,  and  (2)  snb- 
mifision  to  this  condition,  as  most  equal  and  reasonable.     (S)  If  we  break  it,  if  we 


CHAP.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  97 

retain  any  nnAaritr.ble  inclinatior.s,  we  deal  falsely  with  God ;  we  forfeit  all  pre- 
tcnt-e  to  mercy  ami  favour  from  Him  ;  we  are  mither  qualified  for  mercy,  nor  shall 
obtain  it  from  God.  (Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  The  fifth  petition. : — I.  Observe  how 
it  BEGINS — "  aiud  forgive,"  &c.  It  follows  prayer  for  daily  bread.  Life  without 
forgivesjess  would  not  be  worth  having,  IL  It  is  a  prayer  for  the  forgiving  of  cur 
sins  AS  THE  CHILDREN  OF  GoD.  III.  Siu  Is  described  as  a  debt.  IV.  Inis  is  a 
prayer  for  grace.  V.  In  this  prayer  for  forgiveness  we  must  fall  in  with  thb 
Divine  pl.4n  for  its  be?t  >wment.  VI.  The  declaration  connected  with  the  prayer. 
(Dr.  Stanford.)  The  fifth  petition  : — I.  Sin  considered  as  a  debt  to  God.  1.  A 
debt  is  what  we  owe.  2.  We  have  failed  to  discharge  it.  3.  Let  us  glance  at  some 
items  in  the  account.  (1)  Wrong  to  the  property  of  our  neighbour ;  (2)  To  his 
reputation ;  (3)  To  his  person.  4.  Sins  as  debts  (1)  are  entered  in  God's  books. 
(2)  They  increase.  (3)  Can  never  be  discharged.  (4)  They  cannot  be  transferred 
to  any  fellow  creature.  (5)  They  cannot  be  escaped  by  lapse  of  years  or  change  of 
residence.  (6)  Payment  will  be  claimed.  II.  The  debts  of  God's  pardoned  chil- 
dren. III.  Our  Father's  forgiveness.  1.  Absolute.  2.  Immediate.  3.  Com- 
plete. IV.  Prater  for  pardon.  Includes — 1.  Conviction  of  guilt.  2.  Contrition. 
3.  Confession.  4.  Purpose  of  reformation.  V.  FoRGivr-iNKSS  of  one  another.  1. 
Human  forgiveness.  2.  Human  forgiveness  a  condition  of  the  Divine.  There  can 
be  no  genuine  prayer  for  pardon  unless  we  cultivate  a  forgiving  spirit : — 1.  Pardon 
is  always  linked  with  repentance  of  sins,  and  these  include  an  unforgiving  spirit. 
2.  Faith  in  God's  mercy  is  incompatible  with  unmereifulness  in  ourselves.  3. 
Gratitude  to  God  for  pardon  received  or  expected  prompts  forgiveness  of  others.  4. 
This  prayer  includes  those  who  wrong  us.  6.  It  is  the  prayer  of  a  child  of  God. 
(Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  Mercy  in  heaven  and  on  earth  : — 1.  He  who  has  not 
received  the  spirit  of  forgiveness  has  not  truly  received  the  gift  of  pardon.  2. 
Without  this  loving  spirit  we  cannot  truly  worship  God.  3.  He  who  does  not  for' 
give  forsakes  the  f-pirit  of  the  gospel,  and  returns  to  the  spirit  of  legalism.  4.  H« 
who  does  not  forgive  will  soon  lose  the  sense  and  enjoyment  of  God's  pardon.  6. 
He  who  does  not  forgive  lacks  one  of  the  great  evidences  and  confirmations  of  faith. 
(Dr.  Saphir.)  The  penitential  spirit  of  the  Lord's  prayer : — What  is  mere  bread  to 
a  man  under  sentence  of  deuth? — forgiveness  necessary.  I.  Man  is  God'sdebtor.  1> 
As  regards  his  being.  2.  His  moral  debtor.  3.  Chri-st  the  real  paymaster  of  Hia 
people.  II.  The  import  of  the  petition.  1.  It  at  once  confronts  us  with  the  sin- 
forgiving  God.  2.  There  is  unselfishness  in  the  petition — "us."  (Dr.O.Winslow.) 
The  forgiving  spirit  of  the  Lord's  prayer : — Forgiven,  I  am  to  forgive.  I.  There  exists 
a  great  necessity  for  the  exercise  of  this  godlike  precept  of  forgiveness.  1.  In 
the  family  circle.  2.  God's  forgiveness  of  us  the  rule  and  measure  of  oar  forgive- 
ness of  others.  (1)  God  forgives  immediately.  (2)  God  forgives  fully.  (3)  God 
forgives  heartily.  (4)  God  forgets  as  well  as  forgives.  *'  I  will  remember  them  no 
more  for  ever."  (Dr.  O.  Wiiuilow.)  The  fifth  petition: — I.  Consider  man  as  a 
BiNNEB  in  need  of  Divine  forgiveness.  How  could  guilt  be  remitted?  Through 
death  of  Christ.  How  can  a  righteous  lawgiver  who  insists  upon  a  righteous  equi- 
valent be  said  to  forgive?  Foigiveness  and  payment  of  price  often  combined  by 
sacred  writers — "  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  even  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins."  II.  A  reference  to  our  own  moral  condition  and  circumstances.  1 
These  words  presuppose  in  us  some  failure  of  moral  obligation.  2,  That  sin  unre- 
mitted has  an  iudeUble  place  in  the  Divine  remembrance.  Debts  are  registered.  3. 
The   need  of  an  individual  interest  in  the  provided  atonement  for  trauFgression. 

III.  The  scriptural  connection  between  the  forgiveness  we  seek  of  God,  and  the  for- 
giveness  we  may  show  to  our  fellow  man.  1.  The  words  suppose  us  to  have  sacred 
or  relative  rights  which,  as  appertaining  to  our  station,  every  other  person  ia 
under  obligation  to  acknowledge.  Tms  prayer  implies  that  in  the  case  of  invaded 
rights  we  seek  only  such  restitutions  as  are  necessary  to  social  security ;  not  re- 
sentment. 2.  The  exact  force  of  the  connecting  particle  "  as  "  in  this  petition. 
The  word  has  various  meanings,  ground  or  reason — this  would  attribute  to  man 
the  meritorious  initiative  in  obtaining  his  own  pardon.  Sometimes  the  word  is  used 
in  the  sense  of  similitude — God  infinitely  above  man  in  the  way  and  measure  of  His 
forgiveness.  It  is  used  both  as  an  ordained  condition  aiid  as  a  ground  of  hope.  This 
connection  between  our  mercy  and  what  we  expect  is  one  of  unalterable  necessity. 

IV.  The  motives  which  concur  to  enforce  the  duty.  1.  What  kindness  is  it  to 
ourselves  to  forgive.  2.  What  a  victory  is  it  over  our  enemy  to  forgive. 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  At  vie  forgive  our  debts  : — The  debtfnluess  of  sin  should  be 
remembered.      It  implies  the  wrongful  possession  of    what  belongs  to  another. 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Say  fhat  sin  occupied  a  moment  :  that  moment  was  God's.  Sin  has  dimin- 
ished  the  glory  of  God  :  therefore  we  owe  God  glory.  "  Trespass  "  impUea  tl» 
same  thought ;  it  is  when  you  go  on  ground  where  you  have  no  right  to  go.  For^ 
giveness  follows  our  request  for  daily  bread,  and  is  quite  as  necessary.  Only  they 
who  show  mercy  can  expect  mercy.  "We  must  be  careful  to  draw  no  parallel  ot 
degree  between  God's  forgiveness  and  our  a,  though  there  is  a  resemblance  in 
kind.  What  is  the  nature  of  the  forgiveness  you  expect  from  God  ?  l._  Absolute 
in  character.  2.  Immediate  in  time.  3.  Universal  in  extent.  4.  It  is  an  easy 
thing  to  use  a  result,  while  we  are  totally  unobservant  of  the  great  processes  by 
which  that  result  has  been  produced.  If  God  had  forgiven  without  this  process 
He  would  not  have  manifested  any  great  abhorrence  of  sin.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Concomitants  of  debts : — 1.  A  sense  of  burden.  2.  A  sense  of  {ear.  3.  A  sense  of 
perplexity.  4.  A  feeling  of  hatred.  {F.  C.  Blyth,  M.A.)  The  condition  of 
forgiveness: — 1.  Let  us  think  whose  children  we  are  (Matt.  v.  44,45).  2.  Whose 
disciples  we  are  (1  Pet.  ii.  23).  3.  How  often  our  Lord  has  forgiven  us.  4.  How 
small  is  the  debt  our  fellow  servants  owe  to  us  compared  to  the  sum  we  owe  to 
our  Lord.  5.  An  unforgiving  spirit  towards  others  disqualifies  us  for  forgiveness. 
6.  If  we  forgive  our  brethren  their  wrongs  we  turn  those  wrongs  into  blessings. 
"Aswe"  : — 1.  As  a  plea  with  God.  2.  As  an  argument.  8,  As  an  example. 
[Ibid.)  The  prayer  of  the  penitent: — I.  The  okneral  petition.  1.  An  humble 
confession  of  sin.  2.  True  penitence.  3.  Filial  confidence  in  God.  XL  Thjb 
ADDiD  CLAUSE.  1.  This  language  as  preceptive.  It  has  the  force  of  a  precept. 
2.  It  is  solemnly  admonitory.  God  will  not  forgive  us  unless  we  forgive.  3.  It  is 
promissory.  I  have  forgiven,  do  Thou,  Lord,  forgive,  as  Thou  hast  promised. 
4.  It  is  abundantly  consolatory.  (J.  Morgan.)  Sin  a  debt:— I.  How  is  bin  a 
DEBT?  1.  It  supposes  obligation.  2.  It  supposes  obUgation  undischarged,  8,  It 
is  an  obligation  that  cannot  be  denied.  4.  It  is  an  obligation  that  cannot  be 
ignored.  5.  It  is  an  obligation  that  cannot  be  transferred.  6.  It  is  an  obligation 
that  cannot  be  run  away  from.  II.  How  this  debt  may  bk  oancellkd.  1.  Not 
by  repentance.  2.  Not  by  good  works.  3,  Not  by  any  amount  of  seeking 
and  striving.  4.  But  solely  by  the  grace  of  God  forgiving  the  debt  for  the 
sake  of  Jesus  Christ.  (Amer.  Horn.  Rev.)  A  secret  record  kept  of  all  our 
gin-debts  .-—A  record  is  being  kept  unobserved  by  us.  As  a  traveller  calls  for  what 
he  needs  at  his  hotel  and  no  demand  is  made  at  the  time  for  payment, 
though  every  item  is  carefully  recorded,  so  it  is  with  our  daily  incurred 
debts  against  God.  Sins  record  themselves.  As  a  multitude  entering  some 
place  of  resort  pass  individually  through  the  turnstile,  and  a  record  is  uner- 
ringly made  out  of  sight  of  the  visitor,  and  as  mechanical  contrivances  in 
factories  register  every  beat  of  the  piston  and  every  fraction  of  the  result  produced, 
so,  by  the  law  of  God  impressed  on  our  own  nature,  all  our  actions  are  registered, 
all  our  debts  recorded.  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  Forgiveness  of  injuries  a  self- 
improving  act  : — When  thou  forgivest,  the  man  who  has  pierced  thy  heart  stands 
to  thee  in  the  relation  of  the  sea-worm  that  perforates  the  shell  of  the  mussel,  which 
straightway  closes  the  wound  with  a  pearl.  Bishop  Andrewes  observes,  "  David 
compares  his  enemies,  not  to  wasps,  but  to  bees  (Psa.  oxviii.  12),  inasmuch  as,  if 
they  have  a  sting,  yet  they  have  honey  also,  as  ministering  to  his  comfort  before 
God." 

Ver.  13.  And  lead  us  not  into  temptation. — I.  God  pebmits  tjs  to  bb  tempted 

roB  His  own  glory,  to  discover  the  f  reeness  and  riches  of  His  grace,  that  men  may 
be  driven  the  more  earnestly  to  sue  out  their  place  in  the  name  of  JesuB  Christ.  We 
keep  off  from  the  throne  of  grace  till  temptations  drive  us  thither.  As  when  the 
sheep  wander,  the  shepherd  lets  loose  his  dog  upon  them,  not  to  worry  them,  but  to 
bring  them  back  again  to  the  fold  :  bo  God  lets  loose  Satan  to  drive  us  to  Himself. 
II.  For  the  trial  of  that  grace  which  He  hath  wrought  in  us.  Grace  doth 
appear  better  in  temptation  than  out  of  it.  A  great  tempest  discovereth  the  good- 
ness of  a  ship  and  skill  of  the  pilot ;  so  these  great  trials  discover  the  soundness  of 
our  hearts  and  the  fruit  of  that  grace  which  God  hath  wrought  in  us.  Gold  is  most 
tried  in  the  fire,  and  discovered  to  be  pure  and  perfect.  Stars  that  lie  hidden  in  the 
day  shine  in  the  night.  The  valour  and  worth  of  a  Boldier  is  not  known  in  times  of 
peace,  but  when  he  is  out  in  action.  When  we  are  put  to  some  difficulty  and  straits, 
then  Ib  faith  seen.  III.  To  humble  us.  That  we  may  never  be  proud  of  what 
we  have,  nor  conceited  of  what  we  have  not.  Spiritual  evils  need  a  spiritual  cure. 
Outward  aMctiona  humbla,  but  not  so  much  as  temptations  do.    IV.  To  oonfobv 


■HAP.  vi.J  ST.  MATTHEW, 


UB  TO  Christ.  We  must  pledge  Him  in  His  own  cup  ;  it  must  go  round  ;  He  Him- 
nelf  was  tempted,  V.  To  mortiitt  sin.  When  men  have  smarted  they  grow  mora 
cautious.  VI.  To  make  tjs  more  mkek  to  others.  We  are  very  apt  to  be  severe 
npon  the  failings  of  others.  But  now,  when  we  are  tempted  ourselves,  we  learn 
more  pity  to  them.  VII.  To  give  us  experience  oy  the  cabe  and  peovidencb  o* 
God,  and  the  comforts  of  His  promises.  A  man  doth  not  know  what  the  comforts 
of  faith  mean  till  he  be  exercised  by  temptation.  (Thomas  Manton,  D.D.)  Temp, 
tation: — 1.  This  prayer  recognizes  temptation  as  part  of  the  discipline  of  life. 

2.  It  traces  temptation  to  the  source  whence  it  originates.  3.  It  intimates  that 
temptation  generally  results  in  sin.  4.  It  expresses  on  our  part  a  shrinking  from 
temptation  through  a  sense  of  weakness.  5.  It  is  a  joyful  acknowledgment  of 
God's  power  and  strength  to  rescue  us.  (F.  Edwards,  B,A,)  The  temptations  of 
those  who  are  unhappy  : — I.  Those  temptations  that  are  belated  to  God  Himself. 

1.  Persons  who  are  unhappy  often  murmur  against  the  government  of  God.  2.  To 
withhold  prayer  before  Him.  II.  Those  temptations  bespectino  uaneimd.  1. 
They  are  tempted  to  hate  their  race.     2.  A  determination  to  change  their  position. 

3.  A  temptation  to  destroy  their  enemies.  III.  The  temptation  that  comes  upon 
THE  UNHAPPY  THEMSELVES.  1.  To  obtain  Unlawful  information  respecting  their 
destiny.  2.  To  secure  an  oblivion  of  their  wretchedness.  3.  To  seek  to  obtain 
relief  by  suicide.  {J.  Blackburn.)  I.  If  God,  provoked  thereto  by  our  oarelesa- 
ness,  doth  justly  bring  us  into,  or  doth  let  us  enter  into  temptation,  we  shall  in. 
fallibly  run  into  many  grievous  sins  and  mischief.  II.  We  continually  need  God's 
instruction  TO  GUIDE  US,  God's  hand  to  uphold  us,  God's  care  to  guard  us.  (1) 
When  our  condition  and  circumstances  minister  dangerous  occasions  of  sin ;  (2) 
When  the  world  would  frown  or  smile  us  into  it ;  or  (3)  Satan  thrust  us  toward  it ; 
(4)  Then,  in  such  cases  and  seasons,  God's  interposal  is  necessary  to  remove  those 
temptations,  or  to  support  and  defend  us  from  the  prevalence  of  them.  {Isaac 
Barroiv,  D.D.)  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation  "  : — I.  In  praying  thus,  we  desire 
not  to  be  absolutely  freed  from  that  reluctance  of  flesh  against  the  spirit,  but  from 
those  additional  trials  that  surprise,  forgetfulness,  or  public  affairs  may  bring  upon 
ns  more  at  one  time  than  another.  II.  The  petition  is  not  the  effect  of  sloth,  but 
a  wise  provision  for  our  safety,  and  we  thereby  only  desire  to  be  discharged  from 
Buch  trials  as  make  our  perseverance  not  only  difficult,  but  doubtful.  III.  We,  in 
this  petition,  desire  God  to  excite  our  own  care  and  watchfulness.  Humility,  caution, 
and  charity  are  the  several  lessons  which  we  are  taught  in  the  right  use  of  this 
prayer.  (Thomas  Mavgiy.)  The  sixth  petition : — ^I.  This  is  an  appeal  to  our 
Leader.  1.  It  implies  that  our  Father  is  our  Leader.  2.  We  make  this  appeal  to 
our  Father  with  a  sense  of  His  nearness.  II.  This  petition  comes  from  the  fear 
that  when,  in  answer  to  the  last  petition,  our  sins  are  forgiven,  we  shall  be  tempted 

10  SIN  AGAIN.  III.  We  thus  pray  because  we  know  that  oub  path  abounds  with 
instruments  and  occasions  of  temptation.  1.  In  business.  2.  By  the  habits  of 
society.  3.  We  may  be  led  into  temptation  by  retiring  from  the  world.  4.  We 
may  be  so  led  even  when  we  feel  most  secure  from  it  by  communion  with  God.  IV. 
It  implies  a  sense  of  oub  own  tempt ableness.     V.  That  wb  have  no  will  to  oo 

INTO  temptation  UNLESS  IT  BE  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  TO  LEAD  US  INTO  IT.  (Dr.  Stan- 
ford.)       The  sixth  petition : — I.  What  is  meant  by  temptation  ?   The  primary  idea 

11  test,  or  trial  for  discovery.  The  test  may  be  applied  with  various  motives — by 
friend  or  foe.  1.  Inducement  to  sin.  2.  Afflict^ions  or  trials  are  temptations  in  the 
sense  of  being  tests  of  faith.  3.  Temptation  for  the  distinct  purpose  of  testing 
(Gen.  ixii.  1).  II.  What  is  meant  by  asking  God  not  to  lead  us  into  tempta- 
tion. III.  Consolation  for  the  tempted.  1.  Temptation  is  not  sin.  2.  Temptation 
is  not  pecuUar  to  the  individual.  3.  Christ  Himself  was  tempted.  4.  The  prayer 
is  presented  to  our  Father.  IV.  Practical  lessons  :  1.  We  should  not  go  into 
temptation.  2.  We  must  resist  temptation  in  the  way  Christ  Himself  has  appointed. 
S.  We  should  specially  guard  weak  places  in  our  defence.  4.  Turn  stumbling- 
blocks  into  stepping-stones.  5.  We  should  not  bring  others  into  temptation.  (New- 
man  Hall,  LL.B.)       Believers  tempted,  yet  safe  : — 1.  The  universality  of  temptation. 

2.  We  are  concerned  about  the  safety  of  others  as  well  as  our  own.  3.  When  you 
notice  the  sins  and  failings  of  your  fellow-Christians,  remember  they  were  tempted. 

4.  The  special  temptations  of  the  believer.  6.  The  most  gifted,  perhaps  the  most 
tempted.  6.  The  safety  of  the  believer.  7.  Jesus  protects  us  by  His  loving  sym- 
pathy, faithful  intercession,  and  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (Dr.  Saphir.) 
Lead  ui  not  into  temptation : — I.  God's  people  are  exposed  to  much  temptation. 
In  the  old  dispensation  they  were  a  tempted  people.     It  is  exemplified  in  the  varied 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [en a?,  n. 

exj  eriences  of  the  sainta.  The  world  is  a  great  temptation.  The  outward  plague  of 
sin  :  Satan.  There  are  peculiar  seasons  of  temptation  :  Abraham.  II.  What  is  t» 
BE  UNDERSTOOD  by  tliis  petition.  It  does  not  imply  exemption  from  temptation. 
The  Lord  likes  to  know  the  reality  of  the  grace  of  His  people.  Leads  them  to 
watchfulness.  God  does  not  entice  men  to  sin.  A  wise  prayer.  A  holy  prayer. 
(J.  //.  Evans.)  The  watchful  spirit  of  the  Lord's  prayer : — I.  The  present  scenb 
0?  THE  Christian  one  op  temptation.  1.  There  are  temptations  that  arise  from 
the  power  of  Satan,  2.  From  the  world.  3.  From  within  the  Christian.  II, 
The  petition.  I.  The  entire  exemption  of  the  believer  from  temptation  would  be  ex- 
emption from  some  of  the  greatest  blessings  of  his  life.  2.  We  are  not  to  infer  that 
God  can  solicit  men  to  evil.  3.  The  prayer  is  that  God  would,  by  His  providence, 
keep  His  child  out  of  the  way  of  temptation.  4.  That  God  would  either  weaken  the 
powt-r  or  remove  entirely  all  existing  temptation.  5.  It  is  a  petition  that  God 
would  not  withdraw  His  restrainicg  check  from  the  believer.  6.  It  asks  to  be  pre- 
served from  the  great  tempter.  HI.  Peacticai,  conclusions  :  1.  WTiile  praying  not 
to  be  lod  into  temptation,  we  should  be  watchful  against  voluntarily  running  into 
it.  2.  The  unselfishness  of  the  petition — "us."  3.  It  is  offered  in  the  name  of  the 
Tempted  One.  (Dr.  O.  Winslow.)  The  sixth  petition  :—Ta.Tdon  for  past  ia 
followed  by  implored  grace  for  the  future.  I.  Temptation  generaixt,  as  belonging 
of  necessity  to  the  condition  of  moral  agents.  The  word  temptation  suggests  moral 
experiment  for  good  or  evil.  It  has  come  to  mean  invitation  to  sin.  Exposure  to 
illusory  suggestions  is  only  what  the  analogy  of  natural  government  would  lead  oa 
to  expect.  In  our  ordinary  worldly  interests  what  attractiveness  appears  to  hang 
aliout  a  wrong  course  of  conduct,  whilst  difficulty  seems  ever  to  dissuade  us  from 
what  is  right.  We  find  that  men  are  free  to  stand  or  fall.  II.  In  what  sensb 
God  can  be  said  to  lead  ub  into  temptation.  1.  When  God  brings  us  provi- 
dentially into  the  neighbourhood  of  hurtful  influences.  2.  When  He  allows  temp- 
tations to  come  upon  us  with  all  their  unmitigated  force  without  restraining  influences. 
God  never  leads  us  into  temptation  to  make  us  fall.  III.  How  much  of  the  leading 
into  temptation  is  due  to  ourselves.  1.  The  blame  is  our  own  when  we  without 
cause  expose  ourselves  to  any  moral  hazzard.  2.  When  we  allow  ourselves  to  ba 
carried  away  by  sinful  conformity  to  the  world.  3.  When  we  do  not  habitually 
restrain  those  tendencies  and  appetites,  without  which  any  temptation  would  b« 
powerless.  IV,  The  beneficial  ends  for  which  our  temptations  may  be  permitted. 
1.  In  order  to  the  trial  of  our  religious  sincerity.  2.  In  order  that  God  may  get 
honour  to  Himself  by  our  successful  resistance.  3.  The  mercifulness  of  those  per- 
mitted trials,  iu  that  our  very  failures  may  conduce  to  our  greater  spiritual  humility. 
We  should  never  sepaiate  the  prayer  for  deliverance  from  the  pledge  to  keep  our- 
selves. (D.  2Ioore,  31. A .)  Lead  ns  not  into  temptation  : — No  man  should  go  into 
the  future  with  God  till  he  has  a  clear  past.  When  the  soul  has  tasted  forgiveness, 
it  has  the  fear  of  sinning  agun.  Shall  a  man  recovered  from  a  malignant  fever,  go 
and  breathe  iuf  f-ction  ?  Temptation  is  the  precincts  of  sin.  Admire  the  anticipatory 
character  of  God's  care  for  us.  Preventatives  of  temptation.  Prevention  ms,y  bo 
effected  in  three  ways.  The  occasion  may  not  be  presented.  Every  sinful  inclina- 
tion may  be  taken  away  and  overruled,  or  the  power  of  Satan  to  deal  with  one  or  the 
other  may  be  abridged  or  withdrawn.  Temptation  depends  mainly  upon  the  bias 
of  the  natural  character.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Divine  guidance  in  the  midst 
of  dangrrs  : — A  guide  on  the  mountains  leads  the  Alpine  climber  where  dangers 
exist.  The  summit  cannot  otherwise  be  reached.  In  avoiding  or  conquering  the 
danger,  the  traveller's  skill,  courage,  and  endurance  are  both  tested  and  improved. 
His  health  and  manhood,  as  well  aa  his  enjoyment,  are  secured  by  his  being  thus 
led  where  dangers  abound.  But  the  leader  knows  what  path  is  practicable,  what 
perils  should  be  shunned,  and  is  ever  ready  to  lend  a  helping  hand.  Thus  our 
Heavenly  Guide  leads  us  by  His  Providence  even  when  we  are  beset  by  suares. 
{Newman  Hull,  LL.D.)  Men  should  avoid  circumstances  favourable  to  the  develop- 
ment of  evil  tendencies  : — It  would  be  a  great  misfortune  to  a  man  with  weak  lungs 
to  call  him  to  live  in  a  cold,  bleak  air.  So  would  it  be  to  a  man  with  weak  eyes,  to 
fix  him  in  a  situation  which  required  much  study  by  candle-light.  Now  it  is  to  the 
full  as  dangerous  for  the  soul  of  the  ambitious  man  to  be  put  into  the  road  which 
leads  to  high  stations,  as  it  can  be  for  the  lungs  of  the  consumptive  man  to  give 
him  a  houne  on  a  bleak  hill.  (Ibid.)  Men  must  jwt  unnecessarily  expose  themtelve* 
to  teviptation : — It  is  said  that  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  8  wealthy  merchant  ol 
Brussels,  who  had  been  allowed  access  to  headquarters,  asked  Wellmgton  whether 
he  waa  not  exposing  his  person  to  great  danger,  as  shot  and  shell  were  falling 


•HAP.  VI. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  IM 

around.     The  general  replied,  "  You  have  no  business  here,  but  I  am  performing 
my  duty."     So  let  us  never  go  into  spiritual  danger  from  idle  curiosity,  but  only 
when  duty  calls  :  then,  and  then  aloue,  may  we  expect  to  be  safe.     (Ibid.)        Ther» 
are  certain  temptations  which  our  natural  constitution  and  temperament  should  lead 
ta  to  avoid  : — There  is  in  old  Arabic  fable  the  story  of  a  great  rock  that  was  a  great 
magnet,  drawing  ships,  so  that  they  were  dashed  into  splinters  on  it.     If  I  have 
been  magnetized  by  a  certain  Bin,  I  would  not  be  led  near  the  loadstone  that  might 
draw  me  into  destruction  by  its  malignant  potency.   It  I  carry  in  me  the  gunpowder 
of  some  slumbering  badness,  I  would  not  be  led  where  sparks  are  flying.     If  I 
am  "  Little  Faith"  bearing  precious  jewels,  I  would  not  be  led  through  "Dead 
Man's  Lane,"  where  robbers  lurk.     If  I  am  Bhoi-t-si^'hted,  I  would  not  be  led  into 
"  the  land  of  pits."    If  I  am  timid  and  fear  "  the  power  of  the  dog,"  I  would  not  be 
led  near  his  chain,  but  far  as  may  be  beyond  the  reach  of  his  spring.     (Dr.  Stanford.) 
In  Vie  moment  of  defeat  temptation  may  gather  new  force : — But  sin  seems  to  be 
strongest  when  it  has  had  its  death  blow.     The  eagle,  when  down,  strikes  at  yoa 
with  a  beak  like  a  bolt  of  iron,  and  may  flap  you  dead  with  its  wing.    The  red  deer, 
when  down,  may  fell  you  with  its  antlers.     The  djang  horse  may,  in  the  plunge  of 
its  agony,  break  a  man's  limb.    A  harpooned  whale  may  dash  a  boat  over.     Sin  ig 
like  that.     Speared  through  by  its  conqueror,  it  may  grasp  us  in  its  last  convul- 
sions, and  seem  to  be  stronger  dying  than  living ;  but  we  shall  soon  spring  out  from 
it,  and  cry,  "  Deliverance  I  "     (Ibid.)        Lead  us  not  into  temptatioji : — 1.  There  is 
no  evil  in  temptation  unless  complif^d  with.     2.  Temptation  is  a  necessary  element 
in  a  life  of  probation,  such  as  our  life  on  earth  is.     3.  It  is  a  useful  discipline  to 
brace  our  energies  and  increase  our  strength.    4.  If  successfully  overcome  they  con- 
firm our  graces  and  become  hflps  in  the  way  to  heaven.     God  may  be  said  to  lead 
IS  into  temptation — 1.  By  the  dispensations  of  His  providence.      2.  By  giving 
Sataii  permission  to  tempt  us.     3.  When  He  leaves  us  to  ourselves.     Lessons  :  1. 
To  know  and  acknowledge  our  own  weakness.     2.  Temptation  not  a  thing  to  be 
Bourted,  but  feared.     3.  Cannot  be  avoided  by  the  saintUest.    4.  Are  under  God's 
eontrol.     6.  We  must  pray  against  temptations,  especially  such  as  we  feel  we  are 
most  likely  to  fall  under.     6.  To  prayer  we  must  add  watchfulness.    7.  We  must 
avoid  the  seducing  opportunities  of  evil.     8.  How  many  lead  themselves  into  temp- 
tation.   9.  We  must  be  content  to  deny  ourselves  some  things  that  are  lawful  if  we 
would  not  be  lead  to  the  commission  of  what  is  unlawful.     10.  We  must  be  jealous 
about  the  approaches  of  temptation.     11.  We  must  beware  of  little  temptations. 
12.  We  must  listen  to  the  slightest  whispers  of  conscience.   13.  We  must  remember 
the  devil  varies  his  temptations  to  suit  the  changing  circumstances  of  our  life.     14. 
The  consciousness  of  ova  own  individual  danger  must  not  make  us  insensible  to  the 
need  of  our  brethren.   Us  : — 1.  We  are  not  fighting  aloue.  (F.  C.  Blyth,  M.A.)      Keep'' 
far  from  danger : — He  who  has  no  mind  to  trade  with  the  devil  should  be  so  wise 
as  to  keep  away  from  his  shop.     (South.)        If  you  would  not  be  drowned,  what 
do  you  BO  near  the  waterside.     (Baxter.)        Let  us  not  tempt  the  devil  to  tempt  us  ;— 
The  lion  may  cross  our  path,  or  leap  upon  us  from  the  thicket,  but  we  have  nothing 
to  do  with  hunting  him.     (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Temptation: — 1.  The  sources  of 
temptation  may  be  divided  into  three  :  those  within  ourselves,  those  that  surround 
us,  those  from  the  spirit-world.     2.  This  petition  does  not  mean  that  we  should  aslc 
God  to  give  us  an  easy  time.    3.  Temptations  are  just  as  liable  to  come  to  men 
from  things  that  are  good  as  from  things  that  are  bad.     What  is  nobler  than  in- 
dustry well  applied — property — regulated  anger  ?     These  are  full  of  temptations  to 
avarice,  &c.     The  Divine  conception  of  life  is  that  it  is  a  conflict.    4.  Modes  of  re- 
sisting temptation.     Many  of  them  are  to  be  forestalled.     We  are  to  watch  against 
weak  hours.     A  safeguard  against  temptation  is  the  strengthening  of  the  natural 
antagonisms  of  the  passions ;  over  against  cruelty  lies  benevolence,  &c.     (Beecher.) 
Deliver  us  from  evU. — Deliver  us  from  evil : — I.    That  is,  if  we  be   led   into 

TEMPTATION,    LET    D8    BE    KEPT    FROM   THE    EVIL   OF   IT.       It   is   a   mOre    WOUderful   prO- 

vidence  to  be  kept  from  the  evil,  than  from  temptation.  If  a  garrison  be  never 
assaulted  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  staudeth  exempt  from  the  calamity  of  war.  II. 
The  EVIL  OF  sin  is  gbeateb  than  the  evil  of  temptation.  1.  Because  it  sepa- 
rateth  us  irom  God.  Poverty,  sickness,  blindness,  loss  of  goods — let  a  man  be 
never  so  low,  yet,  if  in  a  state  of  grace,  the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  him.  2.  Be- 
cause it  depiiveth  us  of  God,  who  is  the  fountain  of  our  comfort.  3.  It  reproveth 
our  folly.  We  complain  of  other  things,  but  do  not  complain  of  sin,  which  Ib  tha 
greatest  evil.  The  evil  of  affliction  is  but  for  a  moment ;  like  rain,  it  drieth  up  of 
its  own  accord ;   but  the  evil  of  sin  is  for  ever,  unless  it  be  pardoned  and  taken 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

away.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  all  the  evils  of  affliction  ;  therefore,  when  we  complain, 
we  should  complain  not  so  much  of  the  smart,  as  of  the  cause  of  it.  {TImtiuu 
Manton,  D.D.)  Deliver  us  from  evil : — 1.  This  prayer  looks  upon  evil  as  some- 
thing  separate  from  ourselves.  2.  It  regards  our  personal  deliverance  from  evil  ai 
our  great  nfeed.  3.  It  leaves  with  God  the  decision  as  to  what  is  evil,  4.  It  leaves  with 
God  both  the  mode  and  time  of  the  desired  deliverance.  5.  It  recognizes  our  depend- 
ence on  God  for  this  desired  deliverance.  (F.  Edwards,  B. A.)  Deliver  tu  from 
evil : — I.  That  is  principally  from  sin,  or  evil,  (1)  moral  and  spiritual ;  or  evil,  (2) 
penal  and  afflictive.  From  all  (3)  mischief,  from  the  (4)  root  of  all  evil  II.  We 
absolutely  request  of  God  that  He,  in  His  mercy,  would  also  deliver  and  free  us  from 
(1)  remorse  of  conscience,  (2)  anguish  of  spirit  for  having  violated  His  laws,  and 
neglect  of  duty ;  from  (3)  blindness  of  mind,  (4)  hardness  of  heart,  (5)  want  ol 
love,  reverence,  devotion  toward  God ;  of  (6)  charity  and  good-will  toward  oui 
neighbour.  III.  We  are  hereby  taught  not  to  be  studiously  punctual  and  particular 
in  our  prayers,  as  if  God  needed  our  information,  or  were  apt  to  neglect  the  par- 
ticulars concerning  our  good,  {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  Our  supplication  for  dc- 
liverance  : — 1.  This  petition  is  supported  by  the  authority  of  human  experience  and 
history.  We  are  led  into  situationB  of  trial.  2.  It  is  the  natural  language  of  the 
human  heart.  It  is  the  utterance  of  fear.  3.  It  is  the  prayer  of  wise  self-distrust. 
4.  It  must  always  be  a  prayer  springing  from  our  trust  in  God.  5.  The  pra3'er  now 
becomes  an  a8])iration,  a  prophecy.  It  gathers  up  all  the  great  hopes  and  faiths  of 
the  gospel.  (IF.  Hubbard.)  This  prayer  impUes — I.  That  we  are  Uving  in  a 
world  in  which  is  the  presence  of  evil.  II.  That  those  who  use  it  are  under  a  sense 
of  being  in  bondage  to  e\il.  III.  Nothing  less  than  the  omnipotent  arm  of  God  can 
deliver  us  from  this  evil.  IV.  That  nothing  can  be  satisfying  to  the  Christian  but 
the  entire  expulsxon  of  evil  from  the  world.  V.  Let  our  petition  be  presented  in 
fervent  faith  of  an  answer.  (W.  Dodsworth.)  The  devotional  spirit  of  the  Lord's 
prayer : — Deliverance  from  evil.  This  the  cry  of  humanity.  1.  From  the  evil  of 
sin.  2.  From  the  evil  of  the  world.  3.  From  evil  men.  4.  From  the  Evil  One.  6. 
A  daily  prayer  :  what  evil  one  day  may  expose  us  to.  (Dr.  O.  WinsJow.)  Tlu  seventh 
petition : — I.  The  agency  of  Satan.  1.  The  existence  of  orders  of  beings  superior  to  the 
human  race  is  antecedently  probable  ;  as  those  below  us,  so  some  above.  .  Scripture 
confirms  this.  2.  What  are  the  limits  of  this  agency,  and  how  are  the  personal 
attributes  requisite  for  its  success  to  be  reconciled  with  our  notions  of  a  finite  being  ? 
Satan  has  some  form  of  access  to  the  heart,  he  has  insight  into  our  ruliug  mental 
tendencies.  II.  The  means  used  by  Satan  for  the  carrying  on  of  his  designs.  1, 
Our  enemy  is  personal.  2.  He  avails  himself  of  outward  accidents  to  stir  op 
motions  to  evil.  3."  When  he  cannot  find,  he  seeks  to  malie,  occasions  of  sin.  £. 
He  turns  our  permitted  enjoyments  into  evil ;  our  friendship,  our  reUgious  feehngs. 
IIL  The  provisions  made  for  our  deliverance  from  this  adversary.  1.  The  restraints 
constantly  put  upon  the  tempter  in  the  exercise  of  his  own  power.  2.  A  gracious 
Father  has  provided  many  forms  of  unseen  and  unknown  deliverance.  3.  God 
more  generally  delivers  His  children  from  the  adversary  by  enabling  them  to  deliver 
themselves.  We  must  resist  (1)  at  first  (2)  earnestly.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The 
last  petition  : — It  stands  last  because  all  previous  petitions  are  summed  up  in  it.  L 
Evn,  IS  ABOUND  and  within  ub.  II.  Evil  has  a  central  unity — •'  the  evil."  IIL 
Who  delivers.  God  delivers  in  Christ.  IV.  The  promise  involved  in  the  petition. 
In  the  resurrection  delivered  from  evil.  (Dr.  Saphir.)  But  deliver  us  from  evil: 
— It  surrounds  the  purest,  clings  to  the  hoUest,  shadows  the  brightest,  embitters  the 
happiest.  1.  The  true  suppUant  will  try  to  see  evil  from  the  point  of  view  from 
which  God  sees  it.  2.  There  is  no  good  which  has  not  in  its  constitution  some 
evil,  so  there  is  no  evil  that  is  not  mingled  with  some  good.  3.  An  enhghtened 
man  will  leave  the  time  and  way  of  dehverance  to  God,  4,  God's  plan  is  by  ran- 
som ;  He  delivered  Christ  to  evil  that  He  might  deliver  you  from  it.  5.  The  be* 
hever's  liberty,  sanctity,  and  rest.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  seventh  petition  :— 
L  The  EVIL  one.  II.  The  evil  caused  by  yielding  to  the  evil  one — thb  KEsniiT  of  bin, 
III.  The  evil  in  odkselveb.  {Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  The  seventh  petition : — I, 
Identify  the  evil.  1.  Not  the  world.  2,  Not  affliction.  8.  Not  death.  4.  But  sin, 
n.  Notes  on  the  petition.  1.  In  offering  this  petition  we  have  to  keep  in  mind 
the  whole  connection — connect  it  with  the  prayer  for  forgiveness,  with  the  prayet 
against  temptation.  2.  We  offer  this  prayer  in  that  Jesus  is  the  medium  of  deliver- 
ance. 8.  This  prayer  fits  the  hps  of  Cbristians  in  a  time  when  old  sins  seem  to 
recover  new  power.  4.  Our  thoughts  rush  forward  to  the  diiy  when  this  prayer  for 
dehverance  from  evil  will  have  its  finished  and  perfect  answer.     {Dr.  Stanford.) 


CHii'.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  101 

Evil  may  he  productive  of  good  : — Like  the  merchant  who  lost  his  all  in  a  storm, 
and  was  thus  driven  to  learn  philosophy  at  Athens,  many  who  have  been  deprived 
of  earthly  comforts,  have  learned  that  Wisdom  is  better  than  Wealth.  (F.  C. 
Blyth,  AI.A.)  The  universal  pray er- cry  : — 1.  The  evidence  of  an  all-pervadmg 
and  ever-present  evil  is  in-esistible.  2.  If  we  cry  for  deliverance  it  is  because  wa 
have  a  lingering  recollection  of  a  promise  that  there  will  be  a  Dehverer.  3.  But 
God's  children  intelligently  offer  this  prayer  to  the  Divine  Father ;  they  feel  that 
He  is  not  the  Author  of  evil.  4.  As  brethren  we  pray  this  petition :  the  successive 
generations  have  used  it.  5.  Estimate  tha  price  paid  for  deliverance ;  not  silver  and 
gold.  (Dr.  Gumming.)  Afflictions  not  necessarily  evil : — Only  as  you  call  a  flail 
evil  that  separates  the  grain  from  the  chaff ;  a  wheel  evil  that  grinds  jewels  to  shine 
in  a  crown ;  a  knife  evil  that  prunes  a  ti  ee ;  a  tree  evil  that  bears  good  fruit ;  a 
plough  evil  whose  coulter  crashes  through  the  hard  soil,  upens  it  to  the  chemistry  of 
nature,  and  makes  it  a  soft,  porous,  receptive  seed-plot  for  the  harvest ;  the  medi- 
cine evil  that  brings  back  the  colour  of  health  to  the  white  face,  and  the  flash  of 
gladness  to  the  dim  eye  ;  the  hand  evil  that  snatches  back  a  heedless  child  from  the 
nest  of  the  serpent,  or  the  lip  of  the  river,  just  in  tirae  to  feave  its  life — only  in  this 
qualified  sense  can  you  call  an  aMiction  an  eviL  Out  of  our  greatest  sorrows  grow 
our  greatest  joys.  (Dr.  Stanford.)  Suitable  that  this  should  be  the  last  petition 
in  the  prayer: — 1.  If  this  be  grantol  all  other  blessings  are  comprehended  in  it. 

2.  It  will  grant  us  the  gift  of  perseverance.  3.  It  presupposes  all  that  has  gone 
before.  (F.  C.  Blyth,  3I.A.)  For  Thine  Is  the  kingdom. — Thine  is  the  kingdom,  ■ 
the  power,  and  the  ylory : — I.  The  kingdom.  1.  God's  kingdom  is  universal  over 
all  men  or  things,  overall  persons  in  the  world.  2.  It  is  special.  Which  notes  His 
relation  to  the  saints.  It  ia  the  duty  of  a  king  to  defend  his  subjects  and  provide 
for  their  welfare.  II.  The  power.  Titles  without  power  make  authority  ridiculous. 
We  can  ask  nothing  but  what  God  is  able  to  give — yea,  above  our  asking.  III.  The 
OLOBT.  The  honour  and  glorj'  of  all  will  redound  to  God,  the  comfort  accrueth  to 
ns.  IV.  The  ddp.ation.  For  ever.  All  excellencies  which  are  in  God,  are  eter- 
nally in  God.  (Thomas  Mantan.D.D.)  Thine  is  the  kingdom : — That  is  :  I.  Thou 
hast  a  perpetual  and  unmoveable  authority  whereby  justly  to  dispose  of  all  things  ; 
an  indefectible  and  irresistible  power,  whereby  Thou  canst  effect  whatever  seems 
just  and  good  to  Thee.  H.  Therefore  we  profess  only  to  rely  upon,  and  seek  help 
from,  Thee ;  with  hrpe  and  confidence  we  address  ourselves  to  Thee  for  the  supply 
of  our  needs.  III.  Thine  is  the  glory;  all  honour  and  reverence,  all  love  and  thank- 
fulness, are  due  imto  Thee,  therefore  we  render  our  adorations  and  acknowledg- 
ments to  Thee.  (Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  I.  The  kixgdom — "  Thine."  1.  By 
eternal  right.  2.  By  assuaging  wrath.  3.  By  infinite  purchase.  II.  Think  is  thb 
POWER.  1.  Upon  the  intellectual  world.  2.  Upon  the  political  world.  3.  Upon 
the  ecclesiastical  world.  4.  Upon  the  invisible  world.  III.  Thine  is  thb  globt. 
(T.  Mortimer,  M.A.)  The  doxology  : — 1.  Our  confidence  in  the  acceptableness  of 
our  prayers  is  derived  from  God  and  not  from  ourselves.  2.  That  the  power  by 
which  our  desires  are  bronglit  about  is  Divine,  and  not  human.  3.  That  our  cer- 
tainty of  success  is  b'lsed  upon  our  faith  in  God.  4.  That  our  confidence  in  our 
prayers  ought  not  to  waver.  5.  That  our  prayers  ought  always  to  be  confirmed 
and  ratified  by  ourselves.  (F.  Edwards,  B.A)  L  What  is  here  ascribed  to 
God.  The  kingdim.  The  glory.  II.  The  advantages  arising  from  this  ascrip- 
tion OF  PRAISE.  We  shall  feel  that  we  have  presented  to  God  the  strongest  argu- 
ments to  ensure  an  answer  to  our  prayers.  We  should  be  encouraged  to  expect 
great  things  in  answer  to  oar  prayers.  We  shall  feel  how  eternal  and  unchangeable 
is  the  basis  upon  which  our  expectation  rests.  We  shall  feel  calm  and  hoi  ef  ii 
after  pra;"'?r,  whatever  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  or  our  viewt  of 
the  wond  around  us.  (W.  O.  Liliey.)  The  ordering  spirit  of  the  Lord's 
■prayer : — There  is  the  kingdom  : — 1.  Of  nature.  2.  Providence.  3.  Grace.  4. 
Glory.  (Dr.  0.  Winslow.)  The  doxology  : — L  The  offering  o»  pbaisb  as  a 
necessary  part  of  religions  worship.  1.  Praise  is  the  most  disinterested  form 
of  religious  worship.  2.  It  is  a  divinely  appointed  type  of  devotion  because 
of  its  inspiring  and  elevating  influence  upon  the  mind  of  the  worshipper  himself. 

3.  Praise  comes  nearest  to  the  worship  of  heaven.  II.  Those  chabactbbistics 
of  His  holy  nature  and  ground  for  which  we  are  here  taught  to  show  forth 
His  praise.  1.  We  ascribe  to  the  object  of  our  adoration  boundless  and  universal 
sovereignty.  2.  We  are  instructed  to  make  grateful  mention  of  His  omnipotence. 
8.  His  glory.  4.  But  our  doxology  rises  in  the  majesty  of  its  ascriptions- 
dominion,  power,  glory — for  ever.      (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  doxology  : — I.  A 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  fi. 

BEVENFOLD  VIEW  OF  PRAI9E.  1.  Prayer  enia  in  praise.  Our  God  who  seea 
the  end  from  the  beginning,  eeea  praise  in  every  petition.  2.  Praise  is  the 
language  of  the  bouI  in  commnuion  with  God.  3,  It  is  the  culminating  point 
of  prayer.  4.  The  doxology  is  an  argument.  5.  Praise  is  faith  and  more  than 
faith,  it  is  an  anticipation  of  heaven.  6.  The  great  bond  of  union  is  praise.  7. 
Praise  is  God's  gift.  II.  The  threefold  asceipxion  of  praise.  1.  There  is  the 
kingdom.  2.  The  power.  3.  The  glory.  III.  The  kingdom,  power,  and  oIiOBI,  as 
BEOcONGiNO  TO  THE  Triune  God.  IV.  For  eveb.  {Dr.  SapMr.)  The  doxology  : — 
I.  The  doxology  a  confession  of  faith.  II.  An  argument  in  prayer.  III.  An  ascrip- 
tion of  praise.  (Neicman  Hall,  LL.B.)  For  Thine  is  the  kinjdom  :—  I.  Doxology 
1.  All  prayer  should  gather  itself  up  and  crown  itself  in  praise.  2.  Praise  should  not  be 
for  gifts  and  graces,  but  for  what  God  is  in  Himself.  11.  An  argomentativb  doxology. 
"  For  thine,"  &o.  It  establishes  a  plea  for  every  petition.  III.  The  virtue  and 
Bufficiency  of  prayer  lie  in  a  threefold  recognition  of  God.  1.  His  kingdom — perfect, 
sovereign,  regal.  2.  True  prayer  never  stops  to  ask  how.  3.  It  fixes  itself  on  th« 
glory  of  God.  (T.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Amen  : — 1.  It  is  a  word  of  veritable  history 
in  Israel  and  in  the  Church.  2.  It  announces  God's  truth  and  faithfulness.  3.  It 
is  the  name  of  Christ.  4.  It  is  the  seal  of  prayer.  6.  It  is  the  voice  of  faith.  6. 
It  is  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience.  7.  It  is  a  renewal  of  our  dedication  to  God. 
{Dr.  Saphir.)  The  "  Avien  "  of  Christ : — 1.  Christ  is  the  amen  of  the  Father's 
love.  2.  Christ  is  the  amen  of  the  Father's  holiness.  3.  Christ  is  the  amen  of 
the  Father's  sovereignty.  4.  Christ  is  the  amen  of  the  Father's  will.  6.  Christ 
is  the  amen  of  the  Father's  bestowment.  6.  Christ  is  the  amen  of  the  Father's 
forgiveness.  7.  Christ  is  the  amen  of  the  Father's  guidance.  8.  Christ  is  the 
amen  of  the  Father's  deliverance.  9.  Christ  is  the  amen  of  the  Father's  eternal 
kingdom  and  power  and  glory.    (iJ.  W.  Percival,  M.A.) 

Yet,  14. — If  ye  forgive  men. — Mutual  forgiveness : — I,  All  mankind  as  trans* 
gressors  are  deeply  indebted  to  God's  law.  II.  That  if  ever  man  be  saved  it  must 
be  by  an  act  of  pure  mercy.  III.  That  the  Scriptural  character  of  the  Almighty 
ENCOURAGES  US  TO  CONFIDE  IN  HiM  FOR  FORGIVENESS.  1.  Becauso  the  lovo  of  God  has 
laid  such  a  foundation  for  its  exercise.  2.  It  is  seen  in  the  earnestness  of  His 
invitations.  3.  In  the  promises  of  His  word.  4.  In  the  persons  whom  He  has 
saved  ;  (1)  their  number ;  (2)  their  character.  IV.  That  however  free  the  mercy 
of  God  is  to  man,  a  merciful  disposition  towards  our  fellow-creatures  is  neces- 
BAR-j  to  its  enjoyment.  1.  It  cannot,  according  to  the  general  tenour  of  Scripture, 
condemn  self-defence  by  lawful  means.  2.  There  is  a  connection  between  forgiving 
and  being  forgiven.  3.  Reason  establishes  this  connection.  (/.  E.  Good.)  Those 
who  do  not  forgive  others  should  never  sin  themselves : — The  Rev.  J.  Wesley,  in  the 
course  of  his  voyage  to  America,  hearing  an  unusual  noise  in  the  cabin  of  General 
Oglethorpe,  the  Governor  of  Georgia,  with  whom  he  sailed,  stepped  in  to  inquire 
the  cause  of  it.  The  General  addressed  him  :  "  Mr.  Wesley,  you  must  excuse  me  ; 
I  have  met  with  a  provocation  too  great  for  man  to  bear.  You  know,  the  only  wine 
I  drink  is  Cyprus  wine  ;  I  therefore  provided  myself  with  several  dozens  of  it,  and 
this  villain,  Grimaldi  "  (his  foreign  valet,  who  was  present,  and  almost  dead  with 
fear)  "  has  drunk  up  the  whole  of  it :  but  I  will  be  revenged  on  him.  I  have  ordered 
him  to  be  tied  hand  and  foot,  and  be  carried  to  the  man-of-war  which  sails  with  us. 
The  rascal  should  have  taken  care  how  he  used  me  so,  for  I  never  forgive."  "  Then 
I  hope,  sir,"  said  Wesley,  looking  calmly  at  him,  "  you  never  sin."  The  General 
was  quite  confounded  at  the  reproof  ;  and  putting  his  hand  into  his  pocket,  took 
out  a  bunch  of  keys,  which  he  threw  at  Grimaldi.  "  There,  vUlain,"  said  he,  •*  take 
my  keys,  and  behave  better  for  the  future." 

Ver.  16.  When  ye  fast. — L  A  few  remarks  on  the  practice  of  fasting  at  thk  timb 
or  OUR  Lord.  II.  The  smful  and  unprofitable  mannbb  in  which  the  jews  observed 
it.  1.  Their  ostentation.  2.  Its  futiUty — *'  They  have  their  reward."  lU.  The 
directions  given  us  for  its  observance.  1.  The  propriety  of  private  fasting.  2. 
The  manner  of  its  observance.  3.  The  prosperity  of  personal  religion  may  be 
promoted  by  it.  (J.  E.  Good.)  Faating  : — I,  The  nature,  design,  and  importanoi 
OF  fasting.  Not  only  abstinence  from  sin,  but  absiinence  from  food  for  a  time, 
longer  or  shorter,  as  health  and  duty  will  allow.  Scripture  testimony,  &o.  What 
is  the  design  of  fasting?  1.  To  manifest  and  promote  sorrow  for  sin,  &0,  (Isa- 
Iviii.  6).     2.    Self-denial,  and  a  means  of   mortification.     3.    That   it   may  help 


CHAP,  vi.j  ST.  MATTHEW.  10» 

to  prayer  and  other  holy  duties.  These  things  manifest  the  reasonableness  and 
importauos  of  fasting.  II.  How  the  htpockites  fasted.  Partial,  insincere,  selfish, 
&elf- righteous,  external,  &c.  How  much  reason  is  there  to  think  that  thousands 
among  us  fast  in  this  way  !  III.  How  the  true  people  op  God  observe  this  duty. 
They  are  sincere  and  deeply  affected  with  their  own  sins,  &c.  (Joel,  ii,  12-17  ; 
Exod.  ix.  4  ;  Dan.  ix.  3  ;  Jas.  iv.  9,  10).  They  intend  the  glory  of  God  (Matt.  vi.  18), 
and  the  mortification  of  siu  in  themselves  and  others,  and  the  reformation  of  the 
nation  (Rom.  xui.  14,  viii.  13  ;  Gal.  v.  16-24).  They  are  humble,  spiritual,  con- 
nistent,  practical  (Joel  ii.  14 ;  Isa.  i.  16,  Iv.  6,  7 ;  Matt.  iii.  7-10 ;  Luke  iii.  7-9^ 
Xiii.  1-9;  Jas  iv.  8 ;  Isa.  i.  17,  Iviii.  7 ;  Psa.  xlviii.  25 ;  Luke  iii.  11).     (/.  Benson.) 

Ver.  19.  Treasures  upon  earth. — This  doea  not  discourage  diligent  endeavour  for 
the  bady  which  is  necessary  ;  industry,  which  is  one  part  of  duty.  We  are  not  to 
over-value  even  these  valuable  possessions.  I.  Hebe  is  an  exhortation  to  duty. 
1.  "What  are  these  treasures?   2,  "What  is  implied  by  laying  up  treasures  in  heaven? 

(1)  By  fleeing  fiom  the  wrath  to  come,  the  Christian  is  laying  up  heavenly  treasure. 

(2)  By  endeavouring  to  secure  an  interest  in  Christ.  (3)  By  setting  his  affection  on 
things  above.     (4)  By  having  his  conversation  there.     II.  The  encouragements  to 

ENFORCE    the    DUTY    OF    LATINO    UP    TREASURE    IN    HEAVEN.       1.    No   thieves   deprive 

them  of  their  property.  2.  Are  you  trading  for  that  better  world  ?  (Dr.  Fisher.) 
Treasures  in  heaven : — The  love  of  accumiUation  is  a  principle  in  our  nature  ;  no 
man  free  from  its  fascination.  The  only  true  investment  for  an  immortal  being 
must  be  in  eternity.  Everything  done  for  God's  grace  and  glory  is  like  something 
planted  out  of  this  world  into  the  soil  of  another  state.  It  is  a  deposit  which  will 
appear  again.  Take  an  instance  of  the  way  in  which  Christians  may  lay  up 
treasures  in  heaven.  1.  By  selecting  for  oui-  friends  and  companions  those  who  are 
children  of  God,  so  that  each  departing  one  is  an  actual  increase  of  the  holy  treasure 
which  is  awaiting  us  in  another  state.  To  Christian  man,  death  only  sweeps  the 
field  to  house  the  harvest.  The  treasures  of  his  heart  are  only  locked  up  from  him 
for  a  little  while,  to  be  opened  presently,  in  greater  loveliness,  where  everything  is 
real,  and  every  reality  is  for  ever.  It  will  be  our  greatest  joy  to  meet  in  heaven 
those  to  whom  we  have  been  ustful  in  this  life.  2.  The  motive  of  any  action  will 
carry  it  higher  than  its  present  and  %'isible  scope.  Every  man  has  his  time,  talents, 
influence,  and  money,  as  working  materials.  If  he  so  use  these  that  he  is  constantly 
coQsidering  their  value  for  eternity,  he  is  putting  treasure  in  God's  bank.  3.  It 
is  the  power  of  faith  to  appropriate  everything  it  grasps.  You  send  on  your  affec- 
tion to  occupy  heaven ;  you  have  a  prest^nt  eujoyment  of  your  reversion.  You 
increase  your  treasure  in  heaven  by  continued  acts  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  4.  By 
thus  throwing  yourself  into  another  world  this  life  will  appear  an  impoverished 
thing.  {J.  Vauglian,  M.A.)  Earthly  and  heavenly  treasures : — I.  The  treasubeI 
REFERRED  TO.  1.  The  treasures  of  earth  are  evanescent.  2.  The  lawful  possession 
of  earthly  treasures  is  no  sin.  3.  The  text  does  not  object  to  your  getting  rich  in 
a  righteous  way.  II.  Lay  up  treasures  in  heaven.  1.  Because  its  bank  is 
strong  in  its  independence.  Banks  and  firms  are  much  like  ninepins  with 
which  children  play;  when  one  pin  falls  the  others  fall  also.  But  as  for  the 
bank  of  heaven,  it  is  strictly  independent ;  it  is  the  only  bank  of  its  kind  in  the 
universe.  2.  Because  the  omniscience  of  the  Banker  is  the  very  best  security. 
Could  men  foresee  financial  disaster  they  would  avoid  it.  3.  Because  this  bank  can 
never  be  broken  into.  4.  It  is  the  only  bank  that  can  help  you  at  death.  You 
cannot  very  well  trade  in  France  with  English  money.  You  must  change  it  into 
French  money.  But  no  earthly  bank  can  change  its  coin  so  as  to  ferry  you  across 
Jordan.  6.  Bank  not  with  evil  any  longer.  (J.  O.  Davis.)  Toys  must  lot  be 
counted  treasures : — A  lady  once  asked  two  little  boys  who  were  amusing  them- 
selves with  some  beautiful  playthings,  "  Well,  boys,  these  are  your  treasures,  I  sup- 
pose— your  greatest  treasures."  "  No,  ma'am,"  said  the  elder  boy,  "these  are  not 
our  treasures,  they  are  our  playthings;  our  treasures  are  in  hea,ven."  A  noble 
answer  from  a  child.  Oh,  my  congregation,  let  us  treat  gold  and  silver  and  precious 
Btones  as  toys,  and  let  us  treat  moral  goodness,  spiritual  beauty,  righteousness  of 
heart,  Christhkeness,  Godlikeness,  as  our  only  treasures  worthy  the  namel  (Ibid.) 
Treasures  in  heaven  : — Have  a  deposit  on  earth,  if  you  must  or  can  ;  but  let  youi 
chief  banking  be  in  heaven.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Heavenly  mindednesi : — I.  Tub 
CONDUCT  PROHIBITED.  1.  The  heart  of  man  is  the  governing  principle  of  his  actions. 
8.  This  too  high  estimation  of  the  things  of  the  world  leads  to  an  undue  degree  of 
solicitude  for  their  acquisition,  which  the  precept  under  consideration  is  designed  to 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m. 

repress.  II.  The  opposite  duty  which  we  are  required  to  discharge.  1.  Theobjecti 
exhibited  to  our  attentiou — "  Treasures  in  heaven,"  2.  The  exhortation  to  secora 
an  iuteiest  in  this  felicity.  III.  The  satisfactory  seasons  on  which  these  direo- 
tions  are  founded.  1.  The  uncertainty  of  earthly  good.  2.  The  reality  of  that 
which  is  Divine.  3.  And  the  powerful  influence  which  our  possessions  have  over 
our  affections.  Learn  :  1.  The  folly  of  the  worldly-minded  man.  2.  The  wisdom 
of  true  piety.  (-7.  E.  Good.)  Our  treasures  to  he  raised  higher : — The  Rev. 
Ashton  Oxf'nden  quotes  from  an  old  >vriter  an  illuetration  of  this  precept.  He  says, 
"  We  need  not  lose  our  riches,  but  change  their  place.  Suppose  a  friend  should 
enter  thy  house,  and  should  find  that  thou  hadst  lodged  thy  fruits  on  a  damp  floor; 
tind  suppose  he  knew  the  likelihood  ot  those  fruits  to  spoil,  and  should  therefore 
give  thee  some  such  advice  as  this — '  Brother,  thou  art  likely  to  lose  the  things 
which  thou  hast  gathered  with  great  labour.  Thou  hast  placed  them  on  a  damp 
floor.  In  a  few  days  they  will  corrupt.'  lou  would  inquire,  '  What  shall  I  do?  ' 
And  he  would  answer,  '  Raise  them  to  a  higher  room.'  If  wise,  you  would  instantly 
act  upon  this  advice.  So  Christ  advises  us  to  raise  our  riches  from  earth  to  heaven." 
No  vum  ever  went  to  heaven  wlwse  heart  was  not  there  before  : — These  words.  I.  Aa 
an  ENTIRE  PROPOSITION  IN  THEMSELVES.  1.  Every  man  has  something  which  he 
acoouuts  his  treasure  or  chief  good.  This  is  apparent — (1)  From  the  activity  of 
man's  mind ;  (2)  From  the  method  of  his  acting.  2.  Whatsoever  a  man  places  hia 
treasure  in,  upon  that  he  places  liis  heart  also.  (1)  A  restless  and  laboriona 
endeavour  to  possess  himself  of  it.  (2)  He  places  his  whole  delight  in  it.  (3)  He 
supports  his  mind  from  it  in  all  his  troubles.  (4)  For  the  preservation  of  that  be 
will  part  with  all  else  besides.  H.  As  an  akqument.  Two  rivals  for  the  affections ; 
man  cannot  tix  on  both.  1.  Consider  how  far  inferior  the  world  is  to  man's  heart. 
Its  enjoyments  are  (1)  Indefectible ;  (2)  Endless ;  (3)  Not  to  be  taken  away.  {Dr. 
South.) 

Ver.  22.  Tlie  light  of  the  body  la  tlia  eye. — Singleness   of  eye : — The  man 

whose  only  object  is  to  make  good  his  eternity  moves  forward  in  an  element  ol 
clearness,  without  the  doubts  which  harass  other  men.  I.  That  wdich  we  most 
DESIRE  WE  MOST  wjsH  TO  KNOW  ABOUT.  Lot  a  man  be  actuated  by  strong  desire 
for  salvation  and  hy  will  never  cease  to  inquire  till  he  has  found  it.  In  propor- 
tion to  the  laboriousness  of  the  search  is  the  largeness  of  the  discovery ;  the 
"  whole  body  "  is  "  full  of  light."     II.  He  that  hath  singled  out  eternity  as  the 

OBJECT    OP    his    pursuit,    PROVES     THAT    HE    HAS    A   JUST   ESTIMATE    OF   ITS   IMPOBTANCK 

as  COMPARED  WITH  TIME.  To  OUT  optics  magnitude  is  Tfivcrsed ;  but  let  it  be  seen 
in  its  just  proportious  and  all  the  prospects  of  futurity  are  altered.  This  will  bring 
mstice  and  order  into  the  whole  perspective  of  being.  What  a  view  do  we  g(4  o£ 
time  if  we  measure  it  on  the  scale  of  eternity.  This  sweeps  away  a  multitude  of 
errors,  and  the  whole  body  becomes  "full  of  light."  One  principle  will  often  throw 
light  over  the  whole  field  of  contemplation.  We  must  not  try  to  unite  the  interests 
of  both  worlds;  this  has  more  than  a  distracting,  it  would  have  a  darkening, 
effect.  Another  mode  in  which  singleness  of  eye  entails  light  is  by  the  reflex 
inflnence  of  obedience  on  faith.  The  more  we  prepare  for  heaven  and  the  further 
we  get  on  the  way  to  it,  the  light  grows  brighter  and  brighter.  Every  accession  of 
gjace  brings  new  light.  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  tlie  shining  light.  (Dr.  Chalmer$.) 
Religion  the  ruling,  though  not  the  only,  object  of  life.  The  "  eye  "  is  "  sinyle,"  not 
because  it  sees  one  thing,  but  because  it  looks  in  one  direction.  It  is  a  simplicity, 
not  of  the  intellectual,  but  of  the  moral  regards.  It  marks  one  ruling  passion  to 
which  all  others  are  pressed  into  subservience.  A  navigator  may  set  hi.s  mind  on 
the  discovery  of  some  distant  region,  and  may  repel  all  the  templatiou&  he  meets 
with  in  his  way  ;  not  allowing  the  luxury  of  one  place,  or  the  gain  of  another,  to 
detain  him.  Here  is  singfeness  of  eye  ;  but  yet  he  attends  to  the  waters  below,  and 
to  the  firmament  above,  and  to  the  compass  by  which  he  steers  his  courso.  Hera 
the  object  is  one,  but  its  pursuit  is  illuminated  by  the  Ught  of  many  sciences. 
(Ibid).  The  fingle  eye  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  "  the  single  kyk  J  "  1.  It 
implies  the  contemplation  of  one  object.  "  One  thing  have  I  desired  of  the  Lord." 
"  One  thing  is  needful."  2.  Clearness  of  perception  is  implied.  8.  Undeviating 
attention  to  the  object  of  our  view.  II.  What  is  to  be  understood  by  the  fulness 
OF  uoHT  WHICH  IS  SAID  TO  ATTEND  ITS  VISION  ?  Light  is  an  emblem  of  knowledge, 
happiness,  usefulness.  1.  Then  Diviner  knowledge  springs  from  the  contemplation 
of  Ood.  2.  Light  is  an  emblem  of  happiness.  3.  Light  is  an  emblem  of  usefulness. 
{J.  Curwen.)        Tlie  single  eye. .- — 1.  Naturally :  It  is  by  means  of  the  eye  the  bodj 


jHAP.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  1(W 

IS  directed  in  its  avoidance  of  evil.  2.  Metaphorically :  Light  is  the  emblem  of  happi- 
ness and  joy.  3.  Morally :  Light  applied  often  to  the  conscience.  {J.  E.  Good.) 
The  darhiess  of  vnbdief : — L  The  body  has  eies  to  see  with.  IL  We  have  light 
to  see  by,  as  well  as  eyes  to  Bee  with  ;  the  light  is  as  necessary  as  the  organ  of  sight. 
Vision  is  the  result  of  a  two-fold  iigeucy — Man's  and  God's.  III.  The  eyes  are 
subject  to  DISEASE.  Sometimes  the  ey^s  are  intolerant  of  the  light;  sometimea 
they  distort  it  so  as  to  narrow  or  lengthen  objects,  and  thus  misrepresent  thrm. 
Tiiese  three  things  are  true  of  the  mind : — 1.  The  mind  has  eyes — organs  to  see  truth, 
to  know  reahties  in  the  world  oi  thought ;  these  eyes  are  understanding  and  reason. 
Furthermore,  our  natural  eyes  perceive  the  colour  of  objects  as  well  as  the  objects 
themselves,  so  the  mind  has  perception  of  the  quality  of  action  as  just  and  beautiful, 
or  the  opposite.  2.  But  as  the  eyes  are  dependent  upon  light,  so  are  our  minds 
dependent  upon  the  hght  God  sheds  upon  us.  Eeason,  conscience,  need  light. 
It  is  folly  for  a  man  to  say  he  has  no  need  of  light,  that  his  eyes  are  enough 
for  him  1  3.  The  mind's  organ  of  vision  is  subject  to  disease.  How  great  the 
darkness : — 1.  As  to  the  Idud  of  it.  To  be  in  a  room  hung  with  pictures  and 
not  to  be  able  to  see  them  is  grief;  to  be  in  a  world  fiUtd  with  expressions  of 
the  Creator's  power  and  love,  and  not  see  them  is  unutterable  loss.  2.  It  is 
great  in  respect  of  guilt.  3.  It  is  hopeless.  (W.  I.  Budington,  D.D.)  I.  Thebb 
IB  IN  EVEBY  MAN  A  coNSciENCK  or  practical  judgment,  a  si'ikitdal  btk  or  light 
WITHIN  him.  Consciance  is  God's  deputy.  1.  Acts  by  His  commission.  2. 
Dictates  in  His  name.  3.  Censures  by  His  authority.  4.  Refers  us  to  His  sentence. 
5.  Assigns  us  over  to  answer  for  all  our  actions  at  the  bar  of  the  Supreme  Judge 
of  heaven  and  earth.  II.  Coxscienck  is  a  light  to  direct  and  guide  ds.  It 
manifests  and  demonstrates  itself  in  all  the  circumstances  of  human  life  by  uni- 
versal regard  to  pre^^ent,  past,  and  future  action.  1.  When  temptation  assaults  and 
Inclines  to  evil  action,  conscience  is  ready  to  interpose,  admonish,  and  dissuade  ua 
from  it.  2.  WTien  temptation  prevails  upon  us,  conscience  resists,  regrets,  checks, 
»nd  upbraids  the  undertaking,  after  the  commission.  3.  It  objects,  convicts, 
reproves,  accuses,  condemns,  and  aiHicts  us  for  it.  4.  When  occasion  of  doing 
good  is  offered,  conscience  incites,  persuades,  and  encourages  us  to  do  it.  6.  After 
it  is  done,  it  defends,  approves,  and  applauds  the  action.  III.  Conscience  mat 
ABUSE  ITS  orncE,  MISTAKE  ITS  MEA8UBKS.  Thls  eye  may  be  evil,  this  li^^'ht  may  be 
darkness.  1.  Conscience  may  be  perverted  by  false  principles,  prejudice,  dangerous 
errors,  and  evil  practices.     2.  May  err  in  its  notions  of  truth.     IV.  FouB  peinci- 

PLES   GENEBALLTt    INFLUENCE    HUMAN    LIFE.        1.   ChaNCE  ;   2.    SeNSB  ;   3.   CuSTOM  ;   4. 

Temporal  intkbkst.    V.  The  greatest  misery  and  misfortune  that  can  BErALt 

us,  IS  TO  HAVE  OUR  CONSCIENCES  DEPRAVED  AND  CORRUPTED.      If  the  light  within  US  be 

darkness,  how  great,  how  mischievous,  is  that  darkness  ?  (Samuel  Fuller,  D.D.) 
Singleness  of  eye,  its  meaning  and  consequences  : — I.  What  is  here  meant  by 
singleness  of  eye?  It  is  beiug  wholly  decided  for  Christ  alone.  II.  The  conse- 
quences of  having  the  eye  single.  1.  There  will  be  lieht  in  regard  to  God  and  His 
dealings.  2.  There  is  hght  in  regard  to  our  own  position  and  character.  3.  There 
will  be  light  in  regard  to  revelation.  4.  There  wiU  be  light  in  regard  to  onr  own 
experience.  (W,  Park.)  The  mental  eye  fixed  on  one  object : — We  are  told  that 
rope  dancers,  in  order  to  steady  themselves  during  their  perilous  feats,  are  in  the 
habit  of  fixing  their  gaze  steadily  on  some  distant  object,  and  that,  if  once  they 
permit  themselves  to  look  upon  the  rope,  or  upon  the  sea  of  upturned  faces  beneath 
them,  then  they  become  dizzy  and  faU.  If  you  ever  tried  to  cross  a  stream  on  a  log, 
you  will  remember  that,  by  looking  steadily  at  some  object  on  the  opposite  bank, 
you  were  quite  safe  ;  but,  no  sooner  did  you  begin  to  look  at  the  log,  or  upon  the 
foaming,  dashing  waters  beneath,  than  you  lost  your  balance  and  came  to  grief. 
And,  in  order  that  our  conduct  may  be  right,  that  in  this  world,  so  full  of  snares, 
and  temptations,  and  pitfalls,  we  may  walk  aright,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we 
fix  our  affections  upon  one  object,  and  that  object  is  Christ.  {Ibid.)  Singleness 
of  eye  conducive  to  asmrance  of  salvation  : — Why  is  it,  my  friends,  that  you  have 
any  doubt  in  telling  which  way  the  wind  is  blowing  ?  or  in  what  direction  a  river  is 
running  ?  Is  it  not  because  the  wind  is  scarcely  blowing  at  all,  or  always  changing? 
and  because  the  river  is  scarcely  running,  or  running  in  opposite  currents  ?  Let  the 
wind  blow  steadily  in  one  direction,  and  you  do  not  require  to  look  at  the  vane  in 
order  to  tell  what  is  its  point ;  and  when  the  stream,  swollen  and  turbid  with  moun- 
tain torreiits,  rushes  down  to  the  sea,  bearing  everything  before  it,  you  do  not  require 
to  stand  on  its  banks  and  think  whether  it  is  going  this  way  or  that.  So  let  a  man 
have  thoughts,  and  feeUngs,  and  desires  decidedly  heavenward,  let  him  be  wholly 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \cuks.  n. 

tiecided  for  Christ,  and  he  can  have  no  doubt  aa  to  his  own  state  ;  but,  if  he  is  to- 
day with  Christ,  and  to-morrow  on  the  side  of  the  world,  I  should  not  at  all  be 
surprised  if  that  man  had  many  doubta  and  misgivings  as  to  his  acceptance  with 
God.  (Ihld.)  A  sinijle  eye  and  simple  faith  : — I.  The  eye  of  our  faith.  Faith 
the  eye  of  the  believer's  soul.  This  eye  must  look  to  Jesus  alone,  not  to  Christ  and 
our  own  merits.  If  thou  canst  be  saved  by  these  tbiugH  the  glory  is  divided.  Nol 
II.  ^he  eye  of  our  obedience.  There  are  professors  whose  eye  of  obedience  is  not 
single,  they  are  for  the  world  as  for  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Look  and  live  in 
the  same  spiritual  direction: — An  old  Puritan  said,  "A  hypocrite  is  like  the  hawk; 
the  hawk  flies  upward,  but  he  always  keeps  hia  eye  down  on  the  prey;  let  him  get 
up  as  high  as  he  will,  he  is  always  looking  on  the  ground.  Whereas,  the  Christian 
is  like  the  lark,  he  turns  his  eye  up  to  heaven,  and  as  he  mounts  and  sings  he  looks 
upward  and  he  mounts  upward."  {Ibid.)  Pure  motives  the  light  of  the  soul : — 
The  huDian  eye  is  the  most  striking  feature  in  the  human  constitution  ;  is  closest 
to  the  soul ;  gleams  with  ethereal  fire.  As  the  eye  must  not  see  double,  but  must 
be  single  in  order  that  the  body  may  be  full  of  light,  so  there  must  be  no  double 
mind  if  the  Christian  would  not  walk  in  darkness.  Pure  motives  are  the  light  of  the 
Boul.  I.  It  is  the  light  of  the  soul  because  it  relieves  the  mind  of  doubts  con- 
cerning THK  PATH  OF  DOTY.  If  the  Boul  be  fuU  of  pure  affection  for  God  it  will 
guide  in  the  path  of  duty.  II.  Because  it  relieves  the  mind  of  doubta  concernino 
BELiGioua  doctrine.  Dues  ita  adoption  glorify  God?  (W.  G,  T.  Sheed,  D.D.) 
The  causes  and  danger  of  self-deceit : — I.  Explain  the  meaning  of  the  text.  There 
is  a  disparity  between  external  light  and  the  judgment  of  the  mind ;  the  former 
does  not  depend  on  choice.  Obstruction  in  the  eyesight  may  be  a  man's  infelicity, 
it  ia  not  hia  fault.  The  evil  eye  is  the  disease  of  the  mind,  malignant  and  dangerous. 
We  are  to  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven  ;  we  are  in  danger  of  such  darkness  or  ignorance 
as  shall  mnke  us  insensible  of  our  highest  interest.    We  are  liable  to  this  self-deceit. 

1.  It  is  evident  from  the  plain  intimations  of  Scripture  (Prov.  xvi.  2 ;  Isa.  v.  20). 

2.  Instances  within  the  compass  of  our  own  acquaintance.     II.  The  most  gen-erai, 

CADSB    OF   self-deceit   IN    THE    AFFAIRS   OF    RELIGION    IS    SOME    PREVAILING,    CORRtJPl 

lAssioN.     This  leads  to  unfairness  in  these  inquiries  concerning  duty.     HI.  'Thb 

BtEANS  WHEREBY  THIS  FATAL  DISEASE  OF  THE  MIND  IS  CONFIRMED.  1.  False  imagina- 
tion. 2.  Superstition.  3.  Self-flattery.  4.  Feeble,  ineffectual  purposes  of  future 
amenrlment.  IV.  The  extent  of  this  self-deceit.  Learn:  1.  To  be  watchful. 
2.  What  is  right  will  generally  appear  to  our  first  thoughts.  3.  Implore  the  aid 
of  Divine  grace.     (/•  Ahernethy,  M.A.) 

Ver.  24.  Serve  two  masters. — Nputrality  in  religion  exposed: — 1.  No  man  oas 
BERVE  TWO  masters.  1,  There  are  many  who  contrive  to  elude  the  force  of  this 
inaxim,  or  make  awful  experiments  to  try  the  certainty  of  it.  2.  Nor  are  these  per- 
sons wanting  in  excuses  to  palliate,  if  not  to  justify  their  practice.  3.  There  are,, 
however,  four  cases  in  which  you  may  serve  two  masters,  but  the  exceptions  only 
render  the  general  rule  more  remarkable.  (1)  You  may  serve  two  masters  succes- 
sively.  (2)  By  serving  one  in  reality  and  the  other  in  pretence.  (3)  You  may  serve 
two  masters  unequally.  (4)  When  they  are  on  the  same  side  and  differ  only  in 
degree.  You  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon.  II.  One  of  these  yod  will  unavoid- 
ably SERVE.  1.  It  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  be  without  some  master.  2.  The 
advocates  of  independence  are  greatest  slaves.  3.  The  service  of  religion  does  not 
demand  greater  privations  than  that  of  sin.  III.  You  ought  to  sebvk  God.  Re- 
mind you — 1.  Of  His  various  and  undeniable  claims.  2.  Of  Hia  deaigns  in  emp  toy- 
ing you  in  His  service ;  our  own  good,  not  His  need.  3.  Make  the  right  choice. 
{W.  Jay.)  The  impossibility  of  sei-ving  God  and  mammon: — I.  The  meaning  and 
TROTH  OF  THE  MAXIM  HERE  LAID  DOWN.  The  mau  who  serves  his  master  serves 
him  with  faithfulness  and  singleness  of  heart,  with  a  mind  wholly  given  to  hia  ser- 
vice. It  ia  impossible  th^is  to  serve  two.  He  may  appear  to  serve  both :  but  let 
contiary  interests  ari^e  and  it  will  be  seen  to  which  he  really  belonga.  II.  Oub 
Lord's  application  of  this  maxim.  God  and  mammon  are  two  masters:  cannot 
eerve  both.  1.  You  must  follow  your  worldly  business  from  right  motives.  2.  You 
must  fdlow  it  by  right  rules.  3.  You  must  uso  vour  worldly  gain  in  a  right  manner. 
Two  motives  weigh  with  a  man  in  aelccting  masters,  interest  or  gratitude.  On  theae 
grounds  God  claims  your  service  above  the  world.  1.  God  can  do  more  for  you 
than  mammon  can  do.  God  claims  your  service  on  the  ground  of  what  He  haa 
done  for  you.  {E.  Cooper.)  I.  The  necessity  of  decision  in  relioion.  1. 
Prom  the  impracticability  of  uniting  the  two  services.     2.  From  the  misery  which 


»HAP.  VI.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  109 


is  an  attendant  on  the  attempt  to  unite  these  services.  3.  The  fatal  consequences 
in  another  world,  4.  The  happy  consequences  from  a  uniform  attachment  to  the 
right  master.  (1)  Faithfulness  has  its  own  reward ;  (2)  The  path  of  decision  is 
that  of  safety;  (3)  In  heaven.  II.  Application  op  the  subject.  1.  Decision  of 
cht.r»cter,  it  ia  evident,  is  totally  distinct  from  party  spirit.  2.  We  do  not  intend  any- 
thing like  indifference.  3.  But  are  not  some  decided  on  the  other  side  f  {J.  Fell.] 
No  man  can  serve  two  masters  : — 1.  It  is  a  moral  impossibility.  He  will  love  the  one, 
&Q.  Men  who  love  the  world  hate  religion ;  and  those  who  hate  the  world  love 
Cbrist.  2.  A  divided  service  is  making  a  divided  hfe,  the  world  comea  into  the  religion, 
and  religion  comes  into  the  world ;  both  are  spoilt.  3.  The  luxury,  repose,  and 
etrength  of  a  heart  quite  made  up.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  God  and  mammon : — I.  The 
BEBvicE  that  cannot  bo  divided.  II.  Why  cannot  both  be  served.  1.  Because 
God  claims  a  whole  service.  2.  Because  God  claims  a  heart-service.  III.  The 
Gkoxjnds  of  a  keasonable  choice.  1.  Justice — God  claims  our  service  as  His  due  ; 
lj')t  upon  contract,  but  natural  relationship.  2.  Gratitude — God  has  redeemed  us. 
8.  Interest.  Here  mammon  rests  his  whole  case.  His  claim  is  that  he  offers  (I) 
advantages  suited  to  our  nature.  (2)  That  they  are  present.  Examine  his  claims. 
They  are  not  adapt::d  to  our  nature  as  it  ought  to  be.  Are  there  no  present  advan- 
tages in  God's  ser/ice?  Concerning  the  advantages  of  mammon  three  inquiiies 
have  to  be  answered.  1,  Are  they  certain?  2.  Are  they  real?  3.  Will  they 
last?  {T.  M.  Macdonald,  M.A.)  The  service  of  the  heart  supreme: — When  a 
statute  was  made  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  reign  that  all  should  come  to  church,  the 
Papists  sent  to  Kome  to  know  the  Pope's  pleasure ;  he  returned  them  this  answer, 
it  is  said  :  "Bid  the  Catholics  in  England  give  me  their  hearts,  and  let  the  Queen 
take  the  rest."  (Ournall.)  You  cannot  sail  under  two  flags.  The  impossibility 
of  serving  God  and  mammon,  and  the  propriety  of  giving  God  the  preference: — £ 
The  impossibility  of  serving  both.  1.  Because  of  their  opposite  interests.  2. 
From  the  different  objects  they  have  to  advance.  3.  From  the  nature  of  the  flesh 
and  the  spirit.  II.  The  PBOPanyrY  of  giving  God  the  preference.  1.  He  has  the 
first  claim  upon  you.  He  your  Creator.  2.  Consider  the  relative  character  of  the 
service.  One  your  life  and  joy,  the  other  servitude  and  death.  III.  Impkovembnt, 
1.  The  infinite  importance  of  having  singleness  of  heart  in  matters  of  rehgion.  2. 
How  necessary  to  examine  our  hearts  that  we  may  know  whom  we  serve.  3.  What 
an  awful  idea  the  subject  gives  us  of  worldly-minded  possessors.  (J.  E.  Good.) 
The  inconsistency  of  the  love  of  God  and  love  of  tlie  world : — L  What  is  it  to  servb 
God  ?  1.  a  visible  profession,  a  steady  belief,  and  awful  sentiments  of  a  Supi  eme 
Being.  2.  To  ascribe  that  worship  that  is  strictly  due  to  Him,  as  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  His  almighty  power,  and  a  testimony  of  our  submission.  3.  Eegard  to 
His  sacred  laws.  4.  A  ready  and  cheerful  obedience  to  His  will,  and  a  resignation 
under  afflictions.  II.  What  is  it  to  serve  mammon  ?  1.  It  implies  a  persuasion  of 
mind  that  riches  and  grandeur  are  the  true  seat  of  human  happiness.  2.  It  ia  to 
httribute  that  worship  to  the  creature  which  is  only  due  to  the  Creator.  8.  It  ia 
to  be  so  much  devoted  to  the  world,  as  to  fret  at  every  disappointment,  and 
repine  at  the  least  obstruction  to  our  growing  rich.  III.  To  snow  wherein  thb 
8EBVXCE  OF  GoD  AND  MAMMON  18  INCONSISTENT.  Their  Commands  are  contrary  and 
irreconcilable.  God  commands  us  to  seek  Him  first ;  mammon  tempts  ua  with 
kingdoms.  God  asks  for  our  time ;  mammon  takes  it.  2.  Annex  a  consideration 
to  enforce  what  has  been  said.  (1)  The  folly  to  saunter  away  this  span  of  life  in 
the  fruitless  pursuit  of  riches,  since  we  cannot  tell  who  shall  gather  them.  (2)  Can 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  give  us  any  inducement  to  their  pursuit :  they  ara 
gilded  toys.  (3)  Riches  make  to  themselves  wings  and  fly  away.  (4)  From  the  im- 
possibility of  finding  happiness  in  the  love  of  the  world,  and  its  inconsistency  with 
the  love  of  God,  we  meet  with  an  indispensable  obhgatiou  of  fixing  oar  attention 
on  greater  objects.     (IF.  Adey.) 

Ver.  25.  Take  no  thought. — Take  no  thought  for  tht  morrow  : — 1.  The  qnestion 
Arises,  Is  not  the  Christian  character  a  provident  one  f  2.  All  this  ia  done  to  drive 
DB  to  hve  by  the  day  :  to  let  the  day's  affairs  fill  the  day's  thoughts.  See  the  benefit 
of  this.  (1)  As  respects  our  pleasures.  How  can  a  man  enjoy  pleasure  when  he  has 
his  mind  disturbed  about  the  future?  We  must  dwell  on  it  undistractedly.  (2)  ka 
respects  your  pains.  That  which  makes  pain  painful  is  the  thought  that  it  will 
continue.  (3)  As  respects  duties.  The  secret  of  doing  anything  well  ia  concen- 
tration.  3.  We  should  have  only  to  do  with  the  sins  of  the  current  day.  Aa  with 
©ur  sins  so  with  our  sares.  4.  The  trouble  which  comes  is  very  often  not  the  trouble 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n 

•which  we  expected.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  No  thought  for  the  morrow: — 1.  Th« 
Christian  should  live  in  quiet  confidence  in  God.  2.  This  quiet  dependence  upon 
God  is  our  happiness,  usefulness,  strength,  secuiity.  3.  If  this  were  wrought  in 
our  hearts  as  a  principle,  how  energetic  we  should  be  in  the  exercise  of  faith  in 
God.  4.  The  secret  of  getting  through  work  is  to  take  the  work  of  the  day  and 
leave  all  that  does  not  belong  to  it.  5.  Although  a  man  leaves  all  to  God,  and  is 
happy  in  Christ,  he  is  not  therefore  exempt  from  evil.  {J.  W.  Reeve.)  Undue 
anxiety  reproved  : — 1.  Tee  prohibition.  If  the  text  prohibits  anxiety  about  gain- 
ing sustenance  itself,  it  mast  much  more  condemn  such  a  disposition  of  miud  in 
reference  to  the  luxuries  or  sJiow  of  hfe,  what  a  world  of  uneasiness  is  created  by 
inordinate  desire  about  trilles.  II.  The  reasons  oa  motives  for  doing  so.  1. 
The  first  is  derived  from  a  view  of  the  conduct  of  the  Geutiles,  2.  Another  reason 
for  avoiding  anxiety  is  this,  "that  our  heavenly  Father  knoweth  we  have  need 
of  these  things."  3.  There  is  no  advantage  in  excessive  carefulness.  Learn:  1. 
Christianity  is  calculated  to  make  men  happy.  2.  Let  Christians  guard  against  » 
distrustful  spirit.  (R.Robinson.)  The  word  "  thought "  is  here  used  in  the  anti- 
quated sense  of  anxiety.  In  this  sense  it  occurs  in  Bacon  and  Shakespeare, 
*'  Queen  Catherine  Parr  died  of  thought."  "  The  pale  cast  of  thought,"  EviU  of 
anxiotis  forethought : — 1.  From  the  intrinsic  superiority  of  the  spirit  or  the  eoul  to 
its  material  surroundings.  2.  It  is  needless,  as  all  men  stand  in  an  order  of 
nature  that  they  are  sure  to  be  supplied  by  a  moderate  exertion  of  their  powers.  A 
man  ought  to  be  ashamed  if  a  bud  can  get  a  living  and  he  cannot.  3.  Anxiety  does 
no  good.  The  mind  works  more  wisely  when  it  works  pleasantly.  Anxiety  distorts 
the  future.  4.  It  brings  men  under  the  power  of  the  imagination  and  phantoms, 
which  they  fight  without  pause,  and  upon  which  they  spend  their  strength  for 
nothing.  5.  If  a  man  is  constantly  looking  to  the  future  in  despondency,  where 
is  faith  in  his  God?  (Beecher.)  Anxious  thought  incapacitates  for  a  wise  ordering  of 
life  : — The  whole  success  of  hfe  depends  upon  the  wholesomeness  of  a  man's  mind. 
The  ship-master  that  navigates  the  sea  beyond  the  sight  of  land  is  dependent  upon 
the  correctness  of  his  chronometer  and  his  compass.  If  the  instruments  of  navi- 
gation fail  him,  everything  fails  him.  And  what  these  are  to  navigation  on  the 
sea  and  in  a  ship,  the  human  mind  is  to  our  navigation  of  life.  And  anything  that 
disturbs  the  bahmce  of  the  miud  so  far  invaUdates  the  whole  voyage  of  hfe.  (Ibid.) 
Anxiety  for  the  future  often  arises  from  some  unholy  passion: — Fear  still  sits  in  thi 
window.  "  Wliat  seest  thou  ?  "  says  Vanity.  "  Whisperings  are  abroad,"  says  Fear. 
••  Men  are  pointing  at  you — or  they  will,  as  soon  as  you  come  to  a  point  of  obser- 
vation." "  O  my  good  name!  "  says  a  man.  "All  that  I  have  done;  all  that  I 
have  laid  up— what  will  become  of  that  ?  Where  is  my  reputation  going  t  What 
will  become  of  me  when  I  lose  it,  and  when  folks  turn  away  from  me  ?  O  trouble  I 
trouble  1 — it  is  coming  !  "  What  is  it  ?  Fear  is  sitting  in  the  window  of  the  soul, 
and  looking  into  the  future,  and  interpreting  the  signs  thereof  to  the  love  of  appro- 
bation in  its  coarsest  and  lowest  condition.  Fear  still  sits  looking  into  the  future, 
and  pride,  coming  up,  says,  •'  What  is  it  that  you  see?  "  "  I  see,"  says  Fear,  "  your 
castle  robbed.  I  see  you  toppled  down  from  your  eminence.  I  see  you  tinder  base 
men's  feet.  I  see  you  weakened.  I  see  you  disesteemed.  I  see  your  power  scat- 
tered and  gone."  "  0  Lord;  what  a  world  is  this  1 "  says  Pride.  Now,  that  man 
has  not  had  a  particle  of  trouble.  Fear  sat  in  the  window  and  lied.  And  Pride 
cried,  and  Vanity  cried,  and  Avarice  cried — and  ought  to  cry.  Fear  sat  and  told 
lies  to  them  all.  For  there  was  not  one  of  those  things,  probably,  done  there.  Did 
Fear  see  them?  Yes.  But  Fear  has  a  kaleidoscope  in  his  eye,  and  every  time  it 
turns  it  takes  a  new  form.  It  is  filled  with  broken  glass,  and  it  gives  false  pictures 
continually.  Fear  does  not  see  right.  It  is  for  ever  seeing  wrong.  And  it  is 
stimulated  by  other  feelings.  Pride  stimulates  it ;  and  Vanity  stimulates  it ;  and 
Lust  stimulates  it ;  and  Love  itself  finds,  sometimes,  no  better  business  than  to  send 
Fear  on  its  bad  errands.  For  love  cries  at  the  cradle,  '*  Oh,  the  child  will  die  I  "  It 
will  not  -lie.  It  will  get  well.  And  then  you  will  not  be  ashamed  that  you  prophe- 
sied  that  it  would  die.  You  put  on  mourning  in  advance.  (Ibid.)  A  dissuasivt 
from  anxiety : — L  The  bvil  which  we  are  directed  to  avoid.  II.  The  powerful  con- 
siderations BY  WHICH   THE   SaVIOCB  ENFORCES  THE  PBKCEPT,      L   The  poWCr  Of  God 

as  displayed  in  our  creation  and  preservation.     2.  The  care  of  Divine  providence. 

8.  The  futility  of  excessive  anxiety.  4.  The  beauty  of  nature.  III.  Three  bb- 
FLEOTioNS.     1.  The  connection  of  Divine  agency  with  the  existence  of  all  thingst 

9.  This  subject  reminds  us  of  Him  through  whom  we  have  access  to  the  Father- 
8._Let  08  learn  lessons  of  spiritual  wisdom  from  every  thing  around  as.  (J.  E.  Qood.) 


CHAP.  Ti.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  Hi 

Appears  to  use  a  variety  of  arguments  against  over-anxiety.  L  He  that  gave  tba 
lesser  gift  will  surely  give  the  greater.  II.  God  cares  for  the  lower  creation.  III. 
Over-anxiety  is  useless.  IV.  To  be  over-anxious  is  to  arraign  the  Divine  foresight. 
V.  To  be  over-auxious  is  to  sink  from  tne  level  of  the  Christian  disciple  to  that  of 
the  heathen.  {Gordon  Calthrop,  M.A.)  Fretfulness : — Arguments  against  an 
unquiet  spirit.  1.  The  general  course  of  nature  is  in  favour  of  men.  2.  That  there 
is  a  Divine  providence  which  employs  the  course  of  nature  and  gives  it  diiection. 
3.  Fretting  does  no  good,  but  uses  up  the  nerve  force  needlessly.  4.  It  begets  a 
habit  of  looking  at  the  dark  side  of  things.  5.  The  things  we  fear  seldom  happen. 
(1)  A  tranquil  soul  is  iudispansably  necessary  to  anything  like  a  true  Christian 
atmosphere.  (2)  The  chief  ends  of  life  are  sacrificed  to  the  unnecessary  dust  which 
our  feet  raise  in  the  way  of  hfe.  (3)  What  disagreeable  company  we  make  of  ouj- 
Belves  for  God.  (4)  This  way  of  life,  devoid  of  cheer,  is  bearing  false  witness  agaiiUifc 
your  Master.  {Beecher.)  The  folly  of  looking  only  at  the  ills  of  life : — Now, 
what  if  a  man  should  go  round  searching  for  a  more  familiar  acquaintance  with 
thistles  and  nettles  and  thorns,  and  everythhig  sharp,  up  and  down  the  highways, 
over  the  hills,  and  through  the  fields,  and  insist  on  putting  his  hand  on  every- 
thing that  could  give  him  a  scratch  ?  "What  if  a  man  should  insist  upon  finding  out 
whatever  was  sour  and  bitter,  and  should  go  about  tasting,  and  tasting,  and  tasting 
for  that  purpose.  What  if  a  man  should  insist  upon  smelling  every  disagreeable 
odour,  and  should  see  no  gaspipe  open  that  he  did  not  go  and  look  at  it  t  When 
doves  fly  in  the  heavens,  and  go  swinging  round  in  their  flight,  we  know 
what  they  see  —  the  grassy  field,  the  luxuriant  grain,  or  the  inviting  perch 
where  they  may  rest ;  but  when  buzzards  fly  through  the  air  they  see  no  green 
fields,  no  pleasant  gardens,  but  can  ion,  if  there  be  any  in  sight ;  and  if  there  ia 
none  to  be  seen,  there  is  discontent  in  the  buzzard  heart.  (Ibid.)  One  fretful 
person  a  pleasure  spoiler: — It  does  not  take  more  than  one  smoky  chimney  in  a 
room  to  make  it  intolerable.  (Ibid.)  Over-anxiety  forbidden: — I.  Anxiety  is 
aeeless  about  things  not  under  our  own  control.  Duration  of  life,  &o.  IL 
Anxiety  is  useless  in  matters  under  our  own  management.  Anxiety  will  not  furnish 
the  opportunity  of  earning  bread,  or  arm  us  with  power — but  the  reverse.  IIL 
Anxiety  does  not  attract  us  to  the  notice  of  God.  He  cares  for  us  irrespective  of 
our  carefulness.  No  promise  is  made  to  anxiety,  &c.  IV.  Anxiety  is  useless  be- 
cause Jesus  bids  you  get  rid  of  it.  Trust  Him  and  let  the  spirit  rest,  and  be  strong 
and  glad.  {S.  Martin.)  I.  There  is  no  wise  man  who  will  lay  oat  his  time  and 
thoughts  about  things  he  cannot  bring  to  pass  ;  no  one  debates  but  of  things  pos- 
sible and  probable,  lying  within  the  sphere  of  his  activity.  II.  That  our  food  and 
maintenance  nourishes  us,  and  augments  and  enlarges  the  proportion  of  every 
limb,  is  not  the  product  of  our  own  tare,  but  of  God's  blessing.  III.  So  it  is  with 
all  outward  concerns.  From  the  Divine  benediction  which  accompanies  them,  they 
prove  good  and  useful  to  us.     Not  from  our  own  care.    (Adam  Littleton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28.  Consider  the  lilies. — L  God  puts  on  the  lihes  and  tulips  such  gorgeous 
upparel  for  one  day's  woaiing,  spun  by  providence,  as  far  surpasseth  the  tracery  of 
the  most  splendid  court,  that  Solomon  himself,  with  all  his  wisdom  and  magnificence, 
could  not  match  them.  II.  These  are  but  inconsiderable  creatures  in  comparison 
with  men,  and  such  as  God  has  infinitely  less  obligations  to  take  care  of  than  He 
has  for  us,  who  are  by  adoption  through  His  Son  so  nearly  related  to  Him,  that 
He  is  our  heavenly  Father.  III.  Therefore  be  sure  He  will  not  fail  in  looking  after 
Ds,  who  are  creatures  of  so  much  greater  excellence  in  ourselves,  and  of  so  much 
nearer  relation  to  Kiojself ;  insomuch  that  he  who  distrusts  God  in  these  outward 
things,  shows  want  of  faith,  by  not  depending  upon  God  according  to  the  dignity  of 
His  nature,  as  well  as  to  the  obligations  of  His  grace.  (Adam  Littleton,  D.D.) 
Consider  the  liliei : — I.  The  objects  to  which  he  dibects  ds  fob  the  lesson  he 
WOULD  TEACH.  IL  The  LESSON  ITSELF.  God  takcs  care  of  the  lilies ;  the  inference 
(1)  From  the  less  to  the  greater ;  (2)  From  the  gift  to  the  recipient.  Shall  God 
follow  the  gift  with  so  much  interest  and  be  unmindful  of  him  for  whom  it  ia  in- 
tended ;  (3)  From  the  ornamental  to  the  needful.  III.  The  rebuke  to  unbeueb'  and 
CALL  FOB  FAITH.  (C.  M.  Merry.)  Consider  the  lilies : — 1.  For  the  sake  of  their 
tender  associations.  The  life  of  flowers  has  all  the  vicissitudes  of  human  life.  2. 
Consider  their  growth.  3.  Their  beauty.  4.  Their  unselfishness.  6.  Their  death. 
(W.  E.  SlMlders,  B.A.)  Christ  and  the  lilies  : — 1.  Lily-life  and  growth  teach  ua 
freedom  from  care.  3.  The  lily  grows  everywhere,  the  Oriental  lily.  3.  The  special 
utility  of  the  lily.     4.    A  word  on  this  question  of  raiment.    Life  first,  then 


112  TUB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

clothing.  {A.  J.  Griffiths.)  The  lilies*  witness ;  or,  God  will  take  care  of 
you.  I.  So,  then,  tueue  is  a  gospel  in  natube.  Under  pretence  of  exalting  what 
God  has  said  in  His  Word  we  must  not  depreciate  what  He  has  done  in  His  works. 
There  is  a  gospel  in  nature,  not  the  gospel.  Clorist  comes  as  the  interpreter  of 
nature's  gospel.  This  gospel  of  nature  is  especially  for  the  poor,  II.  This  oospei. 
MOST  BE  MCSKD  ON.  Nature's  text  must  be  studied — "  consider."  Multitudes  are 
blind  and  deaf,  not  through  misfortune,  but  from  disposition.  Nature's  gospel  has 
no  vision  for  those  who  consider  not.  III.  This  gospel  is  teby  convincino  and 
CON80LAT0BT  AS  EXPLAINED  BY  JESUS  CHRIST.  1.  God  takes  care  of  the  lilies  and 
the  ^rass.  They  do  not  grow  by  chance.  2.  From  these  specimens  of  nature 
Jesus  preaches  the  good  news  of  faith  in  providence.  Men  are  better  than  birds, 
and  more  useful.  (J.  Stoughton,  D.D. )  Lessons  from  the  lilies  : — The  lily  as 
an  emblem  of  our  blessed  Lord  (Song  of  Sol.  ii.  1).  1.  Purity.  2.  Admiration  at 
the  amazing  power  of  God.  3.  The  unceasing  watchfulness  the  Almighty  One 
extends  over  all  His  works.  4.  Humility.  It  delights  in  the  valleys.  6.  Content- 
ment. Other  flowers  may  boast  that  they  grow  in  more  conspicuous  places,  that 
their  colours  are  more  gay;  but  the  lily  is  content  to  be  as  God  made  it.    6.  Beauty. 

7.   A  reminder  of  immortality.     (J.   U.  Norton.)        The  preaching  of  nature: 

1     The  first  lesson  which  these  silent  preachers  would  have  us  learn  is    the 
unfailing  care  of  God  for  His  creatures.      2.   They  indicate  a  resurrection.      8. 
The  flowers  teach  us  a  lesson  of  Uf?efu!nes8.     4.  The  flowers  teach  us  to  be  a  com- 
fort to  our  neighbours.     {Wilmot  Buxton.)        The  good  life  a  ministry  to  the  barren 
life: — In  the  highest  part  of  the  Peak  of  Tfinerille,  far  aliove  the  clouds,  and  in  a 
dry  and  burniug  waste,  there  grows  a  plant  which,  in  the  spring  time,  fills  the  air 
with  delicious  fragrance.    There  are  some  of  us  who  may  be  condemned  to  live  in  a 
baixen  and  dry  land  of  hard  work  and  lonely  trouble.     But  loving  natures  and 
gentle  wor.i 8  can  make  that  desert  blossom  as  the  rose.     (Ibid.)        Consider  the 
lilies:  —  Contentment    without    distrust.      I.   They    are    clothed    with    beautt 
(1  Peter  iii.  3,  4).    II.  They  gbow  without  anxiety.     They  never  fret  because  of 
the  heat,  drought,  rain,  or  cold.     They   pass  through  changes ;  are  of  different 
growth.    III.  They  are  watched,  although  soon  to  fall.     (Canon  Titcomb,  M.A.) 
True  contentment  found  in   God : — If   the  sun  of  God's  countenance  shine  upon 
me  I  may  well  be  content  to  be  wet  with  some  rain  of  aflliction.     (Bishop  Hall.) 
Lessons  from  the  lily  : — I.  It  hap,  its  root  hidden.     Secret  trust,  &o.    No  pure  white 
lily  could  live  without  the  hidden  root  to  draw  up  moisture  from  the  soil.     IL 
Consider  how  pure  and  sweet  the  lily  is,  and  how  innocent.    Everybody  loves  them. 
What  a  picture  of  the  Child  Jesus  I     III,  Consider  the  lilies  as  a  lesson  about  dbess. 
This  the  special  lesson  of  text.   He  clothes  the  lilies  in  white.    Some  children  always 
fretting  about  diess.   Vain  about  dress.   Sinfully  careless  about  dress.    IV.  Consider 
the  lily  in  the  evening.     When  sun  sets,  close  up.     Don't  stare  at  darkness,  hang 
the  head  and  sleep.   Children  should  do  the  same.     V.  Even  lilies  must  die.     (C.  B, 
Wynne,  M.A.)        The  lilies  of  tJie  field: — We  learn  from  the  liUes  something  con- 
cerning— L  Cub  Father's  poweb.     Oiu:  heavenly  Father  is  almighty.     Variety  in 
colour,  size,  and  form  of  the  lily,  an  indication  of  God's  power.     God's  resources 
are  so  boundless.     This  power  will  puriish  or  save  us.     II.   Oub  Father's  cabk. 
Describe  the  beauty  and  delicacy  of  all  the  parts,  <fec.    Note  concerning  Ulies.    They 
are  comparatively  insignificant.     TLey  are  pe-risLing.     They  often  grow  amongst 
thorns,  yet  are  cared  for.     III.  Oub  faith.     Our  weakness  and  liability  to  sickness 
and  death.     Lilies  not  more  frail  than  our  lives.     IV    Odb  future  life.     When 
stem  and  flower  wither,  root  does  not  die,  &c.     V.     Jksus  Chbist.     He  is  called 
the  "  Lily  of  the  vaUey,"     There  are  spots  and  flaws  in  the  character  of  all  others, 
none  in   His.     (W.    H.  Booth.)        Lily   lessons  ■ — I.  A   lesson    of    wondeb    and 
delight  in  contemplating  the  works  of  God.     They  are  God's  workmanship.    II. 
Admire  and  lovb  what  is  beautiful.     Some  people  take  no  account  of  beauty ; 
they  want  only  the  useful     The  beauty  of  heaven,  the  beauty  of  holiness.    III. 
Dilioenck.    IV,  Patience  and  punctuality.    Every  blossom  has  its  season.    V. 
ToLKBANOE,    Lilies  and  roses  and  oaks  all  grow  in  obedience  to  same  laws ;  but 
each  after  its  own  pattern.     VI,  A  lesson  of  faith.     (E.  R.  Condcr,  D.D.)        God'» 
workmanship  combines  reality  and  beauty : — One  of  the  most  noticeable  things  con- 
oeming  the  beauty  of  God's  works  is  this — that  it  is  never  stuck  on  as  mere  outside 
show,  but  grows  out  of  their  nature.     Men  often  make  a  thing  ugly  first,  and  then 
cover  it  up  with  paint,  or  plaster,  or  gilding,  to  make  it  beautiful.     God  never  does 
■o.     Yon  will  find  no  sham  ornaments  on  His  works.     The  shape  He  gives  to  each 
creature  is  just  that  which  is  fitted  for  it ;  a  d  the  colour  with  which  He  adorns  it 


CHAP.  Ti.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  115 

will  never  wash  off.  In  His  great  workshop,  truth  and  beauty  go  together. 
(Ibid.) 

Vcr.  30.  Much  more  clothe  yon. — Therefore : — I.  We  should  from  hence  be 
excited  to  magnify  and  adore  the  goodness  of  God,  who,  as  a  common  Father,  pro- 
vides for  the  maintenance  of  all  His  creatures.  II.  We  should  never  be  tempted  to 
do  anything  unjust,  in  order  to  increase  our  substance  or  gain  a  livelihood.  We 
may  improve  our  circumstances,  but  within  the  bounds  of  strict  honesty.  When- 
ever we  find  it  impossible  to  mend  our  condition  without  deceitful  and  unrighteous 
iealitig,  we  ought  to  conclude  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  we  should  remain  as  we  are. 
III.  We  should  be  tilled  with  resignation  and  contentment,  being  fully  convinced 
that  He  who  thus  constantly  provides  for  the  substance  of  such  inferior  beings  will 
sever  suSer  us  to  want  anything  which  is  truly  needful.  {Nicolas  Carter,  D.D.) 
Particular  providence  : — I.  Explain  what  we  cndekstani)  by  a  pakticolab  pbovi- 
DEKCS.  Many  deny  that  God  exercises  a  particular  providence  over  the  world. 
They  acknowledge  that  God  rules  by  general  rules,  but  deny  that  these  leave  room  for 
contingencies.  II.  Offkb  some  considerations  in  favoub  of  a  particulab  pkovi- 
CENCE.  1.  That  it  appears  from  the  nature  of  providence  that  it  must  be  particular. 
We  can  no  more  conceive  that  one  creature  can  uphold  itself  than  another.  It 
is  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  created  object  is  independent  of  its  Creator.  2.  The 
■upreme  and  ultimate  end  of  Divine  providence  proves  it  to  be  particular.  If  God 
exercises  a  government  over  the  world  it  is  to  some  detiuite  end  ;  hence,  providence 
must  be  particular  over  the  parts  as  much  as  the  whole.  3.  The  goodness  of  God 
requires  Him  to  exercise  a  particular  pro%'idence  over  His  creatures.  This  leads 
Him  to  caie  for  every  member  of  His  family.  4.  The  Scriptures  represent  God  as 
exercising  a  particular  providence  over  every  part  of  creation.  He  telleth  the 
number  of  the  stars.  Learn  :  1,  Then  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  chance.  2. 
Then  God  wUl  certainly  accomplish  His  ultimate  end  in  creation.  3.  A.  particular 
providence  displays  the  perfections  of  God  in  a  glorious  light.  4.  The  whole  world 
IS  under  obligations  to  Him  for  the  favours  it  enjoys.    (A''.  Emmow,  D.D,) 

Ver.  32.  Your  heavenly  Father  knowsth.  The  antidote  to  anxiety: — I. 
Keasons  AOAiNST  ANXIETY.  1.  Anxiety  is  a  part  of  indecision  of  character  and 
partakes  of  its  harmfulness.  "No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  2.  An  argument 
from  the  greater  to  the  less  ;  God  takes  care  of  fowls,  He  will  of  men.  3.  The  im- 
possibiUties  in  the  case — "  Which  of  you,"  &o.  4.  The  analogies  of  nature — "  Con- 
eider  the  lilies,"  &c.  5.  It  puts  the  Christian  to  shame  by  showing  that  he  is 
anxious  like  the  heathen.     6.  The  character  of  God — "  Your  heavenly  Father,"  &«. 

7.  The  folly  of  the  thing.  II.  The  magnitude  of  the  sin  of  anxiety.  1.  It  makes  you 
unhappy,  which  is  matter  for  blame  rather  than  pity.  2.  It  is  a  positive  wrong  done 
to  God;  it  distrasts  him.  3.  Do  not  speak  of  your  anxieties  as  something  for 
which  you  are  to  be  commiserated.  4.  Never  place  yourself  wilUngly  in  a  position 
of  worldly  anxiety;  it  is  a  great  hindrance  to  spiritual  life.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
God's  individiial  care  of  His  children: — A  father  does  not  deal  with  all  his  children 
by  one  and  the  same  universal  rule,  butAvith  each  child  individually.  For  he  is 
acquainted  with  their  separate,  especial  wants ;  he  knows  them  as  no  one  else 
knows  them.  Therefore,  not  only  have  all  their  portions,  but  every  one  the  portion 
he  requires.  The  delicate  one  is  the  most  shielded, — the  timid  one  is  the  most 
encouraged, — the  infirm  one  is  the  most  helped, — the  dull  one  is  the  most  taught, — 
the  tempted  one  is  the  most  prayed  for, — the  returning  one  is  the  most  rejoiced 
over.  And  it  is  the  speciality  and  the  appropriateness  of  the  care  which  makes 
the  great  characteristics  of  paternal  government.    {Ibid). 

Ver.  33.  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God. — The  profitable  pursvit : — I,  Wha* 
we  are  to  seek.      II.  How  we  are  to  seek.      1.  First  in  time.     2.  First  in  attention. 

8.  What  are  your  desires?  4.  What  are  your  exertions?  These  last  two  ^C 
reveal  the  object  of  your  search.  HI.  Why  we  are  thus  to  seek  these  bi.kjwk 
ING8.  1.  Though  destitute,  as  we  naturally  are,  of  His  kingdom  and  righteousness. 
if  we  seek  them  in  the  manner  here  required,  we  shall  obtain  them.  2.  Benidea 
gaining  this  kingdom  and  righteousness,  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  c 
Religion  has  a  friendly  influence  over  secular  affairs;  other  things  occupy  too  mucL 
of  your  time  and  attention.  1.  This  undue  sohcitude  injures  your  spiritual  welfare. 
S.  It  is  hurtful  even  to  your  temporal  welfare.  {W.  Jay.)  Religion  our  chiej 
tone  em : — 1.  From  the  excellence  of  the  objects  which  it  proposes.    2.  From  tb« 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ft. 

certainty  of  its  rewards.  {TV.  Fleming,  D.D.)  The  care  of  the  body  transferred 
to  the  soul: — I.  The  conclusion  to  which  the  Saviour  arrives.  1.  The  careful- 
ness forbiddei.  2.  The  grounds  on  which  the  prohibition  is  founded.  (1)  It  ia 
heatheniah.  (2)  It  is  ungrateful,  (3)  Fruitless  and  unnecessary.  (4)  Unwisa 
n.  The  Dorr  commanded  us.  1.  The  objects  we  are  to  pursue — "  The  kingdom  of 
God."  2.  The  precept  given  us  respecting  them — "  Seek  first."  (1)  Make  religion 
oar  earliest  and  primary  object  of  attention.  (2)  Give  it  preference.  3.  The 
promise  annexed  to  the  pursuit.  III.  Teres  befleciions.  1.  What  a  friend  to 
man  is  Christianity  I  2.  What  an  enemy  to  our  peace  ia  a  worldly  spirit  I 
3.  What  a  reproof  does  this  administer  to  multitudes  of  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  t 
{J.  E.  Good.)  The  first  object  in  life: — Suppose  a  man  should  be  religious  for 
the  sake  of  temporal  advantage.  Whatever  a  man's  motive,  that  is  the  first  thing. 
Therefore  this  man  is  not  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  the  temporal 
advantages  to  which  his  religion  is  subservient.  Do  not  let  a  poor  man  be  tempted 
to  think  that  because  he  is  not  richer,  either  he  is  not  a  seeker,  or  God  is  not  ■ 
faithful  promiser.  Occasions  on  which  we  may  especially  urge  this  text :— 1.  Upon 
the  young  man  just  entering  into  life.  2.  The  man  who  is  passing  under  some 
temptation  to  compromise  a  principle  for  the  sake  of  some  worldly  interest — in 
friendship  or  business.  Whatever  be  your  engagements  in  life,  remember  that  you 
have  a  prior  one.  And  in  whatever  relation  you  stand  to  man,  never  forget  that 
you  have  a  higher  one.  Kfep  your  eye  on  the  eternal.  1.  Kemember  that  there 
is  a  kingdom  within,  in  which  the  spiritual  is  to  reign  over  the  carnal.  2.  That 
there  is  a  kingdom  around  you,  which  is  God's  Church,  which  is  your  foremost 
duty  to  extend.  3.  That  there  is  a  kiugdom  coming  which  shall  put  to  shame  all 
the  riches  of  this  present  world.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  fit nt  concern: — The 
word  " seek "  is  contrasted  with  the  same  word  used  in  the  thirty-second  verse: 
"  After  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek."  With  what  activity,  zeal,  are  these 
things  attended  to  I     I.  We  need  no  argument  to  convince  you  that  the  thimos 

AFTER     WHICH     THE     GENTILES     SEEK      OCCUPX      A      GREAT      PLACE     IN     MEN'S    MIND8, 

and  necessarily  so.  Keligious  ordinances  not  merely  for  enjoyment,  but  to 
strengthen  for  the  toil  of  life.  But  men  postpone  thf-ir  salvation.  This  is  against 
God's  ordinance,  "  Seek  first."  (1)  In  point  of  preference,  (2)  In  point  of  time. 
(3)  In  point  of  anxiety,  II.  The  assurance  connected  with  this  command. 
This  is  a  positive  assurance ;  the  fulfilment  depends  upon  the  faithfulness  of  God. 

1.  He  argues  from  the  less  to  the  greater — "Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat?" 

2.  He  takes  us  to  God's  providential  care  over  the  lower  creatures.  3.  If  men 
indulge  in  disquieting  care,  what  benefit  do  they  derive  ?  4.  Disquieting  care  is  as 
unnecessary  as  it  is  unprotitable.  "Your  heavenly  Father  kuoweth  that  ye  have 
need  of  these  things."  A  common  objection  is,  "How  is  it  that  so  many  good 
people  are  in  want?"  Have  they  been  seeking  God  first?  (W.  Cadnian,  M.A.) 
Seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God: — I.  What  is  the  kingdom  of  God?  1.  To 
have  the  whole  of  one's  heart  in  subjugation  to  God,  2.  To  extend  the  Church. 
8.  To  pray  for  and  help  on  the  Second  Advent.  II.  What  is  His  righteousness? 
1.  There  was  the  righteousness  in  which  man  was  first  made.  2.  There  is  a 
righteousness  which  is  a  part  of  the  character  of  God.  3.  There  is  a  righteousnesa 
composed  of  all  the  perfections  of  the  life  of  Christ.  Now  this  is  the. righteousness 
which  every  good  man  seeks.  1.  That  it  will  justify  him  before  God.  2.  Then 
Bometliing  that  wUI  justify  him  before  his  own  conscience.  -S.  The  comfort  of  th«^ 
thought  that  it  is  not  to  attainers,  but  to  seekers.  4.  There  is  one  God  in  provi- 
dence and  in  grace.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Man's  first  duty  : — I.  His  first  duty. 
1.  In  priority  of  time.  2.  In  excellence  of  value.  3.  It  implies  diligence.  4.  It 
implies  consideration.  How  the  unjust  steward  planned  his  conduct,  5.  Seek  a 
personal  interest  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  6.  Seek  the  extension  of  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom.  7.  Seek  the  glory  of  the  kingdom.  II.  His  reward.  "  Godliness  hath 
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come."  God  is  revealed 
as  love ;  will  He  allow  His  servants  to  starve  ?  He  has  given  a  positive  pledge — 
"  He  spared  not  His  own  Son  ;  shall  He  not  with  Him  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  " 
{H.  M.  Villiers,  M.A.)  L  The  extent  to  which  the  precept  of  the  text  is 
neglected.  1.  By  the  busy,  anxious,  laborious  class  of  the  community.  2.  By 
the  lovers  of  pleasure.  3.  By  ttie  lovers  of  worldly  honours  and  sordid  applause. 
4.  By  the  professors  of  religion.  II.  The  duty  of  a  stricteb  begard  to  the 
PBECBPT.  1.  The  kingdom  of  God  ia  entitled  to  this  deference.  2.  If  not  sought 
first,  will  never  be  found  at  all.  3.  In  this  search,  all  other  eeaential  things  will 
be  gnnted.    {J,  W.   Cunninaham,  M.A.)        I.  What  are  wa  to  uNDSBSTANr  bi 


OBir.  n.]  8T.  MATTHEW,  111 


THE  KraQDOM  OF  GoD  ?  The  reign  of  God,  the  ascendency  of  God.  Self  is  tha 
great  usurper.  The  righteonsnesa  named  is  the  Christian  character  in  all  the 
details  of  practical  religion.  To  seek  them,  is  to  desire  these  above  all  other  things. 
II.  All  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  too.  Temporal  necessities.  The 
kingdom  of  God,  &c.  1.  It  will  guard  a  man  against  those  vain,  ostentatious 
habits  above  tis  real  income,  which  bring  so  many  iuto  difficulties,  and  eventually 
ruin.  2.  It  will  preserve  from  those  lax  and  slovenly  habits  of  management  which 
bring  so  many  into  ruin.  3.  It  will  preserve  from  all  dishonesty.  {Uugh  McNeiU, 
M^.)  Man's  first  duty,  and  God's  promise : — Jacob's  blessing  has   the  pre- 

ference over  Esau's.  It  is  well  to  obtain  first  "  the  dew  of  heaven,"  then  the  fatness 
of  the  earth.  Things  are  only  of  value  as  God  blesses  them  ;  God's  gifts  are  better 
than  His  permissions.   The  promises  of  prosperity  in  the  New  Testament  are  small. 

L    How  FAR   MAT  OUR  TEXT   BE   USED   A8   A   MOTIVE   TO   GODLINESS  ?      SuppOSe  a  family 

with  whom  everything  goes  wrong,  their  best  pains  useless.  Wo  religion  in  the 
family.  If  I  could  work  a  moral  change,  I  feel  that  the  only  way  of  avoiding  want. 
No  matter  what  means  used,  so  long  as  the  man  is  brought  to  God.  But  we  must 
not  make  secular  good  the  motive ;  this  would  not  be  seeking  first  the  kingdom. 
IL  What  bestriotionb  does  odr  text  impose  upon  human  caeefulness  ?  It 
gives  no  sanction  to  those  enthusiasts  who  would  renounce  all  worldly  provision. 
Anxiety  they  ought  to  dismiss,  but  not  attention ;  lay  aside  distrust,  but  not 
indnstry.  Not  to  seek  only  the  kingdom,  hut  firxt;  this  implies  a  second.  The 
text  gives  no  promise  of  superfluities.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  What  is  meant  by 
seeking  the  kingdom  of  God  ? — 1.  A  fixed  design  and  resolution  to  that  end.  Like 
the  term  and  end  of  a  man's  journey,  towards  which  the  traveller  is  continnally 
tending,  and  hath  it  always  habitually  in  his  intention,  though  be  doth  not  always 
think  of  it  every  step  that  he  takes.  2.  Care  and  diligence  as  to  the  means.  That 
we  make  religion  oar  business,  and  exercise  ourselves  in  the  duties  of  it,  both 
in  public  and  private.  With  the  same  seriousness  and  application  of  mind  as  men 
do  in  their  callings  and  professions.  3.  Zeal  and  earnestness  in  the  pursuit  of  it. 
The  greatness  of  the  design,  and  the  excellency  of  what  we  seek  after,  will  justify 
the  highest  degree  of  discreet  zeal  and  fervour  in  the  prosecution  of  it.  4.  Patience 
and  perseverance  in  our  endeavours  after  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous- 
ness. Notwithstanding  all  the  difficulties,  discouragements,  the  opposition  and 
persecution  we  may  meet  with,  for  righteousness'  sake.  (John  Tillotson,  D.D.) 
I.  Con.stantly  and  sincerely  make  use  of  all  means  such  as  He  hath  prescribed 
whereby  to  obtain  and  practise  true  grace.  II.  Consult  and  study  the  Word  of 
God,  wherein  He  hath  revealed  His  will  to  yon.  III.  Make  it  daily  your  prayer  to 
God,  that  He,  for  His  Son's  sake,  will  assist  you  with  His  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  in 
doing  this.  (William  Beveridge,  D.D.)  Providence  leaves  no  excuse  for  indolence: — 
Take  the  flowers  of  the  field.  They  do  not  reap  nor  plant ;  and  yet  God  clothes 
them  with  beauty.  Very  good ;  the  flosver  has  to  develop.  There  is  not  a  single 
flower  in  all  the  wilderness,  nor  in  all  gardens,  whether  of  the  Orient  or  here  on 
our  continent,  that  does  not  work  for  a  living.  It  sprouts  from  the  seed.  It  sends 
down  its  roots,  and  every  one  of  these  roots  is  a  purveyor  hunting  underground 
here,  there,  and  everywhere;  developing,  spreading  out,  sucking  within  and  sucking 
inthout,  dissolving  the  mineral,  pumping  here  for  the  juices  that  are  to  run  up,  and 
■earching  for  water  yonder.  The  willow  finds  moisture,  even  though  you  should 
not  be  able  to.  In  darkness  the  long  vine  reaches  out  to  the  hght,  seeks  it,  and  at 
last  finds  it.  Every  plant  that  lives  and  comes  to  perfect  plant-life  ia  a  worker, 
only  on  the  plane  to  which  he  belongs  with  his  limited  development,  and  with  Jiia 
limited  organization.  It  works  for  a  hving;  and  what  does  it  find  f  What  d>es 
the  bird  find  ?  He  finds  that  God  so  orders  the  affairs  of  this  world  that  when  he 
works  according  to  his  nature  he  is  provided  for.  The  plant,  when  it  works  and 
develops  itself  according  to  the  laws  of  its  nature,  finds  that  providence  has 
provided  for  it.  When  a  man  works  and  develops  according  to  his  nature,  he 
finds  a  providence  that  makes  it  possible  for  him  to  hve  and  to  thrive.  (Beedier.) 
Unfitness  a  great  occasion  of  anxiety : — Men  are  mistaking  all  the  time  what  they  are 
fit  for.  Shall  a  weak  man  go  into  the  ring  to  wrestle?  Shall  a  d all  and  heavy 
man  go  on  the  road  to  race  r  Shall  an  anskilled  man  undertake  to  carry  on  the 
most  skilful  shop  f  Men  axe  all  the  time  miscarrying  and  miscarrying ;  it  is  tha 
collision  between  impotence  and  desire  that  is  all  the  time  patting  them  back  ;  juid 
they  we  worrying  and  fretting  and  anxious.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  84.  Sufficient  unto  the  day  Is  the  evil  thereot — Undue  anxiety  reproved  >^ 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaj.  vt. 

1.  Because  nothing  can  happen  to  any  without  God's  general  perraiesion.  2.  Be- 
canae  nothing  shall  happen  to  His  people  without  God's  special  direction, 
3.  Because  in  what  does  happen,  the  terms  good  and  evil,  as  we  are  accustomed  t« 
employ  them,  are  often  misunderstood  and  misapplied.  4.  Because  sufficient  will 
be  afforded  by  every  passing  day  to  exercise  our  powers  and  occupy  our  thoughts, 
without  extending  our  views  beyond.  {T.  Dale,  M.A.)  Forecasting  sorrow  : — 1.  It 
renders  ns  insensible  to  present  good.  2.  It  unfits  for  the  activities  of  to-day. 
Anxiety  depresses.  4.  It  gives  a  practical  denial  of  the  Christian  creed.  5.  It  has 
a  saddening  influence  upon  others.  {T.Jackson,  B.A.)  Anxiety  depresses: — 
Men  are  worn  out,  enfeebled,  aged  more  by  corroding  care  than  by  hard  labour. 
Look  at  a  housemaid  ;  if  she  be  bright,  cheerful,  high-spirited,  her  toil  is  performed 
efficiently  and  speedily,  to  the  satisfaction  of  herself  and  her  mistress.  How 
different  if  she  is  cheerless  and  gloomy  1  "  A  merry  heart  goes  all  the  day :  a  sad 
tires  in  a  mile,"  observes  our  great  dramatist ;  while  the  Chelsea  philosopher  says, 
••  Give  us,  oh,  give  us  the  cheerful  man  that  sings  at  his  work.  He  will  do  more 
in  the  same  time ;  he  will  do  it  better ;  he  will  persevere  longer.  One  is  scarcely 
sensible  to  fatigue  when  marching  to  music."  (Ibid.)  It  renders  insensible  to 
present  good  : — A  young  lady  once  expressed  to  Hogarth,  the  great  satirist,  a  wish 
to  learn  to  draw  caricature.  "  Alas  I  "  said  he,  "  it  is  not  a  faculty  to  be  envied. 
Take  my  advice,  and  never  draw  caricature.  By  the  long  practice  of  it  I  have  lost 
the  enjoyment  of  beauty;  I  never  see  a  face  but  distoiled,  and  have  never  the 
satisfaction  to  behold  the  human  face  divine."  So,  by  constantly  looking  at  tht 
dark  side  of  their  Ufe,  its  distorted  and  unpleasant  aspect — evils  at  hand  and  those 
looming  in  the  distance — men  lose  the  power  to  appreciate  the  blessings  which  are 
theirs,  and  make  them  an  object  of  envy  to  their  neighbours.  (Ibid.)  I. 
Folly  to  be  wholly  taken  up  with  the  accessories,  and  neglect  the  principal. 
IL  Tbouble  kot  yourselves  about  FUTUKiTT.    1.  Do  not  anticipate  your  cares. 

2.  Do  not  add  vexation  to  your  life  by  forecasting  and  designing  uncertaintieB. 
8.  Leave  events  to  God's  infinite,  all-wise  disposal.  4.  Look  after  your  present 
duty.  6.  Eeserve  all  your  strength  about  you,  to  bear  you  up  against  present 
difficulties  and  temptations.  UI.  To-morbow  is  a  new  day.  1.  Brings  care  of  its 
own.  2.  Brings  new  duties.  3.  Fresh  troubles.  4.  Both  its  hands  are  full.  To- 
day has  enough  to  do  of  its  own  ;  to-morrow  brings  its  own  harvest.  {Adam 
Littleton,  D.D.)  The  evil  here  is — I.  The  evil  of  punishment.  1.  Afflictions. 
2.  Troubles.  3.  Incumbrances  and  turmoils  of  life.  Every  day  finds  us  enough 
to  do.  Every  year  brings  us  enough  to  suffer.  II.  The  evils  op  bin.  1.  Temp- 
tations and  lapses.  2.  Allurements.  3.  Suggestions  of  Satan.  4.  Enticements 
of  the  world.  As  if  the  load  of  cares  each  day  lays  upon  our  shoulders  were  not 
heavy  enough,  we  ourselves  do  fetch  in  more  grist,  and  heap  more  bags  still  upon 
ourselves,  by  bringing  future  cares  upon  us.  (Ibid.)  Taking  no  thought 
for  the  morrow: — ^We  must  regard  this  injunction  as  Christ  here  regards  it,  as 
flowing  from  faith.  1.  Faith  may  be  intuitive.  It  springs  at  once  from  love. 
You  have  experienced  hours  when  the  Presence  of  a  heavenly  Friend  seems 
most  real ;  doubt  was  impossible.  Such  a  faith  is  a  defiance  of  life's  evils,  dares 
all  futurity.  The  faith  of  love  soars  above  all  the  sorrows  of  time,  and  gazes  on 
the  glory  of  immortality.  2.  Faith  arises  from  reflection  on  the  revelation  of 
God.  The  belief  springing  from  love  does  not  always  Uve  ;  it  is  fitful.  In  nature 
we  find  a  Fatherly  care  extending  to  the  least  of  God's  creatures.  Is  it  possible 
that  faith  in  this  Father  can  exist  with  anxious  care  for  the  morrow  ?  3.  Faith  rises 
from  the  conscious  feebleness  of  man.  The  more  we  are  conscious  of  our  own 
ignorance  and  poweiiessness,  the  more  utterly  can  we  leave  the  future  in  God's 
hands.  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The  future  does  not  belong  to  fear. — The  past  belongs 
to  gratitude  and  regret ;  the  present  to  contentment  and  work ;  the  future  to  hope 
and  trust.  (Beecher.)  Meeting  sorrow : — 1.  This  meeting  trouble  half  way  is 
both  a  sin  and  an  act  of  folly.  God  watches  over  us  as  individuals.  We  are 
doubting  God's  love  and  care  for  us.  2.  This  habit  of  looking  out  for  sorrows 
makes  us  forget  our  past  and  present  blessings.  3.  It  is  a  sin  to  meet  sorrow  half 
way,  because  our  present  troubles  are  sufficient  without  teeking  for  others.  4.  It  is 
•  sin  because  it  is  a  want  of  faith  in  God.  6.  It  makes  us  melancholy,  suspicious, 
and  unfit  for  duty.  (Wilinot  liuxton.)  Anxietxj  produces  an  unhealthy  habit  of 
mind  : — A  man  once  planted  two  rose  trees,  one  on  either  side  of  his  house.  Th<' 
treeft  were  equally  strong  and  healthy,  but  after  a  time  the  one  grew  and  prospered, 
the  other  withered  and  died.  Then  the  man  discovered  that  the  Uvinp  rose  tree 
«M  on  the  sonny  aide  oi  the  house.    Brethren,  we  must  have  the  sunshme  of  faith 


IHAP.  VII.J  ST,  MATTHEW.  IIT 

•nJ  hops  on  our  lives,  or  we  cannot  live.  I  have  read  of  a  little  child  who  was 
often  observed  playing  by  itself,  and  laughing  and  singing  with  delight.  They  asked 
the  child  what  it  was  playing  with,  and  the  little  one  answered,  "  I  am  playing  with 
Bunbeams."  It  would  be  better  for  some  of  us  who  are  too  apt  to  look  on  the  dark 
Bide  to  imitate  that  happy  child.  If  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  always  haunted  by 
the  shadow  of  fancied  misfortune,  we  shall  lose  faith  in  prayer,  since  the  black 
ehadow  will  have  eclipsed  the  face  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  future  should  not 
embitter  the  present: — Will  you  shudder  at  winter's  snow  whilst  the  flowers  of 
summer  are  growing  around  you?  {Ibid.)  By  Ji^hting  with  fancied  ills,  we  shall 
be  too  exhausted  to  struggle  with  real  misfortunes  : — Your  feet  will  become  so  tender 
from  treading  on  imaginary  thorns,  that  they  will  not  endure  the  true  thorny  path, 
and  there  is  such  a  path  for  all  to  tread.  (Ibid.)  Sorrows  to  be  borne  singly  •. — 
John  Newton  says :  "  Sometimes  I  compare  the  troubles  we  have  to  undergo  in 
the  course  of  a  year  to  a  great  bundle  of  fagots,  far  too  large  for  us  to  lift.  But 
God  does  not  require  us  to  carry  the  whole  at  once.  He  mercifully  unties  the 
bundle,  and  gives  us  first  one  stick,  which  we  are  to  carry  to-day,  and  then  another, 
which  we  are  to  carry  to-morrow,  and  so  on.  This  we  might  easily  manage  if  we 
would  only  take  the  burden  appointed  for  us  each  day ;  but  we  choose  to  increase 
our  trouble  by  carrying  yesterday's  stick  over  agam  to-day,  and  adding  to-morrow'a 
burden  to  our  load  before  we  are  required  to  bear  it."  **  Take  therefore  no  thought 
for  the  morrow;  for  the  moiTow  shall  take  thought  for  the  things  of  itself."  Fore' 
boding  : — I.  Its  natube.  It  is  a  painful,  growing,  contagious,  discouraging  habit. 
II.  The  CAUSES  of  this  unhappy  disposition.  Constitutional.  Bad  health.  Lack 
of  faith  in  God.  III.  The  remedy  for  this  evil  habit  or  disposition  of  mind.  If 
the  result  of  phybical  causes  must  be  treated  accordingly.  If  the  result  of  con- 
stitutional melancholy  must  be  borne  patiently,  &o.  If  from  defective  faith  can 
only  be  remedied  by  an  increase  of  faith.  (Dr.  O.  P.  Fitzgerald.)  Live  one  day 
in  the  day : — We  may  consider  the  year  before  us  as  a  desk  containing  365  letters 
addressed  to  us ;  one  for  every  day,  announcing  its  trials  and  prescribing  its  em- 
ployments, with  an  order  to  open  daily  no  letter  but  the  letter /or  the  day.  Now, 
we  may  be  strongly  tempted  to  unseal,  beforehand,  some  of  the  remainder.  This, 
however,  would  serve  only  to  embarrass  us,  while  we  should  violate  the  rule  which 
oar  Owner  and  Master  has  laid  down  for  us.    {Jay.) 


CHAPTER  VIL 


V«B.  1,  Jndgenot. — Against,  censoriousness : — I.  The  PBOHiBrnos.  It  refers  to 
the  conduct  of  private  individuals,  not  to  men  in  a  public  capacity;  nor  to  hinder 
private  persons  from  forming  any  opinion  upon  the  misconduct  of  others.  It  for- 
bids the  indulgence  of  a  censorious  temper.  II.  The  methods  bt  which  Hb  bb« 
PBovES  and  condemns  it.  1.  He  refers  to  the  common  principle  of  retribution.  2. 
As  another  corrective  we  are  reminded  of  our  own  imperfections.  (1)  Men  of 
this  description  have  no  right  to  sit  in  judgment  on  others,  who  are  themselves 
guilty  of  the  same  crimes.  (2)  They  have  no  moral  qualification  for  its  dis- 
charge. 8.  Our  Saviour  directs  us  to  reform  our  own  conduct  before  we  undertake 
to  sit  in  judgment  on  that  of  others.  IH.  The  caution  which  we  must  obsekvb 
IN  rrs  DiPi-aAKOE — "  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,"  &c.  (J.  E.  Good.) 
Judgments  and  retributive  judgments : — I.  Judgments.  1.  We  are  warned  against 
iadgments  that  are  prejudiced.  Not  to  judge  others  by  a  sort  of  hasty  inspuration, 
by  their  manner,  or  by  their  class  or  locaUty.  2.  We  are  warned  against  judgments 
that  are  uncalled  for.  Sometimes  our  duty  ;  but  often  not  required  of  us  to  judga 
our  neighbour's  character.  3.  We  are  warned  against  judgments  that  are  one-sided. 
Must  hear  both  sides.  4.  We  are  warned  against  unmerciful  judgments.  Danger 
arises  from  attributing  motives.  We  must  beware  lest  we  ignore  the  possibihties  of 
good  even  in  a  bad  man.  Be  as  merciful  as  you  can  be  to  the  sinner.  5.  We  are 
warned  against  blind  judgment — "  Why  beholdest  thou,"  &o.  Evil  men  mor« 
■nspicioos  of  others.  IL  Eetbibutivb  judgments — ^who  will  inflict  them  (Lnke  vi, 
87,  38).  1.  The  first  solution  is  that  they  are  the  judgments  of  men.  Tiiis  not 
praotioally  true.    2.  Consider  the  interpretation  which  attribates  the  rethbutiva 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  ▼«, 

judgments  to  angels.  It  is  not  our  Lord's  wont  to  attribute  judgment,  forgiveness, 
<fec.,  to  angels.  3.  God  will  inflict  them.  He  judges  men  according  to  the  state  ol 
mind  in  which  they  live.  (J.  E.  Rust,  M.A.)  The  evil  oj  judging  rashly  : — L 
Ths  duty — **  Judge  not."  1.  From  the  context  it  is  evident  that  the  Saviour  her* 
■peaks  only  of  those  judgments  that  we  form  concerning  our  neighbour.  Favour- 
able judgments  are  not  forbidden ;  unfavourable  judgments  allowed,  when  our 
station  or  clear  evidence  require.  Judges,  parents,  teachers,  must  condemn  and 
publicly  censure.  Our  Lord  condemns — 1.  The  inward  disposition  of  the  mind 
which  inclines  persons  to  judge  the  actions  of  their  neighbours  with  (1)  precipitance, 
(2)  malignity,  (3)  rigour.  2.  He  condemns  the  habit  of  communicating  to  othera 
the  rash  and  severe  judgments  we  have  formed,  when  no  necessity  requires  it.  We 
multiply  the  injury  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  persons  to  whom  we  communi 
cate  our  unfavourable  opinions.  IL  The  motive.  If  we  thus  judge  our  bretliren, 
there  is  more  than  one  tribunal  at  which  we  shall  be  condemned.  1.  We  shall  fini 
for  ourselves  in  society  judges  without  pity.  2.  The  rigour  at  the  last  judgment. 
God  will  punish  those  who  have  encroached  upon  His  rights,  and  who  have  trampled 
down  the  rules  of  justice  and  charity.  (H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  Eeasons  against  a 
censorious  spirit : — 1.  Such  judgment  provokes  rutaUrttion.  2.  Such  judgment  is 
not  becoming  in  us.  Such  a  sinner  has  no  right  to  sit  in  the  judgment  seat.  S. 
Such  judgment  shows  incapacity  for  true  judgment.  {Sermons  by  Monday  Club.) 
Against  rash  censuring  and  judging : — There  are  divers  sorts  of  judging  which  it  is 
requisite  to  distinguish  from  the  judging  prohibited : — 1.  That  exercising  public 
judgment,  or  administering  justice  is  not  here  prohibited.  2.  The  trial  and  cen- 
sure, although  out  of  court,  which  any  kind  of  superiors  do  exercise  on  their  in- 
feriors, committed  to  their  care,  such  as  masters  and  servants.  3.  Neither  is  friendly 
reproof  proceeding  out  of  charitable  design,  on  clear  ground,  in  fit  season,  within 
reasonable  compass,  concerned  in  tbis  prohibition.  4.  All  observing  and  reflecting 
on  our  neighbours'  actions,  all  framing  an  opinion  about  them,  and  expressing  our 
minds  concerning  them,  are  not  forbidden.  5.  We  are  not  hence  obliged  to  think 
so  well  of  all  men  as  without  competent  knowledge  always  to  rely  on  their  pre- 
tences, or  to  entrust  our  interests  in  their  bauds.  6.  We  are  not  obliged,  in  con- 
tradiction to  plain  sense,  to  judge  all  men  well.  We  observe:  1.  No  judge  should 
intrude  himself  into  the  office,  or  assume  a  judicial  power,  without  competent 
authority,  either  by  delegation  from  superior  powers,  or  by  voluntary  reference  to 
the  parties  concerned.  2.  A  judge  should  be  fi-ee  from  all  prejudices  and  all  partial 
affections.  3.  A  judge  should  never  proceed  in  judgment  without  careful  exami- 
nation of  the  cause,  so  as  well  to  understand  it.  4.  A  judge  should  never  pro- 
nounce  final  sentence,  but  after  certain  proof  and  on  full  conviction.  5.  Hence 
there  are  divers  causes  wholly  exempt  from  our  judgment,  such  as  the  secret 
thoughts  of  men.  6.  Hence  we  should  not  judge  the  state  of  our  neighbour  in 
regard  to  God.  7.  A  judge  should  not  proceed  against  any  man  without  warning, 
and  affording  him  opportunity  to  defend  himself.  8.  Moreover  a  judge  is  obliged 
to  conform  all  his  determinations  to  the  settled  rules  of  judgment.  9.  He  must  be 
a  person  of  good  knowledge  and  ability.  10.  It  is  proper  for  a  judge  not  to  make 
himself  an  accuser.  10.  He  should  himself  be  innocent.  11.  He  should  proceed 
with  great  moderation.  Again  :  1.  Censuring  is  an  impious  practice  in  regard  to 
God.  2.  In  respect  to  our  neighbour  it  is  an  unjust  practice.  3.  It  is  an  un- 
charitable practice.  4.  It  is  a  foolish  and  vain  practice.  6.  It  will  produce  many 
inconveniences  and  miscliiefs.  (1)  We  provoke  others  to  requite  us  in  the  same 
kind,  (2)  We  pass  censure  on  ourselves,  as  we  are  seldom  clear.  (3)  We  aggravate 
our  own  faults  and  deprive  them  of  excuse.  (4)  We  forget  to  what  a  dreadful 
judgment  we  stand  obnoxious  to.  (5)  It  causes  us  to  leave  our  own  fanlts  un- 
corrected. (6)  The  best  men  are  the  most  candid  and  gentle.  (7)  It  signifies  bad 
conscience;  a  vulturous  nature  smelleth  out  carrion.  {Dr.  Barrow.)  Social  self- 
echoes. — A  httle  boy  once  went  home  to  his  mother  and  said,  ••  Mother,  sister  and 
I  went  out  into  the  garden,  and  we  were  calling  about,  and  there  was  some  boy 
mocldng  us."  •*  How  do  you  mean,  Johnny  ?  "  said  his  mother.  "  Why,"  said  the 
chUd,  "I  was  calling  out,  '  Ho  1 '  and  this  boy  said,  '  Ho ! '  So  I  said  to  "him,  '  Who 
are  you?'  and  he  answered,  'Who  are  youf  I  said,  'What  is  your  name?*  he 
said,  •  What  is  your  name  ? '  And  I  said  to  him,  •  Why  don't  you  show  j'ouraelf  ?  ' 
he  said,  'Show  yourself?'  And  I  jumped  over  the  ditch,  and  I  went  into  tb« 
woods,  and  I  oould  not  find  him,  and  I  came  back,  and  said,  '  If  yon  don't  come 
out  I  wUl  punch  your  head  ! '  and  he  said,  '  I  will  punch  your  head  I '  "  So  hia 
mother  said,  "  An,  Johnny  1  if  you  had  said,  '  I  love  you,'  he  would  have  said,  •  I 


DHAP.  TO.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  119 

love  yon.*  If  you  had  said,  •  Your  voioe  is  sweet,'  he  would  have  said,  *  Your  voica 
is  sweet.'  Whatever  you  said  to  him,  he  would  have  said  back  to  you."  And  the 
mother  also  said,  "  Now,  Johnny,  wuen  you  grow  and  get  to  be  a  man,  whatever  you 
Bay  to  others  they  will,  by  and  by,  say  back  to  you."  And  his  mother  took  him  tc 
that  old  text  in  the  Scripture,  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured 
to  you  again."  Censoriousnesg  a  compound  of  the  worst  2)nssions  : — Censoriousnesa 
is  a  compound  of  many  of  the  worst  passions ;  latent  pride,  which  discovers  the 
mote  in  our  brother's  eye,  but  hides  the  beam  in  our  own  ;  malignant  envy,  which, 
wounded  at  the  noble  talents  and  superior  prosperity  of  others,  transforms  them 
into  the  objects  and  food  of  its  malice — if  possible,  obscuring  the  splendour  it  is  too 
base  to  emulate ;  disguised  hatred,  which  diffuses,  in  its  pei-petual  mutterings,  the 
irritable  venom  of  the  heart ;  servile  duplicity,  which  fulsomeiy  praises  to  the  face 
and  blackens  behind  the  back ;  shameless  levity,  which  sacrifices  the  peace  and 
reputation  of  the  absent,  merely  to  give  barbarous  stings  to  a  jocular  conversation  ; 
altogether  forming  an  aggregate  the  most  desolating  on  earth,  and  nearest  in  cha 
racter  to  the  malice  of  helL  (E.  L.  Magoon.)  Men  self -reflected  in  their  judgment 
of  others : — Pedley,  who  was  a  well-known  natural  simpleton,  was  wont  to  say, 
"  God  help  the  fool."  None  are  more  ready  to  pity  the  folly  of  others  than  those 
who  have  a  small  share  of  wit  themselves.  "  There  is  no  love  among  Christians," 
cries  the  man  who  is  destitute  of  true  charity.  "  Zeal  has  vanished,"  exclaims  the 
idle  talker.  ♦*  0  for  more  consistency,"  groans  oat  the  hypocrite.  "  We  want  more 
vital  godliness,"  protests  the  false  pretender.  As  in  the  old  legend,  the  woU 
preached  against  sheep-stealing,  so  veiy  many  hunt  down  those  sins  in  others,  which 
they  gladly  shelter  in  themselves.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Judgment  should  combine 
moderation: — Avoid  forming  refined  and  romantic  notions  of  human  perfection  in 
anytliing.  For  these  are  much  apter  to  heighten  our  expectations  from  others,  and 
our  demands  upon  them,  than  to  increase  our  watchfulness  over  ourselves;  and  so 
every  failure  provokes  us  more  highly  than  it  would  have  done  else. 

Vers.  3-5.  The  mote  that  Is  In  thy  brother's  eye. — Three  lessons  stand  oat 
conspicuously  in  the  text.  1.  Close  inspection  of  ourselves,  lest  any  evil  lurk  there 
unobserved  which  we  abhor  in  others  ;  lest  we  be  like  the  farmer  whose  field  is  over- 
run with  weeds,  who  delights  in  pointing  out  the  defective  condition  of  a  neigh- 
bour's farm.  2.  Avoidance  of  passing  rash  judgments  on  others.  3.  Eeadiness  to 
assist  others  in  overcoming  their  faults.  {Baring  Gould,  M.A.)  The  beam  and 
the  mote : — I.  That  sin  may  exist  in  man  to  an  enormous  extent,  and  'set  he  be  un- 
conscious OF  IT — "the  beam."  Several  things  tend  to  produce  this  unconscious- 
ness. 1.  Habit.  2.  Association.  3.  Satanic  agency.  II.  That  however  unconscious 
of  our  own  sins,  we  mat  be  alive  to  the  sins  of  others.  1.  Sin  does  not  destroy 
the  faculty  for  discerning  moral  distinctions.  2.  The  importance  of  Christiana 
being  circumspect  in  their  conduct.  III.  That  self-impbovkment  is  a  necebbabx 
QUALIFICATION  for  the  improvement  of  others.  {Dr.  David  Thomas.)  Self-knowledge 
needful  in  a  minister  : — At  Wragby,  in  Yorkshire,  in  the  vestry  of  the  church  is  a 
very  curious  old  painted  window,  representing  in  coloured  glass  the  subject  of  my 
text ;  a  man  with  a  huge  piece  of  v>rood  before  his  eyes  is  trying  diligently  to  extract 
a  mere  speck  from  the  eye  of  another  man.  And  this  picture  is  most  appropriately 
placed  in  the  vestry,  as  it  reminds  the  priest,  whose  ministry  it  is  to  declare  to 
the  people  their  fatilts  and  sins,  that  he  should  closely  examine  himself,  lest,  after 
he  has  preached  to  others,  he  himself  should  be  a  caot-away.  (Baring  Gould,  M.A.'^ 
Social  inU'rcourse  should  be  free  from  scandal: — I  have  got  a  piece  of  plate,  probably 
two  hundred  years  old,  for  the  table  at  meal  time.  On  the  silver  is  embossed  a 
representation  of  the  mote  and  the  beam  ;  a  man  with  a  spiked  log  sticking  into  hia 
eye  is  trying  hard  to  pick  a  tiny  grain  out  of  the  eye  of  another.  Perhaps  you  may 
think  it  most  inappropriate  to  have  such  a  group  and  subject  on  a  piece  of  plate 
before  one's  eyes  commonly.  But  I  do  not  think  so.  It  is  when  families  meet,  or 
guests  assemble  round  the  board,  that  the  characters  of  neighbours  are  most  freely 
talked  over.  (Ibid.)  A  knowledge  of  self  gives  skill  in  dealing  with  others:—  i 
It  is  only  when  we  have  wrestled  with  and  overcome  our  own  besetting  sins,  thai  | 
we  have  the  insight  and  tact  to  direct  others  how  to  overcome  theirs.  Massillon,  j 
the  great  French  preacher,  was  once  asked  where  he  obtained  his  profound  know-  j 
ledge  of  the  world  and  of  the  human  passions,  and  his  skill  in  solving  religion* ! 
difficulties.  '•  From  my  own  heart,"  he  replied.  In  his  endeavours  after  personal 
holiness  he  had  met  and  vanquished,  one  by  one,  those  bosom  sins  which  troubU 
men.    Their  false  excuses,  their  specious  preteuoei,  their  oonfiicts  with  temptation 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,   m, 


their  weak  Bubmission  to  vices  which  they  have  vowed  to  forsake,  their  remorse, 
their  fears — he  knew  them  all  from  experience,  and  he  described  them  as  one  who 
knew.  Hence  the  convicting  pungency  of  his  preaching,  by  which  the  carelesg 
courtiers  of  Versailles  were  impressed,  and  to  which  Louis  XIV.  himself  bore  witness. 
At  the  close  of  a  sermon  the  king  said  to  him,  "  I  have  heard  several  great  ortitors, 
and  been  very  much  pleased  with  them ;  but  every  time  I  have  heard  you  I  have 
l)een  very  much  displeased  with  myi-elf,"  The  ability  to  minister  to  others  ia 
acquired  through  faithful  self-treatment.  Consistency  required  in  the  reprover : — 
Before  thou  reprehend  another,  take  heed  that  thou  art  not  culpable  in  what  thou 
goest  about  to  reprehend.  He  that  cleanses  a  blot  with  blurred  fingers  will  make  a 
greater  blot.  E  ven  the  candle-snuffere  of  the  sanctuary  were  of  pure  gold.  (Quarles.) 
Nowadays  men  take  upon  themselves  to  reprove  others  for  committing  such  things 
as  themselves  do  practise  without  amendment.  Therefore  these  are  like  some 
tailors,  who  are  busy  in  decking  and  tricking  up  others,  but  go  both  bare  and  beg- 
garly themselves.  (Henry  Smith.)  If  my  carriage  be  unblamable,  my  counsel 
and  reproof  will  be  the  more  acceptable.  Wliolesome  meat  often  is  dihtasteful, 
coming  out  of  nasty  hands.  A  bad  Uver  cannot  be  a  good  counsellor  or  bold  re- 
prover ;  such  a  man  must  speak  softly  for  fear  of  awaking  his  own  guilty  conscience. 
If  the  bell  be  cracked,  the  sound  must  needs  be  jarring.  (Swiymock.)  The 
vicious  reproving  vice,  is  the  raven  chiding  blackness.  (Eliza  Cook.)  It  is 
easier  to  judge  others  than  to  improve  ourselvet: — Easy  and  ordinary  is  it  for  men  to 
be  others'  physicians,  rather  than  their  own.  They  can  weed  others'  gardens, 
whiles  their  own  is  overrun  with  nettles.  But  charity  begins  at  home ;  and  he  that 
loves  not  his  own  soul,  I  will  hardly  trust  hmi  with  mine.  The  usurer  blauics  his 
son's  pride,  sees  not  his  own  extortion  ;  and  whiles  the  hypocrite  is  helping  the 
dissolute  out  of  the  mire,  he  sticks  in  deeper  himself.  No  marvel  if,  when  we  fix 
both  our  eyes  on  others'  wants,  we  lack  a  third  to  see  our  own.  If  two  blind  men 
rush  one  upon  another  in  the  way,  either  complains  of  other's  blindness,  neitlier  of 
his  own.  Thus,  like  mannerly  guests,  when  a  good  morsel  is  carved  us,  we  lay  it 
liberally  on  another's  trencher,  and  fast  ourselves.  How  much  better  were  it  for  ns 
to  feed  on  our  own  portion  I     (Adams.) 

Ver.  6.  Give  not  that  which  Is  holy  unto  the  dogs. — Prudence  necessary  in  eon- 
versing  upon  religious  subjects  : — I.  The  bad  oharactehs  and  dispositions  op  sohs 
MEN  HEBE  REPRESENTED  by  the  allusiou  of  "  dogs  "  and  "swine."  1.  We  may  be 
sure  they  are  unworthy  the  powers  and  dignity  of  human  nature.  There  are  in  their 
»haracter — (1)  Stupid  impunity ;  (2)  Stubborn  forwardness.  They  snarl  at  admoni- 
tions. 2.  How  deplorably  human  nature  is  capable  of  being  corrupted.  3.  Watch 
against  all  tendencies  towards  the  beginnings  of  these  evil  dispositions.     II.  Thb 

NECESSITY  AND    REASONABLENESS  OF  TREATING  THE    AFFAIRS  OF    RELIGION  WITH    CAUTION 

AND  PRUDENCE  IN  OUR  CONVERSING  WITH  OTHERS.  1.  Siuco  WO  know  that  sacred 
things  are  so  liable  to  be  abused  by  profane  persons.  2.  That  it  may  be  attended 
with  bad  consequences  of  iU  treatment  to  ourselves — "lest  they  turn  again  and 
rend  you."  (J.  Abemethy,  M.A.)  The  dogs  and  the  swine: — The  lesson  is  one 
of  reverence  and  discretion.  I.  As  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  II.  As  to 
statements  of  spiritual  experience.  III.  As  to  the  admission  to  saored  privilegefl 
and  functions  in  the  Church.     (D.  Eraser,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  Ask,  and  It  shall  be  g^lven  you. — I.  We  have  in  these  words,  not  a 
formal  definition  of  prayer,  but  an  incidental  definition,  and  most  complete. 
To  pray  is  to  "ask"  of  God;  the  more  childhke  the  asking  the  better.  II.  A 
recognition  of  the  hindrances  which  we  meet  in  prayer.  We  are  to  ask  when 
God  is  nigh ;  mercies  are  sometimes  hid,  then  seek.  III.  A  positive  injunction. 
Prayer  not  optional ;  it  is  a  duty.  IV.  Christ  stimulates  to  obedience  by  words  of 
encouragement.  1.  He  calls  attention  to  universal  experience — "  Every  one  that 
»fketh,  receiveth."  Prayer  is  not  an  experiment.  2.  Christ  points  to  the  conduct  of 
parents  towards  tbeir  children.  3.  A  gentle  reference  to  our  common  depravity — "  If 
ye,  being  evil. "  God  far  above  all  earthly  parents,  more  willing  to  give  good  gifts.  (S. 
Martin. )  frayer  a  duty,  even  though  tliere  he  no  degire  to  pray  : — In  certain  states 
of  the  body  men  lose  all  appetite  for  food.  Are  they  to  yield  to  this  want  of  appetite  ? 
H  they  do  yield  to  it,  they  are  soon  starved  to  death.  Sometimes  without  appetite, 
it  becomes  necessary  for  them  to  take,  day  by  day,  nourishment.  Just  so  with 
prayer.  If  I  cannot  pray  as  a  priv  ege  I  am  to  pray  as  a  duty.  Prayer  not  a 
runaway  knock : — Watch  in  prayer  to  see  what  cometh.     Foohsh  boys,  that  kri9ck 


fHAP.  vu.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  121 

at  a  door  in  wantonness,  will  not  stay  till  somebody  cometh  to  open  to  them ;  but 
a  man  that  hath  business  will  knock,  and  knock  again,  till  he  gets  his  answer.  (J. 
Manton.)  Keeping  up  a  iuit : — Keep  up  the  suit  and  it  will  come  to  a  hearing- 
day  ere  it  be  long.  {Ihid.)  Ash  and  receive : — 1.  Every  promise  is  attached  to 
a  duty.  2.  That  concerning  any  duty  it  is  not  enough  that  you  do  it,  you  must  do 
it  scripturally.  3.  It  does  not  say  when  you  shall  receive.  4.  The  whole  Trinity 
combine  before  there  can  be  prayer.  5.  This  is  the  language  of  entire  dependence. 
"  Ask."  Man  is  empty,  6.  It  is  God's  method  to  try  the  grace  which  He  intends 
to  crown.  "  Seek."  7.  Never  be  afraid  of  being  too  earnest.  ••  Knock."  8.  God 
wishes  you  to  have  a  clear  understanding  about  the  certainty  of  prayer.  (/. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  Ask:  Children  speaking  to  God: — I.  Ask,  wbom.?  Not  to 
angels,  saints.  God  is  the  only  Being  who  is  everywhere  present,  and  therefore 
the  only  one  to  whom  we  should  pray.  II.  Ask,  when  ?  Any  time  ;  some  times 
better  than  others.  Morning,  <fec. ;  the  time  of  perplexity,  &c.  III.  Ask,  where  ? 
•'I  will  that  men  pray  everywhere."  IV.  Ask,  how?  1.  Orderly;  think  about 
what  you  are  going  to  ask.  2.  Earnestly;  not  carelessly,  3.  Repeatedly:  until 
you  receive  an  answer.  4.  In  your  own  style — as  children.  6.  In  faith.  6.  In  the 
name  of  Jesus,  the  only  Mediator,  &c.  {A.  McAuslane,  D.D.)  How  to  find  the  Lord .'y^.'^J^ 
— A  man  said  to  me  the  other  night  in  the  inquiry-rcm,  "  Mr.  Moody,  I  wish  yojTvJy 
would  tell  me  why  I  cant  find  the  Lord."  Said  I :  "  I  can  tell  you  why  you  can't 
find  Him."  "Why  is  it?"  "Why,  you  haven't  sought  for  Him  with  all  your 
heart."  He  looked  at  me,  and  said  he  thought  he  had.  ••Well,"  said  I,  "I  think 
you  haven't ;  because  you  will  surely  find  Him  when  you  seek  for  Him  with  all  youi 
heart.  Now,  my  friend,  I  can  tell  you  the  day  and  hour  you  are  going  to  be  con- 
verted." The  man  looked  at  me,  and  I  have  no  doubt  thought  I  was  a  little 
wild.  Said  I :  i'  The  Scripture  teUs  me,  •  He  that  seeketh  findeth.' "  It  don't 
take  a  man  long  to  find  the  Lord  when  he  makes  his  mind  up  to  do  it.  Life  a 
research : — 1.  Life  is  a  research.  2.  Not  get  some  one  else  to  seek  for  you.  3 
The  Lord  assigns  no  limit  to  the  research.  (A.  Coquerel.)  Rogation  Days, 
Atk,  and  it  shall  be  given  you: — In  May  almost  always  the  Eogation  Days  come. 
The  fitness  of  this.  These  days  are  m*-ant  to  prepare  the  people's  hearts  for  the 
coming  festival  of  the  Ascension  ;  but  mainly  to  be  days  of  intercession  •'  for  the 
fruits  of  the  earth,  which  are  then  tender,  that  they  may  not  be  blasted,"  as  well  aa 
for  health  and  peace  at  that  season  of  the  year  when  war  and  pestilence  may  be 
•expected  to  begin.  These  intentions  are  indeed  closely  blended,  for  when  our  Lord 
ijNBcended  up  on  high  He  received  gifts  for  men.  I.  We  pray  for  a  blessing  upon 
.  he  fruits  of  the  earth.  We  can  scarcely  help  it  unless  we  are  untrue  to  nature, 
fian's  heart  is  on  his  fields;  he  has  done  aU  his  work  as  far  as  crops  are  concerned 
—now  he  can  only  hope,  watch,  and  pray.  Now  all  depends  upon  what  God  will  be 
»dleased  to  do.  We  are  not  powerless:  prayer  is  left  to  us.  Thirteen  centuries  ago 
flogation  Days  were  first  appointed ;  it  was  then  felt  that  prayer  was  a  power  to 
secure  peace  and  plenty.  Thongh  there  is  no  service  for  these  Days,  there  is  nothing 
to  prevent  us  from  keeping  them.  Our  great  authority  for  them  is  found  in  the 
first  and  second  chapters  of  Joel.  In  these  days  of  agricultural  depression  we  have 
need  to  remember  them.  {E.  T.  Marshall,  M.A.)  Prayer,  Knock  with  confi- 
dence : — When  thou  standest  before  His  gate,  knock  loudly  and  boldly,  not  as  a 
beggar  knocks,  but  as  one  who  belongs  to  the  house  ;  not  as  a  vagabond,  who  is  afraid 
of  the  police,  but  as  a  friend  and  an  intimate  acquaintance ;  not  as  one  who  is  appre- 
hensive of  being  troublesome,  or  of  coming  at  an  improper  time,  but  of  a  guest 
who  may  rest  assured  of  a  hearty  welcome.  (Dr.  F.  W.  Krummacher.)  The 
nature  and  efficacy  of  prayer : — I.  The  precept.  1,  The  nature  of  the  duty.  2,  A 
few  of  our  obligations  to  this  holy  duty  :  (1)  The  Divine  command.  (2)  The  pious 
example  of  holy  men.  (8)  It  is  reasonable.  3.  Some  of  the  motives  by  winch  it 
is  enforced  :  (1)  Its  necessity.  (2)  Its  great  importance  in  preparing  the  mind  for 
the  duties  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  family.  (3)  Another  motive  arises  from  the 
maintenance  of  the  power  of  religion  within  us.  (4)  The  pleasure  of  walking  with 
God  is  a  powerful  incentive.  II.  The  encouragement  which  the  text  affords  us. 
1.  The  promise  itsell  2.  Its  Divine  fulness,  (1)  It  comprehends  every  human 
being  that  presents  his  prayer  for  relief.  (2)  The  quality  of  the  blessing — "  good 
things."  Two  reflections  :  1.  How  happy  is  the  believer.  2.  How  important  to  know 
the  mediom  of  acceptable  prayer.  (J.  E.  Good.)  Prayer  the  characteristic  action 
of  religion : — I.  Praveb  ib  religion  in  action.  It  is  the  soul  of  man  engaging  in 
that  particular  form  of  activity  which  presupposes  the  existence  of  a  great  >  ond 
between  itself  and  God,     It  is  the  noblest  kind  of  human  action,  in  which  maa 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cmr.  TXfc 

realizes  the  highest  capacity  of  his  heiug.  This  estimate  of  prayer  not  tmiversal 
anionp;st  even  educated  people.  They  regard  it  as  an  outlet  for  feeliug,  a  means  ol 
discipline  ;  but  less  worthy  the  energies  of  a  thinking  man  than  hard  work.  But 
prayer  is  indeed  work.  The  dignity  of  labour  is  proverbial.  1.  Is  it  true  that 
prayer  is  little  else  than  the  half-passive  play  of  sentiment  ?  Let  those  who  have 
truly  prayed  give  the  answer.  Jacob  wrestled  with  an  unseen  Power  (Matt.  xi.  12). 
2.  Take  prayer  to  pieces ;  it  consists  of  three  different  forms  of  activity.  (1)  To 
pray  is  to  put  the  understanding  in  motion,  and  to  direct  it  upon  the  Highest 
Object.  How  overwhelming  are  the  ideas  which  thus  pass  before  it.  The  issues 
are  realized.  This  an  absorbing  occupation  for  the  understanding.  (2)  To  pray  is 
to  put  the  affections  in  motion,  it  is  to  open  the  heart ;  this  movement  of  the  affeo» 
tions  is  sustained  throughout  prayer.  (3)  To  pray  is  to  put  the  will  in  motion,  just 
as  decidedly  as  we  do  when  we  sit  down  to  read  hard,  or  when  we  walk  up  a  steep 
hill.  It  euters  vitally  into  the  action  of  prayer,  and  is  in  proportion  to  sincerity. 
Now  these  three  ingredients  of  prayer  are  also  ingredients  in  all  real  work,  whether 
of  brain  or  hand  ;  in  prayer  they  are  more  evenly  balanced.  The  dignity  of  prayer 
B8  being  real  work  becomes  clear  if  we  reflect  on  the  faculties  it  employs;  and 
clearer  if  we  consider  the  effect  of  it  upon  the  habitual  atmosphere  of  the  soul.  It 
places  the  soul  face  to  face  with  facts  of  the  first  order  of  solemnity ;  with  its  real 
self  and  with  its  God,  And  just  as  labour  in  any  department  is  elevating  when  it 
takes  us  out  of  and  beyond  the  petty  range  of  daily  and  material  interests,  while 
yet  it  quickens  interest  in  them  by  kindling  higher  enthusiasms  into  life,  so  in  a 
transcendent  sense  is  it  with  prayer.  It  is  so  noble,  because  it  is  the  work  of  man 
as  man  ;  of  man  realizing  his  being  and  destiny  with  a  vividness  which  is  necessary 
to  him  ia  no  other  occupation.  The  nobleness  of  his  best  form  of  toil  must  fall  infi- 
nitely  below  that  of  a  spirit  entering  consciously  into  converse  with  the  eternal  God. 
II.  But  granted  the  dignity  of  prayer  even  as  of  labour :  What  if  this  labour  bb 
MiSAPPMED  ?  1.  There  is  here  no  question  as  to  the  subjective  effects  of  prayer  ;  this 
is  admitted  by  all,  2.  Prayer  is  not  chiefly  a  petition  for  something  that  we  want 
and  do  not  possess.  It  is  intercourse  with  God,  often  seeking  no  end.  3.  If 
prayer  is  to  be  persevered  in,  it  must  be  on  the  conviction  that  it  is  heard  by  a  living 
Person.  We  cannot  practise  trickery  upon  ourselves  with  a  view  to  our  moral  edi- 
fication. If  God  exists,  if  He  be  a  Personal  Being,  then  surely  we  may  reach  Him  if 
we  will.  Where  is  the  barrier  that  can  arrest  our  thought,  as  it  rises  to  the  all- 
embracing  intelligence  of  God.  And  if  God  be  not  merely  an  infinite  intelligence, 
but  a  moral  Being,  a  mighty  heart,  so  that  justice  and  tenrlemess  are  attributes  of 
His,  then  surely  we  appeal  to  Him  with  some  purpose.  It  is  on  this  ground  that 
God  is  said  to  hear  prayer  in  Scripture.  That  He  should  do  so  follows  from  the 
reality  of  His  nature  as  God.  He  who  has  planted  in  our  breasts  feelings  of  inte- 
rest and  pity  for  one  another  cannot  be  insensil'le  to  our  need  and  pain.  III.  But 
will  God  answer  prayer  when  it  takes  the  form  of  a  petition  fob  some  spkcific  bless- 
iNa  which  must  be  either  granted  or  refused?  1.  The  first  presumed  barrier 
against  the  efficacy  of  prayer  to  which  men  point  is  the  scientific  idea  of  law 
reigning  throughout  the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  material  universe.  But  the  laws  of 
nature  are  not  self-sustained  forces ;  God  can  use  His  own  laws.  They  have  not 
escaped  His  control.  2.  A  second  barrier  to  the  efficacy  of  prayer  is  sometimea 
discovered  in  the  truth  that  all  which  comes  to  pass  is  fore-determined  in  the  pre- 
destination of  God.  Prayer,  too,  is  a  foreseen  action  of  man,  and  is  embraced 
in  the  eternal  purpose  of  God.  3.  The  third  barrier  is  the  false  idea  of  the 
Divine  dignity  which  is  borrowed  from  our  notions  of  human  royalties.  Need  not 
dei)reciate  man's  place  in  the  universe  ;  God's  best  creature,  and  He  cares  for  the 
lowest.  4.  A  fourth  barrier  to  the  efficacy  of  prayer  is  thought  to  be  discernible  in 
an  inadequate  conception  of  the  interests  of  human  beings  as  a  whole.  But  Christian 
prayer  is  conditioned.  6.  The  last  barrier  is  really  to  he  discovered  in  man's  idea 
of  his  own  self-sufficiency.  6.  That  prayer  is  answered  is  a  matter  of  personal 
experience.    (Canon  Liddon.) 

Ver.  9.  A  stone. — Th€  bread  of  God^t  Word  not  to  he  petrified  hy  preaehen  :^^ 
Petrarch's  works  are  said  to  have  laid  so  long  in  the  roof  of  St.  Mark's,  at  Venice, 
that  they  became  turned  into  stone ;  by  what  process  deponent  sayeth  not.  To 
many  men  it  might  well  seem  that  the  Word  of  God  had  become  petrified,  for  they 
receive  it  as  a  hard,  lifeless  creed,  a  stone  upon  which  to  sharpen  the  daggers  ol 
eontroversy,  a  stumbling-block  for  young  beginners,  a  millstone  with  which  to  break 
opponents'  heads,  after  the  manner  experienced  by  Abimelech  at  Thebez.    A  man 


CHAP»  vn.j  ST.  MATTHEW,  128 

must  have  a  stout  digestion  to  feed  upon  some  men's  theology ;  no  sap,  no  sweetness, 
no  hfe,  but  all  stern  accuracy,  and  fleshless  definition.  Proclaimed  without  tender- 
ness, and  argued  without  affection,  the  gospel  from  such  men  rather  resembles  a 
missile  from  a  catapult  than  bread  from  a  Father's  table.  Teeth  are  needlessly 
broken  over  the  grit  of  systematic  theology,  while  souls  are  famishinat.  To  turn 
stones  into  bread  was  a  temptation  of  our  Master,  but  how  many  of  His  servanta 
yield  readily  to  the  far  worse  temptation  to  turn  bread  into  stone  I  Go  thy  way, 
metaphysical  divine,  to  the  stone-yard,  and  break  granite  for  McAdam,  but  stand 
not  in  the  way  of  loving  spirits  who  would  feed  t)ie  family  of  God  with  living 
bread.  The  inspired  Word  is  to  us  spirit  and  life,  and  we  cannot  afford  to  have  it 
hardened  into  a  huge  monolith,  or  a  spiritual  Stonehenge — sublime,  but  cold; 
majestic,  but  lifeless  ;  far  rather  would  we  have  it  as  our  own  household  book,  out 
bosom  companion,  the  poor  man's  counsellor  and  friend.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  9-11.  How  much  more  shall  your  Father. — The  heavenly  and  the  earthly 
Parent : — I.  The  facts  which  our  text  recognizes.  1.  The  moral  condition  of 
earthly  parents — "evil."  2.  The  natural  affection  of  earthly  parents.  II.  Thb 
ARGUMENT  OUR  TEXT  EXPRESSES.  Suggested  by  contrast.  Strengthened  by  condition. 
Confirmed  by  covenant.  III.  The  appeal  it  supplies.  Addressed  to  your  con- 
Bciousnesa  of  duty,  compassion  for  suffering,  recollection  of  heavenly  goodness. 
{Jnon.)  I.  An  encouraging  character  of  the  Being  to  whom  we  pray — a  father. 
Most  endearing.  He  feels  the  tenderest  concern  for  ua.  "We  have  freedom  of  access 
to  Him,  &c.  But  the  extent  of  His  Fatherly  relation  is  in  the  text  illustrated — by 
appeal  and  by  contrast.  II.  The  blessings  we  shall  receive  from  our  heavenly 
Father  in  answer  to  our  prayers — "  good  things."  Temporal  and  spiritual  "  tilings." 
What  an  encouragement  to  pray !  How  careful  we  should  be  to  pray  aright. 
AddreS3  those  who  do  not  pray.  {R.  Watson.)  God  the  best  of  Fathers : — How 
pre-eminently  He  sustains  the  IParental  office,  1.  The  first  instance  of  Hia 
superiority  is  derived  fiom  His  knowledge.  2.  The  superiority  of  His  correction. 
8.  God  surpasses  every  earthly  parent  in  His  nearness  and  observation.  Parents 
cannot  always  be  with  their  children.  4.  Parents  may  be  unable  to  relieve  their 
children,  if  with  them.  5.  Other  parents  are  not  suffered  to  continue,  by  reason  of 
death.  7.  The  love  of  parents  is  far  exceeded  by  the  love  of  God,  7.  Parents  give 
good  things  to  their  offspring,  however  imperfectly  they  make  known  their  wants 
and  desires.  (IF.  Jay.)  Dependence  upo7i  God: — I.  What  is  implied  in  this 
dependence  ?  A  conviction  that  we  are  not  able  to  provide  for  ourselves,  and 
therefore  need  to  depend  on  Him,  That  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  God's  providing 

for     us.        II.    How   THE     SPIRIT     OF     DEPENDENCE     IS    TO     BE    EXPRESSED.      HI.    ThB 

SUPPORT  THAT  IS  Qi\EN  TO  THB  SPIRIT  OF  DEPENDENCE.  The  express  promise  of 
God.  The  experience  of  God's  people.  The  relationship  which  God  bears  to  Hia 
people.  There  is  a  lesson  of  instruction,  rebuke,  warning,  encouragement.  {F. 
Tuck,  B.A.)  Good  gifts  to  our  children: — Our  Lord  refers  here  to  the  disposition 
of  the  father  rather  than  to  his  discernment,  his  willingness  more  than  his  vrisdom. 
The  impulse  of  affection  not  always  wise.  What  are  the  gifts  we  owe  to  our  chil- 
dren ?  1.  First  among  them  is  a  careful  training  in  obedience.  2.  Another  gift  we 
owe  our  children  is  a  careful  training  in  the  unselfish  virtues.  3.  Another  gift 
we  owe  our  children  is  a  high  and  worthy  ideal.  4.  Another  good  gift  we  may 
impart  to  oar  children  la  education.  6.  Finally,  a  good  gift  wherewith  you  may  enrich 
your  children  is  your  confidence.  {W,  Gladden,  D.D.)  God  a  royal  Fathrr  con- 
cerned for  the  welfare  of  His  children  : — A  king  is  sitting  with  hia  council  deli- 
berating on  high  affairs  of  state  involving  the  destiny  of  nations,  when  suddenly  he 
hears  the  sorrowful  cry  of  his  little  child  who  has  fallen  down,  or  been  fiii,'htened 
by  a  wasp ;  he  rises  and  runs  to  his  relief,  assuages  hia  Borrows  and  relievea  hia 
feare.  Is  there  anything  unkingly  here?  Is  it  not  most  natural?  Does  it  not  even 
elevate  the  mouarch  in  your  esteem  ?  Wliy  theu  do  we  think  it  dishonourable  to 
the  King  of  kings,  our  heavenly  Father,  to  consider  the  small  matters  of  His  chil- 
dren? It  is  infinitely  condescending,  but  is  it  not  also  superlatively  natural  that 
being  a  Father  He  should  act  as  such  ?     (C  H.  Spur y eon.) 

Ver.  12.  That  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them. — Wherein  lies  that 
exact  righteousness  which  is  required  between  man  and  man : — I,  The  expectation  ol 
it.  Fat  thyself  into  the  place  and  circumstances  of  every  mm  with  whom  thon  hast 
to  do.  This  is  an  exact  rule.  It  is  plain  and  easy.  Three  things  are  to  be  dona 
bafore  this  rule  will  be  of  use  to  us.     1.  We  mtst  make  it  appear  reasonable.    2. 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  tb. 

Make  it  certain.  3.  Maka  it  practicable.  (1)  Labour  to  understand  truly  every 
man's  condition  so  far  as  you  have  opportunity.  (2)  When  from  distance,  self-in- 
terest you  cannot  uuderstand,  trust  the  concurrent  experience  ol  others  that  are  in 
that  condition  (3)  Conclude  that  in  cases  between  superiors  and  inferiors,  the 
partiality  is  usaally  on  the  inferiors'  side.  (4)  In  judging  of  your  present  condition 
and  circumstances,  always  abate  sometliing  for  the  presence  of  them,  for  self-lova 
and  self-interest  and  other  passions.  II.  The  grounds  of  this.  Tlie  equity  of  the 
nxle  stands  upon  these  foundations.  1.  All  men  are  equal  in  many  things,  and 
tht  ee  the  greatest  things.  2.  In  most  of  those  things  wherein  we  are  unequal,  tha 
inequality  is  not  considerable,  so  as  to  be  a  ground  of  any  unequal  deahng  with  one 
another.  3.  In  all  these  things  wherein  men  are  unequal,  the  inequality  is  not  fixed 
and  constant,  but  mutable  and  by  turns.  4.  Among  other  grounds  is  the  mutual  and 
universal  equity  and  advantage  of  this  rule.  5.  The  absurdity  and  inconvenience 
of  the  contrary.  III.  The  instances.  1.  In  matters  of  civil  respect  and  conversa- 
tion. 2.  In  matters  of  kindness  and  courtesies.  3.  In  matters  of  charity  and  com- 
passion. 4.  In  matters  of  forbearance  and  forgiveness.  5.  In  matters  of  report 
and  representation  of  other  men,  and  their  actions.  6.  In  matters  of  trust  and 
fidelity.  7.  In  matters  of  duty  and  obedience.  8.  In  matters  of  freedom  and 
liberty,  which  are  not  determined  by  natural  or  positive  law.  9.  In  matters  ol 
commerce  and  contracts  which  arise  from  thence.  IV.  Rules  for  directing  oni 
commerce.  1.  Impose  upon  no  man's  ignorance  or  unskilfulness.  2.  Impose  upon 
no  man's  necessity.  3.  Use  plainness  in  aU  your  deahngs.  4.  In  matters  of  fancy 
nse  moderation.  Let  us  not  revenge  ourselves.  (J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  It  is  some- 
times said  that  Christians  are  defective  in  the  duties  of  the  second  table;  hypocrites 
may  be,  but  not  real  Christians.  I.  A  eule  of  life.  This  precept  may  be  con- 
Bidered  in  the  affirmative  and  negative ;  the  latter  to  restrain  iujury,  the  former  to 
do  good.  To  impress  this  rule  in  the  negative  sense  take  four  considerations.  1. 
That  in  the  duties  of  the  second  table  we  have  more  light  than  we  have  in  the 
first,  for  in  the  first  we  are  to  love  God  with  all  our  heart  (Matt.  sxii.  S6,  37),  but  the 
love  to  our  neighbour  is  a  measure  more  discernible.  Love  will  tell  us  what  is  good 
for  ourselves ;  in  guiding  our  love  to  God  we  need  many  rules.  2.  The  breach  of  the 
rule  is  more  evil  in  him  which  hath  experienced  the  bitterness  of  wrongs,  than  in 
another ;  because  experience  giveth  us  a  truer  knowledge  of  thiugs,  than  a  naked 
conception  of  them.  Thus  conscience  worketh  in  the  way  of  restraint.  3.  That 
this  rule  is  spiritual,  and  concerueth  the  inward  man  as  well  as  the  outward,  thoughts 
as  well  as  actions.  4.  This  rule  must  be  done  not  only  out  of  love  to  man,  but  out 
of  love  to  God,  and  as  an  act  of  obedience.  Self-love  is  the  measure,  but  not  the 
principle,  of  our  action.  Now  take  the  affirmative  part.  1.  In  gi%'ing.  Be  asready 
to  do  as  to  receive  good.  2.  In  forgiving.  II.  Vindicate  this  rule.  1.  It  seema 
not  to  be  so  perfect  a  rule :  because  laany  desire  and  wish  much  evil  to  themselves. 
2.  It  seems  to  make  all  men  equal,  and  destroy  order  and  superiority,  as  master  and 
servant.  3.  Doth  not  this  establish  revenge  and  retaliation  T  4.  Is  not  this  to  im- 
pose a  restraint  upon  the  Christian  from  which  others  are  free,  and  so  to  expose  to 
constant  loss?  IIL  The  equity  of  this  rule.  1.  The  actr.al  equality  of  all  men 
by  nature.  2.  The  possible  equality  of  all  men  as  to  condition  and  state  of  life. 
IV.  Thb  illative  particle  "Therefore."  1.  That  God  is  the  judge  of  human 
actions.  He  will  see  whether  you  do  to  others  as  they  do  to  you,  and  you  shall  heat 
of  it  in  your  dealing  with  God.  2.  That  the  usage  we  expect  from  God  the  same  in 
measure  we  should  deal  out  to  others.  Application  :  What  an  advantage  religion  is 
to  mankind  in  the  present  life.  (1)  How  securely  we  might  live  one  by  another. 
(2)  How  mutually  helpful  men  would  be  to  each  other.  (3)  How  much  mankind 
have  degenerated,  and  how  few  live  Christians  in  the  world.  {J,  Mayiton,  D.D  ) 
Duty  towards  our  neighbour: — The  several  capacities  wherein  we  can  help  or  hinder 
him.  I.  As  to  his  soul.  Piomote  its  good  by — 1.  Prayer.  2.  Example.  II.  As  to 
the  body  we  must  do  as  we  would  be  done  by.  III.  We  must  deal  with  our  neigh- 
bour as  we  desire  he  should  deal  with  us,  in  respect  of  his  good  name.  IV.  This 
rule  extends  to  men's  estates.  1.  Justice.  2.  Charity.  Some  motives  to  induce  tha 
the  practice  of  this  rule :  1.  The  first  shaU  be  taken  from  the  end  for  which  they 
were  made.  2.  From  the  intrinsic  beauty  and  loveliness  of  the  rule  itself.  3.  Be- 
cause we  and  they  both  bear  the  same  stamp  and  impress  of  heaven.  4.  Because  il 
we  be  just  and  generous  in  time  of  our  prosperity,  it  will  cause  a  like  afiftctiou  in 
others  to  us.  6.  It  would  be  the  best  security  of  our  lives,  honour,  reputation, 
riches,  power.  (Dr.  Barrow.)  1.  The  mutual  dependence  of  man  upon  his  fellow 
2.  The  duty  which  devolves  on  each  to  assist  his  neighbour,  especially  in 


BHAP.  vn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  125 


spiritual  things.  (Bishop  of  Winchester.)  The  golden  rule  : — I.  What  is  thb 
TBOE  MEANING  of  thls  Divine  rule  7  That  we  practise  toward  our  neighbour  in  such 
a  manner  as  our  hearts  and  consciences  would  think  it  reasi  nable  he  ehould  prac- 
tise towards  us  in  a  like  case.  II.  What  is  the  special  arodment  that  our  Lord 
uses  in  order  to  enforce  it.  III.  Wherein  its  PABxicnLAB  excellencies  appear.  Ik 
is  easy  to  be  understood  and  applied,  easy  to  be  remembered,  carries  greater  evidence 
to  the  conscience  than  any  other  rule  of  virtue,  includes  a  powerful  motive,  will 
secure  our  neighbour  from  injury  and  us  from  guilt,  as  fitted  to  awaken  repentance 
as  to  direct  to  duty,  suits  all  stations,  (&o.,  includes  all  actions  and  duties,  a  rule  of 
the  highest  prudence,  and  fitted  to  make  the  whole  world  happy.  IV.  Keflections. 
How  compendious  the  Saviour's  method  of  providing  for  the  practice  of  all  the 
moral  duties  enjoined  by  Moses  and  the  prophets  1  What  Divine  wisdom  to  make 
the  golden  rule  a  fundamental  law  in  both  the  Jewish  and  Christian  systems.  (Dr. 
Watti.)  Concerning  this  rule  or  principle  note  the  following  facts  :  I.  It  is  a 
golden  rule.  It  is  sound  throughout  and  very  precious.  II.  This  is  our  Saviour's 
golden  rule.  III.  It  is  a  revolutionary  rule.  IV.  It  is  a  very  stringent  rule.  V. 
It  is  an  evangelical  rule.  Wnoever  thinks  about  it  cannot  fail  to  see  two  things. 
His  need  of  (Jod's  forgiveness  and  God's  grace.  VI.  Following  the  golden  rule  we 
shall  be  led  to  our  duty  and  therefore  to  blessedness.  (Atwu.)  The  golden  rule 
of  gospel  equity : — I.  The  precept  itself  and  the  limitations  with  which  it  is 
TO  BE  understood.  We  must  not  make  what  we  expect  others  would  do  in  out 
circumstances  the  rule  of  conduct ;  because  we  expect  selfishness,  we  must  not  be 
selfish ;  this  is  retaUation.  The  rule  of  the  text  does  not  apply  when  what  we  would 
is  inconsistent  with  the  well-being  of  society  ;  a  creditor  need  not  forego  a  just  debt. 
So  this  rule  has  equity  and  right  reason  as  a  limit.  We  must  not  take  too  favour* 
able  views  of  our  individval  case  and  form  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  what  we  are 
entitled  to  at  the  hands  of  aneigbbour.  Auger  may  be  justified.  II.  The  excel- 
LENCT  OF  this  rule,  and  the  grounds  on  which  we  claim  for  it  the  respect  of  mankind. 
1.  Its  reasonableness,  as  founded  on  the  original  equality  of  all  men.  2.  Its  capa- 
bility of  easy  and  immediate  application.  3.  The  beneficence  of  such  a  rule  in 
relation  to  ourselves.  God  seems  to  let  us  make  our  own  laws.  III.  A  few  prac- 
tical illustrations  of  the  way  in  which  this  rule  mat  be  applied.  1.  Let  the 
rule  be  applied  to  the  civilities  of  social  intercourse.  2.  To  the  practice  of  neigh 
bourly  charities  and  compassions.  "  Ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  3. 
To  the  rights,  properties,  and  good  name  of  ail  around  us.  4.  To  the  social 
duties  falliog  under  no  special  name,  regard  for  the  opinions  of  others.  6.  The 
connection  of  these  several  duties  with  the  sinner's  acceptance  with  God.  (D. 
Moore,  31. A.)  The  golden  rule: — I.  The  righteous  rule  of  conduct  here  laid 
DOWN.  1,  In  order  to  the  performance  of  this  duty  there  must  be  a  sameness  of 
circumstances.  There  is  a  diversity  in  the  station  and  character  of  men ;  this  re- 
quires diversity  of  duty  towards  them.  2.  We  must  carefully  observe  the  measure 
by  which  we  are  to  regulate  our  conduct  towards  others.  It  is  not  what  they  ac- 
tually do,  but  what  we  would  desire  they  should  do,  which  is  to  be  our  rule.  3.  This 
rule  must  ba  taken  with  certain  modifications,  not  absolutely ;  we  might  wish  others 
to  do  things  tmreasonable  and  sinful ;  it  must  recognize  the  law  of  God.  II.  Its 
EXCKLLENCE.  1.  Its  brevity.  2.  Its  comprehensiveness — "All  things."  8.  Its 
perfect  justice.  III.  A  few  considebahons  to  enforce  obedience  to  it.  1. 
The  argument  exhibited  by  our  Lord — "  For  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets."  S. 
The  injunction  of  our  Lord  on  this  subject.  3.  The  powerful  recommendation  such 
a  course  would  prove  to  the  gospel  of  our  Lord.  4.  It  is  enforced  by  the  benevolent 
and  righteous  example  of  Him  who  gave  it.  Learn  :  1.  It  presents  a  most  invalu- 
able tesiimony  to  the  truth  of  Christianity.  2.  How  happy  will  be  the  world  when 
the  religion  of  Jesus  Clirist  shall  be  universally  diffused.     (J.  E.  Good.)  The 

golden  rue  a  fundamental  law : — Nature's  great  law  that  matter  attracts  matter; 
that  a  vast  central  world  will  attract  planets  from  a  straight  line  into  a  circle  ;  that 
an  earth  will  draw  a  falling  apple  to  itself,  and  hold  its  liquid  sea  and  liquid  air 
close  to  itself,  and  will  hold  the  seas  under  the  air  and  the  land  under  the  sea,  is  not 
more  fundamental  in  the  material  world  than  the  golden  rule  is  in  the  world  of  duty 
and  happiness.  Take  away  the  single  principle  discovered  by  Newton,  and  the 
organized  universe  is  at  once  dissolved  ;  air  and  water  and  land  mingle  ;  oar  globe 
would  become  a  fluid,  and  fill  its  orbit  with  a  floating  debrin  of  itself.  The  golden 
rule  underlies  our  public  and  private  justice,  our  society,  our  charity,  our  education, 
our  religion ;  and  the  sorrows  of  bad  government,  of  famine,  of  war,  of  caste,  of 
•laveiy,  have  come  from  contempt  of  this  principle.  (Z>.  Swing.)        Christ  did  not 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tdu 


originate  the  gulden  rule,  but  gave  it  new  meaning  and  power  over  men  : — To  find 
the  glory,  tberel'ore,  of  a  truth  you  must  not  pause  with  the  man  who  may  have 
first  announced  it,  for  he  may  have  had  no  conception  of  its  worth,  and  may  have 
given  it  little  love,  like  the  Sibji  who  wrote  prophecies  which  she  did  not  herself 
understand,  and  which,  written  upon  leaves,  she  permitted  the  winds  to  carry  about 
never  to  bo  seen  or  cared  for  again.  In  order  to  locate  the  glory  of  discovery  yoa 
must  measiire  the  hciirt  and  mind  that  first  took  hold  of  the  idea  or  law  in  its  in- 
fancy or  later  Ufe.  You  will  find  the  word  liberty  in  Cicsar's  history  and  in  Cicero's 
ethics,  but  they  knew  nothing  of  the  idea  as  compared  with  that  conception  of  iha 
word  in  the  mind  of  a  Wilberforce  or  a  Polish  exile.  [Ihid.)  The  golden  rule  a 
portable  lew : — By  that  I  mean  it  is  always  at  hand,  always  ready  to  be  appealfti 
to.  It  is  like  the  *'  two-foot  rale  "  which  the  skilful  artizan  always  carries  with 
him  ready  to  lake  the  measurement  of  any  work  to  which  he  is  called  ;  a  rule  is  his 
that  can  measure  the  brick  that  is  but  of  few  inches  length,  or  that  could  compute 
the  height  of  the  pyramids.  So  is  it  with  this  law.  Other  social  regulations,  such 
as  those  of  professional  etiquette,  of  trade  customs,  and  even  of  national  statutes, 
are  continually  failing  men  according  to  the  class  or  country  in  which  they  are 
found.  But  this  is  ever  at  hand.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  golden  rule  should  be 
rememhered  in  the  infliction  of  punishment : — The  Emperor  Alexander  Severus  was 
BO  charmed  by  the  excellence  of  this  "  golden  rule,"  that  he  obliged  a  crier  to 
repeat  it  whenever  he  had  occasion  to  punish  any  person  ;  and  caused  it  to  be 
inscribed  in  the  most  noted  parts  of  his  palace,  and  on  mauy  of  the  public  buildings : 
he  also  profes.-ed  so  high  a  rcgaid  for  Christ,  as  having  been  the  author  of  so  excel- 
lent a  rule,  that  he  desired  to  have  Him  enrolled  among  the  deities. 

Vers.  13, 14.  Enter  ye  la  at  the  etrait  gate. —  The  strait  gate  not  a  shut  gate  .•-— 

1.  The  FAiTHFULiNESS  OF  A  HOLY  Goo.  God  has  told  us  the  way  is  difficult.  It  id 
against  nature.     II.  Thb  tendeknesb  of  a  meecifcl  Fathki:.     1.  There  is  a  gate. 

2.  The  gate  kadeth  unto  life.  If  the  pleasures  of  sin  must  be  left  behind,  the 
pleasures  of  holmess  await.  3,  Those  who  enter  neither  make  nor  open  the  gate; 
they  only  find  it.  Men  cannot  m&ke  ways  of  peace  for  themselves ;  they  cannot 
force,  but  liud  the  way.  4.  He  who  made  the  way,  and  keeps  it  open  now,  is  glad 
when  many  '*  go  in  thereat."  (W.  Amot.)  Saivatio7t :  joy  that  the  gate  is  open : — 
If  some  of  the  Queen's  soldiers  were  taken  prisoner  by  the  enemy,  and  confined 
in  a  fortress  far  in  the  interior  of  a  forteign  land  ;  and  if  an  intimation  were  con- 
veyed to  the  captives  by  a  friendly  hand  that,  at  a  certain  part  of  their  prison  walls 
there  is  an  opening  to  liberty  and  home,  but  that  the  opening  is  narrow  and  the 
j)ath  beyond  it  rough,  their  hearts  would  forthwith  fill  with  joy.  They  would  feel 
already  free.  Strait  gate  !  what  do  they  care  for  its  straitness  ? — enough  for  them 
that  there  is  a  pate.  Ere  that  setting  sun  get  round  to  gild  the  east  again,  many 
long  miles  will  be  betwe««  them  and  the  house  of  bondage.  Surer  and  safer  is  their 
outgate,  if  slaves  to  sin  were  as  willing  to  be  free.  (Ibid.)  Salvation :  the  gate 
cannot  be  forced: — Outside  the  frowning  barrier  swarm  the  multitudes  of  all  kindreds 
and  tongues,  who  strive  to  be  their  own  saviours.  One  will  give  ten  thousand 
rivers  of  oil.  Another,  more  alarmed,  and  more  in  earnest,  will  give  the  fruit  of 
his  body  for  the  sin  of  his  soul.  Another  will  waste  or  wound  his  ovm  flesh  at  the 
bidding  of  a  priest  wlio  will  assure  him  of  an  entraneo.  Another,  without  the  inter- 
vention of  any  human  mediator,  will,  under  the  spur  of  an  alarmed  but  unenlightened 
eonscience,  abaudoii  ibis  life  to  blank,  slavish  fear,  not  daring  to  enjoy  any  comfort 
or  any  hour,  in  order  that  he  may  more  surely  propitiate  the  judge,  aud  finally  laake 
hiB  way  into  heaven.  It  ia  all  labour  lost.  There  is  no  gate  on  that  side,  and  you 
cannot  make  one.  (Ibid.)  The  supreme  importance  of  personal  salvation  : — L 
The  FAcnjTT  of  attaining  destrdction.  WiU  appear  from  the  following  consider- 
ations : — 1.  Temptation  to  evil.  2.  Man's  susceptibility  to  temptation.  3.  The 
large  numbers  who  tread  this  way.  4.  The  needlessness  of  effort  to  tread  this  way. 
II.  Thk  difficultt  of  attaining  salvation.  The  attainment  of  salvation  demauda 
(1)  The  resistance  of  temptation  ;  (2)  The  exercise  of  self-denial ;  (3)  The  overcoming 
of  difficulties.  IIL  The  duty  of  stbivino  to  attain  salvation.  I.  Strive  to  trust 
in  God.  2.  Strive  to  watch  and  work.  {William  Jo7ies.)  The  difficulty  of  sal- 
vation : — We  wish  not  to  discoui  age,  bat  awaken  Christiana  from  their  languor, 
I.  The  figures  Christ  has  employed  set  forth  the  difficulty  of  salvation.  A  warfare 
in  which  we  must  engage;  a  building  we  must  erect.  2.  Perhaps  the  places  where 
Christ  speaks  without  figures  will  be  less  severe.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth 
violence."    "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  outer  into  th« 


«HAP.  m.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  127 

kingdom  of  heaven."  8.  The  exalted  perfection  of  the  law  of  Jesus  Christ  joined 
to  the  extreme  weakness  of  man  in  the  state  of  corrupt  nature.  4.  What  shall  I 
Bay  of  outward  obstacles?  5.  Those  who  have  been  influenced  by  sincere  desire  to 
work  out  their  salvation  have  perfectly  understood  its  difficulty.  6.  Why  has  God 
made  the  way  to  heaven  so  difScult?  (1)  It  does  not  belong  to  us  to  call  God  to 
account.  (2)  The- difficulty  comes  from  man,  to  whom  God  has  given  all  necessary 
strength  to  do  well.  (3)  All  good  men  have  had  other  sentiments  on  this  alleged 
difficulty,  wonder  that  God  for  so  few  things  should  save  His  people,  (-i)  When  a 
thing  is  not  absolutely  necessary  difficulty  may  dishearten  ;  but  when  of  indigpensabla 
necessity,  there  is  nothing  that  we  ought  not  to  sm-mount.  (5)  Above  all,  we  must 
have  recourse  to  God  with  this  prayer,  "  Lord,  save  us,  or  we  perish."  (Cheminau.) 
The  strait  gate,  and  the  wide  ;  the  narrow  way  and  tiie  broad : — 1.  They  all  produce 
destruction  of  peace.  2.  Some  of  its  paths  lead  to  destruction  of  character,  S. 
Some  of  its  paths  lead  to  destruction  of  health.  4.  Some  of  these  paths  lead  to 
the  destruction  of  hfe.  5.  They  all  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  soul.  (J.  Gwyther, 
B.A.)  The  broad  way: — I.  Thb  place  thev  enxeb — "wide  gate."  1.  Wide 
enough  to  admit  spiritual  ignorance,  3.  Wide  enough  for  inconsistency  and  sloth. 
II.  The  road  they  tbavel.  III.  The  ndmbebs  WHim  bear  thb  ungodly  com- 
pany. IV.  The  end  to  which  they  come.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  I.  A  contbabt 
WITH  respect  to  THB  ENTRANCES — "  strait,"  "  wide."  U.  Two  ways  contbastbd — 
"broad,"  "narrow."    III.  A  contrast  as  to  the  number  that  journey  in  thess 

WAYS.       IV.    A   C0NTBA8T  AS   TO   THE   ENDS   TO   WHICH   THESE   WAYS   LEAD.       (Garrard.) 

1.  The  IDEA  WHICH  oue  Lord  gives  ok  fotube  misery — "destruction."  Although 
the  powers  of  the  soul  will  be  preserved  in  all  their  might,  yet  the  sources  of  sensaal 
gratification  will  be  destroyed.  It  is  a  positive  penalty  inflicted  by  the  justice  of 
God.  The  ruin  is  complete,  often  sudden,  certain,  eternaL  IL  A  confirmation  o» 
the  statement  made  concerning  it.  The  gate  is  "  wide,"  &0,  The  way  of  sin  is  broad, 
considering  the  ease  with  which  it  is  found.  Broad  by  its  enticements.  So  broad 
as  to  admit  persons  of  all  descriptions,  <feo.  What  enteiing  in  at  the  strait  gate  im- 
plies. Inducements  to  comply  with  this  admonition.  (R.  Treffry.)  I.  Thk 
binner's  imminent  danger.  Great,  certain,  near,  hastening.  II.  Thb  sinner's 
immediate  duty.  To  search  the  Scriptures,  self-examination,  prayer,  believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  destruction  of  sinners  will  be  charged  to  themselves.  H 
you  are  in  the  narrow  way  be  thankful.  {J>r.  J.  Mattliews.)  The  way  to  life  and 
the  way  to  destruction  unfolded : — I.  An  exhortation  and  warning,  how  to  direct 
oar  course  for  the  other  world,  which  this  life  is  but  the  avenue  to.  1.  The  safe 
course.  2.  The  unsafe  course.  3.  Our  duty  and  interest  with  respect  to  these 
g^tes.  II.  A  REASON  FOR  THIS  EXHORTATION  AND  WARNING.  That  though  the  Other 
gate  is  easy  and  much  frequented,  yet  it  is  most  dangerous.  The  nature  of  the  gate 
opposite  to  that  we  are  called  to  enter  in  by,  and  of  the  way  of  joining  it.  1.  It  la 
wide.  2.  It  is  broad.  They  are  not  hampered  by  conscience,  Bible,  &c.  3.  The 
Cise  made  of  it.  There  are  many  dispositions  of  carnal  men.  4.  The  end  of  it. 
The  safe  way : — 1.  The  gate  is  strait,  2.  The  way  is  narrow.  It  is  like  a  strait 
shoe  that  presses  the  foot.  It  is  not  easy  walking  in  it.  Afflictions  and  temptations 
beset  it.  3.  The  unfrequentedness  of  it.  4,  The  happy  tendency  and  end  of  it. 
(T.  Boston,  D.D.)  What  makes  the  gate  strait  J — 1.  The  mighty  contrariety  of  our 
natiretoit.  2.  The  various  lusts  hanging  about  the  soul.  3.  The  keen  opposition 
made  by  Satan  to  the  soul's  entry.  4.  The  enmity  of  the  world  against  religion. 
5.  The  nature  of  the  thing  makes  it  a  strait  gate.  The  entering  in  by  the  $trait 
gate: — What  they  enter  into  by  it:  1.  A  new  road  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  2.  A  safe  road 
(Piov.  i.  83).  3.  Into  a  house  all  ease  and  comfort  (Bev.  xxi.  7).  How  do  they 
enter  in  by  this  gate  ? — 1.  Coming  out  of  themselves.  2.  Coming  to  Christ  in  the 
tree  promise  of  the  gospel  faith.  3.  Coming  unto  God  by  Christ.  What  this 
entering  hears  : — 1.  A  discerning  of  the  gate.  2.  A  finding  of  an  absolute  necessity 
of  entering  by  it.  3.  Eesoluteness  for  a  happy  arrival.  4.  A  contentment  to  forego 
our  present  ease.  6.  Nobody  walking  carelessly  will  get  a  safe  arrivaL  6.  They 
must  begin  well  who  would  end  well.     The  wide  gate : — 1.  It  is  a  deceitful  way. 

2.  It  is  an  unprofitable  way.  3.  It  is  a  trifling  way.  4.  It  is  a  restless  way.  6. 
It  is  a  disappointing  way.  6.  It  is  easy  to  fall  on  it.  7.  It  is  easy  walking  in  it 
8.  It  is  not  easy  to  get  off  it.  This  way  leads  to  destruction : — 1.  This  is  the  con- 
stant voice  of  the  word  of  God.  2.  The  rectorial  justice  of  God  demands  it,  8. 
The  nature  of  things  manifests  it.  4.  The  voice  of  the  natmal  conscience  confirms 
it.  The  multitude  in  the  broad  way : — 1.  Seen  in  the  universal  corruption  of  human 
nature.    2.  The  constant  call  tc  the  multitude  to  repent.    3.  The  judgments  God 


128  THB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  fli. 

has  sent  on  the  world.  4.  From  our  own  observation.  5.  It  is  the  most  agreeable 
way  to  the  corrupt  nature.  6.  The  blindness  of  the  human  mind.  7.  Prejudices 
against  the  way.  8.  The  broad  way  is  easiest.  9.  Satan  influences  them  to  it.  10. 
Example  contributes  to  it.  11.  Also  want  of  consideration.  (Ibid.)  The  facility 
with  which  sinnem  go  to  destruction : — This  will  appear — I.  From  the  fact  that  it  ia 
agreeable  to  the  nature  ot  man  to  pursue  a  sinful  course.  II.  From  the  spiritual 
sloth  of  the  transgressor.  III.  The  blindness  of  the  carnal  mind.  IV.  The  strength 
of  unbelief,  the  allurements  of  the  world,  and  the  devices  of  Satan.  V.  The  effect 
of  things  present,  compared  with  the  influence  of  things  distant.  VI.  The  imper- 
fections  and  sins  of  professing  Christians.  VII.  The  example  of  the  multitude. 
These  obstacles  must  be  overcome,  or  we  inevitably  perish.  (W.  Mitchell,  A.M.) 
The  broad  and  the  narrow  way  : — I.  The  way  of  destruction.  1.  The  gate  into 
it  is  wide.  2.  The  way  itself  is  broad.  3.  It  is  the  way  along  which  the  great  bulk 
of  mankind  are  travelling.  II.  The  way  of  Lira.  1.  The  gate  into  it  is  strait. 
2.  The  way  itself  is  narrow.  3.  It  is  a  way  little  travelled.  Ill,  Let  us  judge  as  • 
to  which  WAT  WE  ARE  WALKING  IN.  {E.  CoopeT.)  The  two  ways : — I.  The  way 
OF  BIN  WHICH  WE  ABE  DIRECTED  TO  AVOID.  1.  The  gate  IS  wide.  It  requires  no 
difiiculty.  2.  It  is  broad.  It  is  lawless.  3.  It  is  crowded.  4.  Its  termination. 
n.  The  PATH  OF  Christian  holiness  which  we  abe  to  pursue.  1.  Its  entrance. 
2.  Its  dimensions.  3.  Its  paucity  of  passengers.  4.  Its  blissful  end.  III.  Rb- 
FLECTIONS.  1.  There  is  an  inseparable  connection  between  the  present  and  the 
future.  2.  There  is  no  middle  path  in  religioQ.  3.  Never  suffer  the  world  to  be 
your  authority  in  mattters  of  religion.  4.  Stnve  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gat«, 
{J.  E.  Good.)  The  iiarrownesa  of  the  gospel: — I  know  nothing  broader  than 
Christianity ;  not  one  of  the  ideas  of  which  it  has  taken  hold  that  it  has  not  eo- 
larged  in  infinite  proportions.  Take  the  ideas  of  God,  humanity,  and  destiiiy  ot 
man.  Yet  it  is  accused  of  narrowness.  The  cause  not  in  any  weakness,  but  in  the 
gospel  itself.  It  is  narrow — I.  Because  it  is  the  way  of  truth.  It  can  tolerate  no 
other  way.  Truth  alone  is  good.  In  science  men  prefer  it:  why  not  in  religion' 
Because  morally  inconvenient.  II.  Because  it  is  the  way  of  holiness.  Each  would 
like  to  retain  his  favourite  inclination.  It  will  not  let  our  vices  pass.  III.  Becauvs 
it  is  the  way  of  humility.  It  is  closed  even  to  virtuous  pride,  to  fancied  merita. 
IV.  Because  it  is  the  way  of  love.  The  Divine  love  is  narrow  in  that  it  rejects  all 
that  is  contrary  to  it.  Your  love  is  narrow,  and  seeks  the  welfare  of  its  object. 
But  none  can  reject  the  privations  of  this  narrow  way.  (E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The 
gate  of  salvation  too  narrow  for  the  self-righteous : — See  in  the  middle  of  the  night 
a  house  on  which  fire  has  caught.  Everywhere  the  flame  breaks  out  with  the 
rapidity  of  lightning.  Cries  of  alarm  are  raised,  for  there  is  an  unfortunate  sle<per 
above  this  furnace  which  is  going  to  consume  him.  He  awakes,  he  turns  his  scared 
looks  everywhere.  Before  him  a  single  passage  remains  open,  narrow,  but  sufficient 
to  save  his  life.  What  does  he  do  ?  "With  a  grasping  and  feverish  hand  he  gathers 
all  that  he  can  save  of  his  goods,  and  laden  with  his  treasures,  bending  under  his 
burden,  he  arrives  at  this  door  which  refuses  to  give  him  passage.  "For  me,"  he 
cries  then,  "  for  me  I  the  door  is  too  narrow."  Ah !  poor  idiot !  leave  there  thy 
treasures  which  will  cost  thee  thy  hfe,  strip  thyself  of  that  which  prevents  thy  pro- 
gress, eonscLS  to  sacrifice  all ;  thy  salvation  is  only  at  that  price.  Yon  have 
understood  me,  brethren.  This  house  which  is  falling  in  is  oar  life  ;  this  devouring 
flame  is  the  judgment  of  the  holy  God ;  this  open  door  is  pardon  ;  and  these  trea- 
sures which  will  ruin  you,  are  those  qualities,  those  virtues,  those  merits,  whiell 
you  wish  to  preserve  at  all  cost.  Yes,  the  door  of  heaven  is  too  narrow  for  the  self- 
righteous,  and  because  of  this  the  Gospel  raises  so  much  repugnance  and  irritation 
amongst  them.  (Ibid.)  Salvation:  its  difficulty  argues  its  worth : — The  difliculty 
of  obtaining  shows  the  excellency ;  and,  surely,  if  you  consider  but  what  it  cost 
Christ  to  purchase  it ;  what  it  costs  God's  Spirit  to  bring  men's  hearts  to  it ;  what 
it  costs  ministers  to  persuade  to  it ;  what  it  costs  Christians,  after  all  this,  to  obtain 
it;  and  what  it  costs  many  a  half-Christian  that,  after  all,  goes  without  it;  you 
will  say  that  here  is  difficulty,  and  therefore  excellency.  Trifles  may  be  had  at  a 
trivial  rate,  and  men  may  have  damnation  far  more  easily.  Conclude,  then,  it  is 
surely  somewhat  worth  that  must  cost  all  this.  (Baxter.)  Salvation:  dlMculty 
the  law  of  entrance  to  it  and  all  other  kingdoms:— Into  what  kingdom  is  it  that  you 
are  anxious  now  to  enter?  Above  all  things  you  wish  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
music.  Very  well.  This  is  the  New  Testament  doctrine  concerning  the  kingdom 
of  music  •'  Strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  which  leadeth  unto  excellence 
in  moBio,  and  few  there  be  that  find  it."    Yon  have  to  study  night  and  day,  you 


CHAS.  Tn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  12? 

have  no  time  for  yourself,  you  are  at  it,  always  at  it,  or  getting  ready  for  it,  criticizing 
or  being  criticized,  repeating,  rehearsing,  going  over  it  again  and  again,  still  higher 
ftnd  higher.  If  that  is  the  law  of  your  little  kingdom  of  music,  why  should  it  not 
be  the  law  of  the  larger  kingdom  of  life,  which  includes  all  beauty,  and  learning, 
and  music,  and  power?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  world  way  : — All  the  world  is  & 
way.  It  is  bo  broad  that  the  whole  generation  for  the  time  travel  abreast  upon  it 
{W  Arrwt.)  The  way  of  sin  easy  : — You  have  nothing  more  to  do  than  lie  like  i 
withered  leaf  upon  the  stream,  and  without  a  thought  or  an  effort  you  are  carried 
quickly  down.     Sinners  do  not  find  it  difficult  to  sin.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  15.  Beware  of  false  prophets. — The  false  and  the  true  : — I.  The  testh  by 
which  the  false  and  the  true  may  be  known.  II.  The  ultimate  destiny  of  the  false 
and  the  true.  1.  In  respect  to  the  paths  they  tread.  2.  In  respect  to  the  fruit 
they  bear.  3.  In  respect  to  the  profession  they  make.  4.  In  respect  to  the  founda- 
tions on  which  they  build.  The  plainness  of  these  tests.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
False  prophets. — But  while  we  are  thinking  of  the  teachers  that  are  without,  ht  us 
not  forget  that  we  all  have  within  us  a  falbe  prophet,  the  most  insidious,  and  there- 
fore the  most  dangerous  of  all.  (W.  G.  Humphry,  M.A.)  Fahe  prophets  and 
false  Christians  : — The  Scriptures  treat  largely  of  the  false — false  gods,  false  doc- 
trines, false  Christs,  and  false  hopes.  I.  False  pnoPHEia.  A  prophet  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  word  is  one  who  foretells  future  events.  A  false  prophet  is  one  who 
assumes  the  ofHce  without  a  call  from  God,  or  who  puts  forward  his  own  thoughts 
as  if  they  had  Divine  sanction.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  detect  which  are  the  true 
prophets,  and  which  the  false;  but  though  difficult,  thoy  may  be  detected.  Their 
plausible  guises  are  among  their  marks.  Some  ander-estimate  errors  in  matters 
of  doctrine.  II.  False  Christians.  Most  men  have  some  religion  ;  man  has 
religious  instincts.  The  religion  of  some  is  a  mere  profession  ;  they  say  unto  Him, 
"  Lord,  Lord."  Others  add  to  their  profession  some  of  the  more  striking  works  and 
offices  of  Christianity.  The  fearful  end  of  this  self-deception.  Let  us  not  receive 
the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  proph<'cies  of  deceit : — They 
hinder  repentance  by  bidding  us  believe  (1)  In  delay:  no  need  to  repent  now;  (2) 
In  an  easy  return  to  holiness  ;  (3)  Tliat  sin  is  not  so  dreadful  as  it  is  represented  ; 
(4)  That  repentance  may  be  worse  for  us  in  the  end,  if  we  fall  away  from  it ;  (5) 
That  by  some  one  great  act  we  can  atone  for  sin.  {J.  M.  Ashley, 'S  The  false 
prophet: — I.  The  imposture.  They  "come  in  sheep's  clothing:  "in  the  garb  of 
(1)  innocence  ;  (2)  weakness ;  (3)  gentleness.  II.  Its  detkction.  III.  Its  ponish- 
MENT,      (Ibid.)  Wisdom    needed    to    detect  little  errors : — The    first    appear- 

ances of  error  are  many  times  modest.  There  is  a  chain- of  truths;  the  devil 
taketh  out  a  link  here  and  there,  that  all  may  fall  to  pieces.  (T.  ManVm,  D.D.) 
Satan  knows  that  we  would  never  consent  to  give  up  a  wheel  of  the  gospel  chariot, 
and  therefore  in  his  craftiness  he  only  asks  for  the  linch-pins  to  be  handed  over  to 
him.  (G.  H.  Spnrgeon.)  Ability  cannot  condone  error : — Mere  talent  ought  not 
to  attract  us ;  carrion  well  dressed  and  served  upon  Palissy  ware,  is  still  unfit  for 
men.  Who  thrusts  his  arm  into  the  fire  because  ite  flame  is  brilliant  ?  Who 
knowingly  drinks  from  a  poisoned  cup  because  the  beaded  bubbles  on  the  brim 
reflect  the  colours  of  the  rainbow?  As  we  would  not  be  fascinated  by  the  azura 
bues  of  a  serpent,  so  neither  should  we  be  thrown  off  our  guard  by  the  talents  of 
aa  ousoand  theologian.    (Ibid.) 

Vers,  ie-20.  Know  them  by  their  troAt*.— Utility  th*  test  of  truth.^The  two 
criteria  on  which  men  most  chiefly  rest  for  the  guidance  of  their  religious 
opinions  would  here  be  of  no  avail ;  authority  would  be  claimed  by  the  prophet ; 
and  private  judgment  might  possibly  lead  his  votaries  astray.  Both  these  useful,  but 
require  caution.  Let  us  get  a  clear  conception  of  the  notion  of  utility  as  a  crite- 
rion. It  is  an  acknowledged  fact  that  every  human  action  and  word  is  followed 
inevitably  by  certain  consequences,  which  are  good  or  bad.  Those  acts  which 
produce  happiness  are  useful ;  those  which  do  not  are  injurious.  We  must  extend 
our  notion  of  happiness  beyond  the  ancient  conception  of  it.  Christianity  has  made 
happiness  in  worldly  good  things  alone  impossible.  It  must  now  include  peace 
with  God.  This  a  criterion  which  cannot  be  mistaken.  Apply  this  test.  I.  As 
AN  ABOtJMEHT  FOB  CHRISTIANITY  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word.  When  Christi- 
anity appeared  in  the  world,  Roman  civilization  had  practically  failed.  The 
privilege  of  Boman  citizenship  had  done  much — had  kindled  a  feeling  of  oommu- 
■ity  of  interest;  bat  needed  a  higher    sanction.     The  Incarnation  taught  men 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

brotherhood ;  nations  which  possess  this  truth  have  the  principle  of  vitality.  IL 
Let  us  apply  this  test  to  our  English  Christunity.  Doubtless  there  are  physical 
reasons  which  make  the  English  race  so  strong;  but  also  moral,  latent  in  our 
Christianity.  IIL  As  an  argument  supplying  to  us  each  practical  reasons  for 
FOLLOWING  IN  ouB  CONDUCT  THAT  LINE  OF  DUTY  which  conscieuce  tells  US  to  be  right. 
It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  we  can  be  like  a  good  tree  or  a  bad  one.  It  is  the  uses  oi 
a  man  which  determine  his  status  before  God.  (J.  T.  Coxhead,  M.A.)  The  test 
of  true  religion : — L  The  rule  laid  down  by  Christ  in  the  text  is  infalliblb  ni 
CHARACTER  AND  UNIVERSAL  in  application.  It  is  true  in  the  natural  world  as  in  the 
spiritual.  II.  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.  1.  This  test  is  a  reasonable 
one.  2.  It  is  a  sensible  one.  3.  It  is  a  simple  one.  4.  It  is  a  just  one.  6.  It  is 
a  sure  one.  6.  It  is  one  which  men  apply  continually  in  judging  of  each  other's 
conduct.  7.  It  is  one  which  the  Judge  will  apply  on  the  final  day.  (J.  M.  Sherwood, 
'D.D.)  The  standard  of  good  and  evil: — I.  That  there  is  a  standard  of  good 
and  evil.  1.  It  is  fixed.  2.  It  is  just.  3.  It  is  evidenced  by  experience.  4.  It  is 
knowable.  6.  It  is  practical.  II.  By  this  standard  God  will  judge.  1.  Men 
cannot  plead  ignorance,  it  being  written  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  not 
the  Scriptures.  2.  Judgment  will  not  be  according  to  profession.  3.  Nor  with 
respect  of  persons.  4.  Conscience  approves  these  principles.  5.  The  Holy  Spirit 
will,  if  we  ask,  teach  us  the  will  of  God.  III.  By  this  standard  Christlans  abb  to 
judge.  I.  False  prophets  must  needs  be,  they  aie  foretold,  and  are  busy  perverting 
the  truth.  8.  We  must  judge  them  by  the  Word  of  God.  (Flavel  Cook.)  Tin 
moral  influence  of  doubting : — I.  Doubt  loosens  the  moral  hold  of  the  principle  of 
the  Bible  upon  our  personal  obedience.  II.  The  position  of  antagonism  into 
which  doubting  throws  a  man  is,  in  itself,  unfavourable  to  growth  in  moral  virtue. 
III.  Doubt  presents  no  incentive  to  holiness  like  that  which  Christianity  offers. 
{Bishop  Cheney.)  The  test  of  the  fi-uitage  : — We  do  not  usually  connect  fruit- 
bearing  with  children.  This  is  a  mistake.  Notice  three  things.  I.  What  onb 
FLAVOUR  SHOULD  THERE  BE  IN  ALL  FRUITS  ?  Many  different  flavours  in  fruits,  yet 
there  is  something  common  to  them  which  makes  us  approve  of  them  all.  This 
may  be  applied  to  children.  There  are  many  varieties  of  disposition,  but  we  can 
call  all  children  good,  if  we  can  detect  in  them  the  flavour  of  godliness — Christlike- 
ness.  That  is  just  the  wonderful,  beautiful  thing  about  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  He  can 
be  a  model  for  all — for  the  young  and  for  the  old.  II.  What  peculiarities  of 
FLAVOUR  should  THERE  BE  IN  CHILDREN'S  FRUITS  1  Unselfishness,  thoughtfolness, 
truthfulness,  gentleness.  These  flavours  are  to  be  found  in  our  words  and  in  our 
deeds.  III.  What  is  the  secret  which  accounts  fob  the  best  flavoured  amb 
MOST  ABUNDANT  FRUITAGE  ?  For  even  in  fruits  of  one  kind  of  flavour,  we  find  differ. 
ences.  "  From  me  is  thy  fruit  found" — the  Lord  Jesus,  the  life.  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 
Oood  fruits  the  test  of  principle : — I.  The  persons  whom  oub  Loed  directs  ns  to 
SHUN.  1.  Their  deception.  2.  Their  artifice.  3.  Their  end.  H.  The  satisfao- 
TOfiT  AND  EQUITABLE  TEST  by  which  they  are  to  be  ascertained.  Of  this  rule  we 
remark  (1)  that  it  is  infallible ;  (2)  it  is  easily  comprehended  ;  (3)  it  is  of  universal 
appUcation — to  personal  religion  and  doctrine,  &c.  ;  (4)  it  will  apply  to  the  several 
views  of  Christianity  which  are  propagated  in  the  world.  {J.  E.  Good.)  The  false 
and  the  true  : — I.  That  action,  and  not  appearance,  is  the  test  that  determines  tha 
genuineness  of  religion.  II.  The  announcement  of  the  law  of  moral  certainties — 
"  A  good  tree  cannot,"  &o.  HI.  That  mere  sincerity  is  not  salvation.  IV.  Chris* 
sad  His  gospel  are  man's  only  security.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Figs  of 
thistles  f — It  has  pleased  God  to  make  every  tree  and  herb  "  after  its  kind."  There 
are  three  reasons  for  this : — 1.  That  people  may  know  what  to  expect.  2.  That 
diligent  work  may  be  rewarded.  3.  That  great  results  may  be  caused  to  grow  oat 
•f  small  beginnings.  4.  We  reap  what  we  sow.  {E.  R.Conder,D.D.)  Ravening 
wolves : — Conduct  indicates  character.  I.  As  illustrated  by  the  well-known  com- 
FABisoN  which  is  here  employed.  II.  In  reference  to  the  special  chabaotebs  which 
»re  here  described.  1.  Their  oflSce.  2.  Their  outward  aspect — sanctimonious, 
t.  Their  evil  designs.  "Inwardly  they  were  ravening  wolves."  III.  In  its  genertd 
application.  1.  This  is  the  only  true  standard  by  which  to  judge  either  ourselves 
or  others.  Profession,  feelings,  are  deceptive.  2.  According  to  this  rule  the  decisions 
of  the  great  day  will  be  regulated.  {Expository  Outlines.)  The  effecU  of  the 
Bible: — 1.  Upon  the  laws  of  nations.  2.  Upon  the  liberty  of  nations.  3.  Upon  the 
morality  of  nationa  4.  Upon  the  charity  of  nations.  6.  Upon  the  literature  of 
nations.  6.  Upon  the  acts  of  nations.  7.  Upon  social  life  and  domestic  relationships. 
iL  Ui>on  individaala.    Thus  judged  by  its  fruits  it  is  a  good  book.     {J.  H.  Hitchens.) 


can.  vu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  131 

Christians  known  by  their  fruits : — Not  by  our  acquired  knowledge,  or  fancied  ex- 

Erience,  or  creed ;  but  by  fruits.  L  The  pbimabt  and  immediatb  design  or  ou» 
iBD  IN  THB  DECiABATiON  BEFOBE  US.  This  text  Connected  with  the  preceding  (vers. 
15-20) — "  Wherefore."  The  greater  part  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  was  de- 
signed to  rectify  the  errors  of  the  Phariseea  1.  The  false  prophets  whom  oar 
Lord  condemns  were  guilty  of  lowering  the  standard  of  moral  duty  by  explaining  away 
the  spirituality  and  extent  of  the  law,  and  reducing  the  whole  of  human  obedience 
to  a  few  unimportant  ceremonies.  2.  They  frustrate  the  free  grace  of  the  gospel  by 
insisting  on  the  meritoriousness  of  human  obedience.  Thus  did  the  Judaising 
teachers  in  Corinth,  Galatia,  and  Ephesus.  II.  The  pbactical  natube  of  Chbis- 
TiAiJiTY  Afl  A  DECISIVE  PROOF  OF  ITS  DIVINITY.  1.  The  iiiflueiice  of  genuine  Christianity 
IB  always  practically  holy.  2.  Let  the  actual  results  of  the  influence  of  Christianity 
upon  the  world  be  examined,  and  it  will  be  found  that  they  are  uniformly  of  a  holy 
and  felicitating  character.  (J.  Savill.)  But  wlio  expect  to  gather  grapes  of  thorns 
and  Jigs  of  thistles  t — L  The  man  who  expects  to  obtain  happiness  without  a  holy 
life.  IL  The  man  who  expects  to  obtain  a  holy  life  without  a  renewed  heart.  III. 
The  man  who  expects  to  obtain  a  renewed  beart  without  faith  in  evangelical 
truth.  {R.  HalUy,  D.D.)  Thistle  seed. — There  is  a  schoolboy,  yawning  over 
his  lesson.  He  sits  with  his  books  before  him,  but  he  is  not  working.  If  we 
ask  him  why,  he  says,  "  Oh,  I  hate  Latin  1 "  "  Well,  perhaps  you  like  arithmetic 
better?  "  "  Oh  no,  I  hate  doing  sums."  "  Well,  do  you  like  geography  ?  "  •*  Oh  no, 
I  hate  geography  worst  of  all."  The  real  truth  is,  he  hates  work.  He  is  sowing 
thistles  ;  and  by  and  by,  when  his  school-days  are  over,  the  prickles  wiU  sting  him, 
and  the  empty,  useless  seed  be  a  plague  in  his  neighbours'  fields.  {E.  R.  Conder, 
D.D.)  Grace  seen  in  co7iduct : — The  apples  appear  when  the  sap  is  not  seen.  It 
is  the  operative  and  lively  graces  that  will  discover  themselves.  A  man  may  think 
well,  or  speak  well ;  but  it  is  that  grace  which  governeth  his  actions  which  most 
showeth  itself.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  It  is  all  very  fine  to  plead,  as  some  have 
done,  that  they  are  doing  inside  work ;  if  their  fmit  is  all  within,  they  will  have  to 
be  cut  down  that  it  may  be  got  at.  A  true  epistle  of  Christ  is  not  written  in 
invisible  ink,  and  then  sealed  up,  but  it  is  known  and  read  of  all  men.  A  tree  of 
tne  Lord's  right  hand  planting  bears  fruit  to  His  glory,  visible  to  all  about  him. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Christian  fruitjul  in  a  barren  scene  : — Those  who  travel 
through  deserts  would  often  be  at  a  loss  for  water,  if  certain  indications,  which  the 
hand  of  Providence  has  marked  out,  did  not  serve  to  guide  them  to  a  supply.  The 
Becret  wells  are  for  the  most  part  discoverable  from  the  verdure  which  is  nourished 
by  their  presence.  So  the  fruitfulness  of  good  works  of  the  believer,  amidst  the 
deadness  and  sterility  around  him,  proclaim  the  Christian's  life.     (Salter.) 

Yer.  21.  Rot  every  one  that  salth  onto  Me,  Lord,  Lord. — The  connection  between 
holy  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  and  the  happiness  of  heaven: — I.  Desceiption  of 
THE  ohabacteb  of  those  who  make  an  external  profession  of  religion,  but  walk  un- 
worthy of  its  precepts,  connected  with  the  impossibility  of  their  entering  in  such  a 
state  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  1.  It  is  evident  that  a  person  may  have  much 
which  bears  the  semblance  of  piety,  while  he  is  far  from  feeling  its  genuine  influence. 
i.  The  text  may  refer  to  the  lukewarm  and  indifferent.  II.  The  connection  between 
the  character  of  those  who  not  only  profess  Christianity,  but  adorn  it  by  a  suitable 
eon  verba  tion,  with  the  reward  which  is  held  out  for  their  encouragement.  1.  The 
will  of  God  is  a  term  of  vast  extent.  2.  It  is  easy  to  see  the  connection  between  the 
character  of  those  who  do  the  will  of  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  and  the  pros- 
pects of  future  bliss.  Learn  :  1.  That  active  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  Christianity 
is  the  surest  mark  of  a  genuine  Christian  beUever.  2.  The  necessity  of  unremitting 
endeavours,  relying  on  the  strength  of  Divine  grace  to  quahfy  us  for  admission  into 
heaven.  (D.  Kelly,  M.A.)  I.  A  great  truth  proclaimed.  The  religion  of  Christ 
is  to  be  practised.  1.  For  the  teachings  of  Jesus  are  only  understood  as  they  are 
put  into  practice.  2.  They  are  only  honoured  as  they  are  put  into  practice.  II.  A 
great  errob  perpetrated — mere  profession.  1.  This  error  is  common.  2.  It  is  dis- 
pleasing to  Christ.  3.  It  injures  the  individual  who  practises  it.  4.  It  is  a 
misrepresentation  of  Christianity.    HI.  A  great  duty.     {U.  R.  Thomas.)        I.  The 

IBUR  qualification  FOR  ADMISSION  INTO  THE   KINGDOM   OF   HEAVEN.      "  He   that   doeth 

the  will,"  <feo.  IL  The  delusive  hopes  which  many  will  ohebish  as  to  admission  into 
Christ's  kingdom  by  means  of  other  qualifications.  1.  The  first  having  made  a 
strong  and  ambitious  profession  of  His  name.  2.  Arising  from  a  life  of  prsotica] 
tuefolness  to  others.    UL  These  hopes  will  bs  debtboybd.     {0.  T.  Noel.)        Fro 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  th 

fession  and  practice : — Let  us  observe  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  light  of  this  text. 
1.  It  is  a  kingdom  of  fruit,  not  of  thorns,  not  of  leaves.  2.  We  see  that  the  faith 
which  is  so  essential  to  it  is  an  active  grace.  The  proof  of  sincerity  is  doing.  It  ia 
not  a  mere  emotion  destitute  of  energy.  3.  That  every  one  that  cometh  into  it 
must  do  God's  will.  Active  trust  not  enough ;  it  must  be  in  the  proper  direction. 
The  world  is  a  great  law-keeper.     Even  Christ  did  the  will  of  His  Father.    Learn : 

I.  That  active  obeying  the  will  of  God  is  the  decisive  test  of  being  in  the  king* 
dom  of  God.  2,  That  it  is  one  thing  to  hear  and  another  to  do  the  will  of  God.  3. 
Nor  is  confidence  sufficient.  The  Pharisees  were  sure  that  they  were  on  the  rock. 
{T.  L.  Cuylcr,  D.D.)        The  disowned : — I.  They  went  a  long  way  in  religion. 

II.  They  kept  it  up  a  long  while.  III.  They  were  fatally  mistaken.  IV.  They  found 
it  out  in  a  terrible  way.  (C.  H.  Spurgean.)  Self-confidence  no  security  : — You  re- 
member the  lighthouse  that  was  built  off  the  coast  of  England  by  Winstanley.  The 
architect  was  confident  that  the  structure  was  strong,  and  laughed  at  the  criticisms 
upon  it.  To  show  his  confidence,  he  took  up  his  abode  in  the  building.  In  the  midst  of 
that  fearful  November  storm,  how  little  that  confidence  availed  him  as  the  structure 
was  caught  in  the  grasp  of  the  winds  and  shaken  to  pieces !  Now  another  hghthonsa 
stands  there  well  founded,  well  builded,  and  lights  the  mariner  to  the  safe  harbour. 
So  that  character  tbat  is  rightly  founded  and  builded  in  Christ  will  not  only  be  secure 
itself,  but  Ught  others  to  security.  (Ibid.)  Sincere  obedience  necessary  to  our 
acceptance  with  God: — I.  Explain  the  false  pretences  to  the  favoub  of  God  and 
THE  kingdom  ok  HEAVEN.  1.  The  first  pretence  is  saying  to  Christ,  ••  Lord,  Lord  " 
— a  mere  profession  of  Christianity.  2.  The  second  founded  on  the  gift  of  prophecy  — 
that  is  to  propagate  Christianity  and  promote  edification,  separable  from  a  holy 

life.     II.  To  ILLUSTRATE  THAT  ONLY  SOLID  GROUND  OF  HOPE  WHICH  OUR  LoRD  ESTABLI8HK8. 

1.  The  will  of  God  is  revealed  plainly.  2.  In  what  sense  is  it  to  be  done? 
Infirmity  cleaves  to  us  all;  the  gospel  of  pardon  in  Christ  requires  sin- 
cerity in  doing  His  will ;  a  partial  obedience  will  not  please  Him.  3.  There 
must  be  a  persevering  continuance  in  well  doing.  This  the  only  ground  of 
hope.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  The  final  rejection  of  false  professors: — L  Thk 
QUALiFviNG  TERMS  OP  ouB  ADMISSION  TO  HKAVEN — "He  that  doeth  the  will," 
&0.  II.  The  OPPOSITE  GROUNDS  of  dependence  which  many  prefer: — 1.  National 
privilege  and  profession.  With  such  persons  religion  is  a  question  of  geography ; 
they  are  Christians  because  born  in  a  land  of  knowledge.  2.  Splendid  professions 
of  zeal.  3.  Deeds  of  charity  and  mercy.  III.  The  final  rejection  of  all  who 
place  their  confidence  on  these  insufficient  grounds.  1.  The  period.  2.  The  dignity 
of  the  Son  of  God  at  that  time.  3.  The  nature  of  the  profession  itself — "  I  never 
knew  yon."  4.  The  designation  given  to  those  unhappy  men — "Workers  in 
iniquity."  (J.  E.  Good.)  The  danger  of  formality  and  hypocrisy: — 1.  That  in 
the  great  day  there  will  be  an  earnest  desire  in  many  to  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  lieaven.  2.  A  mere  profession  of  religion  will  then  be  found  insufficient.  3. 
All  true  and  obedient  behevers  will  be  admitted  into  the  heavenly  kingdom.  (<?. 
Burder.)  Christian  profession  easy  : — It  is  easy  enough  to  assume  the  charartwr 
and  manner  of  a  Cbristian,  but  to  live  the  Christian  life  is  not  so  easy.  A  mftn 
can  make  a  sham  diamond  in  a  very  short  time,  but  the  real  gem  must  lie  for  ages 
in  the  earth  before  it  can  sparkle  with  perfect  purity.  We  hi7e  far  too  many  of 
these  quickly  made  Christians  amongst  us,  who  have  never  brought  forth  fruita 
meet  for  repentance,  nor  gone  through  the  fire  of  trial,  and  sorrow,  and  self-sacrifice. 
Do  not  trust  to  feelings,  or  words,  in  yourselves  or  others,  look  at  your  life  ;  a  real  and 
a  false  diamond  are  very  much  alike,  and  yet  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world 
in  their  value.  (Wilmot  Buxton.)  Christian  profession  partial: — Tliere  ia  a 
vaiiety  of  mineral  which,  when  held  before  the  light,  exhibits  translucency  only  on 
its  edges  They  are  dark  in  the  centre ;  such  are  marble,  flint,  or  hornstone.  It 
is  so  with  some  men ;  the  light  of  Christianity  has  shone  upon  them  and  modified 
much  of  their  external  conduct,  and  produced  a  considerable  regard  for  piety,  but 
within,  the  centre  of  their  being,  remains  in  the  darkness  of  sin.  (Profei^sor  Hitch- 
cock.) There  are  many  men  hke  ponds,  clear  at  the  top,  and  mud  at  the  bottom ; 
fair  in  their  tongues,  but  foul  in  their  hearts.  (Swinnock.)  Like  a  beautiful 
flower,  full  of  colour,  but  without  scent,  are  the  fine  but  fruitless  words  of  him  who 
does  nut  act  accordingly.  (Buddha.)  The  testimony  of  works  more  reliable  than 
that  of  words : — Actions  are  a  greater  discovery  of  a  principle  than  words.  Tha 
testimony  of  works  is  louder  and  clearer  than  that  of  words,  and  the  frame  of  men'a 
hearts  must  be  measured  rather  by  what  they  do  than  by  what  they  say. 
Tbare  may  be  a  mighty  distance  between  the  tongue  and  the  heart,  bat  a  course  of 


CHAP,  vn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  131 

action  is  as  little  gnilty  of  lying  aa  interest  ia,  according  to  our  common  saying. 
All  outward  impieties  are  the  branches  of  an  atheism  at  the  root  of  our  nature,  aa 
all  pestilential  aores  are  expressions  of  the  contagion  in  the  blood.  Men's  practices 
are  the  best  indexes  of  their  principles.     The  current  of  a  man's  life  is  the  counter- 

Eart  of  the  frame  of  his  heart ;  who  can  deny  an  error  in  the  spring  or  wheels  when 
e  perceives  an  error  in  the  hand  of  the  dial  t  Who  can  deny  atheism  in  the  heart 
when  so  much  is  visible  in  the  life  t  The  taste  of  the  water  discovers  what  mineral 
it  18  strained  through.     {Chamock.) 

Ver.  24. — I  will  liken  him  unto  a  wis©  man  which  built  his  honse  upon  a 
rock. — L  The  buildino.  Every  immortal  creature  is  supposed  to  be  building  a 
house — entertaining  a  hope  of  heaven.  They  know  they  cannot  always  hve  in  their 
present  earthly  house,  &o.  II.  The  foundation.  There  is  the  foundation  of  the 
formahst,  hypocrite,  presumptuous  enthusiast.  The  foundation  of  the  real  saint — 
Christ,  the  Eook.  All  his  hopes  of  pardon,  &c.,  founded  on  Christ  alone.  III. 
The  TBiAii.  The  storm  of  tribulation  and  persecution,  affliction,  death,  judgment, 
will  try  every  man's  work,  what  sort  it  is.  All  joy  to  the  believer.  IV.  Thb 
BESDiiT,  certain.  Nothing  can  then  prevent  the  fall  of  a  house  not  built  on  the  true 
foundation ;  nothing  can  then  endanger  the  hope  that  is  built  on  Christ.  Total: 
Irrevocable.  1.  Look  well  to  the  foundation.  2,  If  the  true  fouudation  be  laid. 
Bee  that  the  superstructure  goes  on,  3.  No  ground  for  boasting.  {J.  Hirst.) 
The  two  builders : — I.  Thb  points  of  resemblance.  They  both  heard  Christ's  say- 
ings ;  both  saw  the  necessity  of  building  a  house,  or  place  of  refuge;  both  actually 
erected  a  house ;  both  houses  were  exposed  to  storms ;  both  builders  rested  with 
security  in  the  edifices  they  had  raised.  II.  Those  things  in  which  they  differed. 
In  their  personal  character  ;  in  their  practice ;  in  the  foundations  on  which  they 
built ;  in  the  final  result  of  each.  1.  How  necessary  is  careful  examination.  2. 
How  important  a  saving  knowledge  of  Christ.  3.  How  indispensable  practical 
godliness.  {J.  Burns,  LL.D.)  The  wise  and  foolish  builders : — I.  The  builders. 
1.  They  were  ahke  (1)  in  their  need  of  a  house.  (2)  In  their  privileges.  Both 
heard  the  same  words  of  Jesus.  (3)  In  their  efforts ;  both  built.  2.  They  were 
unlike  (1)  in  their  character.  (2)  In  their  choice.  (3)  In  faith  and  love.  One 
heard  and  did  not.  "  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  words."  II.  The  founda- 
TioNS.  The  one  sure,  the  other  insecure.  HI.  The  superstructure.  IV.  The 
trial.  V.  The  results.  [Ani'^rican  Horn.  Munthly.)  The  wise  and  the  foolish 
Imilding  for  eternity: — I.  The  Designation — "  Whosoever  heareth  these  sayings  of 
mine,  and  doeth  them."  1.  Fortuity.  •*  Whosoever,"  a  pronoun  contingent ;  we 
cannot  foresee  the  issue.  We  must  leave  our  spiritual  toils  with  God.  2.  Privilege. 
Privilege  to  hear  the  gospel.  3.  Docility.  "  Doeth  them."  II.  Wisdom.  1.  De- 
sign. Building  a  house  denotes  an  intention  to  live  in  it.  2.  Selection.  If  you 
build,  you  must  look  after  a  place.  3.  Perseverance.  He  went  on  buildiug  in  face 
of  difficulties.  4.  Stabihty.  If  the  works  of  art  are  less  durable  than  the  works  of 
nature,  the  works  of  grace  outshine  the  works  of  nature  much  more.  There  ia 
something  enduring  when  you  are  enabled  to  build  upon  the  Pi,ock  of  Ages,  III. 
Folly.  1.  Concession.  He  could  not  manage  without  a  house,  2.  Labour.  Ha 
took  much  pains.  3.  Promise.  It  looked  fair,  4.  Fall.  The  fall  of  a  soul! 
Ruinous.  {K.  Andrews,  LL.D.)  The  great  Teacher : — I.  The  sayings  of  Christ 
are  eminently  practical.  II.  They  are  practicable.  It  was  no  impossible  ideal. 
God  has  provided  helpful  agencies,  1.  The  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  A 
means  of  Christian  holiness  is  the  earthly  life  of  the  personal  and  human  Christ. 
3.  There  is  the  encouragement  of  conscious  progress.  UI.  The  sayiugs  of  Christ 
are  authoeitativb.  IV.  The  sayings  of  Christ  are  imper.\tive.  (//.  Alloju.) 
The  wise  and  foolish  builders: — I.  We  have  every  one  of  us  a  house  to  build  ;  or,  in 
other  words,  a  soul  to  save.  2.  There  is  a  Rock  provided  for  us,  on  which  we  may 
safely  build  our  house.  3.  On  this  Rock  we  mu5t  buUd  if  we  would  escape  ever- 
lasting destruction.  4.  The  danger  of  delaying  to  place  your  building  upon  the 
right  foundation.  {E.  Cooper.)  I.  Wherein  these  two  builders  resembled 
EACH  otheb.  1.  They  both  heard  Christ's  sayings.  2.  They  both  saw  the  necessity 
ol  building  a  refuge.  3.  They  both  actually  erected  a  house.  4.  Both  houses  were 
exposed  to  storms.  5.  Both  builders  rest  securely  in  their  houses.  II.  Wuereim 
THBT  DIFFERED.  1.  In  their  characters.  2.  In  their  practice — one  was  a  hearer, 
the  other  a  doer.  8.  In  their  judgments  of  the  foundation.  4.  In  the  final  issue, 
ni.  Thb  conseqobnces  which  followed.  1.  The  fallen  house  involves  the  eternal 
ruin  of  the  inmate.    2.  It  is  a  disappointment  of  fondly-cherished  hopes.   S.  It  is  » 


134  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  th 

fall,  total  and  irreparable,  for  ever,  4.  The  inmate  in  the  other  house  ia  in  no 
danger.  5.  He  lives  in  peace  and  plenty  on  earth.  6.  He  shall  reign  with  God  in 
glory.     (J.  B.  Baker.)        The  isure  foundation: — I.  The  points  of  resemblanck 

BETWEEN  THK  CONVERTED  AND  THE  UNCONVERTED  PROFESSOR.    1.  Both  profeSS  tO  be  rcU- 

gious.  Both  build  a  house.  2.  Both  have  their  religion  put  to  the  test.  II.  Thb 
POINTS  OF  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THEM.  1.  In  their  conduct.  The  one  indolent,  the 
other  was  laborious  ;  one  idly  plants  his  house,  the  other  digs  for  foundation.  2. 
In  the  foundation  of  their  hopes.  3.  In  their  end.  How  wise  the  genuine  belierer  1 
How  foolish  the  unconverted  professor  !  (C  Clayton,  M.A.)  Building  upon  the 
Rock  : — 1.  True  religion  is  likened  to  a  man's  own  house.  Every  one's  jeal  life  ia 
his  own  home.  2.  There  are  a  few  persons  who  are  fond  of  looking  at  founda- 
tions, and  questioning  whether  they  rest  on  the  right  place ;  others  make  the  far 
more  vital  mistake  of  not  searching  into  them  enough.  3.  Foundations  are  found, 
after  much  search,  in  deep  places ;  certain  floating  ideas  about  religion  are  not  enough 
to  build  a  life  upon — such  as  "  He  is  a  kind  God,  and  will  not  punish."  4.  The  Spirit 
of  God  shows  a  man  the  Book.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  foundation  inipartt 
strength  to  the  structure: — But  \shat  can  the  hurricane  do?  Just  what  the  elementa 
do  in  nature.  Whatever  they  do  not  break,  they  consolidate.  Tour  trials  will  only 
consolidate — they  will  consolidate  your  principles,  your  affections,  your  bopes — they 
will  make  you,  on  "  the  Bock,"  yourselves  a  rock.  Judgments  may  fall  from  above, 
like  the  descending  "  rain."  Disappointments,  afflictions,  persecutions,  may  swell 
around  you,  like  rolling  "floods."  Temptations  may  buffet  you  with  all  the 
mysterionsness  of  the  invisible  "  wind."  Yet  St.  Luke  says,  *'  They  could  not 
shake  it."  The  strength  of  "the  Eock  "  is  in  the  believer — he  passes  all  his 
troubles  on  to  his  "  Bock,"  and  from  his  "  Bock  "  he  draws  his  strength.  And  the 
eternal  unchangeableness  of  the  foundation,  makes  the  poorest,  weakest  stone  that 
is  once  fastened  to  it,  unshaken  and  impregnable  as  the  throne  of  Jehovah.  (Ibid.) 
The  two  Iniilders  and  their  houses : — I.  The  two  builders.  1.  They  were  equally  im- 
pressed with  the  need  of  building  a  house.  2.  They  were  both  alike  resolved  to  obtain 
a  house.  3.  They  were  equally  well  skilled  in  architecture.  4.  They  both  persevered 
and  finished  their  structure.  II.  Their  houses.  1.  The  chief  apparent  difference 
between  the  two  edifices  probably  was  this,  ihat  one  of  them  built  his  house  more 
quickly  than  the  other,  2.  One  was  built  with  far  less  trouble  than  the  other.  3. 
The  main  difference  lay  out  of  sight — underground.  III.  The  common  trial  of 
the  two  houses.  IV.  Thb  dutfekent  results  of  the  trials.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
False  foundations  removed,  and  true  ones  laid  for  such  wise  builders  as  design  to 
build  for  eternity : — I.  To  show  the  reasons  why  practice  oh  obedience  is  thb 

BEST   AND   surest   FOUNDATION   FOR  A   KAN  TO  BUILD  HIS   DESIGN  FOB   HEAVEN  AND  THH 

HOPES  OF  HIS  SALVATION  UPON.  1.  Bccausc,  Bccording  to  the  economy  of  God'a 
working  upon  the  hearts  of  men,  nothing  but  practice  can  charge  our  corrupt 
nature  ;  and  practice  continued  in,  by  the  grace  of  God,  will.  2.  Because  action  ia 
the  highest  perfection  and  drawing  forth  of  the  utmost  power,  vigour,  and  activity 
of  man's  nature.  3.  Because  the  main  drift  of  religion  is  the  active  part  of  it. 
(1)  Thus  God  is  honoured.     (2)  The  good  of  society.    II.  Those  false  and  sandy 

FOUNDATIONS   WHICH    MANV   VENTURE    TO    BUILD  UPON,  AND   ARE   ACCORDINGLY  DECEIVED 

BY.  1.  An  unoperative  faith.  2.  Honesty  of  intention.  3.  Party  and  singularity. 
III.  Whence  it  is  that  such  ill-founded  structures  are,  upon  trial,  sure  to 
FALL.  The  force  and  opposition  from  without.  Satan.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  The 
wise  builder : — I.  The  sayings  to  which  the  Saviour  refers.  H,  The  practical 
Rttrntion  they  demand.  III.  The  dispositions  of  mind  necessary  for  the  due  recep- 
tion and  practice  of  the  truth.  1.  A  holy  vigilance  against  whatever  may  prove  an 
obstacle ;  custom,  curiosity,  criticism.  2.  To  cherish  whatever  may  be  likely  to 
promote  the  due  reception  of  the  gospel,  freedom  of  the  mind  from  worldly  entangle- 
ments ;  there  must  be  reverence  for  the  truth,  docility,  self-application,  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God,  prayer.  IV.  The  inviolable  safety  of  such  hearers  of  thk 
Word.  1.  The  faith  and  hope  of  the  Christian  may  be  rudely  assailed  in  the 
present  life.  2.  However  assailed  the  Christian  is  secure.  (J,  E.  Good.)  Ths 
foolish  builder  : — I.  Who  amono  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  are  intended  by  this 
bbpresentation.  1.  It  applies  to  all  who  build  their  hope  of  heaven  upon  the 
mere  belief  of  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  2.  The  individual  who  builds  upon 
his  own  goodness,  and  rejects,  either  in  part  or  whole,  the  atonement  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  8.  The  foolish  builder  represents  likewihe  the  hearer  of  the  gospel, 
on  whose  mind  its  Divine  truths  only  partially  operdte.  4,  The  persons  on  whose 
Binds  the  influence  of  the  Word  is  transient.     II.  Tbb  fearful  and  TBBUENDOuif 


«UP.  vn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  131 

ovERTHEow  WHICH  AWAiTB  SUCH  HBAREES  OF  THE  "WoRO.  1.  As  regards  the  time  ol 
its  occurrence.  It  fell  in  the  storm,  when  the  builder  had  most  need  of  it.  2.  It 
was  great  as  to  the  sacrifice  of  property.  The  plans  and  toils  of  the  wicked  are 
vain.  9.  It  was  great  because  it  was  irreparable.  Too  late  to  build  another. 
Ibid.)  Thr  builders: — The  two  houses  in  building;    the  two  houses  in   the 

atorm.  I.  We  abb  all  of  tjs  btjildeks.  People  are  often  building  something 
quite  diSerent  from  what  they  fancy.  A  man  fancies  he  is  building  a  fortune, 
when  in  reality  he  is  building  a  prison  for  himself.  Some  persons  go  on  building 
for  sixty  years,  and  have  nothing  to  show  worth  calling  a  life.  II.  If  we  would 
bnild  safely  and  well  we  must  BurLD  on  a  bight  focndaiion.  It  is  so  in  small 
things.  The  want  of  a  good  foundation  does  not  always  show  at  once,  but  s-ooner 
or  later  the  trial  comes,  1.  Sometimes  it  is  the  temptations  of  worldly  companion- 
ship and  influence  that  try  our  formdations.  2.  Sometimes  it  is  sorrow.  3. 
Sometimes  sickness  searches  out  the  hidden  weakness  of  the  foundation.  (E.  R. 
Conder,  D.D.)  Life  a  structural  process: — The  trust-house.  A  quiet,  bright  girl 
is  sitting  at  work  in  a  cottage  by  her  mother's  side ;  ready,  with  cheerful  prompt- 
ness, to  run  on  an  errand,  to  spread  the  table,  to  fetch  her  little  brother  from 
school,  or  to  teach  and  amuse  the  younger  children.  Is  she  building  anything  ? 
Many  things.  For  one  thing,  a  feeling  of  trust  in  her  mother's  heart.  Years 
hence,  when  that  mother  is  stricken  down  with  sickness,  she  will  not  have  to  say 
with  s  BJgh,  "Jane  means  well,  but  I  can't  trust  her."  She  will  say,  *'  I  can  trust 
you,  my  child,  to  do  all  that  I  have  been  used  to  do — all  that  you  know  I  should 
wish.     (Ibid.)  The  memory -house  : — A  brother  and  sister  are  sitting  together 

by  the  fireside,  listening  to  thoix  father's  teaching,  to  their  mother's  sweet 
voice  reading  aloud  :  they  repeat  the  same  hymns ;  they  turn  over  the  leaves  ol 
one  book;  they  kneel  side  by  side  at  family  piayer.  V/hat  are  they  building?  A 
happy,  holy  chamber  of  memory,  of  which  they  two  alone  will  have  the  key.  (Ibid,) 
The  thought-house : — Shall  we  look  at  one  or  two  other  builders  ?  A  grave,  bright- 
eyed  boy  is  sitting  before  a  fire,  earnestly  watching  the  bubbling,  hissing,  steaming 
tea-kettle,  and  thinking,  thinking,  thmking.  WTiat  is  he  building  7  Neither  he  nor 
any  one  else  can  guess ;  but  in  truth  he  is  building  things  as  wonderful  as  the  en- 
chanted castles  and  palaces  of  the  genii  in  fairy-tales.  Steam-engines,  steam- 
boats, locomotives,  with  their  long  trains  of  railway  flarriages,  and  the  long  lines  of 
railway  made  for  them  to  rnn  on :  all  these  are,  in  time,  to  grow  out  of  the 
THOUGHT  which  that  boy  is  building  in  his  busy  br^in.  All  the  steam-engines  that 
ever  will  be  built  were  wrapped  up,  like  a  forest  of  oaks  in  a  single  acorn,  in  th« 
first  thought  of  the  steam-engine  in  the  mind  of  James  Watt.  For,  let  me  tell  you 
(though  I  scarcely  expect  you  to  understand  it),  of  all  that  men  build  in  granite,  or 
marble,  or  iron,  or  whatever  else  they  please,  nothing  is  so  strong  and  lasting  as 
thought.  The  pyramids  themselves  might  be  blown  up  and  shattered  into 
fragments,  but  what  power  could  destroy  the  twenty- third  Psalm?  (Ibid.) 
Life-structures  are  varied : — Some  men's  hves  are  hke  palaces,  fair  and  spacious 
and  lofty  ;  fuU  of  nobleness.  Some  are  like  castles,  grim  and  stern  and  tyrannical, 
with  dark  cells  and  secret  winding  passages.  Some  are  like  mills  and  warehouses, 
stuffed  so  full  with  machinery  and  merchandise  that  the  owner  has  scarce  room  to 
move  about ;  and  not  a  glimpse  of  the  bright  blue  sky  can  he  catch  through  their 
dusty  windows.  Some,  again,  are  lighthouses,  standing  bravely  on  their  rock  amid 
the  dashing  waves,  and  holding  forth  the  light  by  which  many  a  storm-toased  voyager 
is  guided  into  port  Some  lives  are  more  hke  ships  than  houses,  ever  wandering, 
nowhere  abiding.  Some  are  lik6  quiet  cottage  homes,  with  no  pplendid  outside  or 
towering  pinnacles,  but  full  of  homely  peace  and  quiet  usefulness.  And  i*i)me — 
how  many '- -never  get  beyond  the  beginning:  just  a  few  courses  Iftid.  (Ibid.) 
Foundations  always  important  even  in  small  things.  If  you  are  going  to  paint  a 
picture,  and  get  the  outline  wrong  (which  is  the  foundation  of  the  picture),  all  the 
picture  will  be  wrong.  If  yon  have  a  long  division  sum  to  do,  and  make  a  mistake 
in  the  first  step,  all  the  sum  will  be  wrong.  A  child  soon  learns  that  he  cannot 
even  bnild  a  card  house  on  a  shining,  polished  table,  or  on  a  crooked,  ricketty 
table ;  or  a  house  of  toy  bricks  without  a  firm  level  foundation.  How  much  mors 
must  this  be  bo  in  greater  matters  1    (Ibid.) 

Ter.  28.  When  JesuB  had  ended  these  sa3rlng8. — The  Sermon  on  the  Mount : — L 
Bome  rsw  cbaractebistics  which  the  Sermon  possesses.  1.  The  wonderful  literary 
beanty  of  the  language  carmot  have  been  unobserved  by  any  one.  2.  Then  we  have 
xeiaarked  the  desultory  arrangemcfnt  and  the  apparently  disconnected  progress  ol 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vh 

Ideas.  3.  Chiefly,  however,  all  of  ns  have  perceived  the  one  great  absence  in  thii 
discouTBe,  I  might  almost  say  lack,  as  we  contemplated  it  fi-om  our  Christian  ©ut- 
look.  There  is  no  allusion  to  the  atonement.  Clirist  is  here  as  the  preaching 
prophet,  not  as  the  atoning  priest.  4.  Hence  the  history  of  the  Sermon  affords  a 
conspicuous  example  of  the  way  in  which  men  sometimes  pervert  God's  Word. 
They  say,  "  Our  sufficient  creed  is  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount."  6.  Many  of  us 
■would  admit  this  statement,  for  we  remember  a  startling  and  supernatural  reach  of 
requirement  in  this  discourse — "Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  "<fec.  II.  The  pcbpose  of 
this  Sermon,  1.  We  find  in  it  the  description  of  a  character.  2.  We  find  in  it  • 
rule  of  life.  3.  A  standard  of  spiritual  and  experimental  attainment.  4.  We  find 
in  this  Sermon  an  instrument  of  condemnation.  5.  We  find  in  it  an  incitement  to 
holiness,  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Effects  of  our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the  people  ,•— 
I.  The  IMPRESSION  of  this  Sermon  on  the  minds  of  the  people — "  They  were 
astonished,"  &c.  1.  Admiration.  2.  Some  were  penetrated  with  the  importance 
of  the  word,  and  became  "  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  mind."  It  is  not  so  much 
information,  as  vital  impression  which  the  masses  of  the  people  require.  II.  The 
CAUSE  to  which  it  is  ascribed — "  For  he  taught  them,"  &c.  1.  His  doctrine.  2.  His 
manner.  There  was  a  combination  of  dignity,  earnestness,  and  affection.  III.  A 
few  points  of  instbtiotion  which  the  whole  conveys.  1.  The  true  nature  of  personal 
religion.  2.  To  exercise  Christian  charity  towards  all  mankind.  3.  Never  to 
despair  of  the  Salvation  of  any  of  the  human  family.  4.  A  lesson  of  caution  to 
all  who  attend  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  {J.  E.  Good.)  Truth  oains  by  being 
lived: — For  whereas  precepts  and  discourses  of  virtue  are  only  the  dead  pictures 
and  artificial  landscapes  and  descriptions  of  it,  a  virtuous  example  is  virtue  itself ; 
informed  and  animated,  alive  and  in  motion,  exerting  and  exhibiting  itself  in  all  its 
natural  charms  and  graces.  And,  therefore,  as  we  know  a  man  much  better  when 
we  see  him  alive  and  in  action  than  when  we  only  see  his  picture ;  so  we  understand 
virtue  much  better  when  we  see  it  living  and  acting  in  a  good  example  than 
when  we  only  behold  it  described  and  pictured  in  various  precepts  and  discourses. 
{J.  Scott.)  Truth  attracts  by  beivg  lived: — A  belief  without  any  adequate  expres- 
Bion  in  acts  is  like  an  organ  when  all  its  pipes  are  silent  and  its  keys  untouched.  It 
is  dumb.  It  charms  no  one.  It  attracts  no  one.  But  bring  forth  the  player;  let 
him  press  the  ke>8,  let  the  dead  air  in  all  the  choral  columns  be  started  into  vibra- 
tions, and  how  the  anthem  swells,  and  how  hearts  are  lilted  on  the  waves  of  sound, 
and  all  the  thousands  applaud,  some  with  their  hands,  others  with  eyes  filled  with 
happy  tears.  (W.  H.  H.  Murray.)  The  doctrine  of  Christian  obedience  rewarded: 
—1.  Let  us  take  a  general  view  of  the  doctrine  op  christ.     II.    The  effect 

WHICH  IT  HAD   UPON  THE  MINDS  OF  THE  SURROUNDING    MULTITUDE.       1.    TheSC    mav    be 

an  astonishment  of  delight  and  approbation,  2.  It  may  be  a  feeling  of  voluntaiy 
nnhelief.     3.  The  high  and  irresistible  authority  with  which  He  taught  these  holy 

truths,    ni.    THE  PROMISED  REWARD  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  DOCTRINE    OF  ChRIST "  He 

shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward."  1.  Because  the  Lord  has  said  it.  2.  Because 
godliness  with  contentment  is  gain.  3.  Because  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all 
things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  and  of  that  which  is  to  come* 
4.  Because  if  these  things  be  in  you  and  abound,  they  make  you  that  ye  be 
neither  barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  5. 
Because  though  they  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  they  will 
fear  no  evil.     (S.Morrell.) 

Yei  29.  Having  authority. — The  great  authority: — There  reside*  in  what  is 
called  an  "  authority  "  a  power  which  we  shall  do  well  to  contemplate.  By  it  I 
mean  that  position  as  an  adviser  which  is  gained  only  by  diligent  study  and  habi- 
tual practical  research  ;  or  else  by  the  inherent  endowment  or  special  gifts  of  a 
superior  nature.  The  medicine  man,  the  legal  man,  gain  authority  by  study.  Toe 
importance  of  finding  in  Jesus  the  authoiity  in  the  affairs  of  the  soul,  and  also  of 
the  mind  when  brought  up  against  eternal  questions.  There  is  a  class  of  mind 
which  takes  deUght  to  fathom  the  unfathomable.  Faith  is  as  much  an  integral 
part  as  our  ignorance,  in  our  imperfect  condition.  It  is  the  aim  of  faith  to  turn 
ignorance  into  bliss  in  the  perplexities  of  life,  with  respect  to  most  of  which  it  were 
folly  to  be  wise.  What  a  calamity  if  in  this  half-fiedged  condition  we  knew  all 
about  ourselves  and  God.  We  should  shake  our  dispositions  with  thoughts  beyond 
the  reaches  of  our  souls.  Christ  knows.  He  is  the  authority  for  the  soul.  (W.  P. 
Philpot,  M.A.)  Authority   the  result  of  ktwwh'dqe  : — We  have  lately  learned 

among  the  laws  of  solar  light  which    ave  been  revealed  to  us — for  scien<^e  also  has 


CHAP.  VIU.1  ST.  MATTHEW.  187 

its  late  and  lagging  revelations — the  astonishing  fact,  that  beyond  the  atmosphere 
of  our  world,  as  of  all  other  worlds,  all  is  blackness  and  darkness,  even  till  the  eye 
again  reaches  the  airy  envelopes  of  other  worlds,  and  catches  the  Isright  particular 
stars  which  are  the  sources,  direct  or  mediate,  of  the  rays  that  play  upon  its  tiny 
pupil.  And  so  we  find  it  to  be  round  all  the  circle  of  science,  round  every  world  of 
knowledge  there  is  also  a  darkness  which  no  knowledge  can  penetrate.  We  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being  upon  the  edge  of  a  ring  of  precipitous  and  abysmal  dark- 
ness. But,  as  we  have  seen  to  be  the  case  in  the  fiery  citadels  of  heaven,  so  we 
Christians  believe  it  to  be  in  the  moral  world  ;  that,  dark  as  its  surroundings  are 
In  respect  of  the  origin  and  workings  of  evil,  and  all  the  problems  that  hang  about 
this  inquiry,  there  abides  above  and  beyond  all  a  Paternal  source  of  Light.  "  God 
is  a  centnd  aud  Personal  Sun,  Who  gives  light  to  all,  and  borrows  none  from  any, 
and  in  \Vhom,"  as  Jesus  shows  Him  to  us,  "  is  no  darkness  at  all."  In  that  light 
Jesus  dwells,  "  having  no  part  dark,"  and  from  that  light  He  speaks  to  us,  and 
teaches  with  an  authority  which  is  unique.  {Ihid.)  Divine  audacity : — Audacity, 
in  reverent  sense,  better  expresses  the  word  than  authority.  This  He  did — 1.  In 
declaring  His  pre-existence.  2.  In  declaring  His  identity  with  the  Godhead.  3. 
Id  assuming  Divine  prerogatives.  4.  In  arrogating  exclusive  rights,  and  exhausting 
in  Himself  the  similitude  of  things.  Lessons :  1.  A  proof  that  Christ  was  what  He 
professed  to  be.  2.  This  was  the  only  consistent  course.  3.  An  audacious  Christ 
should  have  an  audacious  Church.  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Authority  of  our  Saviour 
as  a  teacher: — The  nature  of  this  authority.  1.  It  was  the  authority  of  truth. 
There  was  no  artifice  or  affectation  in  His  manner ;  no  excess ;  solemnity. 
Earnestness  of  conviction  apparent.  2.  It  was  derived  from  the  intrinsic  truth  of 
the  doctrines  which  Jesus  communicated,  as  from  the  sincerity  with  which  they 
were  taught.  3.  It  arose  from  the  purity  of  His  clmracter.  It  was  the  authority  of 
a  good  life.  4.  It  was  the  authority  of  heaven.  The  Divine  assistance  was 
afforded  to  Jesus  ;  God  confirmed  what  He  said,  and  miracles  were  wrought.  We  are 
too  familiar  with  Christ's  doctrine  to  be  astonished  «t  it.  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D,D.) 
Truth,  not  beauty,  gives  autliority  to  doctrine  : — The  question  is  not  whether  a 
doctrine  is  beautiful,  but  whether  it  is  true.  When  we  want  to  go  to  a  place,  we 
don't  ask  whether  the  road  leads  through  a  pretty  country,  but  whether  it  is  the 
right  road,  the  road  pointed  out  by  authority,  the  turnpike-road.  {Hare.)  Christ 
an  unconventional  but  model  preacher : — I.  Hb  was  a  model  as  to  thb  matteb 
OF  His  PKEACHiKO,  which  was  unconventional.  Christ  taught  Himself.  1.  He 
had  nothing  higher  to  represent  than  Himself.  2.  He  had  nothing  that  the  world 
required  more  than  Himself.  II.  He  was  a  model  as  to  the  >iannbb  of  His 
TEACHiNo,  which  was  unconventional.  1.  His  positiveness.  2,  His  self-assurance. 
8.  His  naturalness.  4.  His  freshness.  6.  His  suggestiveness.  6.  HisdeSniteness. 
7.  His  tenderness.  8.  His  faithfulness.  9.  Hia  consistency.  10.  His  devoutness. 
{D.  Thonuut  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  Vm. 


Vert.  1  -4.  And,  toehold,  there  came  a  leper. — The  leper*s  cure : — I.  Thk  ijipeh  b 
VAITH.  II.  Christ's  treaiment  of  the  leper.  1,  That  this  disease  is  a  type  of 
moral  corruption.  2.  God's  grace  alone  can  effect  a  cure.  3.  We  see  the  power  of 
prayer.      (W.  Wight,  M.A.)  The  healing  of  the  leper:—!.  The  leper's  oppob- 

TUNiTT.  Let  every  hearer  of  the  word  follow  Jesus  Christ  till  he  finds  Him  in 
secret.  II.  The  lepeb'b  defilement.  1.  The  disease  of  leprosy  seems  to  have 
appeared  first  in  Israel  while  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  earliest  notice  of  it  being 
in  the  leprous  hand  of  Moses.  Sin,  like  leprosy,  is  deeply  hereditary.  It  spreads 
corruption  and  dissolution  through  the  entire  body.  It  was  viewed  with  the  hope- 
lessness of  death.  2.  The  leprosy,  selected  by  God  as  the  special  type  of  sin,  was  more 
than  other  diseases  sent  immediately  from  heaven  as  the  express  punishment  of  sin. 
Thus  with  Gehazi.  3.  The  leper,  alone  of  all  the  sick,  was  shut  out  from  the  camp 
of  Israel.  The  sinner  excluded  from  holy  fellowship.  4.  The  leper  was  appointed 
to  bewail  himself  as  one  already  dead  ;  he  was  to  become  his  own  mourner  (Lev. 
xiii.  45).  These  were  three  of  the  chief  symbols  of  sorrow  for  the  dead.  The 
leprous  sinner  is  dead,  while  he  lives.  III.  The  leper's  prayer.  1.  He  was  con. 
Tinoed  of  Ohrist's  ability  to  heal  him.    This  the  chief  element  of  saving  faith.    !( 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Iohaf.  Till. 

There  is  an  appeal  to  the  compassionate  will  of  Jesus.  IV.  The  lkpks'9  cleinsino. 

I.  Jesus  is  moved  with  compassion,  touches,  and  cleanses.  2.  The  thaaksgiving 
ia  seasonable  and  acceptable  in  one  case ;  the  gratitude,  unwise  and  not  obedient 
in  the  other.  The  case  of  the  ten  lepers.  (A.  Moody  Stuart.)  I.  The  individdal 
BEFEEBED  TO — "a  leper."  No  condition  more  awful  and  distressing.  Striking  re- 
presentation of  sin.  Leprosy  was  generally  hereditary;  small  in  its  first  appear- 
ance, deep-seated  and  inveterate  in  its  nature,  universal  in  its  prevalence,  loathsome 
iu  its  appearance,  exoluded  from  eociety,  incurable  by  human  power,  and  generally 
pro<Iuced  a  most  awful  death.  II.  His  address  to  the  Kedeemer.  It  was  aa 
address  of  humble  res-pect,  associated  with  faith,  affecting  appeal  to  his  misery  and 
Christ's  goodness.  III.  The  conduct  of  the  Saviodb.  Ke>ponded  to  his  apppal ; 
His  word  was  omnific  and  conveyed  Eis  healing  power;  He  put  forth  His  hand  to 
testify  to  his  cleanness ;  He  sent  him  to  the  priest  that  his  recovery  might  be  duly 
attested ;  He  was  to  present  a  gift  unto  the  Lord.  See  how  you  are  to  obtain 
heahng  and  purity.  See  the  way  in  which  Christ  will  receive  you.  1.  Bless  God 
for  health  of  body.  2.  Especially  be  anxious  for  he*>lth  of  soul.  3.  Praise  God 
for  the  means  of  spiritual  health  and  felicity.  4.  Come  and  be  healed.  (J.  Bitrns, 
LL.D.)  Healing  of  the  leper : — I.  His  himentable  condition.  II.  His  appropriate 
prayer.  III.  His  complete  restoration.  IV.  His  instant  dismissal.  {J.  T.Woodhouse.) 
Christ's  liealing  touch  : — It  was  a  touch  (1)  of  purity ;  (2)  of  sympathy  ;  (3)  of  power. 
(G.  ShreiCihury.)  The  touch  oj  Christ  clcanseth: — •'  Blessed  are  the  merciful,"  so 
our  Lord  had  said  ;  now  the  act  follows  the  word.  I.  How  truly  hcmble  and  lowly 
was  Jesus.  Free  &om  ostentation  He  walked  among  men.  Christ  can  heal  the 
leprosy  of  pride.  II.  Though  lowIy,  the  Saviour  was  not  fearful.  With  all  our 
pride,  how  many  things  we  fear.  We  fear  labour,  difficulty.  Let  us  learn  from 
Christ  what  courage  is.     He  can  cleanse  from  the  leprosy  of  fear.     III.  Impurity 

18  ANOTHEK   FORM   OP   LEPROSY.      IV.    INDOLENCE,    TOO,  IS   A   LEPROSY.      Chlist'S   13   aH 

active  Spirit,  by  feeling  the  influence  of  which  we  shall  be  healed  of  sloth.  V. 
SELFisoNESS  IS  LEPROSY.  VI.  We  shall  see  in  discontent  an  irritatuig  leprosy,  eating 
into  our  mind's  health  and  our  soul's  peace.  These  are  instances  of  our  moral 
disease.  The  Saviour's  hand  can  heal.  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  Christ's 
healing  touch  .-—Notice  in  Christ's  touch  of  the  sick.  L  His  fixing  and  confirming 
FAITH  IN  Himself  the  Hf.aler,  It  is  in  condescensiion  to  human  weakness  that  He 
lays  His  hands  on  sick  folk  ;  we  believe  in  little  that  we  cannot  see.  Naaman  said, 
"Behold,  I  thought,"  &c.  Pain  and  sickuesa  are  sensible;  we  look  for  equally 
sensible  tokens  of  the  energy  of  the  Restorer.     Thna  we  are  touched  into  attention. 

II.  His  answer  to  our  craving  for  sympathy.  Had  Jesus  held  aloof  from  the 
diseased  they  would  never  have  trusted  liim.  His  touch  was  healing  ;  some  touches 
irritate.  In  the  Incarnation  Christ  touches  us  in  sympathy.  It  is  a  comfort  to  be 
touched  by  Christ.  III.  The  symbol  op  His  bearing  odb  infirmities  and  carry. 
iNO  OUB  SINS.  He  touched  our  nature  in  all  its  pollution.  He  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  us  brethren.  {A.  Mackennal,  B.A.)  Touching  the  loathsome :— A.  good 
Christian  lady  living  in  Sweden  opened  a  home  for  crippled  and  diseased  children — 
children  whom  nobody  really  cared  about  but  herself— and  received  about  twenty 
of  them  into  it.  Amongst  them  was  a  little  boy  of  three  years  old,  who  was  a 
more  frightful  and  disagreeable  object  than  you  ever  saw,  or  are  ever  likely  perhaps 
to  see  in  your  life.  He  resembled  a  skeleton.  His  poor  skin  was  so  covered  with 
blotches  and  sores  that  he  could  not  be  dre.s:ied.  He  was  always  crying  and  winn- 
ing, always  peevish,  and  the  poor  little  fellow  gave  more  trouble  almost  than  all  the 
others  put  together.  The  good  lady  did  her  best  for  him  ;  she  was  t,s  kind  aa 
possible— washed  him,  ted  him,  nursed  him  ;  but  the  child  was  so  repuliive  in  his 
look  and  wavs,  that  she  conld  not  bring  herself  to  like  him,  and  her  (h^^gnHt,  I  sup- 
pose,  occasionally  appeared  in  her  face.  One  day  she  was  silting  on  the  verandah- 
steps  with  the  cliild  in  her  arms.  The  sun  was  shining  warm,  the  scent  of  the 
autumn  honeysuckles,  the  chirping  of  the  birds,  the  buzzing  of  the  insects,  lulled  her 
into  a  sort  of  sleep;  and  in  a  half- waking,  half-dreaming  state, she  thought  of  herself 
as  having  changed  places  with  the  child,  and  lying  there,  only  more  foul,  more  dis- 
agreeable than  he  was.  Over  hor  sho  saw  the  Lord  Jesus  bending,  looking  intently 
and  lovingly  into  her  face,  and  yet  with  a  sort  of  expression  of  gentle  rebuke  in  it, 
as  if  He  meant  to  say,  "If  I  can  love  and  bear  with  you,  who  are  so  full  of  sin, 
surely  you  ought,  for  My  sake,  to  love  that  guiltless  child,  who  suffers  for  the  sin  of 
his  parents."  She  woke  up  with  a  start,  and  looked  in  the  boy's  face.  He  had  waked 
up  too,  and  she  expected  to  hear  him  begin  to  cry ;  but  he  looked  at  her— poor 
little  mite  I — very  quietly  and  earnestly  for  a  long  time,  and  then  she — sorry  for  her 


CHAT.  Tin.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  ISt 

past  disgust,  and  feeling  a  new  compassion  for  him,  and  a  new  interest  in  him — bent 
her  face  to  his,  and  kissed  his  forehead  as  tenderly  as  she  had  ever  kissed  any  of 
her  own  babes.  With  a  startled  look  in  his  eyes,  and  a  flush  in  his  cheeks,  the  boy, 
instead  of  crying,  gave  her  back  a  smile  so  sweet,  that  she  had  neyer  seen  one  like 
it  before  ;  nor  will,  she  thinks,  till  it  will  light  up  his  angel  features  some  day  on 
their  meeting  in  heaven.  From  that  day  forth  a  perfect  change  came  over  the  child. 
Young  as  he  was,  he  had  hitherto  read  the  feelings  of  dislike  and  disgust  in  the  faces 
of  all  who  approached  him,  and  that  had  embittered  his  little  heart ;  but  the  tmich 
of  human  love  swept  all  the  peevishness  and  ill-nature  away,  and  woke  him  up  to  a 
new  and  happier  life.  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  Christian  reserve  in  words  modified  by 
deeds  (ver.  4) : — ^Wfay  was  this  reserve  insisted  on  ?  What  wonid  have  led  the  restored 
leper  to  act  at  variance  with  Christ's  command  7  Two  motives — a  desire  of  bearing 
personal  witness  to  the  miraculous  power  of  his  Benefactor ;  or  a  \nsh  to  draw  the 
eyes  of  men  on  the  favour  he  had  received.  Both  these  we  can  conceive  our  Lord 
would  be  likely  to  prohibit — the  one,  because  it  was  needless  ;  the  other,  because 
it  was  exposed  to  harm.  1.  The  first  of  those  objects  was  prohibited  for  reasons 
of  our  Lord's  showing.  He  did  not  wi''h  to  be  the  idol  of  strong  excitement.  2.  It 
was  not  His  purpose  to  tahe  men's  minds,  as  it  were,  by  force.  He  would  lay  no 
compulsion  on  faith.  3.  Tiien  there  was  also  the  fact  itself,  clear  and  patent  to  the 
observation  of  all  men.  Then  see,  on  the  other  hand,  how  the  injnnction  of  onr 
Lord  seems  to  have  borne  on  the  personal  case  of  the  leper  himself.  "  Go,  show 
thyself  to  the  priest."  As  if  our  Lord  had  said,  "  Be  not  occupied  with  thine  own 
eelf ,  make  no  display  of  what  I  have  done,  let  not  that  distract  thee  from  what  thou 
onghtest  to  do,  thy  duty  is  more  than  words,  more  than  even  magnifying  thy  bless- 
ings." Thus  our  Lord  prohibited  words  that  He  might  enjoin  actiorut.  The  full 
heart  can  seldom  find  adequate  vent  in  wc  rds ;  deeds  do  not  fail  us.  This  is  a  com- 
fort to  the  poor.  (J,  Puckle,  M.A.)  The  prudence  of  Jesus  (ver.  4) : — Why  did 
Jesus  give  this  charge  ?  L  It  may  be  observed  that  though  our  Saviour's  injunc- 
tions of  silerce  and  secresy  were  frequent,  they  were  by  no  means  constant.  Many 
of  His  miracles  were  wrought  in  public.  Jews  expected  a  temporal  Messiah.  He 
wished  to  prevent  popular  rebellion.  Fear  did  not  snggest  the  injunction  ;  but  it  waa 
the  course  of  courage,  benevolence,  and  wisdom.  He  guarded  Himself  against  the 
imputation  of  political  intentions  and  of  turbulence.  II.  Our  Lord  desired  to 
AVOID  ALL  IDLE  AND  UNPEOFiTABLE  EXCITEMENTS.  A  lovo  of  displav  formed  no  part 
of  His  character.  Quiet  faith  was  the  grace  He  loved  to  see.  He  desired  obedience 
rather  than  profession.  Is  all  need  for  caution  gone  ?  A  due  regard  to  circumstances 
and  consequences  no  proof  of  a  timid  spirit.  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood^  D.D.)  A 
picture  of  true  faith  (ver.  1-13) : — I.  What  it  sefs  in  Christ.  1.  Both  of  these  appli- 
cants assigned  to  Him  the  character  of  a  great  Healer.  Saving  faith  sees  in  Christ 
the  attributes  of  a  great  Physician.  2.  They  both  saw  in  Christ  a  superhuman 
Power,  Saving  faith  never  thinks  meanly  of  Christ.  3.  They  both  saw  in  Christ 
a  most  encouraging  beneficence.  True  faith_  sees  in  Christ  a  Reward  er  of  them 
that  seek  Him.  II.  What  abe  tke  affections  with  which  it  moves  toward  Hih. 
1.  It  despairs  of  help  in  any  one  but  Christ.  2.  True  faith  is  also  attended  with  a 
feeling  of  great  unworthiness.  3.  True  faith  is  attended  with  earnest  and  practical 
interest  in  others.  HI.  The  mannek  in  which  the  Savioub  met  the  f.mth  of  thesb 
MEN.  1.  He  graciously  entertained  their  applications.  2.  He  mercifully  granted 
their  requests.  3.  He  introduced  them  into  another  empire.  They  were  to  sit 
down  with  Abraham,  &o,  («/.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Human  leprosy  and  its  Divine 
cure : — I.  The  lepeb.  1.  He  comes.  2.  He  worships.  3.  He  pleads,  II.  Thb 
Healeb.  1.  He  puts  forth  His  hand.  2.  He  touched  him.  3.  He  spoke.  (1)  It 
is  the  voice  of  love  ;  (2)  of  authority;  (3)  of  power.  (Dr.  Bonar.)  In  the  leper 
two  things  are  remarkable— the  weakness  of  his  body ;  the  virtues  of  his  mind. 
I.  Thb  weakness  of  nis  bodt.  Weakness  proceeds  from  wickedness.  The  weakness 
of  his  body  brought  him  to  the  Physician  of  his  soul.  He  felt  his  misery  great ;  but 
hoped  Christ's  mercy  was  greater.  II.  The  virtues  of  his  mind.  1.  Faith.  2. 
Adoration.  3,  Wisdom  in  selecting  place,  not  on  Mount,  but  in  valley ;  time,  not 
interrupting  His  sermon.  4.  Patience.  Content  to  stay  God's  leisure.  5.  Confession. 
III.  Now  look  at  the  Physician.  1.  His  mercy.  2.  His  might.  (1)  Christ  touched 
the  leper,  which  was  forbidden  by  Moses.  Hence  He  was  greater  than  Mows.  (2) 
Moral  duties  superior  to  ceremonial  observances.  (8)  This  intimates  that  Christ  waa 
▼ery  man  in  toucliing,  but  more  than  a  man  in  heaUng  with  a  touch.  (4)  To  demon- 
(Btrat<)  that  Himself  and  none  other  cured  him.  (5)  Christ's  humility  in  touching 
a  leper.    1.  The  leper  was  commanded  to  tell  no  man.    We  must  temper  zeal  witb 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  Tin. 

knowledge  and  obedience,  2.  It  was  needless  to  tell  it  since  his  whole  body,  made 
clean,  was  a  tongue  to  tell  it.  3.  It  was  absurd  that  he  should  boast  he  was  clean, 
before  he  was  so  judged.  [J.  Boys,  D.D.)  The  leper's  prayer : — L  The  ohabao- 
TBRisTica  OF  LEPKOSY  AS  SET  FOBTH  IN  ScEiPTtJRB.  Loatbsome — helpless — hope- 
less. 1.  The  position  of  this  leper  was  one  of  shame  and  disgrace.  He  inspired 
repugnance  in  those  around  him.  Sin  is  a  disgrace.  It  ought  to  fill  with  shame. 
2.  Other  maladies  healed  by  Christ  invited  sympathy  and  help  and  society.  The 
leper  was  reminded  by  everything  that  he  was  alone  in  the  world.  Each  one  of  u> 
alone  before  God.  II.  His  faith.  1.  There  was  a  thorough  consciousness  of  hia 
own  misery  and  a  perfect  conviction  of  his  own  helplessness.  But  he  knew  it  was 
not  too  bad  for  Christ  to  deal  with  successfully.  2.  The  concentrated  force  which 
resides  in  the  leper's  petition.  His  entire  resignation ;  he  is  willing  to  leave  the 
matter  in  the  hands  of  Christ.  3,  What  a  Divine  concentration  there  is  in  the 
answer — ♦'  I  will ;  be  thou  clean,"  What  a  majestic  utterance.  Christ  accepts  the 
recognition  of  His  power.  The  main  point  of  the  answer  is,  not  His  power,  but 
His  will.  {Dean  Howson,  D.D.)  The  leper's  loneliness  as  indicating  the  scuV$ 
solitude  : — Each  one  of  us  is  alone  before  God.  However  great  may  be  the  human 
crowd  in  which  we  live,  however  closely  we  may  be  connected  with  one  another  by 
affection,  by  interest,  by  duty,  each  soul  is  solitary  in  its  relation  to  God.  Just  as 
in  those  great  American  forests,  which  stretch  in  vast  succession  over  mountain 
and  plain — whatever  be  the  interlacing  of  the  foliage — whatever  be  the  beauty 
which  comes  from  the  blending  of  sunlight  and  shade — whatever  havoc  may  be 
done  on  a  great  and  extensive  scale  by  storm  and  tempest — each  tree,  rising  from 
its  own  root,  with  its  one  stem,  and  with  the  outgrowth  of  its  own  branches,  is  a 
solitary  tree.  So  is  the  human  soul,  with  the  outgrowth  of  its  own  words  and 
deeds,  a  solitary  soul.  No  other  human  soul  can  share  its  responsibility.  (Ibid.) 
Secret  leprosy.  —  I  have  seen  a  fair  and  well  •  built  house,  lifting  its  head 
proudly  above  its  neighbours,  and  having  a  goodly  outside  presence.  And  I  have 
looked  within,  and  found  that  the  dry  rot  had  eaten  away  rafter  and  beam,  and 
that  the  house  was  ready  to  fall  to  ruin.  During  the  Crimean  War,  our  ships 
suffered  far  more  from  the  dry  rot  within  their  timbers,  than  from  the  outside 
attacks  of  shot  and  shell.  How  many  lives  there  are  like  that  grand  house,  or  those 
stately  ships  I  Outside  they  are  fair  to  look  upon,  men  envy  their  wealth,  or 
position,  or  good  fortune,  and  all  the  while  the  foul  leprosy  is  within,  eating  away 
the  moral  nature,  making  that  life  a  ruin,  {Wilmot  Buxton.)  The  mark  of  the 
leper. — Is  it  the  leprosy  of  an  impure  life,  or  a  selfish  nature,  or  a  cruel  tongue, 
or  a  proud,  rebellious  spirit  ?  Whatever  it  be,  once  more,  are  you  willing  to  be 
made  clean?  Before  you  can  find  pardon,  you  must  8e«  your  sin  and  hate  it. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers,  6, 10,  There  came  nnto  Him  a  centnrlon.  beseechtngr  Him. — I,  Thr  atpli. 

OaNT,  He  was  a  centurion,  <fec.  He  was  a  Gentile,  and  not  of  the  house  of  Israel. 
His  profession  was  unfavourable  to  piety.  II,  The  suit  he  presented.  The  object 
of  his  suit.  The  way  in  which  he  presented  it :  personal  exertion,  earnest  appli- 
cation, reverence  and  humility,  extraordinary  faith.  III.  The  success  es  expb- 
BiENCED.  He  was  honoured  by  the  Saviour,  his  servant  was  healed.  1.  Admire 
this  example  of  human  excellence.  2.  See  the  grace  and  power  of  the  Saviour.  S. 
Let  all  believers  exert  their  iniiuence  for  the  good  of  others.  {J.  Burns,  LL.D.) 
Manliness  : — It  is  sometimes  said  that  religion  is  not  a  thing  for  men.  I.  Look  at 
this  soldier's  faith.  It  was  the  faith  of  a  man ;  no  sign  of  weakness  or  effeminacy, 
II.  Look  at  this  soldier's  humility.  It  was  the  humility  of  a  man ;  not  mere  sub- 
eervionce,  which  bends  before  title,  wealth,  and  perhaps  not  before  God.  It  is  an 
elevating  thing  to  bend  before  such  a  God  as  ours.  III.  Look  at  this  soldier's 
affection.  Human  affections  not  to  be  sneered  at.  These  are  the  qualities  of  tme 
manhood.  {A.  G.  Bowman,  M.A.)  1.  The  duty  of  masters  in  relation  to  their 
aervants.  2.  The  duty  of  making  intercession  on  behalf  of  others  at  the  throne  of 
grace,  and  the  encouragement  given  thereto,  3,  The  intimate  connection  between 
great  faith  and  great  humility.  (A.  Peebles.)  Christ's  healing  the  centurion's 
servant : — I.  In  the  centurion  we  have  an  iNSTBUcxrvB  example  to  petitioners.  1. 
His  benevolence  in  applying  to  Christ  on  behalf  of  the  sick  servant.  He  had  not 
been  hardened  by  scenes  of  war.  The  prudence  and  diligence  of  the  servant  won 
his  esteem.  Providence  compensates  cruelty  or  attention  towards  servants ;  this 
cdcknesB  brought  the  centurion  into  contact  with  Our  Lord.  2.  The  humility 
that  declined  the  Saviour's  offer — "  I  will  come  and  heal  him."    What  oonacioos 


CHAP,  vm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  141 

Eower ;  prompt  kindness ;  unwearied  benevolence  I  The  military  spirit  often 
aughtj.  3.  The  faith  that  asked  only  a  word  from  the  Saviour's  lips.  He  was 
eonvinced  of  Christ's  supremacy.  II.  In  the  Saviour  we  have  an  ediftino  pattern 
TO  BENEFACT0K8.  1.  His  admiration  of  the  centurion's  faith.  Christ,  who  saw  all 
the  glory  of  the  world — wealth,  valour,  culture — admires  faith  more  than  all.  2. 
Christ's  warning  to  the  Jewish  nation — "  Many  shall  come,"  &o.  (ver.  11).  S.  The 
miracle  of  healing  on  the  servant.    (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)        The  Roman  centurion : — I. 

In  AUi  THE  BICE  THE    HIOHEST  HONOUR   GIVEN  TO   A   SYINO  SLAVE.       1.    He  is  hoUOUred 

by  his  master  because  he  is  faithful  and  obedient.  Also  because  he  was  probably  a 
beUever  in  the  God  of  Israel.  How  anidous  ought  we  to  be  for  the  spiritual  good  of 
our  friends,  if  centurion  so  anxious  for  bodily  healing.  2.  The  whole  city  is  moved 
on  behalf  of  this  poor,  dying  stranger ;  it  is  this  which  exalts  his  case  above  all  the 
other  sick  in  the  gospel  narratives.  3.  The  Lord  Himself  honours  this  dying 
stranger,  saying,  "I  wUl  come  and  heal  him."  Jesus  had  a  hard  day's  work,  and 
might  have  spared  Himself  this  visit  to  the  sick  bed.  H.  The  deepest  htjiulitt 
HID  IN  THE  HEART  OP  A  BouAN  COMMANDER.  1.  The  centurfon  is  the  only  example  of 
a  man  who  thought  himself  unworthy  to  come  to  Christ,  to  speak  to  Jesus  per- 
sonally. How  unworthy  are  we  to  address  God  I  2.  He  is  the  only  man  who  thinks 
his  house  unworthy  of  Christ.  Probably  he  had  a  good  official  residence.  HI. 
The  STRONGEST  FAITH  FOUND  IN  A  Gentilb  SOLDIER.  The  Strength  of  his  faith  ii 
connected  with  the  depth  of  his  humility  ;  faith  the  root  of  every  grace.  1.  Hia 
fafith  discerns  in  the  Son  of  Mary  the  unseen  arm  of  the  Lord.  2.  His  faith  so  dis- 
cerns Christ  as  to  make  his  own  unworthiness  no  barrier  to  Christ's  work.  {A.  M, 
Stuiirt. )  Miracles  of  healing : — I.  What  disease  is  ;  what  place  it  holds  with 
BEFERENCE  TO  THE  OFFICE  AND  WORE  OF  THE  Eedee:iier.  Au  important  place  from 
the  numerous  cases  of  cure.  Disease  is  the  beginning  of  death.  Christ  came  to 
abolish  death ;  by  healing  confirmed  His  mission.  He  showed  the  great  restoration 
He  came  to  effect  in  our  whole  nature.  1.  The  Son  of  Man  came  to  save  men'a 
lives,  not  to  destroy  them.  2.  The  importance  of  these  our  bodies  in  the  great 
process  of  redemption.  Modern  religion  too  spiritual :  must  better  the  body  by 
civilization  and  art,  as  well  as  soul.  II.  The  typical  import  of  these  HBALiita 
MIRACLES.  1.  A  type  of  man's  great  disease — sin.  2.  The  great  command  which 
Christ  has  over  all  diseases,  as  His  servants,  going  and  coming  at  His  word.  {H. 
Alford,  D.D.)  True  faith: — Our  Lord  did  not  heal  the  centurion's  servant  at 
once  ;  He  delays.  He  will  allow  time  for  the  play  and  energy  of  faith.  What  were 
the  characters  of  the  centurion's  faith  ?  1.  His  faith  must  have  been  a  thing  of 
gradual  growth,  and  it  must  have  grown  under  no  ordinary  conditions.  He  was  a 
heathen.  Many  a  man  in  his  position  would  have  looked  at  the  religion  around  him 
with  lack  of  sympathy.  But  he  had  come  to  see  that  though  the  Romans  were 
better  than  the  Jews  in  courage,  the  Jews  were  in  possession  of  a  higher  faith.  One 
step  leads  to  another.  He  took  interest  in  the  religion  of  Israel :  then  led  to  notice 
the  fame  of  Jesns.  No  help  came  to  him  from  the  memories  of  youth.  When 
adverse  circumstances  do  not  kill  faith,  they  brace  it.  2.  His  faith  was  marked  by 
thoroughness.  No  flaws  in  it  at  a  critical  hour.  3.  His  faith  was  characterized 
by  humility.  AUve  to  the  awful  majesty  of  God.  The  question  has  been  asked. 
Why  should  such  a  disposition  and  effort  as  faith  have  this  power  ?  1.  One  reason 
of  the  religious  power  of  faith  is  that  it  implies  knowledge  of  facts  of  the  highest 
importance  to  man.  2.  It  is  a  test  or  criterion  of  the  predominant  disposition  ol 
the  soul  or  character.  The  believer  has  moral  affinities  with  the  revelation.  The 
habit  of  insincerity  is  fatal  to  faith.  3.  The  third  reason  for  the  religious  power 
of  faith  is  its  leverage.  It  sets  the  soul  in  motion,  it  embodies  the  element  of  wUL 
Here  a  caution  is  necessary.  Faith  does  not  create,  but  apprehend.s  its  object.  The 
heahng  power  of  Jesus  is  not  dependent  upon  the  centurion's  faith,  although 
exerted  as  a  token  of  approval  of  it.  Let  us  pray  for  the  faith  of  the  centurion, 
persevering,  thorough,  humble.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Faith  poioerful  becutvie  of  the 
knowledge  it  imparts. — At  the  time  of  the  Franco-German  War,  some  twelve  years 
ago,  the  success  of  the  Germans  was  largely  attributed  to  the  superiority  of  their 
intelligence  department.  They  knew  so  much  more  about  the  strength  and  position 
of  the  enemy,  and  their  own  available  resources,  than  did  the  French,  that  they 
conquered.  Well,  faith  supplies  the  general  intelligence  department  of  the  soul. 
Faith  reports  all  that  is  of  most  importance  to  a  being  who  is  wrestling,  not  against 
flesh  and  blood,  but  against  principalities,  against  powers,  against  the  mlers  of  the 
darkness  of  this  world,  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.  True,  snch 
information  may  not  be  acted  on.    The  truant  soul  often  prevails  against  the  sens* 


143  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  vm. 

of  evil ;  bat  faith  does  supply  the  information  which  may  be  acted  on,  and  thns  it 
contributes  very  efficieutly  indeed,  a  first  condition  of  religious  success.  {Ihid.) 
Faith  powerful  because  of  the  will-power  it  evokes. — The  action  of  faith  is  in  Scrip- 
ture represented  to  us  not  merely  by  that  of  the  eyo  ;  it  is  also  represented  by  that 
of  the  hand.  When  Scripture  speaks  of  the  believing  Christian  as  "  apprehending," 
or  •*  laying  hold  on  "  Chiist  our  Lord,  it  implies  that  faith  is  a  hand  as  well  as  an 
eye;  that  it  is  not  merely  spiritualized  intelligence,  but  spiritualized  will.  Th« 
faith  which  iustilies  does  not  merely  behold  ;  it  claims  its  object.  And  the  effort 
of  vrill,  which  is  thus  inseparable  from  faith,  means  energy — let  ns  be  quite  Bure 
of  it — in  a  great  many  more  directions  than  one.  (Ibid.)  The  faith  of  th« 
eenturion  : — I.  That  he  attained  it  undee  uNFAvouE-iBLB  cibcumstances.  IL 
That  his  application  was  made,  not  fob  himself,  but  tor  his  servant.  His  faith 
was  thns  adorned  by  fervent  charity.  We  should  intercede  for  others.  III.  Thai 
HH  DOES  NOT  IN  WORDS  ASK  ANYTHING.  He  merely  stated  to  Jesus  the  fact  that  his 
servant  was  ill.  His  faith  deemed  this  enough  to  ens-ure  relief  from  Christ.  Jesus 
says,  "  I  will  come  and  heal  him."  In  these  words  He  expresses  His  own  gracious 
method  in  dealing  with  mankind.  IV.  That  it  was  tempered  with  hdmility.  A 
false  faith  known  by  its  pride.  V.  How  he  uses  nis  own  reason  for  help  in 
BSTABLisHiNa  THIS  EXCELLENT  FAITH.  "  For  I  am  a  man  under  authority,"  &c.  To 
us  the  word  only  is  spoken.  We  must  be  healed  through  the  influence  of  the  written 
Word,  if  healed  at  all.  This  is  the  condition  of  our  trial.  Some  want  sensible  proof 
of  the  truths  of  rehgion.  (<7.  Girdlestone,  M.A.)  The  centurioti's  faith  proved: 
— "  Go  thy  way  ;  "  "  I  will  stay  apart  from  thy  sick  servant ; "  "  I  will  take  thee  at 
thy  word."  I.  Observe  how  this  proposal  was  calculated  to  try  the  earnest- 
ness OF  HIS  FAITH.  How  far  we  really  believe  may  be  gathered  from  the  fruits  of 
our  faith.  Let  us  thus  test  our  belief  in  Providence,  revelation,  the  assistance  of 
Di^nne  grace,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  What  portion  have  we  by  real  faith 
in  these  ?  To  the  centurion  Christ's  words  were  words  of  comfort ;  to  his  servant, 
of  heaUng.  Are  they  to  us?  He  was  justified  in  the  profession  of  his  faith.  II. 
Hence  we  m.<i\^  account  for  the  slight  deop.ee  in  which  we  at  present  derivb 
benefits  from  the  privileges  of  the  gospel.  It  is  only  by  believing  more  heartily 
that  we  can  be  healed  more  fully.  III.  From  these  words  we  may  form  a  just 
APPREHENSION  ALSO  OF  OUR  FUTURE  SENTENCE.  Then  it  wiU  be  Said,  "  As  thou  hast 
behoved,  so  be  it  done  unto  thee."  We  are  graciously  justified  by  faith.  (Ibid.) 
Thy  word  svjjices  me : — I.  The  perfect  readiness  op  Christ.  II.  Thb  con- 
scious ABILITY  OF  Christ.  III.  The  abiding  method  of  Christ.  He  spake  and 
it  was  done.  1.  This  coming  back  to  the  original  form  of  working  in  creation.  2. 
This  method  suits  true  humiiity.  3.  It  pleases  great  faith.  4.  It  is  perfectly 
reasonable.  5.  It  is  sure  to  succeed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Divine  Word 
enough. — When  William,  Prince  of  Orange,  was  invited  to  come  to  England  and 
be  liing,  he  promised  certain  ofiices  to  his  friends,  and  he  gave  them  written 
pledges.  But  when  he  offered  such  a  pledge  to  the  man  who  was  to  be  his  Lord 
Chamberlain,  that  nobleman  repUed,  "  Your  Majesty's  word  is  sufficient.  I  would 
not  serve  a  king  if  I  could  not  trust  in  his  word."  That  saying  pleased  the 
Ung,  and  he  who  showed  such  faith  in  him  became  Ids  favourite  minister.  Should 
we  not  be  willing  to  take  the  word  of  the  King  of  kings  f  The  Almighty  Healer: 
— I.  As  AN  ANSWER  TO  PRAYER.  1.  Whose  prayer  was  it  that  was  here  answered? 
A  heathen's.  2.  What  was  the  prayer  that  was  here  answered  t  Not  personal  but 
relative,  for  another.    3.  When  was  this  prayer  answered — immediately?    II.  As 

AK  INSTANCE  OF  CONDESCENSION.      III.    As  A   DISPLAY  OF  POWER.       IV.   As   AN   EMBLEM 

OF  His  GRACE.  (IF.  Jay.)  The  centurion's  faith  and  humility: — 1.  The  care  of 
this  centurion  for  his  servant  was  commendable.  2.  A  beautiful  instance  of  the 
conquest  over  prejudice.  When  prejudice  shall  be  universally  overcome,  Turks  and 
Hindoos  will  build  Christian  temples,  and  bigots  of  every  sect  will  unite  in  seeking 
the  Saviour's  mercy  for  the  wretched  of  our  race.  3.  An  example  of  great  liumility. 
His  situation  was  calculated  to  foster  piide.  4.  The  power  of  grace  to  overcome  all 
the  obstacles  of  rank  and  condition.  5.  His  faith.  (W.  H.  Lewis.)  The  worth 
of  humility.— Look  at  the  tops  of  the  mountains.  They  represent  pride.  Nothing 
grows  there.  See  how  bare  and  barren  they  are  I  And  then  look  at  the  quiet,  low- 
lying  valleys.  They  represent  humility.  And  see  how  beautiful  they  are  in  their 
greenness  and  fertility  1  The  highest  branches  of  the  vine  or  tree  represent  pride. 
You  find  no  fruit  on  them.  The  low  branches  represent  humility.  These  you  will 
find  bending  down  with  the  load  of  rich,  ripe  fruit  that  hangs  upon  them.  A 
fanner  went  with  his  son  into  the  wheat  field  to  see  if  it  was  ready  for  the  harvest 


CHAP,  vin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  148 

"  See,  father,"  said  the  boy,  "how  straight  those  stems  hold  up  their  heads  1  They 
must  be  the  best  ones.  Those  that  hang  down  their  heads,  as  if  they  were  ashamed, 
cannot  be  good  for  much,  I'm  sure."  The  farmer  plucked  a  stalk  of  each  kind,  and 
said,  "Look  here,  foolish  child.  This  stalk  that  stood  up  so  straight  is  light- 
headed, and  almost  good  for  nothing ;  while  this  that  hung  its  head  so  modestly 
is  full  of  the  most  beautiful  grain."  (R.  Newton,  D.D^  The  greatness  oj 
faith: — Christ  knew  all  the  man  had  gone  through  to  arrive  at  faith.  Faith 
ia  a  hard  work :  and  Jesus  knows  it.  A  man  who  is  not  a  real  Christian  some- 
times shows  a  trust  which  might  well  put  to  shame  the  truest  child  of  God. 
L  What  composed  the  grbatness  oy  his  faith?  1.  With  few  advantages  the 
centurion  had  gone  far  in  advance  of  the  age.  2.  Seizing  the  first  opportunity 
with  personal  exertion,  and  on  a  loving  purpose,  he  came  to  Christ.  3.  Arrived  in 
His  presence,  he  was  earnest,  simple,  devout.  4.  At  Christ's  favour  to  him  his 
faith  rose  higher,  and  his  heart  went  lower.  II.  How  did  that  faith  coaa  7  By 
the  ways  you  cannot  see— a  grace — a  creation.  What  makes  faith  gi'ow  larger  t  1. 
Look  into  the  constitution  of  faith.  First,  it  is  a  clear  understanding  of  the  truth ; 
■ecoudly,  it  is  a  converting  of  the  abstract  truth  into  a  thing  real  in  the  mind ; 
Ihirdly.'it  is  an  appropriation,  a  making  your  own  the  truth  unuerstood.  To  increase 
faith  these  three  points  must  be  cultivated.  1.  Keep  pure  the  affections ;  avoid  sin. 
Faith  glows  by  its  own  actings.  2.  He  who  would  enlarge  faith  must  feed  upon 
promises.  3.  To  have  found  Christ  as  a  Saviour  gives  faith  its  best  impulse.  4.  The 
measurement  of  everything  to  a  Christian  is  the  falling  and  rising  of  his  faith. 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  It  is  evident  that  our  religious  attainments  may  not  be  equal 
to  our  opportunities  of  spiritual  growth,  and  that  we  may  be  surpassed  in  moral 
excellence  by  those  who  have  not  enjoyed  our  mercies.  I.  Oob  advantages  as  thk 
PBOFESSED  DISCIPLES  OF  Christ.  "  In  Judah  is  God  known ;  His  Name  is  great  in 
Israel."  Our  advantages  may  be  considered  as  great.  1.  In  our  birth  and  educa- 
tion. 2.  That  we  have  the  inspired  volume  in  our  own  language.  3.  The  ordinances 
of  the  Lord  are  with  us.  4.  That  we  enjoy  reUgious  liberty.  II.  Combideb  oub 
ATTAINMENTS  i»  THE  WATS  OF  GoD.  '*  What  do  we  more  than  others  ?  "  1.  En- 
eouragement.  If  we  have  a  little  faith,  it  is  a  great  mercy.  2.  Eeproof.  Have  we 
not  loitered  in  the  ways  of  God  ?  3.  Instruction.  Learn  to  do  better.  IT.  Wood.) 
A  hlesged  wonder: — What  was  there  about  the  centurion's  faith  so  remarkable  that 
Christ  wondered  at  it  ?  I.  That  there  was  scch  faith  found  in  buch  a  pebson. 
Did  not  expect  to  find  it  in  a  Gentile — a  Eoman — a  soldier,  <feo.  The  most  astonish- 
ing and  acceptable  faith  may  be  exercised  by  the  most  unhkely  persons.  II.  Tna 
subject  of  the  centtjbion's  confidence — his  servant  struck  with  the  palsy.  His  was 
A  faith  which  took  an  impossibility  into  its  hand  and  threw  it  aside,  &o.  There  is 
no  sin  too  black  for  His  blood  to  wash  out  the  stain.  III.  The  BKALiziNa  enebgx 
OF  this  man's  faith  which  led  him  to  deal  with  the  case  in  such  a  business-Uka 
way.  So  should  we.  IV.  He  did  not  abk  fob  a  sign.  Some  want  to  feel  "  strong 
convictions,"  "  extraordinary  sensations,"  &c.  We  must  accept  the  bare  word  ol 
God  in  Christ  Jesus  as  the  basis  of  faith,  for  no  other  foundation  is  to  be  depended 
on  for  a  moment.  V.  His  conviction  that  Christ  could  cube  his  sebvant  a> 
ONCE.  Usually,  successful  combat  with  disease  requires  time.  Pardon,  a  present 
blessing — not  the  result  of  weeks  of  fasting,  <S:c.  VI.  His  deep  humility,  which 
instead  of  weakening  his  faith  only  strengthened  it.  How  often  the  sense  of 
unworthiness  keeps  from  Chiist — "  I  cannot  beheve,  I  am  so  great  a  sinner,"  &o. 
The  simplicity  of  faith  often  makes  it  difficult.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  MarvelUnu 
faith: — This  faith  was  remarkable,  because  it  was — L  Gbeat  in  itself.  The 
centurion  beheved — 1.  That  Christ  bad  absolute  power  over  disease.  2.  That  He 
could  heal  his  servant  at  a  distance.  3.  By  His  word.  II.  Gbeat  as  compabed 
WITH  THAT  OF  THE  Jew8.  They  Were  favoured  with  many  aids  to  faith,  while  the 
centurion  had  many  obstacles,  &c. ;  yet  the  faith  of  the  latter  far  transcended  that 
of  the  former.  In  this  we  have — 1.  Warning  for  privileged  people.  2.  Encourage- 
ment for  those  who  labour  under  disadvantages.  IH.  Joined  with  gbeat  humility. 
"  Humihty  is  both  the  fruit  of  faith  and  the  companion  of  faith ;  an  humble  soul  Ima 
a  high  esteem  of  Christ,  and  a  low  esteem  of  himself."  The  faith  of  the  centurion 
was — IV.  Globiously  kewakded.  1.  His  servant  was  healed.  2.  He  himself  wai 
received  as  a  citizen  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (IF.  Jonet.)  The  soldier  and  Jus 
tlave : — The  supphant's  previous  history.  A  centurion — a  Gentile.  1.  He  was  a 
good  neighbour.  2.  He  was  a  kind  master.  I.  Look  at  the  cenxubion's  addbess 
to  the  Saviour.  1.  His  humility.  What  words  for  a  proud  Boman  to  address  to  a 
poor  J'ew.      %.  His  faith.      It  took  its  colour  from  his  soldier-life.      II.  Tht 


i44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

Saviocb's  comment  on  the  conduct  of  this  noble-miniled  soldier,  and  reflection  to 
which  it  leads.  1.  He  announces,  in  connection  with  this  remarkable  display  of  faith, 
the  inbringing  of  the  Gentile  nations.  The  Roman  soldier  was  the  earnest-sheaf  of 
a  mighty  harvest  yet  to  be  reaped  in  heathen  lands.  2.  That  in  every  profession 
and  occnpation  of  life  a  man  may  serve  God.  His  military  habits  fed  his  faith.  3. 
Great  faith  is  fostered  in  the  midst  of  diflSculties.  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.).  Tha 
senturum'g  servant : — 1.  The  value  of  faith.  2.  The  value  of  intercession.  3.  The 
value  of  Christ's  intercession.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  The  true  dispositiMi  required 
in  eonimunicants : — "I  am  not  worthy."  Personal  humility,  met,  limited,  and 
directed  by  personal  faith.  Many  say  of  the  Holy  Communion  that  they  are 
unworthy.  1.  But  this  humility,  if  really  what  it  ought  to  be,  should  lead  us 
directly  to  the  performance  of  this  sacred  duty.  Our  humility  should  take  the 
form  of  that  in  our  text.  The  communicant  can't  be  worthy  as  far  as  r<^al  worthi- 
ness is  concerned.  2.  But  it  is  at  this  point  that  our  humihty  should  be  met, 
limited,  and  directed  by  our  faith.  The  centurion's  sense  of  unworthiness  did  not 
turn  him  aside  from  duty,  from  beseeching  our  Lord  to  help  him ;  it  delicately 
gave  greater  force  to  his  request.  3.  Our  humility,  if  sincere,  will  issue  in  our 
greater  confidence  in  God's  mercy.  {J.  Prickle,  M.A.)  Faith  where  not  expected  :  — 
On  which  side  of  the  garden  wall,  children,  would  you  expect  to  get  the  tinest  fr^t 
— on  the  inside,  where  the  gardener  has  carefully  tended  the  fruit,  or  on  the  other 
side,  where  the  seed  has  accidentally  dropped  and  grown  up  by  itself?  On  the 
inside,  would  not  you  say  T  And  if  yon  found  on  the  other  side  more  order  a  ud 
better  fruit  than  inside,  you  would  be  very  much  astonished.  So  was  Jesus  whan 
He  found  this  heathen  man  with  such  a  beautiful  trust  and  character  as  He  bad 
not  met  with  among  His  own  people — the  sons  of  Abraham.  Faith  superior  to 
circumstances : — The  temptations  incident  to  a  military  life  are  neither'  few  nor 
Bmall.  Camps  are  not  churches.  Barracks  are  often  baleful.  We  may,  therefore, 
safely  afQrm  that  if  a  holy  life  can  be  lived  there,  it  can  be  lived  anywhere.  "God 
is  able  to  make  you  stand,"  though  your  lot  be  cast  in  "  slippery  places."  The 
leaves  of  some  plants  may  be  plunged  in  water  and  taken  out  dry.  They  are  so 
defended  by  a  fine,  thick  down  all  over  their  surface  that  water  will  lie  in  "miiia- 
ture  lakes "  in  their  hollows  for  hours,  and  leave  no  tinge  of  dampness.  By 
God's  grace  the  plant  of  piety  may  be  surrounded  by  evil  influences  and  yet  pre- 
served from  their  power.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  A  soldier's  faith: — One  day  when 
Napoleon  I.  was  reviewing  his  troops  in  Paris,  he  let  fall  the  reins  of  his  horse  upon 
the  animal's  neck,  when  the  proud  charger  galloped  away.  Before  the  rider  could 
recover  the  bridle,  a  common  soldier  ran  out  from  the  ranks,  caught  the  reikis, 
stopped  the  horse,  and  placed  the  bridle  again  in  the  hands  of  the  Emperor. 
*' Much  obliged  to  you,  captain,"  said  Napoleon.  The  man  immediately  beheved 
the  chief  and  said,  "Of  what  regiment,  sir?"  Napoleon,  delighted  with  his  quick 
perception  and  manly  trust  in  his  word,  replied,  "  Of  my  guards,"  and  k  ia  away. 
As  soon  as  the  Emperor  left  the  soldier  laid  down  his  gun,  saying,  '*  He  may  take  ii 
who  will,"  and  started  for  the  Company  of  Staff  Officers  .  .  .  and  so  the  soldier 
came  duly  to  his  post  as  'laptain  of  Napoleon's  Guard.    (<Sib^s.) 

Vers.  11, 12.  Slany  shall  come  ft-om  the  east  and  west — Jhe  extent  cf  Ood's 
family  : — I.  That  the  number  of  the  saved  shall  be  great,  "  Many."  Might 
expect  the  contrary  from  aspect  of  society.     God  has  secret  servants.     II.  That  xhk 

LABOB   OOMFAMY    SHALL  BE  MAJ>E  DP    OF    MEN    FROM  AI^  NATIONS.      "From   the  east   ftud 

west."  III.  That  all  these  perrons  shall  be  united  in  heaven  in  society.  "  Sit 
down  together."  The  happiness  of  heaven  will  not  be  solitary ;  it  will  not  be 
without  union.  IV.  This  ohanob  takes  place  in  heaven.  Must  not  take  earthly 
conceptions  of  this  celestial  state ;  it  is  a  state  connected  with  God.     V.  Wk  may 

INFER  something  WITH  BEOAED  TO  THE  NATURE  AND  COMPLETENESS  OF  THE  HAPPINESg 
THAT  WILL  BE    ENJOYED  BY  THE   SAINTS    IN  GLORY.       1.    RcSt.       "They  shall  sit  doWU." 

2.  Sovereignty.  They  shall  sit  on  thrones  as  kings.  {J.  W.  Cunningham,  M.A.) 
The  connection.  Christ  receives  applications  from  all  sorts  of  characters.  The 
centurion — conscious  of  personal  unworthiness — concerned  for  hie  domestics — 
unbounded  confidence  in  the  capacity  of  Christ.  I.  The  exulting  pbophecy.  Implies 
that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  (Isa.  xlv.  6,  lix.  19 ;  Mai.  i.  11)  ;  that  many  shall 
be  saved  ;  that  heaven  ia  an  exalted  state  of  felicity,  rest,  and  social  intercourse,  &o. 
(Chron.  xxv.  10,  xxvi.  29  ;  Luke  xiv.  15,  xxii.  30 ;  Rev.  xix.  7,  9).  Loyal  sub- 
mission to  the  King,  enjoyment  of  His  presence,  admiration  of  His  glories ;  laud 
and  magnify  His  name.    U.  Tub  agency  by  which  it  shall  bb  bffeotxd.   Mani> 


CHIP,  viir.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  145 

fold — chiefly  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  i.  21) ;  adapted — to  every  stage  of 
human  society,  to  every  order  of  mind,  and  to  every  moral  condition  ;  efficient — the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  awakening,  convicting,  &a.  (1  Thess.  i.  5,  &o.).  "  All  the 
ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God."  {A.  Tucker.)  Bigotry  mugt 
not  limit  the  number  of  the  saved : — The  readiest  way  in  the  world  to  thin  heaven, 
and  replenish  the  regions  of  hell,  is  to  call  in  the  spirit  of  bigotry.  This  will 
immediately  arraign,  and  condemn,  and  execute  all  that  do  not  bow  down  and 
worship  the  image  of  ottr  idolatry.  Possessing  exclusive  prerogatives,  it  rejects 
every  other  claim  —  *'  Stand  by,  I  am  sounder  than  thou.  The  temple  of  the 
Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we  1 "  How  many 
of  the  dead  has  this  intolerance  sentenced  to  external  misery,  who  will  shine 
like  stars  in  the  kii)gdom  of  our  Father !  How  many  living  characters  does  it 
not  reprobate,  who  are  placing  in  it  all  their  glory  1  No  wonder,  if  under  the  influ- 
ence of  tliis  consuming  zeal,  we  form  lessening  views  of  the  number  of  the  saved : 
•'  I  only  am  left " — yes,  they  are  few  indeed,  if  none  belong  to  them  who  do  not 
belong  to  your  party — that  do  not  see  with  your  eyes — that  do  not  believe  election 
with  you,  or  universal  redemption  with  you — that  do  not  worship  under  a  steeple 
with  you,  or  in  a  meeting-house  with  you — that  are  not  dipped  with  you,  or  sprinkled 
with  you  I  But  hereafter  we  shall  find  that  the  righteous  were  not  so  circum- 
Boribed.  (Jay.y  Heathen  convrrts  : — Mosheu,  an  African  chief,  visited  Dr.  Moffat  at 
Kuruman.  The  missionary  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  speak  of  the 
"one  thing  needful,"  but  without  apparent  effect.  After  some  time  Mosheu 
repeated  his  visit  to  Kuruman,  bringing  with  him  a  very  large  retinue.  He  was 
agonizing  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  "  When  first  I  visited  you,"  he  said  to  Dr. 
Moffat,  *'  I  had  only  one  heart,  but  now  I  have  come  with  two.  I  cannot  rest ;  mjr 
eyes  will  not  slumber,  because  of  the  greatness  of  the  things  you  told  me  on  my  first 
visit."  Heaven  and  Hell: — I.  A  gloeious  promise.  1.  It  is  a  land  of  rest — "sit 
down."  2.  The  good  company  they  sit  with,  "  Abraham  and  Isaac,"  (fee.  3.  Many 
shall  come.  I  have  no  wish  for  a  small  heaven ;  many  mansions.  4,  Where  they 
come  from — from  all  places  and  classes,  even  the  most  hopeless.  5.  The  certainty  — 
"  shall."  II.  The  children  of  the  kingdom  cast  out.  1.  Tnose  noted  for  externals 
in  religion.  2.  The  children  of  pious  fathers  and  mothers.  3.  They  are  to  be  cast 
out.  Where  to?  {C.  H.  Spnrgeon.)  The  heavenly  state: — 1.  Many  will  be  there. 
What  are  "  many  "  in  the  Divine  authentic?  Must  not  lower  the  standard  of  admis 
eion,  2.  The  imagery  that  of  a  banquet,  the  attitude  assigned  to  the  assembly. 
Kest  and  repose  after  labour  and  conflict.  3.  The  celestial  citizens  are  to  know  one 
another,  else  it  would  littlo  avail  to  sit  down  with  Abraham,  <fec.  The  meeting- 
place  of  generations.  (H.  Melinll,  B.D.)  The  wonderful  M,  : — The  Countess  of 
Huntingdon  used  to  say,  "  She  thanked  God  for  the  wonderful  letter  M,  for  it  turned 

•  any '  into '  many  ; '  thus  the  Word  of  God  reads,  •  Not  many  wise,  not  many  mighty, 
not  many  noble  are  called'  (1  Cor.  i.  26),  therefore  she  could  be  found  amongst  the 

*  not  many.'  "  The  wonderful  "  M  "  shows  forth  the  extent  of  God's  grace.  Man 
does  not  enter  heaven  by  virtue  of  his  poverty  or  his  riches,  sufferings  or  rejoic- 
ings, morality  or  immorality,  but  by  virtue  of  the  atonement  and  the  shedding 
of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  None  can  rightly  say,  "  I  have  had  so  much  trial 
and  trouble  down  here  that  I  am  sure  God  will  provide  a  place  for  ma ; "  nor  can  they 
say,  "  I  am  so  noble,  and  have  such  power  in  this  world  that  I  surely  must  have  a 
place  above."  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  All,  whatever  their  station  or  cir 
Jifimstances,  find  but  one  entrance  into  eternal  glory,  even  through  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ — the  only  door,  the  one  way,  by  which  alone  any  can  be 
saved.  The  children  of  the  kivgdom: — I.  By  the  cheldben  of  the  kingdom  ahb 
INTENDED  THE  Jews,  who  Were  God's  peculiar  people,  1.  God  was  in  an  e>tpecial 
manner  their  King.  He  revealed  Himself  as  their  King  and  Saviour.  He  fought 
against  their  enemies.  2.  As  a  king  He  laid  down  laws  which  they  were  to  follow. 
3.  They  were  not  only  subjects  of  the  kingdom  ;  they  were  to  be  children  of  it.  4. 
The  justice  of  that  sentence,  which,  after  their  ejection,  deprived  the  children  of  the 
kingdom  of  their  glorious  inheritance.  II.  How  were  they  cast  into  outer  dark- 
ness. 1.  They  were  withdrawn  immediately  from  that  which  is  light  even  on  earth 
— the  enjoyment  of  God's  grace,  and  the  enlightenment  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  This 
was  outer  darkness  of  soul.  2.  They  were  driven  into  the  darkness  of  sorrow  arid 
aflSiction.  III.  The  cause  why  this  happened — their  unbelief.  We  are  now  the 
children  of  the  kingdom  ;  have  God's  laws  written  in  our  hearts.     (J.  Garbett). 

Vet.  14.  Sick  of  a  fever. — Peter  was  a  disciple,  yet  afliiction  wm  permitted  ta 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

visit  his  domestic  circle.  Affliction  at  home : — 1.  Develops  sncial  sympathy.  S. 
Brings  out  family  characteristics.  3.  Unites  the  household  in  devotional  exercises. 
4.  Evokes  practical  and  affectionflte  gratitude.  (Dr.  Parker.)  Fevers  at  Caper- 
naum  : — How  do  you  account  for  the  prevalence  of  fevers  at  Capernaum  ?  for  it  was 
there,  of  course,  that  "  Peter's  wife's  mother  laid,  and  sick  of  a  fever."  Fevers  are 
Btill  prevalent  in  this  region,  particularly  in  summer  and  autumn,  owing  to  the 
extreme  heat  acting  upon  the  marshy  plains,  like  that  of  El  Batihah,  at  the  influx 
of  the  Jordan.  (TF.  J/.  Tliovison,  D.D.)  Dorn''.otic  affliction  an  improving  minis- 
try : — You  would  not  be  half  the  man  you  are  but  for  your  sick  child  ;  your  tendency 
ia  towards  bumptiousness,  aggressiveness  of  speech,  sternness,  harshness.  You  have 
a  magisterial  cast,  and  bearing  in  your  life  ;  but  that  liltle  sick  child  has  softened 
you,  and  been  like  a  benediction  upon  your  life.  Men  now  take  notice  of  your  voice 
and  say,  "  What  new  tones  have  subtly  entered  into  it ;  how  different  the  kind 
grasp,  how  noble  the  new  bearing,  how  impressive  the  sacred  patience,  how  touching 
and  pathetic  the  sadness  of  the  face  I  "  Afflictions  do  not  sjring  out  of  the  dust : 
do  not  be  impa.tient  with  them  ;  we  need  sora*  thii'g  to  sofien  this  hard  life.  O,  if  it 
were  all  bming,  selling,  getting  gain,  outrunning  one  another  in  a  race  for  wealth 
in  which  the  racers  take  no  time  to  recover  themselves — there  would  be  no  gardens 
on  the  face  of  the  earth,  no  j^laces  consecrated  to  floral  beauty,  no  houses  built  for 
music,  no  churches  set  op  for  prayer.  But  affliction  helps  to  keep  us  right,  affliction 
brings  ua  to  our  knees.     (J,  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Himself  took  our  Infirmities.  The  preciousness  of  Christ's  sympathy 
with  our  infirviities  : — Our  Lord's  union  with  our  nature  was  actual  and  personal,  &0. 
In  this  point  of  light,  the  truth  of  Christ's  sympathy  with  our  infirmities  presents 
itself  with  an  actuality  and  vividness  the  most  reahzing  and  personal.  The  proper 
discussion  of  our  subject  suggests  the  consideration  of :  I.  The  iNiiRMiirES  which 
APPERTAIN  TO  ocB  HUMANITY.  Physical — as  the  consequence  of  sin,  and  not  in 
themselves  sinful :  New  Testament  iUustrations.  May  become  occasions  of  sin. 
But  Christ's  sympathy  extends  to  all  tlie  infirmities  to  which  His  people  are  subject — 
the  inbf^iug  of  sin  ;  constitutional  iufirmiiies — varied ;  sufierings  and  persecutions, 
provocations,  trials  and  temptations  ;  proneness  to  look  to  the  dark  providences  of 
God,  rather  than  to  His  power,  faithfulness  to  live  in  the  providence,  &o.  II.  Odb 
Lohd's  PEESONAii  PAKTiciPATioN  IN  THOSE  INFIRMITIES.  It  was  a  pemonol  act ;  by 
His  assumption  of  our  humanity ;  by  taking  upon  Him  our  sins.     UL  The  prk- 

ClOUbNESS    OF   HiS   SYMPATHY  WITH    THE  VAKIED   INFIRMITIES   OF   Hl8    PEOPLE.       Fitted 

to  sympathize — "  toLiched,"  &o.  Let  us  be  patient  and  sympathizing  towards  the 
infirmities  of  our  fellow  Christians.  (Dr.  0,  Winslow.)  Christ's  identity  and 
tympathy  with  Ilin  ixople  : — I.  The  completeness  of  Christ's  identity  with  His 
PEOPLE.  1.  Our  true  nattire.  2,  In  its  entirety.  3.  In  our  trials.  II.  Thk 
closeness  of  His  sympathy.  Identity  is  the  source  of  sympathy.  Christ  had 
sympathy  with  His  followers.  {H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  Tlie  sympathy  ofJ/sus  : — The 
iniracles  which  Chiiht  had  wrought.  I.  A  revelation  of  Christ — of  the  sym- 
pathetic heart  of  Jesus.  The  woiking  of  healing  miracles  not  with  Jesus  a  matter 
of  calculation,  rather  the  spontaneous  forth-putting  of  endowment,  in  response  to 
need;  a  reveLition  of  the  grace  in  Himself.  They  show  His  love  even  more  than 
His  power.  II.  A  pkopuecy  of  betjer  days  for  the  world.  They  are  signs  that 
disease  does  not  belung  to  the  true  order  of  nature ;  a  prophecy  that  the  true  order 
shall  be  restored.  III.  An  inspiration  to  all  who  honour  the  name  of  Christ  and 
cherish  the  spirit  of  Christ.  We  cannot  do  as  Chiist  did;  but  we  may  adopt 
His  aim,  and  work  for  it  according  to  our  abihty.     (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19-22.  Master,  I  will  follow  Thee.  Impetuous  and  hesitating  disciplesMp  : — 
I.  The  significance  of  Christ's  treatment  of  the  impetuous  scribe.  He  declarei 
his  determination  to  follow  Christ,  lead  where  He  may.  Christ  checks  rather  than 
encourages  the  man.  We  may  regard  the  determination  of  the  scribe  as — the 
resolution  of  an  unreflecting  emotionalist,  and  an  ambitious  worldling.  Our  Lord's 
words  have  important  applications  in  ovir  own  day.  II.  The  suoqestivkness  o» 
Christ's  treatment  of  the  shrinking  and  hesitating  disciple.  Christ  might  have 
Been  in  this  reciuest  a  sensitive  shrinking  from  the  sacrifice  and  sufferings  involved 
in  following  Him.  The  man  had  heard  the  words  in  verse  20,  or  Christ  might  hava 
foreseen  that  to  grant  it,  would  be  attended  with  fatal  results  to  bis  yet  unri})ened 
disciplesliip.  Immedinte  decision  was  the  essential  conditions  of  his  salvation, 
^.  Taylor.)        Followen  on  the  sea-eliore ; — I.  Thk  fou.uwkes  on  the  sea-shohk.  L 


CHAP.  Yin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  147 

The  hasty  follower  who  is  the  first  who  presents  himself,  and  he  is  sifted  by  Christ. 

2.  The  tardy  follower  is  hastened  by  Je?u8.  He  is  called  not  to  bury  the  dead,  bn< 
to  preach  the  life-givi::.g  word.  3.  The  last  of  the  three  followers  is  halting  with 
B  divided  heart,  a^:  is  reproved.  It  is  not  the  claims  of  family,  but  th« 
clinging  of  His  own  unloosened  attachment  that  divides  and  detains  Him.  IL 
The  passage  acboss  the  lake.  {A.  M.  Stuart.)  The  corrective  test : — I.  High- 
sounding  words  are  not  always  a  proof  of  deeply  rooted  faith.  II.  Christ  should  be 
followed  for  what  He  is  in  Himself,  as  well  as  for  what  He  has  to  bestow.  III.  Tha 
omui&sfenee  of  Christ  enables  Him  to  detect  the  most  hidden  motives  of  men.  IV. 
The  poverty  of  Christ  may  well  excite  our  wonder  and  gratitude.  {H,  O.  Parrish, 
B.A.)  Following  Christ: — Every  man  has  a  "Master";  business,  home,  Ac, 
command  and  we  obey.  Evexy  person  has  a  master  passion,  also  every  man  t«  a 
master.  Has  the  power  of  will ;  is  a  servant  by  consent.  The  resultant  of  these 
two  facts,  is  necessitated  relationship  to  something.  I.  Christ  is  a  valuable  com- 
panion because  He  embodies  a  lofty  and  perfect  moral  ideal,  the  expression  of 
the  grandest  conception  of  truth  this  world  has  ever  known.  He  gives  the  idea  and 
the  grace  to  imitate  it.  II.  Christ  is  a  pleasant  companion.  Imparts  joy  and  sense 
of  security — hope.  III.  Christ  is  a  safe  guide.  But  if  a  man  is  to  follow  Christ 
there  are  some  conditions  which  he  must  observe.  1.  There  must  be  a  fixed  pur- 
pose.    "I  V9ill  "  must  be  will  and  not  impulse  only.     2.  You  will  require  courage. 

3.  Too  will  have  to  take  on  the  habits  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  You  cannot  follow  hTth 
and  be  selfish  and  narrow.  (J.  R.  Day,  D.D.)  The  lower  duty  hinders  the  higher: 
— It  is  not  that  you  desire  wrong  things  ;  it  is  not  that  you  desue  to  avoid  right 
things;  but  you  say,"  Suffer  me  first  to  do  the  inferior,  and  then  I  shall  be 
ready  for  the  superior.  Suffer  me  first  to  take  care  of  myself.  Suffer  me  first 
to  take  care  of  my  household.  Suffer  me  first  to  take  care  of  my  business. 
Suffer  me  first  to  take  care  of  my  party.     Suffer  me  first  to  look  after  this 

enterprise,  and  then ."      No  1   this  constant  habit  of  humbling  the   higher, 

and  making  it  subordinate  to  the  lower;  this  constant  preference  of  the  in- 
ferior to  the  superior,  works  demoralization.  A  man  does  not  need  to  throw 
away  his  Bible,  nor  defy  his  God,  nor  sell  his  soul  voluntarily.  He  only  needs 
to  eay,  "  Suff  r  me  first  to  do  this  lesser  thing."  The  moment  that  is 
done,  there  will  be  another  '*  Suffer  me  first "  in  its  place.  And  so  we 
shall  put  the  inferior  duties  in  the  place  of  higher  duties,  and  go  through 
life,  and  fail  at  last.  {Beeclier.)  EeUgion  must  surmount  difficulty : — A  man 
fascinated  with  the  idea  of  raising  fruit,  goes  to  the  country  and  sets  out 
his  orchards  with  bright  anticipations  us  to  the  result.  But  no  sooner  have 
bis  trees  got  well  started  than  all  nature  becomes  his  tormentor.  The  frost  blasts 
the  blossoms.  The  worms  gnaw  the  roots.  The  insects  ^ting  both  blossom  and  roots. 
And  when  he  has  toiled  year  after  year,  and  brought  his  trees  into  such  a  state  that 
he  thinks  that  he  is  goiug  to  have  a  profusion  of  delicious  fiuit,  the  black  wart 
seizes  his  plum-trees,  and  the  gum-canker  attacks  his  cherry-trees,  and  the  winter- 
blight  kills  his  pear-trees,  and  his  apple-trees  will  not  bear  anyhow;  and  at  last 
disgusted  with  raising  fruit,  he  comes  back  to  the  city,  and  says,  "  I  prefer,  after  all, 
that  other  people  should  be  my  pomologists.  I  have  had  enough  of  gardening." 
(Ibid.)  Religion  more  than  resolution: — Oh!  wl)at  pictures  there  would  be,  if  I 
could  only  take  the  trouble  to  learn  to  paint  the  things  that  I  dream  about  I  Such 
hescoes !  Such  magnificent  renderings  of  magnificent  scenes  1  Such  portraitures  I 
The  trouble  is,  that  while  my  imagination  is  fruitful  enough,  it  is  a  shiftless  and 
careless  fruitfulness,  and  it  never  comes  down  low^r  than  that,  and  dies  in  the  nest 
where  it  was  bom.  I  think  of  things,  and  turn  them  over,  and  turn  them  over,  and 
make  pictures,  and  forget  them,  and  make  pictures,  and  forget  them  ;  but  I  am  net 
sn  artist.  An  artist  is  a  man  whose  wishes  get  down  through  his  shoulders  to  his 
fingers;  and  he  makes  what  he  wishes  he  was  going  to  make.  He  does.  He  turns 
into  account  that  which  would  othei  wise  die  as  smoke  or  cloud.  Men  of  reverie  ara 
like  clouds  that  never  rain.  Men  of  function  shower  down  resolutions  in  the  form 
of  drops,  and  results  spring  up  from  them.  {Ihid.)  Religious  impressions  not  to 
be  cheeked : — I.  The  importance  of  a  prompt  and  resolote  devotedkess  of  mini* 
to  THE  OBBAT  CONCERN  OF  RELIGION.  This  is  to  foUow  Christ,  and  includes  :  1.  The 
candid  reception  of  His  revelation.  2.  It  involves  a  surrender  of  ourselves  to 
Christ  as  our  Saviour  and  Governor.  3.  It  imparts  an  ardent  solicitude  for  the  pre- 
valence of  his  religion.     II.  The  egregious  folly  of  stifling  religious  impbes- 

BIONS  IN  FAVOUR  OF  SUCH  DEVOTEDKESS,  BT  WOBLDI^T  CONSIDERATIONS.      **  Let  the  dead 

bury  theii-  dead."     1.  Some  are  prgv  ented  from  an  immediate  compliance  with  theii 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

convictiong,  by  the  notion  that  their  happiness  is  to  be  found  in  the  world,  which 
they  would  be  required  to  abandon.  2.  Some  by  the  remonstrances  of  worldly 
relatives  and  friends.  3.  Some  by  some  particular  worldly  object  of  pursuit,  upon 
which,  for  the  moment,  they  are  intent,  and  which  promises  soon  to  leave  them  at 
liberty.  (.7.  L'rifchild.)  I.  The  jien  of  the  world  are  but  dead  men.  The 
sentence  of  death  passed  upon  all  men  still  abides :  it  is  not  repealed.  As  dead 
as  men  in  their  graves.  You  rotting  above  the  ground,  and  they  under  (Eom.  viii. 
10).  As  there  is  in  the  sinner  a  seeming  life,  so  is  there  in  the  righteous  a  seeming 
death.  They  may  seek  a  new  life,  1.  They  may  become  alive  in  their  apprehen- 
sions of  God  2.  They  are  alive  in  their  devotions  to  God.  3.  These  awakened 
sinners  are  alive  in  their  obedience  to  God.  U.  As  the  men  of  the  world  are,  so 
AiiSO  ABE  THE  THiN'os  ABOUT  WHICH  THEY  ABE  CONVERSANT.  They  are  dead  things, 
they  have  no  real  life  in  them.  They  perish  in  the  using.  (IF.  Gilpin,  M.A.) 
Jesus  a  homfiless  wanderer : — I.  The  striking  fact.  II.  Reasons  for  this.  1.  As 
the  Son  of  Man  He  was  the  federal  representative  of  our  race,  in  certain  important 
respects. — He  showed :  (1)  That  man  has  forfeited  all  right  to  shelter  upon  earth. 
(2)  That  we  should  seek  shelter  elsewhere,  and  not  look  for  our  portion  on  earth. 
2.  In  the  work  of  our  redemption  it  was  needful  for  Jesus  to  stoop  thus  low.  (1) 
It  was  part  of  the  penalty  He  bore.  (2)  He  went  down  to  the  lowest  of  men.  (3) 
It  was  to  illustrate  the  unearthliness  of  His  religion.  III.  Some  additional  reflieo- 
tions:  1.  Christian,  adore  the  hunjiiliation  and  condescension  of  your  loving  Lord. 
2.  Be  willing  if  need  be  to  Buffer  shame  and  poverty  with  Him.  3.  If  more  happily 
circumstanced  be  amazed  and  overwhelmed  with  gratitude  at  your  superior  lot.  4 
Yet  set  not  your  affections  on  earthly  possessions.  6.  Nor  despise  poorer  brethren 
6.  If  offering  to  follow  Christ,  count  the  cost.  7.  In  another  sphere,  how  this 
saying  is  reversed.  (T.  G.  Horton.)  Not  where  to  lay  His  head: — A  little  boy, 
between  four  and  five  years  old,  was  one  day  reading  to  his  mother  in  the  New 
Testament ;  and  when  he  came  to  these  words,  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  tha 
birds  of  the  air  have  nests  ;  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  head," 
his  eyes  filled  with  tears,  his  tender  breast  heaved,  and  at  last  he  sobbed  aloud. 
His  mother  inquired  what  was  the  matter  ;  but  for  some  time  he  could  not  answer 
her.  At  length,  as  well  as  hi.-^  sobs  would  let  him,  he  said,  '•  I  am  sure,  mamma, 
if  I  had  been  there,  I  would  give  Him  my  pillow."  The  foxes  and  birds  bettet 
accommodated  than  Chrixt : — I.  Christ's  ekmark  on  the  provision  made  fob  thb 
habitation  of  the  inferior  creatures.  Men  have  reason,  are  able  to  contrive 
habitations  for  themselves ;  Providence  hath  furnished  them  with  trees,  stones, 
<fec.,  for  this  end.  Suitable  provision  also  made  for  the  inferior  creatures.  Tame 
animals  are  accommodated  by  the  care  of  man  ;  wild  beasts  directed  by  instinct  to 
proper  places  (Job  xxxix.  27  ;  Psa.  civ.  17).  II.  Christ's  representation  of  Hii 
OWN  destitute  circumstances.  1.  How  wise  and  faithful  was  Christ  in  this  repre- 
sentation ;  how  much  instruction  doth  it  convey  to  His  followers.  A  test  of 
sincerity.  2.  The  condecension  of  Christ  in  submitting  to  these  hardships  is  truly 
admirable.  3.  How  reasonable  is  it  that  the  disciples  of  Christ  should  be  humble 
when  they  have,  and  contented  when  they  have  not,  the  comfortable  accommodations 
of  life  I  4.  With  how  much  pleasure  should  we  think  of  the  exaltation  and  gloiy  of 
Christ  in  Leaven,     {J.  Orton.) 

Vers.  23-27.  And  when  fie  was  entered  Into  a  ship. — 1.  A  storm  arose  whila 
the  disciples  were  following  their  Master.  Sea  of  life.  Storms  in  the  voyage- 
even  when  sailing  according  to  the  Master's  orders.  2,  While  the  disciples  were 
alarmed,  their  Master  was  asleep.  It  was  the  sleep  of  real  innocence.  He  was  free 
from  fear.  Peter.  Argyle  on  the  eve  of  his  execution.  It  was  the  sleep  of  apparent 
indifference.  Reasons.  3,  In  their  distress  the  disciples  implored  their  Master's 
assistance.  Faith  in  His  power  and  love.  Leading  to  earnest  prayer.  Embodied 
in  a  brief  sentence.  4.  The  disciples  were  reproved  by  their  Master.  Not  for  dis- 
turbing His  repose.  For  their  fears  as  indicative  of  their  little  faith.  Faith  is 
the  true  antidote  against  fear.  Much  fear,  little  faith :  little  faith,  much  fear. 
6.  The  disciples  were  delivered  by  their  Master.  His  dominion  over  nature. 
6.  The  disciples  uttered  an  exclamation  of  profound  feeling  in  reference  to 
the  interposition  of  their  Master.  Gratitude,  admiration,  worship.  (1)  Be  pre- 
pared for  storms.  (2)  Amid  all  storms  call  on  Christ.  (3)  Adore  and  praise  Hins 
lor  the  deliverance  He  HlTords.  {Various.)  'The  disciples  in  a  storm: — I.  Thh 
storm  arose  while  the  disciples  were  followino  our  Lord.  II.  Wnmt  His 
DisctPUKS  ivxBx  PKRPLBXED  AND   ALAJiMED  He  WAS   ASLEEP.      1.  Sleep   of  refresh' 


CHAT.  VIII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  14J 

ment.  2.  Wonderful.  3.  Designed.  Hi.  They  came  to  Him  and  awoke  Him, 
BAYiKO,  "  Lord,  save  rs."  IV.  Ouk  Lohd  reproves  His  disciples.  Y.  What 
EFFECT  HA©  ALL  THIS  UPON  Eis  DISCIPLES  ?  1.  Admiration.  2.  Praise.  3.  Fami- 
liarize j-our  minds  with  Christ  as  present  with  you  in  all  diliiculties.  (TF.  Jay.) 
Christ  stilling  the  tempest : — I.  The  danger.  May  not  the  body  of  man  be  com- 
pared  to  a  ship ;  and  the  soul  which  he  carries  within  that  body  be  likened  to  a 
treasure.  The  world  as  a  current ;  trials  hke  storms.  The  disciples  may  aptly 
represent  the  Church,  and  the  hazard  they  were  in,  the  extremity  to  which  the 
Church  is  often  rtduced.  One  of  the  chief  reasons  why  our  Lord  permitted  His  dis- 
ciples to  be  thus  tried  was — 1.  To  teach  them  humility.  2.  To  exercise  faith  and  pati- 
ence, n.  The  behaviour  of  the  disciples  under  the  danger.  1.  Distrust  of  God. 
2.  Distrust  of  His  goodness  and  ability.  Just  before  they  had  seen  Him  cure  tho 
palsy,  &c.  3.  Kepioof.  4.  In  one  respect  v.orthy  of  imitation,  they  had  resource  to 
Christ.  III.  The  qbacious  deliverance  effected  by  our  blessed  Lord.  1.  The 
Divinity  of  our  Lord.  2.  How  compassionate  our  Lord  was  to  His  timid  disciples. 
8.  The  man  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God  has  no  cause  for  alarm. — {J.  Seger, 
M.A.)  The  storm: — I.  The  way  of  obedience  leads  through  many  a  scene  of 
boisterous  trouble.  II.  Through  whatever  storms  the  way  of  Christian  obedience 
may  lie,  they  are  for  some  good  purpose.  IH.  Whatever  storms  may  overtake 
Christian  voyagers,  there  is  this  consoling  fact :  Christ  is  with  them  in  the  ship. 
IV.  Jesus  not  only  comforts  by  His  presence,  He  also  gloriously  delivers  by  His 
power.  Chiist's  help  may  be  deferred,  but  will  be  timely  and  complete.  V.  A 
prophecy  of  the  blessedness  whiuh  Christ's  finished  work  is  to  bring  to  the  world, 
and  to  those  who  eiubark  with  Him  in  the  voyage  of  hfe — Peace.  (J.  A.  tieiss,  D.D.) 
Christ  stilling  the  stonn: — I.  The  storm.  We  are  closely  connected  with  the 
material  world,  waves  may  dash  against  our  spirits  as  well  as  our  bodies.  1.  The 
storm  in  the  elements  of  nature.  2.  The  storm  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church.  II. 
The  calm.  1.  In  the  elements  of  nature  ?  2.  The  calm  in  the  kingdom  of  grace. 
Application : — 1.  Have  you  embarked  with  Christ  ?  2.  Flee  to  Jesus  now,  and  cry, 
'  Lord,  save :  we  perish."  3.  If  we  are  embarked  with  Christ,  learn  His  claims  to 
confidence.  4.  This  miracle  speaks  to  ministers.  They  must  iearn  by  experience  the 
value  of  the  Saviour  they  recommend.     (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)  I.  The  passagh 

ACROSS  THE  LAKE.  1.  Christ  commands  His  disciples  to  pass  over  to  the  other 
side  of  the  sea.  He  left  the  attractive  for  the  repulsive.  2.  The  voyage  is  under- 
taken suddenly — "even  as  He  was."  Disciples  should  hold  themselves  ready  to  go 
at  a  moment's  notice  on  their  Master's  service.  3.  He  takes  the  apostles  with  Him : 
tlie  school  of  the  prophets,  in  which  He  is  training  the  ministers  of  the  Word. 
Daily  lessons  in  providence.  4.  Besides  Christ's  immediate  company  in  their  own 
ship,  a  number  of  other  disciples  accompanied  Him  in  "  other  httle  ships."  II. 
Jesus  asleep  in  the  storm.  1.  An  apt  figure  of  the  homeless  state  of  Jesus  on 
earth.  2.  The  holy  rest  of  the  weary  workman  after  earnest  labour.  He  redeems  thia 
time  for  rest.  3.  A  quiet  sleep  in  the  midst  of  danger.  4.  The  sleep  of  innocence 
—a  contrast  to  the  sleep  of  Jonah  in  guilt.  IH.  Jesus  stilling  the  tempest.  1. 
The  calm  is  in  answer  to  the  earnest  cry  of  the  disciples.  We  should  pray  in  time 
of  need.  The  cry  of  the  disciples  brought  deliverance  to  many  around  ;  we  never 
pray  for  ourselves  without  benefitting  others.  2.  Jesus  stills  the  tempest  by  Hia 
word.  An  image  of  many  a  believer's  life.  (A.M.Stuart.)  Miracles  of  power  :—. 
In  the  former  miracles  love  and  mercy  are  prominent  ;  in  this,  power. — (H.  Alfordf 
D.D.)  The  stilling  of  the  tempest: — I.  An  appalling  scifiE  to  contemplatb. 
1.  Of  imposing  grandeur.  2.  Of  no  ordinary  peril  and  disJress.  3.  Highly  in- 
structive in  its  symbolical  signification.  "  The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea."  II. 
The  co.N's :  EBNAiioN  wpicn  was  felt.  1.  To  whom  they  applied.  2.  The  language 
in  which  they  addressed  Him.  The  last  of  these  cries  given  by  St.  Matthew.  (1) 
It  is  short  ;  (2)  It  is  appropriate ;  (3)  It  is  fervent.  HI.  The  wonderful  foweb 
AND  AUTHORITY  THAT  WERE  MANIFESTED.  This  act.  1.  By  what  it  was  preceded. 
He  rebuked  the  disciples  before  rebuking  the  winds.  2.  The  manner  in  which  it  waa 
done.  3.  The  result  that  followed.  IV.  The  amazement  which  was  produced. 
1.  In  their  wonder  there  was  considerable  awe  and  terror.  2,  Notwithstanding 
their  excited  emotions,  they  expressed  themselves  in  language  eminently  befitting  so 
memorable  an  occasion ;  not  like  St.  Peter  on  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  {Expository 
Outlines.)  A  man  destitute  of  fear: — A  simple  but  characteristic  incident  is 
recorded  in  connection  with  the  early  history  of  Lord  Nelson.  On  one  occasion  hia 
mother  was  telling  him  that  he  should  fear  a  certain  thing,  and  not  go  near  to  it ; 
he  at  once  turned  round  to  her.  and  asked.  "  Mother,  what  is  fear?  "    It  was  a 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  thi, 

question  which  shows  how  true  it  is  that  the  boy  is  father  to  the  man ;  for  il 
ever  there  was  a  character  of  duintless  intrepidity  it  was  he.  Now  it  is  evident 
that  there  was  no  need  for  the  disciples  to  have  asked  such  a  question  ;  what  fear 
was  they  well  knew,  and  it  was  for  giving  way  to  it  that  they  were  now  gently 
rebuked  by  our  Lord.  To  us  also  He  addresses  the  same  words,  for  He  would  have 
each  of  us  to  say  with  the  Church  of  old,  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid ;  "  and, 
among  many  other  instances,  the  present  case  is  intended,  and  peculiarly  adapted, 
to  strengthen  the  one  feeling,  and  to  remove  the  other.  Storms  on  the  Sea  of 
OaVlee : — Dr.  Buchanan  experienced  one  of  these  sudden  storms  on  the  Sea  of 
Galilee.  *'  While  gazing  on  the  suggestive  scenery  around  us,  our  earnest  conver- 
sation  was  suddenly  disturbed  by  a  movement  among  our  Arab  crew.  All  at  once 
they  pulled  in  their  oars,  stepped  tlieir  mast,  and  began  to  hoist  their  long  and  very 
ragged  lateen  sail.  What  can  the  fellows  mean  to  do  with  a  sail  in  a  dead  calm  f 
Bat  they  were  right.  There  comes  the  breeze,  ripphng  and  roughening  the  lately 
glaspy  surface  of  the  lake.  It  reaches  us  before  the  sail  is  rightly  set.  A  few 
minutes  more,  and  it  is  blowing  hard.  The  bending  and  often-spliced  yard  threatens 
to  give  way,  and  the  tattered  leach  of  the  sail  seems  as  ii  it  would  rend  right  up, 
and  go  away  in  .shreds.  To  go  upon  a  wind  with  such  a  craft  is  impossible.  There  is 
nothing  for  it  but  to  slack  away,  and  run  before  it.  .  .  .  "  And  where  are  we  going 
now  ? '  was  our  first  inquiry,  when  things  had  been  got  a  little  into  shape.  *  Wher« 
the  wind  will  take  us,'  was  the  reply  of  the  old  greybeard  at  the  helm.  And  away 
we  went,  the  lake  now  all  tossed  into  waves,  and  covered  with  foaming  white  heads, 
as  if  a  demon  had  got  into  its  lately  tranquil  bosom — an  adventure  that  afforded  os 
a  fresh  illustration  cf  the  reality  of  those  events  which  the  narratives  of  Scripture 
relate."  (Clerical  Furlough  in  the  IIolij  Land.)  Fearless  in  danrjer ;— Some  yeari 
ago,  an  officer  in  the  army,  who  was  a  pious  man,  was  drafted  abroad  with  his 
regiment.  He  accordingly  embarked,  with  his  wife  and  children.  They  had  not 
been  many  days  at  sea  when  a  violent  storm  arose,  which  threatened  the  destruction 
of  the  ship,  and  the  loss  of  all  their  lives.  Consternation  and  teiTor  prevailed 
among  the  crew  and  passengers  ;  his  wife  also  was  greatly  alarmed.  In  the  midst 
of  all,  he  was  perfectly  calm  and  composed  :  his  wife,  observing  this,  began  to  up- 
braid him  with  want  of  affection  to  her  and  her  children,  urging,  that  if  he  was  not 
concerned  for  his  own  safety,  he  ought  to  be  for  theirs.  He  made  no  reply,  but 
immediately  left  the  cabin,to  which  he  returned  in  a  short  time  with  his  drawn  sword 
in  his  hand,  and  with  a  stern  countenance  pointed  it  to  her  breast ;  but  she, 
smiling,  did  not  appear  at  all  disconcerted  or  afraid.  "  What  I  "  said  he,  "  are 
you  not  afiaid  when  a  drawn  sword  is  at  your  breast  t "  "  No,"  answered  she, 
*'  not  when  I  know  that  it  is  in  the  hand  of  one  who  loves  me."  "  And  would  yoa 
Lave  me,"  replied  he,  "  to  be  afraid  of  this  storm  and  tempest,  when  I  know  it  is 
in  the  hand  of  my  heavenly  Father,  who  loves  me?  "  Ctesar  in  the  ship  : — One 
of  the  greatest  of  tlie  old  Romans  was  once  overtaken  by  a  storm  at  sea,  and  when 
the  captain  of  the  ship  was  full  of  terror,  the  conqueror  said,  "  Why  do  yon  fear 
for  the  ship?  Do  you  not  know  that  it  carries  Caesar?  "  Let  us,  as  Christians, 
remember  that  the  ship  in  which  we  must  cross  the  waves  of  this  troublesome 
•world,  is  the  ship  of  the  Climch,  and  that  it  carries  Jesus.  A  straight  coxtrse : — 
A  certain  noble  family  of  England,  which  gained  its  position  by  the  victories  of  an 
ancestor  at  sea,  has  for  its  motto  the  single  word — Thus.  That  word  is  a  nautical 
term  of  command,  which  means  that  the  steerman  is  to  keep  the  ship's  head 
straight  on  the  course  which  she  is  sailing.  This  is  the  true  motto  for  a  Christian. 
Let  him  keep  his  course  straightforward,  through  the  storm  and  tempest,  through 
dangers  and  difficulties,  steering  the  course  of  duty,  with  Jesus  as  his  companion  and 
his  gnide.     (Wihnot  Buxton.)       Lord,  save  us,  we  perish : — I.  Man  in  his  helpx-ess 

CONDITION  LB  A  PEBISHING  CREATURE.       II.   SALVATION  ALONE  IS  OF  THE  LoKD.      1.   It  is 

of  the  Lord  in  its  origin.  2.  In  its  execution.  3.  In  its  bestowment.  HI.  Personal 
APPLICATION  to  Chbist  IS  NECESSARY.  1.  This  implies  knowledge  of  Christ.  2.  Faith 
in  His  Holy  Name.  3.  Importunity  of  desire.  IV.  Such  application  to  Christ  shall 
never  fail.  1.  Because  it  is  His  own  appointment.  2.  It  is  His  delight  to  save 
His  people.  3.  He  tiever  allows  His  believing  people  to  perish.  [T.  B.  Baker.) 
In  the  storm: — 1.  That  we  must  not  be  fearful  in  the  time  of  danger.  2.  Not 
to  be  f(mrful  in  the  storm  of  everyday  life.  {Wilrnot  Btixton,  M.A.)  The  Saviour 
in  the  ship : — I.  What  absolute  helplessness  is.  II.  When,  at  last,  the  voyager 
eomea  sincerely  and  anxiously  to  that,  and  utters  the  prayer,  Christ  does  not  refus* 
him  because  he  did  not  call  sooner,  or  because  when  he  prayed  his  prayer  was  not 
the  piuest  and  loftiest  of  prayers.     III.  The  person  of  Jesus,  Son  of  God  and  Son 


CHAP,  viii.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  151 

of  Man,  is  the  actual  bond  of  a  living  unity  between  the  visible  world  of  nature  and 
the  invisible  world  of  God's  spiritual  kingdom.  IV.  The  miracle  thus  discloses  to 
us  the  true  practical  use  both  of  the  gospel  miracles  themselves,  and  of  every  othel 
gift  and  blessing  of  heaven,  in  leading  us  up  in  affectionate  gratitude  to  Him  who 
stands  as  the  central  figure  among  all  those.visible  wonders,  and  the  originator  of  all 
tho  peace-making  powers  which  tranquilize  and  reconcile  the  turbulences  of  the 
world.  (Bishop  Huntingdon.)  Christ's  supremacy  over  nature  : — I.  The  bopremacy 
or  Chkisx  over  all  tcebulent  and  seemixgly  uncontrollable  forces.  1.  The 
act  represents  Christ's  supremacy  over  the  physical  world.  2.  This  act  is  symbolical 
of  Chiist's  supremacy  over  the  mental  and  moral  disorders  which  agitate  the  world. 

II.  The  bearing  of  Christ's  supremacy  on  certain  aspects  of  truth  and 
CONDUCT.  1.  In  relation  to  His  promises  to  each  of  His  disciples.  He  will  fulfil 
EUs  word  both  because  He  wishes  and  can.  2.  In  relation  to  the  establishment  of 
His  kingdom  on  earth.  3.  In  relation  to  the  day  of  resurrection  and  judgment. 
Christ's  supremacy  over  nature  afiects  diversely  diSerent  classes  of  character.^  1.  It 
is  an  occasion  of  fear  and  diead  to  those  who  are  alien  in  heart  and  life  to  Him.  2. 
Of  consolation  to  those  who  are  loyal  to  Him.  {€.  Chapman,  M.A.)  1.  Under- 
take no  enterprize  in  which  Christ  does  not  accompany  you.  2.  Distinguish 
between  storms  which  you  have  provoked,  and  the  storms  which  God  has  appointed. 

3.  Be  assured  that  all  forces  are  under  the  control  of  Divine  beneficence.  {Dr. 
J.  Parker.) 

Vers.  28-33.  There  met  tt<tti  two  possessed  vlth  devlla. — Christ  and  th4 
demoniac  : — I.  The  immediate  connection  of  the  world  of  darkness  with  the  evil 
heart.    II.  The  great  power  of  the  inhabitants  of  darkness  over  the  evU  heart. 

III.  The  UTTER  iMPOTENCY  OF  MAN  TO  DELIVER  THE  POSSESSED  from  the  power  of  the 
inhabit  mts  of  darkness.  IV,  The  weakness  of  the  powers  of  darkness  in 
CONFLICT  WITH  Chris  t.  Eemarks :  1.  Beware  of  tampering  with  evil.  2.  The  wish 
of  evil  will  ever  be  self-destructive.  3.  If  Jesus  has  cured  you  show  it  by  causing 
joy  where  you  have  caused  so  much  misery — in  your  home.  {F.  Wallace.)  _  Sin 
and  salvation  : — I.  Some  aspects  of  bin.  1.  Its  contagiousness.  2.  Its  anti-social 
tendency — ♦'  Neither  abode  in  any  house."    3.  Its  embrutalization  of  character. 

4.  Its  dread  of  righteousness.  II.  Some  aspects  of  salvation.  1.  It  is  begun  in 
expulsion,  not  repression,  of  evil  principles  and  desires.  2.  God  accounts  as 
nothing  whatever  material  loss  may  be  incurred  in  its  effectuation.  Souls  more 
than  8\\dne.  3.  Its  moral  and  spiritual  results  have  a  counterpart  and  external 
evidence  in  improved  material  and  social  condition.  4,  The  surest  proof  of  the 
reahty  of  its  accomphshment  is  rtnunciation  of  personal  preferences  in  obedience 
to  Christ's  commands.  (Pulpit  Analyst.)  The  atcxising  conscience  of  the  wicked 
(ver.  29) : — 1.  Bad  men  must  sooner  or  later  acknowledge  their  deserts.  2.  They 
believe  that  a  "  time "  for  punishment  of  their  sins  will  come.  3.  A  guilty 
conscience  dreads  the  presence  of  Christ.  (American  Homiletic  Monthly).  Christ 
sending  th^  demons  from  the  man  into  the  sioine : — I.  The  malice  of  Satan.  1.  The 
possession.  2.  The  dwelling  of  the  man — among  the  tombs.  A  melancholy 
madness.  3.  The  fierceness  of  the  demoniac — he  could  not  be  bound.  II.  Thb 
SBACE  AND  JUSTICE  OF  THE  Savioub.  1.  The  gracc  displayed  in  expelling  the 
demons  from  the  man.  The  devils  saw  their  Master.  2.  The  justice  manifested  ia 
the  entrjAice  of  the  demon  into  the  swine.  HI.  The  result  of  the  miracl*.  1. 
The  swineherds  flee  to  carry  the  tidings.  Fear  gives  wings  to  their  feet.  2.  Th« 
demoniac  comes  and  sits  at  Jesus'  feet.  3.  The  Gadarenes  entreat  Christ  to  depart, 
and  He  goes.  4.  The  recovered  demoniac  seeks  to  be  allowed  to  follow  Christ,  and 
is  refused.  Learn : — 1.  Let  us  shudder  at  the  maUce,  power,  and  misery  of  fallen 
spiritg.  2.  Fly  for  refuge  to  the  power  and  grace  of  Christ,  and  dread  the  thought 
of  desiring  Christ  to  depart.  3.  See  the  place  and  duty  of  those  whom  Christ  has 
healed.  (-/.  Bennett,  D.D.)  The  authority  of  right  over  wrong  :— 1.  That  this 
was  not  a  work  of  authority  done  by  our  Master  in  His  own  country.  He  had 
passed  from  His  own  country.  Truth  knows  no  limitations ;  a  man  that  has  it 
owes  it  to  mankind.  2,  The  sad  spectacle  that  met  our  Lord  was  a  man  in  ruins. 
8.  The  moment  our  Saviour  came  into  the  presence  of  this  man,  he  brought  a 
distributing  force.  Two  spheres  came  together  that  were  antagonistic.  Evil  claimi 
its  rights,  hberty.  This  is  the  keynote  of  the  opposition  in  modem  society  to  every 
attempt  to  make  men  better.  4.  We  should  oppose  these  malign  influences  from 
self-interest,  and  in  self-defence.  It  is  not  going  away  from  our  own  affairs  when 
we  attempt  to  break  down  everything  that  is  destroying  the  industry  and  virtue  of 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  na 

Bociety.  We  are  bound  to  meddle  with  the  demonized  part  of  society.  Men 
ought  to  stand  on  the  ground  of  goodness  and  assort  the  dignity  of  rectitude  over 
immoraUty.  (Beecher.)  A  man  in  ruins: — There  is  nothing  sadder;  and, 
sad  to  say,  nothing  more  common.  No  one  can  see  great  desolation  by  conflagra- 
tion without  having  a  kind  of  commercial  sympathy.  The  consumption  of  bo 
much  property,  the  waste  and  ruin  of  so  many  costly  structures,  is  painful  to 
behold.  No  man  can  learn  that  a  storm  has  swept  the  sea,  and  that  fleets  and 
merchantmen  have  been  wrecked  or  foundered,  without  a  certain  sadness.  And  yet 
all  the  ships  on  the  sea  might  sink,  and  all  the  buildings  on  the  globe  might  be 
burned,  and  the  united  whole  would  not  be  as  much  as  to  shatter  one  immortal  soul. 
There  is  nothing  in  old  dilapidated  cities,  there  is  nothing  in  temples  filled  with 
memorials  of  former  glory,  that  tends  to  inspire  such  sadness  and  melancholy  as  to 
look  upon  a  dilapidated  eonl,  whose  powers  and  faculties  are  shattered  and  cast 
down.  {Ibid).  Evil  to  be  opposed  in  gelf-difence  : — It  is  not  going  away  from  cor 
own  ailairs  when  we  attempt  to  break  down  everything  that  is  destroying  the  irulustiy, 
and  order,  and  virtue,  and  the  well-being  of  the  young  in  society,  and  corrupting 
society  itself.  Every  man  is  to  a  very  great  extent  dependent  for  his  own  prosperity 
upon  the  average  conditions  of  the  community  in  which  he  lives.  A  man  is  very 
much  like  a  plant.  If  you  put  a  plant  in  a  pot  of  poor  earth,  there  is  no  inherent 
force  in  the  plant  by  which  it  can  grow.  The  atmosphere,  too,  which  surrounds 
the  leaf  has  much  to  do  with  the  health  and  growth  of  the  plant.  But  suppose  a 
plant  should  be  endowed  with  momentary  intelligence,  and  should  cry  out  and 
protest  that  it  was  potted  in  bad  earth,  and  surrounded  by  poisonous  vapours  ?  and 
suppose  the  earth  should  say,  "  Mind  your  own  business,  and  I  will  mind  mine," 
and  the  atmosphere  should  say,  "  You  take  care  of  yourself,  and  I  will  take  care  of 
myself  "  ?  It  would  be  very  much  like  these  enemies  to  8"ciety  sajing  to  us,  when 
we  raise  our  voices  against  them,  "  Mind  your  own  business."  That  is  just  what 
we  are  doing.  We  are  minding  our  own  business.  Our  business  is  to  breathe  and 
to  grow,  and  we  must  have  pure  air  and  good  soil.  And  if  we  are  living  in  a  com- 
munity where  we  find  our  roots  starved,  and  our  leaves  poisoned,  we  have  a  right  to 
take  care  of  ourselves  and  defend  ourselves.  A  man  depends  for  his  prosperity  and 
happiness  upon  the  average  condition  of  the  community  in  which  he  lives.  A  man 
that  lives  in  a  virtuous  community  is  like  a  man  that  lives  on  some  mountain  side, 
where  the  air  is  pure.  A  man  that  lives  in  a  corrupt  community  is  like  a  man  that 
lives  where  the  air  is  impure.  And  for  the  sake  of  our  own  well-being,  and  the  well-being 
of  our  households,  we  have  a  right  to  resist  these  men  who  are  destroying  society  by 
eorrupting  it.  ilbid.)  Physical  injury  not  tolerated: — Let  a  man  start  a  mill 
for  grinding  arsenic,  and  let  the  air  be  filled  with  particles  of  this  deadly  poison, 
and  let  it  be  noticed  that  the  people  in  the  neighbourhood  are  beginning  to  sneeze 
and  grow  pale,  and  let  it  be  discovered  that  this  mill  is  the  cause,  and  do  you  sup- 
pose he  would  be  allowed  to  go  on  grinding?  No.  Men  would  shut  up  his  estab- 
Bshment  at  once.  And  yet,  men  open  those  more  infernal  mills  of  utter  destruction 
— distilleries,  and  wholesale  and  retail  dens  for  liquor;  and  yon  can  mark  the 
streams  of  damnation  that  flow  out  from  them ;  and  yet  nobody  meddles  with  them. 
One  man  is  getting  carbuncles ;  another  man  is  becoming  red  in  the  eyes ;  another 
man  is  growing  irritable,  and  losing  his  self-control ;  another  man  is  being  ruined 
both  in  body  and  mind;  multitudes  of  men  begin  to  exhibit  the  signs  of  approach- 
ing destruction ;  and  the  cause  of  all  tlJs  terrible  devastation  may  be  traced  to 
these  places  where  intoxicating  drinks  are  manufactured  and  sold.  You  would  not 
let  a  man  grind  arsenic ;  but  you  will  let  a  man  make  and  sell  liquor,  though 
arsenic  is  a  mercy  compared  with  liquor.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  34.  Besought  Him  that  He  would  depart. — God  coming  near  to  na.  L 
The  way  in  which  God  tormerlv  presenteu  Himself  to  men.  II.  The  way  in 
WHICH  He  does  80  NOW.  III.  The  way  in  which  men  decline  His  Presencb. 
(E.  M.  Goulburn.)  God's  goodness  and  man's  ingratitude  : — The  Gadarenes,  in 
return  for  Christ's  works  of  love,  majesty,  and  mercy,  besought  Him  to  depart. 
They  cared  more  for  the  swine  wliich  the  devils  had  destroyed  than  for  the  poor 
man  Christ  had  restored.  {A.  Jones.)  Man's  dislike  and  dread  of  Christ : — Still 
the  same  in  our  own  day  1  Let  us  mark — I.  The  comino.  It  was  a  universal 
movenjent,  and  a  most  interesting  one.  A  whole  city  flocking  out  to  meet  Jesus  J 
How  seldom  had  such  a  thing  been  seen,  or  is  seen  now.  II.  The  seeing.  Thej 
did  not  remain  afar  oiT,  b'lt  came  nigh — they  saw  for  themselves,  and  that  aggra- 
vated their  guilt.     III.  The  refosinq.    An  awful  request  in  many  ways.     Wag 


«HAP.  n.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  153 

there  ever  a  request  so  sad,  so  fatal  ?  Why  was  this  ?  There  was  something  in 
Jesus  that  diew  them ;  but  there  was  more  that  they  disliked.  They  would  like 
Him  as  the  physician  of  the  body,  but  not  of  the  soul.  His  company  seemed 
dangerous  and  terrible.  So  they  besought  Him  to  depart.  Their  "  depart  from 
!!•  "  is  the  foreboding  of  His  ' '  depart  from  Me  "  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  1.  How  near 
salvation  they  were.  2.  How  they  wronged  the  Saviour.  3.  How  they  wronged 
themselves.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  case  of  the  Gergesenet : — That  the  rejection 
of  Christ  sometimes  arises  from  imperfect  knowledge  of  Him ;  and  that  deeper 
knowledge  wiU  frequently  lead  to  deeper  love.  I  try  to  place  myself  in  the  position 
of  these  people.  1.  I  observe  that  almost  the  whole  knowledge  which  they  had  of 
our  Lord  was  confined  to  the  miracle  of  the  destruction  of  the  swine.  Can  we 
wonder  that  they  wished  to  get  rid  of  a  visitor  at  once  so  powerful  and  destructive  ? 
True,  they  had  another  chapter  of  evidences,  the  healed  men  to  bear  witness  to  the 
healing  and  restoring  character  of  Him  who  had  destroyed  the  swine.  There  was  a 
problem  of  loss  and  gain  ;  some  palliation  of  their  error.  2.  If  these  Gergesenes, 
instead  of  the  last  seven  verses,  had  had  the  whole  of  this  chapter  before  them, 
would  they  have  asked  Him  to  leave  their  coasts  ?  I  doubt  it.  3.  If  they  had 
heard  His  teaching  contained  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  would  they  have  acted 
so  f  Think  of  the  goodness  and  gentleness  pervading  it.  4.  The  magnitude  of  the 
reiponsibility  of  rejecting  Christ — intellectually  and  speculatively,  or  rejecting  Him 
virtually  by  despi>ing  aud  forgetting  His  precepts — depends  upon  the  knowledge 
which  we  have  of  Him,  and  in  spite  of  which  we  reject  Him.  Those  who  have,  as 
it  were,  a  casual  visit  from  Christ  may  not  be  much  better  or  worse  for  it ;  it  is 
ot  lerwise  with  those  who  have  the  whole  picture  of  His  life  before  them.  (Bishop 
oj  Carlisle.)  The  conduct  of  the  Gergesenes  explained  : — Why  the  Saviour  is  not 
w«,4come.  1.  Because  the  need  of  Him  is  not  felt.  2.  They  look  upon  Christ  as  a 
qvestionable  Benefactor.  He  will  take  notice  of  everything  unlawful  and  unholy. 
"Vi  e  like  the  aids  of  religion  in  domestic  government,  but  not  its  restrictions.  3. 
The  time  will  come  when  the  Son  of  man  will  be  admitted.  Who  may  abide  the 
d-vy  of  His  coming?  He  will  not  be  shut  out  then.  {T.  E.  Hankinson,  M.A.) 
Bejeeting  salvation: — To  me  it  is  specially  appalling  that  a  man  should  perish 
through  wilfully  rejecting  the  Divine  salvation.  A  drowning  man  throwing  away 
the  life-belt,  a  poisoned  man  pouring  the  antidote  upon  the  floor,  a  wounded  man 
tearing  open  his  wounds,  any  one  of  these  is  a  sad  sight ;  but  what  shall  we  say  of 
a  Roul  putting  from  it  the  Redeemer  and  choosing  its  own  destruction?  (C  R. 
Sfurgeon.)  Christ  should  be  welcomed  : — If  you  do  but  hear  when  the  king  is  on 
hin  road  to  your  town,  you  raise  your  bells  to  ring  him  in,  and  stay  not  till  he  be 
entered  the  gates.  The  birds  they  rise  betimes  in  the  morning,  and  are  saluting  the 
idsing  sun  with  their  sweet  notes  in  the  air.  Thus  should  we  strike  up  oar  harps 
in  praifling  Qod  at  the  appearance  of  a  meroy.     {Gumall.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 
Tsrg.  1-8.    A  man  sick  of  the  palsy. — The  highest  eatue  for  jof : — ^I.  Thb 

mSERABLE  CONDITION  OF  A  HUMAN  BEING.       II.    ThE  POWEB   AND    LOVE    0»    JeSCB.       HI. 

The  joyous  change  produced.  {American  Homiletical  Review.)  Sin  and  its 
forgiveness: — I.  Oub  faith  may  be  effectual  in  saving  othebs.  The  faith  of 
the  centurion  obtained  a  cure  for  his  servant.  Such  instances  prove  that,  in  all 
cases,  we  may  help  on  the  salvation  of  our  friends ;  that  in  some  cases  our  faith 
may  stand  in  the  place  of  theirs.  Another  one's  faith  may  do  for  an  infant,  a 
lunatic,  for  one  who  has  an  insurmountable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  coming  to  Christ. 
Apply  this  to  the  case  of  sponsors  in  infant  baptism.  We  are  related  to  God, 
and  members  one  of  another.  II.  The  connection  between  disease  and  sin. 
Christ  goes  deeper  than  the  outward  evil,  to  that  which  is  evil — sin.  The  conse- 
quence of  sin  often  traced  in  suffering.  The  consequences  of  past  deeds  remain. 
III.  Chrtst  the  Restorer  of  he.o-th  and  the  Forgiver  of  sin.  We  have  no  right 
to  arpTie  there  was  no  repentance :  he  felt  his  need  of  Christ.  Christ  spoke  to  the 
suffering  sinner ;  giving  first  that  we  may  return  to  Him  of  His  own.  There  may 
be  •  crowd  of  evil  thoughts,  doubts  between  you  and  your  Saviour ;  let  none  of  these 


154  xaE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

hinder  you.  (C.  B.  Drake,  M.A.)  Helplessness  and  its  Master  : — There  are  three 
views  of  the  outward  miracles  of  our  Lord,  one  as  marvels  of  power,  as  demon- 
strations of  benevolence,  as  seeing  in  them  a  Divine  correspondeuco  between  the 
things  of  nature  and  the  things  of  the  spirit ;  between  the  facts  of  the  outer  and 
inner  world.     Thus,  the  multiplied  bread  a  visible  image  of  heavenly  nomnsbment. 

1.  In  the  text  paisy  stands  for  rpibitual  prostration  and  indifference.  Action 
and  feeling  are  smitten  ;  but  not  gone.  II.  The  condition  of  the  cure.  This 
patient  does  hear,  does  believe,  and  is  ready  to  obey.  Let  us  never  despair  of 
another.  "  They  brought  him  " — notice  this  neighbourly  and  vicarious  kindness. 
There  are  instances  when  the  sick  man  alone  lacks  force  to  aiise.  In  the  fulfilment 
of  the  necessary  conditiori  faith  and  action  are  joined,  and  the  action  expresses 
the  faith.  These  persons  not  only  believe  abstractly  in  Christ's  power ;  they  brought 
their  sick  neighbour  where  He  was.  It  was  not  an  experiment  with  them,  but  the 
faith  of  confident  expectation.  On  our  way  to  cure  we  have  no  time  for  specu- 
lation, or  curiosity  ;  but  to  draw  near  with  faith.  III.  What  he  said  to  the  sick 
or  THE  PALSY,  1,  A  title  of  endearment  and  an  assurance  of  hope.  Adaptation 
of  Christ's  treatment ;  he  never  administers  rebuke  to  self-abasement.  2.  The 
words  reveal  a  deep  insight  into  the  relations  of  physical  and  moral  evil.  Pain,  the 
result  of  sin;    hence  He  removes  disobedience,  then   discomfort.     IV.  The  low 

instincts  and  preferences  op  the  NATURAL  MAN  CHAFE  AT  THIS  DIVINE  FRIENDLINESS. 

These  scribes  represent  jealous  and  selfish  human  nature.  This  friendliness  is  too 
wise,  deep,  holy,  for  their  low  desires.  The  scribes  watch  for  the  chance  of  hostile 
criticism.     Self-will  demands  to  be  saved  after  its  own  manner.    V.  Here  then,  m 

THE  CAVILS    OF  THESE    SPECTATORS,  THE    DIVINE  PHYSICIAN  FINDS  A  NEW   DISORDER  MOBB 

DEEPLY  STRUCK  THAN  THE  OTHER.  His  compassioH  ;  His  patienco.  He  changes  the 
manner  of  His  mercy,  and  is  willing  by  any  means  to  convince  the  people  that  He 
is  Lord.  All  miracle  is  one,  the  cure  of  sick  bodies  and  sick  hearts.  VI.  The 
MULTITUDE  GLORIFIED  GoD.  The  intended  result  was  reached.  (Bp.  Huntingdon.) 
Good  cheer  for  sad  hearts  : — I.  Sin — its  relation  to  the  body.  Its  sphere  of  action 
is  in  '•  high  places ;  "  mere  matter  cannot  sin.  It  lives  secretly  in  the  soul,  but 
works  terribly  in  the  body.  As  sin  works  outward  through  the  body,  punishment 
strikes  the  body  on  its  way  to  the  seat  of  sin.  Here  is  one  of  God's  grandest 
temples  lying  in  ruins  ;  and  God  incarnate  comes  to  restore  it.  He  came  not  to 
deliver  the  body  from  the  temporal  consequences  of  sin,  but  the  man  from  its 
power  here,  and  its  presence  hereafter,  II.  Sin — its  removal  by  the  Lord.  1.  It 
is  by  a  free  pardon  that  sin  is  removed  and  its  eternal  consequences  averted.  There 
is  no  other  cure.  2.  The  Saviour  to  whom  this  needy  man  was  brought  has  power 
to  forgive  sins.  It  is  the  acquired  right  of  Him  who  bore  the  law's  curse.  3. 
Christ  has  power  to  forgive  on  earth.  While  we  are  on  this  earth  only.  4.  The 
Son  of  Ulan  hath  power  to  forgive.  The  power  lies  in  our  brother's  hands.  6. 
Christ  the  Saviour,  in  coming  to  a  sinful  man  desires  his  safety  hereafter,  but  also 
his  happiness  now — "  Son,  be  of  good  cheer."  Every  man  has  his  own  way  o£ 
seeking  "good  cheer";  some  by  money,  lands,  politics,  war.  {W.  Arnot.)  The 
efficacy   of  grace  : — 1.  In  awakening   the   dormant  powers  of  the  palsied  man, 

2.  In  calming  the  perturbed  soul — "Be  of  good  cheer."  3.  In  healing  both  soul 
and  body.  {A.  F.  C.  Wallroth.)  The  cure  of  t)ie  paralytic  : — I.  That  sin  re  A 
obeat  evil.  II.  That  faith  is  a  great  blessing.  III.  That  Christ  is  a  great 
Savioi  R.  1  His  knowledge.  He  knew  the  real  need  of  the  paralytic.  2.  His 
authority.  It  is  good  to  have  been  afflicted.  (D.  Rees.)  The  paralytic,  or 
sickness  improved : — Why  does  our  Saviour  begin  with  the  pardon  of  sin  1  1.  To 
display  His  sovereignty.  2.  To  show  that  the  f-oul  is  the  principal  care.  8.  Per- 
haps the  man  sufi'ered  more  from  spiritual  distress  than  from  bodily  pain.  4,  It 
would  eeem  to  emit  a  ray  of  His  glory,  and  prove  a  test  to  try  the  dispositions  of 
the  company.  Here  are  several  things  worthy  of  notice  : — 1.  This  cure  was  effected 
by  a  word.    2.  He  was  ordered  to  return  home,     Christ  did  not  seek  His  own  glory, 

3.  Fix  your  eye  on  Jesus,  the  most  prominent  figure  in  the  story.  4.  How  far  the 
case  of  the  paralytic  resembles  yours.  (1)  Are  you  distressed  in  mind  and  body 
too  ?  (2)  Has  Christ  healed  thy  body  and  not  thy  soul  ?  (3)  Has  he  8pol<en  peace 
to  thy  con-cience,  and  is  thy  body  still  under  the  influence  of  disease?  (W.  Jay.) 
The  forgiven  paralytic: — 1.  The  afflicted  sufferer  brought  to  the  Savioub. 
II.  "The  reception  given  by  Christ,  1,  Observe  what  it  was  that  found  its  way  to 
the  heart  of  Christ,  Not  his  suUering,  but  faith.  2.  Mark  the  peculiarity  of  th« 
reception  he  gave  to  the  paralyzed  man — "  Son,  be  of  good  cheer,"  (fee.  III.  Thb 
eoNTBADiCTioN  OF    8INNBH8  WHICH  Jesus  HAD  TO  ENDUBB.    "  This  man  speaketb 


CHAP.  K.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  156 

blasphemy."  IV.  The  great  tbuth  taught  us  bt  this  nabratite.  1.  All  men, 
till  they  come  into  saving  contact  with  Christ,  are  carrying  about  with  them  two 
heavy  burdens.  2.  Christ  has  power  to  meet  every  case  of  accumulated  guilt  and 
heart-seated  depravity.  3.  What  then  is  the  nature  of  this  blessing  ?  (P.  Morrigon.) 
The  mystery  of  sickness : — 1.  The  connection  which  subsists  between  the  prevalence 
of  sickness  and  the  invasion  of  tin.  2.  V7by  it  is  not  always  the  case  that  when 
Bin  is  pardoned  sickneos  is  healed.  Not  for  want  of  power  on  the  part  of  our  Lord. 
Also  in  the  case  of  the  pals-ied  man  it  was  necess.iry  that  He  should  give  to  the 
Jewish  people  a  proof  that  He  possessed  the  power  He  claimed ;  this  not  necessary 
now.  Christ  does  even  now  sometimes  heal  where  all  human  remedy  has  failed ; 
but  not  always.  Then  the  discipline  of  continued  affliction  is  good,  impatience  ia 
subdued.  Also  we  have  given  an  evidence  of  the  power  of  the  gospel,  in  the 
triumph  of  grace  over  nature.  {S.  Eobjohns,  M.A.)  The  paralytic  healed: — 
1.  The  terrible  state  of  the  patient.  2.  The  charity  of  his  friends.  3.  The  com- 
passion of  Jesus,  so  ready  and  comprehensive.  4.  The  opposition  of  his  enemies. 
6.  The  patient,  meek  forbearance  of  our  Lord.  6.  The  triumphant  display  of  Hia 
Divine  power.  7.  Its  effect  upon  the  multitade,  wonder,  not  repentance.  {The 
Clergyman's  Marjazine.)  The  story  of  a  paralytic: — One  real  case  of  bodily 
paralysis  may  help  us  to  pictm'e  what  above  all  things  we  ought  to  know,  the  state 
of  our  own  inner  Life.  I  have  seen  this  quoted  from  the  medical  records  at  Paris  : — 
A  man  was  attacked  by  a  creeping  paralysis ;  sight  was  the  tirst  to  fail ;  soon  after, 
hearing  went ;  then,  by  degrees,  taste,  smell,  touch,  and  the  very  power  of  motion. 
He  could  breathe,  he  could  swallow,  he  could  think,  and,  strange  to  say,  he  could 
speak  ;  that  was  all ;  not  the  very  slightebt  message  from  without  could  possibly,  it 
seemed,  reach  his  mind,  nothing  to  tell  him  what  was  near,  who  was  still  alive ; 
the  world  was  utterly  lost  to  him,  and  he  all  but  lost  to  the  world.  At  la«t,  one 
day,  an  accident  showed  that  one  small  place  on  one  cheek  had  its  feeling  left.  It 
seemed  a  revelation  from  heaven.  By  tracing  letters  on  that  place,  his  wife  and 
children  could  speak  to  him,  his  dark  dungeon-wall  was  pierced,  his  tongue  bad 
never  lost  its  power,  and  once  more  he  was  a  man  among  men.  Strange  this,  and 
true ;  a  parable  too  if  we  read  it  aright.  The  worst  kind  of  paralysis,  but,  God  be 
thanked,  far  the  rarest  of  all,  is  that  of  the  heart  and  conscience.  There  never 
was  a  man  with  no  affections  and  no  sense  of  right  and  wrong.  But  never  must 
they  be  pronounced  past  cure.  God  alone  knows  our  real  state ;  there  is  always 
some  tender  spot  in  our  nature,  some  sensitive  place  on  which  He  can  write  in 
characters  of  love,  and  it  ma>'  be  some  one's  privilege  to  find  it — the  thought  of  a 
mother,  of  the  days  of  childhood,  of  a  httle  one  who  died,  or  whatever  it  be,  God 
can  still  use  that  as  a  means  of  cure.  (H.  S.  Sivithinbank,  M.A.)  Forgiveness,  the 
primary  need  of  the  sinner : — Not,  "Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  health  ia  given  thee," 
though  that  he  had  also;  but  "thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  If  a  friend  should 
come  to  a  malefactor,  on  his  way  to  the  gallows,  put  a  sweet  posy  in  his  hands,  and 
bid  him  be  of  good  cheer,  smell  on  that ;  alas  I  this  would  bring  Uttle  joy  with  it  to 
the  poor  man's  heart,  who  sees  the  place  of  execution  before  him.  But  if  one  came 
from  his  prince  with  a  pardon,  put  it  into  his  hand,  and  bade  him  be  of  good  cheer ; 
this,  and  this  only,  would  cheer  the  poor  man's  heart,  and  fill  it  with  a  ravishment 
of  joy.  Truly,  anything  short  of  pardoning  mercy  is  as  inconsiderable  towards 
pacifying  a  troubled  conscience,  as  that  posy  in  the  d}  ing  prisoner's  hand  would  be. 
(Gumall.)  Christ  sees  the  beginning  and  tfie  ending  of  the  patient's  ailment: — Sin 
is  the  well  in  which  it  springs,  and  perdition  the  sea  to  which  it  is  flowing.  When 
be  looked  on  disease,  he  sees  its  beginning  and  its  ending  :  hia  work  is  to  cut  short 
its  course,  ere  it  issue  in  the  sec<md  death.  He  looks  upward  and  downward :  he 
will  not  confine  his  view  to  these  symptoms  which  appear  in  the  body,  and  pertain 
to  time.  (]V.  Arnot.)  Getting  the  pahied  m^in  to  Jesus  : — Many  Oriental  houses 
have  a  court  or  quadrangle  in  front ;  the  buildings  which  form  the  house  occupy 
one  or  more  of  its  sides.  The  internal  part  of  such  a  house  is  often  screened  by 
a  corridor  below,  having  the  various  household  officers  behind  it,  and  a  gallery 
above,  from  which  is  the  entrance  to  the  family  apartments.  The  gaUery  is  roofed 
over,  and  its  roof  is  about  the  same  height  as  the  roof  of  the  house.  Bearing  this 
in  mind  we  may  account  for  what  occurred  in  this  way.  The  quadrangle  was  full 
of  people ;  our  Lord  instructs  them  from  the  gallery  ;  the  Pharisees  are  in  the 
fainily  apartments  adjoining  the  gallery  ;  the  friends  of  the  sick  man  cannot  enter 
the  quadrangle  from  the  street ;  or  if  this  could  be  done,  they  cannot  reach  the 
corridor,  from  which  there  were  steps  leading  to  the  gallery ;  they  ascend,  there- 
fore, the  stairs  fi-om  the  back  or  side  of  the  house  leading  to  the  roof,  and  break 


15b  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

open  the  roof  or  verandah  which  covered  the  gallery.  The  house-roof  was  used  for 
a  terrace,  aud  was  built  of  strong  materials ;  the  gallery-roof  was  of  very  slight 
constrnction,  of  the  same  character  aa  the  covered  balcony.  {Webster  and 
Wilkinson.) 

Ver.  6.  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  of  Man. — Forgiveness ;— This  narr»> 
tive  is  remarkable,  1.  Because  it  is  evideni  that  while  our  Lord  forgave  the  siok 
man's  sins  for  his  own  sake,  He  healed  hid  disease  for  the  sake  of  those  who  stood 
by.     2.  Because  our  Lord  claims  the  power  of  forgiving  sins,  not  because  He  is  the 
Son  of  God,  but  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Mau.     3.  It  is  one  of  the  very  rare 
instances  in  which  a  miracle  seems  to  have  been  performed  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
vincing unbelief.     What  is  this  forgiveness  ?    It  must  be  the  same  thing  as  human 
forgiveness.     "  Forgive  us  our  trespttsses,  as  we  forgiv*  them  that  trespass  against 
us."      It  therefore  canuot   mean  the  remission  of  punishment.     Forgiveness  is 
reconciliation  ;    the  offence  is  no  longer   aUowed  to  stand  between  the  parties. 
When  God  forgives  He  receives  us  back  to  His  favour.     It  is  free,  full,  and  outrung 
our  repentance.     But  He  does  not  destroy  the  consequences  of  sin ;  the  punish- 
ment remains.     But  it  entirely  changes  the  character  of  the  punishment.     What 
■we  regarded  as  the  blow  of  au  angry  Ruler,  becomes  the  chastisement  of  a  kind 
Father.     Our  Lord  claims  the  power  of  forgiving  sins,  not  because  He  is  the  Son  ot 
God,  but  because  He  is  the  Son  ot  Man.     Why  does  our  Lord  thus  describe  Him- 
self ?    We  are  accustomed  to  think  that  the  pardon  of  sin  is  a  power  possessed  by 
God  alone.   When  Christ  calls  Himself  the  Son  of  Man,  He  is  displaying  before  our 
eyes  a  pattern  of  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  of  powers  we  ought  to  possess.     Were 
we  perfect  beings,  the  power  of  forgiving  sins  would  be  ours.     The  ministry  of 
reconcihation  is  committed  to  man.     The  forgiveness  of  sins  is  the  reconciliation 
oi  the  sinner  to  God ;  people  of  great  personal  holiness  have  the  power  of  recon- 
ciling sinners  to  God.     This  may  fall  short  of  the  power  to  forgive ;  but  it  is  be- 
cause the  holiest  man  falls  short  of  the  measure  of  Chriat.     We  may  now  see  why 
our  Lord  accepted  the  challenge  of  unbelief.     He  cured  the  man  to  show  the  by- 
standers that  they  ought  to  have  like  power.     It  was  man,  not  God,  who  had  made 
the  way  of  forgiveness  hard.     Love  raised  the  life  that  self-righteous  scorn  had 
trampled  down.     (J.  P.  Wright^  M.A.)         The  forgiveness  of  sins  : — Christ  here 
addiessed  the  soul  of  the  man  first ;  sometimes  His  first  attention  was  given  to 
the  body.     From  the  indiscriminate  order  of  Christ's  procedure  in  this  matter,  we 
like  to  see  how  body  and  soul  are  equally  dear  to  God.     The  power  which  is  given 
no  Christ  upon  earth  to  forgive  sins.     1.  There  is  a  beautiful  justice  in  the  fact 
tliat  He  who  purchased  the  pardon,  at  such  an  untold  price  of  suffering,  should  be 
the  one  to  whom  it  is  penuitted  to  have  the  joy  of  giving  it.     2.  At  the  moment 
when  our  blessed  Lord  said  these  words  the  apostles  were  all  standing  by ;  and  He 
did  His  own  work,  in  His  own  solitude,  to  His  own  glory.     3.  In  these  words  *'  on 
earth  "  I  read  the  blessed  promise  that  so  luug  as  this  earth  shall  last,  more  and 
more  wicked  though  it  may  grow.  He  will  never  leave  this  earth  while  it  is  an  earth, 
but  will  be  always  here  to  do  His  forgiving  work.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)         The  for- 
giveness  of  sins : — I.  As  the  gekat  want  of  jian.    II.  As  the  peculiab  achievb- 
MENT  OF  Christ.     III.  As  thk  pbimaby  offer  of  the  gospel.     (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 
I.  The  force  of  the  name  "  Son  of  Man,"  implying  (I)  Divine  origin.     (2)  Repre- 
sentative of  manhood.    Not  the  Son  of  the  Jew,  or  carpenter.    (3)  Brotherhood.    (4) 
Manhke  sympathy.    2.  His  grand  prerogative — "  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins." 
Fosfgiveness  is  His  own  right  by  virtue  of  His  (1)  Sacrifice ;  (2)  Intercession  (Acts  v. 
31).    3.  The  great  blessing — "  forgiveness."     "  The  soul  might  have  been  healed 
and  the  body  untouched ;  but  the  paralysis,  both  moral  and  physical,  was  removed. 
(1)  Forgiveness  is  obtainable  "  on  earth."     (2)  Many  realized  it  now.     CJ.  Harris.) 
The  Son  of  Man : — "  There  have  been  two  men  in  the  world,"  says  St.  Fanl :  "  the 
fallen  Adam,  with  his  infantile  an-d  undeveloped  perfections;  and  the  Christ,  with 
His  full  aud  complete  humanity."  All  other  men  are  fragments  ;  He  is  the  "  Entire 
and  peifect  Cbrysolite."     "  Aristotle  is  but  the  rubbish  of  an  Adam,"  and  Adam  in 
but  the  dim  outline  sketch  of  a  Jesus.     And  between  the  two  there  have  been  none. 
The  one  Man  as  God  meant  Ilim,  the  type  of  man,  the  perfect  humanity,  the 
realized  ideal,  the  home  of  all  the  powers  of  manhood.    {Dr.  Maclaren.)        Eastern 
beds : — The  Oriental  fr<  quently  spreads  a  mat  upon  the  ground  and  sleeps  in  the 
open  air.    In  the  morning  he  rolls  up  his  mat,  and  carries  it  away.    {A.  Carr,  MA.) 
Forgiveness  personal : — The   Rev.  H.  Wilkius,  Cheltenham,  in  "  Good  Cause  for 
Good  Cheer,"  writes:  "It  is  no  general  statement,  but  a  personal  assurance  o^ 


OHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  167 

the  forgiveness  of  eina.  Looking  with  His  own  been  glance  of  love  into  the  pick 
man'B  eyes,  He  says :  *  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee. '  The  general  truth  of  the  pardon 
of  sins  is  not  enough  for  us,  we  want  a  personal  forgiveness.  One  day  when  Martin 
Luther  was  almost  overwhelmed  with  despair  in  his  cell  at  Erfurth,  an  old  monk 
tried  to  comfort  him  by  repeating  the  article  of  the  Apostles'  Creed,  •  I  believe  in 
the  forgiveness  of  sins.'  Luther  often  repeated  the  same  words.  'Ah  ! '  said  the 
good  old  monk,  '  it  is  not  enough  to  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  David's  sins  or 
Peter's  sins ;  this  the  devils  believe.  God's  command  is  to  believe  that  our  own 
eins  are  forgiven.*  This  was  the  assurance  that  Jesus  gave  here.  He  knew  this 
man's  life-history;  He  knew,  probably,  that  there  was  a  close  connection  between  his 
suffering  and  his  sin ;  but  whatever  his  sins  were,  they  were  frankly  forgiven." 

Ver.  9.  He  saw  a  man  named  Matthew  sitting'  at  the  receipt  of  custom. — Ttie 
■  following  Christ : — Whom  are  we  to  follow,  and  on  what  road,  and  to  what  place? 
I.  We  ABE  TO  FOLLOW  Christ.  Do  uot  the  soldiers  follow  their  captain  ?  Do  not 
the  redeemed  follow  their  deliverer  ?  Do  not  the  disciples  foUow  the  teacher?  We 
mnst  follow  Him  further  and  fuither.  Immediately,  lest  we  never  have  the  invita- 
tion given  us  again.  He  has  something  worthy  to  be  obtained  by  such  as  follow 
Him.  Will  a  man  shut  his  ears  to  such  a  merciful  invitation  7  If  a  rich  man  were 
to  call  a  famished  man  to  come  into  his  house  and  be  fed,  would  he  not  instantly 
follow  ?  The  state  of  those  who  refuse  is  one  of  miserable  bondage,  II.  What  is 
THE  WAT  ALONO  WHICH  HE  CALLS  US  TO  FOLLOW  ?  Christ  has  opened  a  new  and  living 
way,  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  Our  old,  corrupt  nature  dislikes  a  new  way. 
Christ  gives  the  power,  hence  no  excuse.  But  is  this  new  way  unpleasant  ?  It  hat 
good  company  and  entertainment ;  at  the  end,  the  house  of  the  Almighty  Fathei . 
in.  To  WHAT  PLACE.     (R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)        The  eulling  of  Matthew: — I.  Con* 

BIDBB  THE   EVENT  AS   ILLUSTBATIVE   OP   DIVINB   OBACE.      God   SCeks  whom   He  wiU   tO 

serve  Him.  The  change  rapid.  II.  We  are  to  forsake  all  inobdinatb  iiova 
oV  biches.  Discriminate  between  the  possession  of  riches  and  inordinate  love  of 
them.  III.  Subsequently  to  his  conversion  Matthew  entertained  hib  hasteb, 
INVITING  ODE3T8  FROM  HIS  FORMER  COMPANIONS — a  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  his  con« 
version.  We  should  silently  and  sedulously  seek  others.  Wliat  mariner,  rescued 
from  the  fury  of  the  waves,  would  refuse  to  extend  a  charitable  hand  to  his  com*^ 
panions  who  are  plunging  in  the  abyss  he  has  escaped.  {Pitman.)  T)ie  calling 
oj  St.  Matthew : — I.  The  call.  1.  It  was  a  call  of  sovereignty.  There  was  no 
miracle ;  the  attraction  of  personal  authority.  2.  It  was  a  call  of  grace.  What 
was  there  in  St.  Matthew  to  recommend  him  ?  3.  It  was  a  call  of  love  (1  John 
iii.  1).  II.  The  answer.  1.  It  was  an  answer  of  faith.  He  followed  because  he 
believed — had  trust  —  in  Christ.  2.  It  was  an  answer  of  decision.  3.  It  waa 
an  answer  of  self-sacrifice.  (Canon  Titcomb,  M.A.)  *^A  man  called  Matthew:  " — 
I.  His  call  seemed  accidental  and  unlikelt.  II.  His  call  was  altoqetheb  uh- 
thought  of  and  unsought.  1.  He  was  in  a  degrading  business.  2.  He  was  in  an 
ensnaring  business.  3.  He  would  not  have  dared  to  follow  Jesus  even  if  he  had 
wished  to  do  so.  III.  His  call  was  orvEN  by  the  Lord,  with  full  knowledoe  o» 
HIM.  Jesus  "  saw  a  man  named  Matthew,"  1.  He  saw  all  the  evil  that  had  been 
in  him.  2.  He  sr;W  his  adaptation  for  holy  service,  3.  He  saw  all  that  He  meant  to 
make  of  him.  IV.  His  call  was  oraciouslt  condescending.  V.  His  call  wai 
bublimelt  sniPLE.  1.  Few  were  the  words.  2.  Clear  was  the  direction.  3,  Per- 
sonal was  the  address.  4.  Koyal  was  the  command.  VI.  The  call  was  immediateli 
EFFECTUAL.  1.  He  f ollowed  at  once.  2.  He  followed  spiritually  as  well  as  literally. 
8.  He  followed  wholly.  4.  He  followed  growingly.  6.  He  followed  ever  after.  VII, 
His  CALL  WAS  a  doob  of  hope  for  others.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon. )  St.  Matthew's  Day : — 
I.  We  may  learn  also  the  necessity  of  our  immediate  and  cheerful  obedience  to  th« 
commands  of  God.  When  our  Saviour  called  him  to  arise  and  follow  Him,  He  (1) 
called  him  to  give  up  a  gainful  profession  for  a  life  of  hardship,  toil,  and  danger. 
(2)  To  expose  himself  to  the  mockery  of  his  former  companions.  (3)  To  the  scoffa 
of  the  wise,  and  the  (4)  persecution  of  men  in  power.  (5)  To  enter  into  a  situation 
for  which  neither  his  former  habits,  nor,  as  he  might  plead,  his  general  education 
suited  him.  Should  we  have  wondered*  if,  under  such  circumstances,  St.  Matthew 
had  offered  an  excuse  ?  II.  St.  Matthew  did  not  answer,  "  not  tet,  Lord,  whxls 
BO  MANY  persons  ABE  LOOKING  ON  ;  at  night  I  will  come  to  Thee.  Not  yet,  Lord, 
while  my  fortune  is  beginning  to  thrive ;  another  year  and  I  will  give  up  my  bnii« 
ness."  1,  He  arose  immediately,  and  followed  Him.  2.  With  joy,  as  having 
attained  the  highest  honour  which  mortal  man  could  obtain.     3,  To  prove  that  joy 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

he  makes  a  great  feast :  calls  together  his  brother  publicans.  4.  In  defiance  of 
their  ridicule  or  wotitler.  III.  Compare  this  conduct  with  tour  own.  {Bishop 
Ileber.)  St.  Matthew's  Day  : — I.  The  call  ;  in  a  word  of  command,  "Follow  me" : 
a  word  very  well  befitting  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  when  He  was  to  list  soldiers 
or  officers  in  His  militia.  Some  have  not  come  at  the  call.  Others,  thouf;h  they 
have  coiue,  have  not  followed  Him  as  they  should  do.  II.  There  is  something  on 
OUR  PART,  WHKN  WE  ARE  CALLED,  TO  BE  DONE  BY  US.  There  must  be  Concurrence 
and  obedient  compliance  of  our  wilU  Else  we  may  resist  the  word  as  well  as  the 
Spirit.  III.  The  ouediencb — "  He  arose  and  followed  Him.'  His  rising  up  shows 
(1)  reverence  and  respect,  as  well  as  (2)  resolution.  {?,)  Henceforth  he  owns  Chriet 
as  his  master.  (4)  He  was  wealthy,  but  now  sees  nothing  before  him  but  poverty 
and  pel  seen  tion.  Yet  he  accepts  the  condition  at  first  word.  IV.  The  constanct. 
1.  He  followed  his  master  to  the  end.  2.  Till  His  departure,  3.  Till  his  own 
death.  {Adam  Littleton,  D.D.)  Reenpt  of  custom: — Some  articles  of  produca 
art  taxed  as  they  are  brought  into  the  town.  A  booth  of  branches,  or  a  more  sub- 
stantial hut,  is  erected  at  every  entrance  into  the  city  or  village,  and  there,  both 
day  and  nijht,  sits  a  man  at  the  "receipt  of  custom."  He  taxes  all  the  piod  .oe, 
piercing  with  a  long,  sharp  iron  rod  the  large  camel-bags  of  wheat  or  coi.on,  in 
order  to  discover  concealed  copper- wire,  or  other  contraband.  {Van  Lennep.) 
Custom  of  sitting  at  uork : — The  pei'ple  of  this  country  sit  at  all  kinds  of  work. 
The  carpenter  saws,  planes,  and  hews  with  his  hand-adze  sitting  upon  the  ground, 
or  upon  tlie  plank  he  is  planing.  The  washer-woman  sits  by  the  tub,  and,  in  a 
word,  no  one  stands  where  it  is  possible  to  sit.  Shopkeepers  always  sit ;  and  Levi 
sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom  is  the  exact  way  to  state  the  case.  {W.  M.  Thom- 
son, D.D.)  Tlie  commencement  of  a  religious  life  easy  for  some  men: — How  easy  it 
is  for  some  men  to  rise  and  follow  Christ,  as  compared  with  others.  They  seem  to 
fall  into  the  way  of  faith  :  it  is  like  bringing  the  sun  to  bear  upon  a  bud  that  wants 
to  opt  n,  and  that  is  just  waitivg  for  light  in  order  that  it  might  unfold  its  deep  and 
sacred  beauty.  It  is  so  easy  for  some  men  to  pray :  tley  seem  to  be  walking  np 
a  gentle  green  slope  to  meet  God  at  the  height  of  it.  '\i\Tien  other  men  try  to  pray 
it  is  like  climbing  up  a  rugged,  nteep  rock,  some  of  the  stones  loose,  and  it  you  put 
your  foot  upon  them  you  will  fall.  It  is  so  easy  for  some  men  to  do  the  act  of 
benevolence.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  When  Christ  calls.  He  also  draws : — "Come," 
says  the  sea  to  the  river.  "  Come,"  saya  the  magnet  to  the  steel.  "  Come,"  saya 
the  spring  to  the  sleeping  life  of  the  field  and  forest.  And,  like  the  obedience  of 
the  river  to  the  sea,  of  the  steel  to  the  stone,  of  the  earth's  charmed  atoms  to  the 
spring's  effectual  call,  is  the  obedience  of  the  soul  to  Christ's  wondrous  spirit. 
{C.  Stanford.)  He  that  said  "Let  there  be  light,"  says  now,  "Follow  me." 
That  power  sweetly  inclines  which  could  forcibly  command ;  the  force  is  not  more 
irresistible  than  the  inclination.  V/h*n  the  suu  shines  upon  the  icicles^  can  they 
choose  but  melt  and  fall  ?  When  it  looks  into  a  dungeon,  can  the  place  choose 
but  be  enlightened  f  Do  we  see  the  jet  drawing  up  straws  to  it ;  the  loadstone, 
iron  ?  And  do  we  marvel  if  the  Omnipotent  Saviour,  by  the  influence  of  His  grace, 
attract  the  heart  of  a  publican  f  {Bishop  Hall.)  St.  Matthew : — 1.  We  must 
remember  how  in  business  may  be  found  a  service  for  Christ.  2.  We  may  learn 
not  to  think  too  much  of  daily  work,  and  set  too  great  a  price  on  it,  3,  We  shall 
seek  to  give  of  the  fruits  of  our  trading  to  Christ.  4.  The  true  servant  of  Chriit 
will  be  willing  to  give  np,  not  only  of  the  fruits  of  daily  work,  but  daily  work  ibiel/ 
foi  Chiist.     (T.  Gaxqitoine,  B.A.) 

Yer.  10.  Ab  Jefins  sa,t  at  meat  In  the  house.    I.  Levi's  oaixinq.    n.  Levi's 

fp:ast.  1.  It  probably  did  not  immeiliaiely  follow  the  call,  but  was  a  fit  token  of 
the  joy  of  its  acceptance.  2.  St.  Matthew  the  blessed  means  of  bringing  together 
the  Saviour  and  the  lost  whom  He  came  to  redeem.    {A,  M.  Stitart.) 

Ver.  11.  Publicans  and  sinners. — Appreciation  an  elevating  influence: — Tou 
cannot  elevate,  you  cannot  improve  any  man  whom  you  utterly  despise.  Ton 
cannot  bring  the  best  out  of  a  man  if  you  do  not  believe  that  the  best  is  somewhere 
in  him.  There  is  a  shocking  insolence  in  human  judgments,  and  the  tendency  of 
them  is  to  crush  men  down  to  their  own  base  level,  till  the  whole  world  is  all  thistles 
and  all  mole-hills,  never  a  mountain  and  never  a  forest  tree.  When  Cowper  was  a 
Westminster  boy,  he  was  despised  as  a  bhrinking,  moping,  ineffectual  creature  ;  it  wai 
not  until  the  age  of  fifty,  that  in  the  warmth  of  loving  aj)preciation,  like  flowers  in  the 
rac,  the  powers  unfolded  within  him,  which  made  him  one  of  the  swobteat  of 


CHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  159 

English  poets.  When  Clyde  became  the  hero  of  Plassy  and  the  conqueror  of  India, 
his  father  said  that  he  did  not  think  the  booby  had  so  much  sense.  When  Dal- 
garno,  the  ablest  and  most  eloquent  man  of  his  day,  went  to  an  English  countess 
as  a  candidate  for  the  post  of  tutor  to  her  sons,  slie  insulted  him  with  the  remark 
that  she  could  not  possibly  engage  a  person  so  stupid.  So  it  is,  we  judge  men  not 
by  what  they  are,  not  by  what  they  might  be,  but  by  our  own  dull  prejudices  and 
ignorant  misconceptions.  Men  are  elevated  hy  an  appeal  to  their  best  qualities : — 
My  brethren,  the  love  that  sees  goodness  and  beauty  in  all  human  nature  helps  to 
make  goodness,  and  to  make  beauty  in  human  nature.  The  ntoon  turns  but  one 
side  to  the  earth ;  it  has  another  side  in  which  there  may  be  silver  lights  and 
shades  undreamed  of,  seen  only  by  the  angels  of  God.  So  there  are  two  sides  to 
your  character  and  mine.  The  woman  whom  yoii  despise  when  you  meet  her  as 
BO  dull  and  commonijlace  is  an  angel  of  God  to  her  husband,  and  the  man  whom 
you  think  so  singularly  stupid  and  ineffectual  is  a  very  idol  to  his  mother  and 
his  sisters.  What  makes  the  difference  ?  The  man  is  the  same.  It  is  love  makes 
the  difference,  it  is  appreciation,  it  is  sympathy.  To  those  in  whom  the  man  is 
not  one  of  a  class,  he  is  not  a  publican  or  a  sinner,  or  a  heretic,  or  a  Samaritan, 
but  he  is  a  human  soul,  who  walks  in  the  transfiguring  glory  of  their  affection. 
You  think  a  person  dull — why,  that  is  because  you  are  dulL  An  angel  has  b&en 
with  you  and  you  have  known  it  not,  and  I  imagine  that  to  a  spirit  full  of  malice 
and  self-conceit  an  angel  would  be  very  dull.  Each  human  soul  is  like  a  eavem 
full  of  gems.  The  casual  observer  glances  into  it  through  some  cranny,  and  all 
looks  dark  and  sullen  and  forgotten.  But  let  hght  enter  into  it ;  hft  a  torch  up 
to  the  walls,  let  God's  sunlight  fall  into  it  and  flood  its  open  recesses,  and  lo  1  it 
will  flash  with  crystals  and  with  amethysts,  and  each  separate  crystal  will  quiver 
nnder  the  touch  of  brightness  with  a  transporting  discovery  of  its  own  nature. 
If  souls  do  not  shine  before  you  it  is  because  you  bring  them  no  light  to  make  them 
Bhine.  Throw  away  your  miserable,  smouldering,  fuming  torch  of  conceit  and 
hatred,  lift  up  to  them  the  hght  of  love,  and  lo  I  they  will  arise  and  ahine ;  yea, 
flame  and  bum  with  an  undreamt  of  glory.     {Canon  Farrar.) 

Ver.  12.    They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician. — The  heavenly  physician : — 

I.  Who  neglect  the  Heavenly  Physician  ?  1.  Those  who  depend  for  salvation 
upon  their  own  good  Uves.  2.  Those  who  depend  for  salvation  upon  their  re- 
ligious duties.  3.  Those  who  depend  for  salvation  upon  their  correct  notions.  IL 
Those  who  value  the  Heavenly  Physician — "  They  that  are  sick."  A  general 
invitation  to  this  Physician.  Eeasons  why  some  of  you  are  still  unonred.  How 
will  His  medicine  affect  you  ?    Think  of  His  love.     {C.  Clayton,  M.A.)        L  Thebb 

IB   A   moral   disease    IN    THE    HEART   AND     CHARACTER   OF    MAN.        1.    DepraVSd   mCUtal 

appetite.  2.  The  faculty  of  moral  vision  is  impaired.  3.  Moral  stupor  and 
lethargic  disposition  of  mind.  4.  Feverish  excitement  of  disposition.  5.  Moral 
weakness  and  want  of  activity.  11.  The  peculiar  characteristics  by  which  thu 
MORAL  disease  IS  DISTINGUISHED.  1.  Universal  in  extent.  2.  Disastrous  in  re- 
sults. 3.  Incurable  by  anything  less  than  Divine  energy.  III.  The  remedy  pbo- 
posED.  1.  Universally  adapted.  2.  Absolutely  free.  3.  Infallably  efficacious. 
{The  Pulpit.)  Jesus  the  Physician: — I.  We  are  all  sick.  Many  are  our  ul> 
ments.     Sin  the  great  malady.   We  need  a  Physician.     The  world  has  no  medicineg. 

II.  What   a  Physician   Hk  is.      1.  He  is    appointed   of   God  (Isa.  Ixi.  1). 

He  is  adapted  for  it.  Understands  all  cases.  Neglects  none.  HI.  The  beuedt. 
He  makes  use  of  many  means  of  recovery.  1.  Sometimes  he  makes  use  of  the 
affections  as  a  means  of  restoring  health.  How  many  have  to  trace  that  recovery 
to  loss  of  a  dear  object  1  2.  Sometimes  He  makes  use  of  a  reproving  conscience. 
8.  The  main  remedy  is  His  own  precious  blood  :  (1)  it  is  no  small  mercy  to  feel  our 
spiritual  malady  ;  (2)  the  remedy  must  be  received  or  our  soul's  sickness  cannot  be 
healed  ;  (3)  beware  of  false,  superficial  heaUng ;  (4)  beware  of  losing  the  heahng ;  (5) 
take  heed  of  expecting  a  more  perfect  cure  than  scripture  warrants ;  (6)  admire 
the  costliness  of  the  remedy,  its  freeness,  universaUty,  and,  above  all,  the  Giver. 
{J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Christ  the  great  Physician: — I.  That  sin  is  the  diseasb 

o»  THE  SOUL.  1.  Sickness  destroys  our  power  of  action.  2.  It  deprives  a  man  of 
rest.  3.  It  frequently  occasions  delirium.  4.  It  deforms  the  body.  6.  It  ia  the 
forerunner  of  death.  II.  That  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  Physician.  III. 
That  men  are  generally  too  insensible  of  theib  sins  to  apply  to  Christ. 
rV.  Those  who  know  their  true  condition  are  very  desirous  of  Hib  help. 
(G.  Burder.)         The  Physician  and  His  patients  : — L  A  defence,   complete  and 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  nc. 

unanswerable.  Christ  did  not  come  despising  the  people,  but  as  a  Healer  of  th« 
eick.  II.  A  DIRECTION  to  His  followers.  1.  Christianity  is  remedial.  2.  Christianity 
is  hopeful.  (D.  Fraser,  D.D.)  The  healing  work  healthy : — A  physician  once 
told  us  that  he  kept  himself  in  health  by  going  to  see  patients.  Whenever  ha 
discontinued  this,  and  insisted  on  patients  coming  to  him,  or  when  he  tried  to  go 
out  of  practice  altogether,  he  fell  into  lethargy,  and  lost  both  physical  and  mental 
power;  but  so  soon  as  he  resumed  active  efforts  to  heal  others,  hia  own  health 
returned.  Let  servants  and  handmaids  of  Christ  take  the  hint.  He  who  desires  m 
Bound,  strong,  spiritual  life  and  health  in  himself  should  go  and  try  to  heal  others, 
ehowing  patif-nce,  sympathy,  and  hopefalneas.  Tliis  is  to  walk  as  Christ  walked. 
{Ibid.)  The  characteristics  of  the  whole  and  sir.k,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  con- 
sidered and  contrasted: — There  are  none  of  the  sons  of  men  wuo  are  really  whole. 
The  whole  and  sick  in  contrast  are  these :  1.  He  that  is  whole  has  never  had  a 
clear  affecting  sight  and  sense  of  sin ;  but  he  that  is  sick  is  fully  convicted, 
and  deeply  sensible  of  it.  2.  They  that  are  whole  are  generally  easy  and  serene, 
and  unapprehensive  of  danger ;  but  the  sick  soul  is  alarmed  and  anxious,  and 
can't  be  easy  till  it  perceives  some  appearances  of  recovery.  3.  They  that  are 
whole  are  unwilling  to  apply  to  a  physician,  or  to  follow  his  prescriptions;  but 
to  the  sick  a  physician  is  welcome,  and  thuy  wiU  submit  to  his  directions,  how- 
ever self-denying.  (S.  Davies,  M.A.)  Christ  no  specialist: — Properly  wo  have 
amongst  ourselves  now  special  studies  of  special  cases.  One  man  undertakes  the 
brain,  another  the  heart,  another  the  blood,  it  may  be,  another  the  bones  and 
joints.  This  is  right,  amongst  ourselves ;  for  probably  hardly  any  one  man  has 
the  time,  even  if  he  had  the  capacity,  to  master  with  sufficient  adequateness  all  the 
details  and  necessities  of  our  wondrous  boJily  frame.  But  Jesus  Christ  said  to  the 
leper,  "  l^e  thou  clean,"  to  the  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  grievously  tormented,  "  I 
will  come  and  heal  him."  When  he  went  into  Peter's  house  and  saw  his  wife'i 
mother  laid  and  sick  of  the  fever,  he  touched  her  hand  and  the  fever  left  her,  he 
put  out  the  lire  with  his  touch.  He  is  no  specialist,  he  has  not  a  necromancer's 
power  over  any  one  department  of  human  life  or  human  suffering.  His  healing 
was  fundamental  and  all-inclusive.  He  rnade  the  well-head  pare,  and  the  flowing 
stream  was  as  pure  as  the  fountain  whence  it  flowed.  It  is  so  in  spiritual  matter*. 
There  is  not  in  the  Church  a  doctor  who  cures  lying,  and  another  who  makes  a 
special  study  of  drunkenness,  and  a  third  who  is  gifted  with  peculiar  ability  in 
dealing  with  persons  of  felonious  disposition.  There  is  one  Mediator  between  God 
and  man  :  he  makes  the  heart  right,  and  then  all  the  accidental  local  diseases, 
with  all  their  train  of  ever-varjing  symptoms,  are  cleansed  and  utterly  expelled. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Jetfus  Christ  can  attend  to  all  who  come  to  Him  at  the  same 
moment: — I  once  went  with  a  friend  who  wanted  to  see  a  great  physician.  But 
there  were  ever  bo  many  other  people  waiting  to  see  him,  and  they  went  in  by 
turns  one  by  one,  and  we  had  to  wait  a  whole  hour  before  our  turn  came.  The 
physician  could  not  attend  to  more  than  one  person  at  a  time.  But  if  all  yon  dear 
children  were  to  pray  to  the  Saviour  this  evening  at  the  same  moment,  and  tell 
Him  all  your  wants,  He  could  listen  to  you  all  at  the  same  time,  and  help  each  of 
you  according  to  your  need.  {W.  Hairis.)  Jesus  ig  always  at  home  : — If  your 
little  sister  was  taken  very  ill  and  you  were  sent  for  the  doctor,  you  would  run 
with  all  your  speed  ;  yet  when  you  came  to  his  house  he  might  be  just  gone  out, 
and  your  sister  might  die  before  he  came  home.  But  this  is  never  the  case  with 
Jesus.  Whenever  you  call  upon  Him,  you  will  find  Him.  He  is  always  where 
people  can  find  Him  directly  they  want  Him,  and  yon  know  he  can  heal  people 
without  coming  to  them  in  His  bodily  presence.  (Ibid.)  Unconscious  of  danger  : 
— Sometimes  people  are  in  a  very  dangerous  state,  and  yet  they  do  not  feel  pain. 
In  a  sad  railway  accident  which  happened  some  time  ago,  a  young  lady  was  taken 
out  of  one  of  the  carriages,  and  she  said  she  was  not  hurt  at  all,  she  felt  no  pain. 
She  stood  up  and  tried  to  walk  and  then  fell  back  dead.  She  had  received  a  very 
serious  injury,  and  yet  she  did  not  feel  it  at  the  moment.  So  it  was  with  these 
Pharisees,  they  had  a  sin  within  their  hearts  which  would  ruin  them  if  it  was  not 
taken  away.  That  sin  was  pride.  This  sin  is  so  dangerous,  because  it  keepe 
people  from  feeling  how  sinful  they  are,  and  so  keeps  them  from  coming  to  Jesus 
Christ  to  be  healed.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  Physician  of  souls: — I.  Sin  is  thb 
SICKNESS  OF  THE  SOUL.  It  is  the  disease  of  the  soul  that  makes  the  sinner  a  siok 
man.  1.  Sickness  brings  pain  and  torment  to  the  body,  so  does  sin  to  the  aooL 
2.  Sickness  takes  away  the  beauty  of  the  body.  Sin  spoils  the  beauty  of  the  sonl. 
8.  Diseases  are  death's  cords  which  are  sent  before  it  to  bind  the  prisoner.    Sin 


CHAP.  n.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  161 

tencls  to  spiritual  and  eternal  death,  and  mil  bring  it  on  if  it  be  not  cured.  II. 
What  is  in  bin  that  sickens  the  soul?  1.  The  guilt  of  it,  the  obligation  to 
punishment.  2.  The  stain.  It  brings  a  blot  with  it,  that  defiles  the  soul.  3. 
The  reigning  power  of  it.  Sin  keeps  its  throne.  It  commands  and  receives  obe- 
dience. 4.  The  indwelling  power  of  it.  III.  What  are  the  properties  op  soui. 
SICKNESS?  1.  It  is  spirit nal.  They  are  the  most  dangerous  disorders  that  affect 
the  vital  parts.  2.  It  is  an  universal  sickness,  spreading  itself  through  the  whole 
man.  All  ihe  faculties  of  the  soul  are  injured  and  disordered  by  it.  It  darkens 
the  mind,  wounds  the  conscience,  pollutes  the  heart,  disorders  the  affections,  and 
weakens  the  memory  for  good.  3.  It  is  an  infectious  sickness.  4.  It  is  here- 
ditary, natural  to  us.  We  are  born  with  it.  5.  It  is  a  growing  disease.  6.  It  is 
mortal  disease.  IV.  Is  sin  the  sickness  op  tocb  eool  ?  1.  Go  quickly  to  the 
Physician  for  the  cure  of  the  disease  of  the  soul  which  you  labour  under.  Delay 
no  longer.  2.  Time  is  flying.  No  medicine  will  cure  that  wound,  no  argument 
will  persuade  it  to  return.  Yesterday  has  taken  its  eternal  farewell.  The  candle 
burnt  to  the  snuff  will  not  light  again.  Your  only  time  is  the  present.  3.  Death 
is  approaching.  If  death  take  us  away  nnder  the  power  of  that  sickness,  there  ia 
no  cure  for  it  hereafter.  4.  Make  frequent  application  to  Christ,  Such  people  as 
can  take  little  food  at  once,  had  need  to  take  it  frequently.  Alas  I  the  few  ad- 
dresses which  we  make  to  the  throne  of  grace,  look  like  as  we  thought  ourselves 
whole,  httle  needing  the  Physician.  {Thomis  Boston.)  Chriftfs  way  of  curing 
souls : — Three  things  concur  to  the  cure  of  the  soul.  I.  The  blood  op  CJhrist. 
II.  The  Spirit  op  Christ.  III.  The  Word  op  Christ.  1.  "  He  sent  His  word 
and  healed  them."  2.  The  waters  of  the  sanctuai-y  are  healing  waters.  (Ibid.) 
Chri.ot  cures  all  who  come  to  Hivi : — Why  does  He  undertake  and  perform  the  cure 
of  souls?  I.  Because  Hb  has  His  Father's  commtssion  fob  that  effect.  II. 
Because  op  His  love  and  piti  to  men.  Love  provided  the  remedy  and  applies 
it  also.  III.  Because  He  hath  been  at  vast  expense  to  prepare  the  bemedy 
and  medicine  fob  theib  souls.  IV.  Fob  His  own  glory.  1.  The  glory  of  the 
Mediator  is  highly  exalted  by  His  curing  sick  souls.  2.  The  glory  of  God  is  dis- 
played in  the  cure.  3.  Had  the  sick  been  left  to  be  swallowed  up  by  death,  justice 
would  have  been  exalted,  but  now  justice,  mercy,  grace,  and  truth,  are  ail  glorified 
in  their  salvation  through  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  Physician  of  souh  : — Come 
to  Him  for  the  cure  of  your  spiritual  diseases.  I.  You  have  need  of  Him.  Let 
necessity  drive  you  to  Him.  The  less  you  see  your  need,  the  more  need  you  have 
of  flim.  Some  diseases  are  very  common  among  us.  1.  Blindness  of  the  eyes  of 
the  mind.  2.  Spiritual  dumbness.  3.  Hardness  of  heart.  4.  Falling  evil  of  back- 
sliding. 5.  Pride  and  self-conceit.  6.  Decay  of  grace.  II.  Christ  is  skilful.  1. 
He  knows  what  will  suit  your  disease.  2.  He  is  successful.  Some  diseases  are  the 
reproach  of  meilicine ;  none  can  baffle  Him.  III.  He  cubes  freely.  1,  Other 
physicians  are  enriched  by  their  patients,  but  He  enricheth  His  making  them  heirs 
of  glory.  2.  He  is  the  only  physician.  3.  Either  you  must  die  or  oome  to  Him. 
{Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice. — Mercy  preferred  to  sacrifice :—- 
God  prefers  it.  I.  Because  It  indicates  more  clearly  man's  relation  to  Himself. 
Canuot  judge  of  man's  character  by  outward  ordinances,  but  when  he  straggles 
against  sin.  H.  Because  it  is  more  serviceable  to  our  neighbours.  Religious 
exercises  may  do  us  good,  a  pure  life  useful  to  others  as  well.  HI.  Because  it  brings 
the  greatest  happiness  to  us.  (Seeds  and  SajAiiifis.)  Instituted  religion  not 
intend  d  to  undermine  nattiral : — I.  That  natural  religion  is  the  foundation  of 
ALL  instituted  AND  REVEALED  RELIGION.  OuT  Lord  owHS  that  which  the  Pharisees 
objected,  but  purified  it — 1.  By  tolling  them  that  it  was  allowed  to  a  physician  to 
converse  with  the  sick  in  order  to  their  cure.  2.  By  endeavouring  to  convince  them 
of  the  true  nature  of  religion,  and  of  the  order  of  the  several  duties  thereby  required. 
Natural  and  moral  duties  more  obligatory  than  ritual  and  positive ;  showing  mercy 
is  a  piime  instance  of  these  moral  duties ;  sacrifice  is  an  instance  of  positive  and 
ritual  observances.  1.  That  the  Jewish  Scriptures  every  where  speaks  of  these  as  the 
main  duties  of  the  Jewish  religion.  2.  That  no  instituted  service  of  God,  no  posi- 
tive part  of  religion,  was  ever  acceptable  to  Him,  when  these  were  neglected  (Isa. 
i.  11 ;  Jer.  vii.  4,  6).  3.  The  great  design  of  the  Christian  religion  is  to  restore  and 
reinforce  the  practice  of  the  natural  law  (Titus  ii.  11,  12;  James  i.  ^7).     II.  That 

HO    REVEALED    RELIGION    WAS    EVER     DESIGNED     TO    TAKE    AWAY    THE     OBLIGATION     0» 

NATURAL  DUTIES,  BUT  TO  ESTABLISH  THEM.    1.  That  sil  revealed  religion  calls  men 

11 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  foflAP.  a, 

to  the  practice  of  natural  duties.  2.  The  most  perfect  revelation  that  ever  God 
made,  fnvnislies  helps  for  the  performance  of  moral  duties.  3.  The  positive  rites  of 
revealed  religion  are  shown  to  be  subordinate  to  them.  {J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  The 
Savour's  tenderness  : — It  is  a  characteristic  of  all  false  religions  to  make  more  of  tha 
outward  sacrifices  we  could  offer  to  God  than  of  the  infinite  mercy  He  is  willing  to 
■how  to  us.  I.  The  tenderness  of  the  Saviour's  chabactee.  1.  In  connection 
with  what  has  been  revealed  to  us  concerning  His  mission  and  life  and  work.  This 
harmoni5;es  with  all  the  prophetic  intimations  given  of  His  character.  The  tender- 
ness of  His  character  has  accompanied  Him  to  heaven,  a  permanent  condition  ol 
His  nature.  II.  View  this  compassionate  attribute  of  ode  Lord  in  its  beaeino 
ON  some  of  the  experiences  of  the  Christian  life.  1.  How  should  we  be  com- 
forted by  it  under  our  early  convictions  of  sin,  and  doubts  of  the  Divine  forgiveness. 
2.  It  should  be  comforting  under  the  weakness  of  our  failing  hearts,  when  it  is  hard 
to  grasp  the  promise,  and  faith  is  uncertain.  3.  As  it  bears  upon  oui  slow  progress 
in  the  Divine  life,  and  fluctuations  of  religious  feeling.  4.  In  adversity  and  temp- 
tation the  Christian  has  a  strong  refuge  in  Christ's  tenderuess.  5.  In  death  he 
feels  the  Saviour's  tenderness.  (D.  Moore,  21. A.)  The  religion  of  tenderness  : — 
A  domestic  illustration  of  this  principle  occurs  to  me.  Suppose  that  when  a  father 
is  engaged  in  earnest  prayer  for  the  salvation  of  the  world,  there  rings  through  the 
house  the  cry  of  ono  of  his  children  in  pain,  perhaps  in  danger,  will  he  be  doing 
right  to  spring  to  his  feet  and  go  to  the  little  one's  help  ?  Certainly  he  will.  Let  it 
be  remembered  that  God  is  a  Father,  and  there  will  be  no  two  thoughts  about  that. 
And,  as  for  the  prayer  for  the  world's  salvation,  God  can  and  will  open  His  ear 
when  you  go  again  to  speak  to  Him,  and  the  salvation  of  mankind  will  be  none  the 
farther  off,  but  somewhat  nearer,  because  you  succoured  your  little  one.  I  will  put 
it  from  the  child's  point  of  view.  What  do  you  think  would  be  his  conception  of 
God  if  he  knew  that  God  would  not  allow  his  father  to  come  and  help  him  when  he 
■was  in  trouble  ?  I  will  put  it,  so  to  say,  from  God's  point  of  view.  What  would  He 
think  of  those  who  supposed  Him  to  be  indifferent  to  a  child's  cry  ?  (J,  P.  Gledstone.) 
I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous. — The  main  object  of  ChrisVs  ministry,  to  call 
sinners  to  repentance.  1.  He  calls  sinners  by  making  appeals  to  the  conscience. 
2,  By  preaching  an  all-sufficient  atonement  for  sin.  3.  By  means  of  an  offer  of 
reconciliation.  4.  By  raising  in  their  minds  hopes  of  future  glory.  (R.  Burgess,  B.D  ) 
Christ  not  for  the  self-righteous : — A  young  man  was  recommended  to  Diogenes  for 
a  pupil ;  and  his  friends,  thinking  to  give  Diogenes  a  good  impression  concerning 
his  intending  disciple,  were  very  laviah  in  his  praises.  "  Is  it  so  ?  "  said  the  old 
philosopher ;  "  if  the  youth  is  so  weU  accomplished  to  my  hands,  and  his  good 
qualities  are  already  so  many,  he  has  no  need  of  my  tuition."  As  little  are  self- 
righteous  people  fit  for  Christ.  {Toplady.)  Christ  for  the  needy  : — Suppose  a 
man  of  learning,  in  company  with  two  persons :  the  one  really  ignorant,  but  highly 
conceited  of  his  knowledge,  and  consequently  unteachable  ;  the  other  ignorant  too, 
but  sensible  of  it,  and  therefore  de^irous  of  instruction.  Suppose  he  should  turn 
from  the  self-conceited  creature,  and  carry  on  conversation  with  the  other,  who  was 
likely  to  profit  by  it :  and  suppose  the  former  should  resent  it,  and  say,  "  If  he  were 
indeed  a  scholar,  as  he  pretends  to  be,  he  would  not  be  fond  of  the  society  of  such  an 
ignorant  dunce,  but  would  rather  choose  me  for  a  companion."  How  properly  might 
a  teacher  reply,  '*  Oh,  you  are  a  wise  man,  and  have  no  need  of  instruction — but  thia 
poor  ignorant  creature  is  sensible  of  his  want  of  instruction,  and  therefore,  it  is 
most  fit  I  should  converse  with  him."  Such  a  reply  has  a  peculiar  pungency  and 
mortifying  force  in  it,  and  such  Jesus  used  in  the  case  before  us.  (President  Davies.) 
The  sinner  awakened  : — Suppose  some  of  you,  who  have  come  here  to-day  vigoroua 
and  healthy,  should  suddenly  discover  the  spots  of  a  plague  broken  out  all  over  you, 
how  it  would  strike  you  with  surprise  and  horror !  Such  is  the  surprise  and  horror 
of  the  awakened  sinner,  thus  he  is  alarmed  and  amazed.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  15.    Can  the  children  of  the  bride-chamber  mourn? — The  joy  of  the  Jesus 

circle  : — ''The  children  of  the  bride-chamber,"  how  much  this  name  tells  us  as  to 
the  spirit  that  reigns  in  the  Jesus  circle.  Like  a  wedding  party.  This  bliss  was  not 
an  accident,  or  an  affair  of  temperament.  It  was  the  natural  effulgence  of  the  new 
life  imparted  to  those  who  joined  the  society  of  Jesui.  Christ  was  a  man  of  joy. 
He  had  (1)  the  joy  of  his  vocation.  (2)  The  joy  of  ote  whose  religion  is  an  original 
thing,  a  fountain  of  fiesh  intuitions  of  truth.  Sweet  after  the  routine  of  leligioui 
mechanism.  Into  these  joys  of  Jesus  the  twelve  more  or  less  entered.  1.  ^hey 
had  the  joy  of  fresh  religious  intuitions.     2.  The  joy  of  spiritual  freedom.     (.<.  B. 


CHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  161 

Bruce,  D.D.)  Right  response  to  circumstances : — ^Let  there  be  liberty  in  God  while 
there  may ;  girding  up  in  ourselves,  by  forced  exercise  and  discipline,  when  thera 
must ;  let  the  soul  go  by  inspiration  when  the  gale  of  the  Spirit  is  in  it,  and  when  it 
has  any  way  stifled  or  lost  the  Spirit,  let  it  put  itself  down  upon  duty  by  the  will ; 
when  the  Divine  movement  is  upon  it,  let  it  have  its  festal  day  with  the  bridegroom, 
and  when  the  better  presence  fades  or  vanishes,  let  it  set  itself  to  ways  of  self- 
compulsion,  moving  from  its  own  human  centre.  (Horace  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
Liberty  and  Discipline  : — We  may  figure  in  a  certain  coarse  analogy,  that  we  live  in 
a  city  having  two  supplies  of  water  for  its  aqueduct :  one  upon  high  ground  back  of  it, 
whence  the  water  runs  down  freely  along  the  inclinations  of  the  surfaces  ;  and  the 
other  in  some  lake  or  river  on  its  front ;  whence,  in  case  that  fails,  or  the  ducts  giv« 
way,  a  supply  is  to  be  received  by  forcing,  or  the  dead  lift  of  the  pomp.  (Ibid.) 
Spiritual  espousals : — With  Messiah  begins  the  holy  union  between  the  soul  and  God, 
BO  of  tv)n  declared  by  the  prophets.  The  first  hour  of  spiritual  espousals  must  neede 
be  one  of  joy.  A  sorrowful  moment  will  soon  come ;  there  are  sura  tokens  of  it 
already  in  the  malice  of  the  rulers  of  the  hierarchy,  reai^y  to  break  forth  on  every  occa- 
Bion.  (E.  de  Prexsens4,D.D.)  Putting  ourselves  in  position  for  God : — The  navigator 
of  a  ship  does  nothing  for  the  voyage,  save  what  he  does  by  setting  the  ship  to  her 
courses,  and  her  sails  to  the  wind.  A  seed  must  have  position,  else  it  cannot  grow ; 
if  it  is  laid  on  a  rock,  or  buried  in  sand,  or  sunk  in  water,  or  frozen  up  in  ice,  it  will 
be  inert  as  a  stone ;  but  in  good  warm  soil,  and  sun,  and  rain,  and  dew,  it  will  quicken 
easily  enough,  because  it  is  in  position.  A  tree  will  die  out  of  position,  a  clock  will 
Btop  out  of  position,  a  plough  wants  holding,  a  saw  wants  guiding,  a  compass  wanti 
setting ;  nothing  in  the  world  works  rightly  that  has  not  position  given  it. 
(if.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  A  piece  of  new  cloth  unto  an  old  garment. — Chritt  the  great  Innovator  : 
— The  boldness  with  which  Christ  asserted  the  novelty  of  Christianity.  His  waa 
not  the  apologetic,  half-hearted  tone,  so  common  amongst  those  who  have  some 
thing  fresh  to  tell  the  world.  I.  In  what  kespect  was  the  gospel  of  Jesus  new  T 
1.  In  its  idea  of  God.  Jesus  was  the  first  to  teach  effectively  the  Fatherhood  of  God. 
The  legal  idea  of  God  fell  into  desuetude.  The  old  Jewish  view  of  God  was  as  an 
exactor ;  the  new  God  of  Jesus  was  a  giver.  2.  Along  with  the  new  idea  of  God 
came  naturally  a  new  conception  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  rather  than  law,  it  waa 
viewed  as  love.  3.  These  thoughts  were  accompanied  by  a  new  way  of  life,  the 
typical  feature  of  which  was  neglect  of  fasting,  which  meant  a  conscience  freed 
from  legal  scrupulosity.  II,  The  courage  op  Jesus  was  not  less  coNSPicuong 
THAN  His  orioinautt  in  thought  and  conduct.  1.  As  He  believed,  so  He  spoke 
publicly,  habitually.  2.  He  was  equally  unreserved  in  His  action.  3.  He  was 
fearless  in  defence  of  His  conduct  when  assailed.  4.  The  gloomy  foreboding  waa 
not  a  mistaken  one.  The  Bridegroom  was  taken  from  the  sorrowing  society.  The 
•duty  arising  out  of  these  facts.  To  glorify  Christ  as  the  Maker  of  the  new  world. 
How  is  this  to  be  done  ?  1.  By  recognizing  to  the  full  extent  the  service  rendered, 
by  forming  to  ourselves  a  broad,  comprehensive  idea  of  the  vast  change  introduced 
into  the  world  by  the  action  of  our  Saviour.  2.  By  becoming  ourselves  children 
of  the  new  era,  appreciating  and  using  to  the  full  the  liberty  of  a  Christian  man. 
{A.  B.  Bi^ce,  D.D.)  Beligious  patchwork: — It  is  wrong — I.  In  kitual.  II.  I» 
theology,  hi.  In  human  characteb.  1.  Disfigurement — "  agreeth  not."  2.  In- 
jury— "  the  rent  is  made  worse."  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  The  parable  of  the  new  pieet 
of  cloth  : — By  an  old  garment  I  understand  is  meant  a  man's  own  righteousness. 
It  may  be  so  compared.  1.  Because  it  is  old  as  Adam.  2.  Because  it  is  worn  oat. 
3.  It  was  once  a  new,  good  garment.  4.  It  needs  mending.  But  why  is  righteoua- 
ness  compared  to  a  garment  ?  1.  Because  it  is  to  cover  nakedness.  2.  Because  it 
covers  the  shame  of  mankind.  3.  Because  of  the  usefulness  of  it.  4.  In  respect  ol 
ornament.  6.  Because  it  tends  to  keep  a  man  warm  in  winter.  6.  It  preservei 
from  thorns  and  briars.     (B.  Keach.) 

Ver.  17.  New  wine  into  old  bottles. — Garments  and  wine  $lcim : — By  these  illas- 
trations  our  Lord  conveyed  a  lesson  on  the  charm  of  naturalness  and  the  law  of 
congruity  in  religion,  1.  As  old  cloth  and  new  cloth  are  one  in  being  cloth,  old 
wine  and  new  are  one  in  being  wine  ;  so  the  religion  before  Christ  and  that  which 
He  introduced  are  essentially  one  in  kind,  if  not  in  quality.  2.  The  effect  of  tha 
forced  junction  of  the  old  and  new  would  be  injurious  to  both.  (D.  Eraser,  D.D.) 
What  is  meant  by  old  bottles  ? — Why  is  the  carnal  heart  compared  to  an  old  bottle! 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [aoAt.  a. 

1.  Because  a  bottle  is  a  proper  receptacle  of  liquor,  so  is  the  heart  of  man  a  propcf 
receptacle  of  Divine  knowledge,  grace,  joy,  &c.  2.  Because  a  bottle  of  itself  is  an 
empty  thing,  and  must  be  filled ;  so  the  heart  of  man  is  naturally  empty  of  good. 
8.  Because  a  broken  bottle  cannot  hold  new  wine,  nor  can  an  unrenewed  heart  hold 
saving  peace,  joy,  &c.  {B.  Reach.)  Making  skin  bottles  : — As  soon  as  the  animal 
(goat)  is  killed,  an  opening  is  made  in  the  skin  large  enough  to  introduce  the  lips, 
and  a  man  begins  to  blow  between  the  skin  and  the  flesh  until  the  two  are  compl.tely 
separated  from  each  other  throughout.  The  head  and  feet  are  then  cut  off,  and  the 
entire  body  of  the  animai  is  drawn  out  of  its  skin  through  the  opening  at  the  neck. 
The  hair  is  sometimes  partially  removed  and  the  skin  tanned.  In  Persia  the  skins 
are  saturated  with  pitch.  The  opening  at  the  neck  is  used  for  fiUing  and  emptying 
the  vessel,  while  the  four  feet  are  tied  or  sewed  up.  The  grape-juice  which  is  to 
undergo  the  process  of  fermentation  is  put  into  skins,  which  are  either  entirely  new 
or  which  have  been  carefully  examined  and  found  able  to  withstand  the  pressure. 
(Van  Lennep.) 

Ver.  20-22.  And  touched  the  hem  of  Hla  garment. — Touching  Jesus : — L  How 
many  evils  sin  hath  brought  into  the  world.  II.  We  are  too  much  disposed  to  seek 
human  help  instead  of  going  directly  to  God.  III.  However  deep-seated  and  des- 
perate the  condition  of  the  soul's  health,  the  Saviour  can  help  us.  IV.  The  secrecy 
with  which  the  afflicted  woman  sought  help  of  Jesus.  V.  The  impression  which 
the  suffering  woman  had  formed  of  Jesus.  (J.  U.  Norton.)  Christ  the  Healer: — 
The  sinner  and  the  Saviour.  I.  The  way  in  which  these  two  abe  thrown  to. 
GETHER.  As  we  Say  by  chance  this  woman  crosses  His  path  ;  it  was  a  by-errand  ol 
the  Son  of  Man.  11.  The  occasion  of  theib  being  beought  together.  It  is  th4 
incurability  of  her  disease  by  earthly  skill  that  throws  her  upon  the  heavenly  Phy- 
sician. Man's  failure  brings  her  to  One  who  cannot  fail.  III.  The  point  of  con- 
nection between  them.  IV.  The  woman's  need  of  Christ.  V.  Christ's  need 
OF  the  woman.  The  sun  needs  the  earth  as  traly  as  the  earth  needs  the  sun.  Yoa 
may  say.  What  would  the  earth  be  without  the  sun  ?  Yes ;  but  what  would  the 
sun  be  without  an  earth  to  shine  upon  ?  What  would  become  of  its  radiance?  All 
wasted.  It  would  shine  in  vain.  So  Christ  needed  objects  for  the  exercise  of  Hi3 
skill,  love,  and  power.  The  Lord  hath  need  of  us.  VI.  The  woman's  thoughts 
OF  Christ.  She  is  modest,  earnest,  humble  ;  so  full  of  faith  that  she  deems  a  touch 
enough.  Like  the  garden.  He  cannot  but  give  out  His  fragrance.  The  simplest 
form  of  connection  with  Him  will  accomplish  the  cure.  (A.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Faith's 
approach  to  Christ: — I.  Faith  comes  with  a  deep  despair  of  all  other  help  but 
Christ's.  II.  Faith  has  a  Divine  power  to  discover  Christ.  III.  Faith  comts  with 
an  implied  trust  in  Christ.  IV.  Faith  seeks  for  its  comfort,  close  contact  with 
Christ.  V.  Faith,  with  all  its  impejfections,  is  accepted  by  Christ.  VI.  Faith 
feels  a  change  from  the  touch  of  Christ.  (J,  Ker,  D.D.)  The  patient  of  many 
physicians: — I.  One  touching  out  of  mant  pressing  on  Jesus.  There  was  lovo, ' 
power,  and  nearness  enough  for  all  the  crowd,  yet  only  one  touched  Christ  for  heal- 
ing. We  are  near  Christ  in  the  house  of  God  and  at  the  holy  table,  yet  perhaps  do 
not  by  faith  touch,  IL  Her  case  is  the  worst  of  all.  1.  She  is  the  weakest 
in  all  the  crovd,  yet  she  presses  through  till  she  reaches  Jesus.  Our  inability  a 
needful  lesson,  but  earnestness  is  a  power.  By  grace  are  we  saved.  There  is  always 
a  crowd  between  Christ  and  the  inquiring  soul — a  crowd  of  past  sins,  evil  spirits, 
&c.  2.  She  is  the  vilest  of  all,  the  most  unfit  to  touch  the  Holy  One,  for  her  very 
touch  defiles,  Christ  is  cleansing  for  the  vile.  3.  Her  coming  is  the  worst-timed 
of  all  applications ;  it  was  unseasonable.  He  was  in  the  midst  of  another  case.  The 
coming  ill-timed  He  does  not  refuse.  4,  Her  coming  seems  to  be  in  the  very  worst 
way ;  none  other  appears  to  have  come  so  ill.  She  comes  by  stealth.  III.  Heb 
immediate  healing.  1.  Her  coming  to  be  healed  is  late,  and  yet  immediate  ;  late 
in  soference  to  the  past,  immediate  in  the  haste  of  this  afternoon.  The  reason 
humlding,  because  she  has  spent  all.  The  sinner  does  not  come  to  Christ  first,  but 
after  every  other  refuge  has  failed.  2.  Her  cure  is  immediate,  complete,  conscious. 
3.  She  cannot  depirt  in  health  without  confessing  Christ  the  Healer.  The  comer 
need  not,  but  the  follower  must  bear  the  cross  of  Christ ;  it  is  lighter  to  bear  after- 
ward. (A.  M.  Stuart.)  The  issue  of  blood  healed : — I.  The  woman's  condition, 
and  touch,  and  cube.  1,  Her  condition  represents  that  of  every  sinner. 
Diseased.  (2)  Unclean  and  pei>arate  from  the  fellowship  of  God  and  His  people. 
Hopeless  of  help  from  earthly  physicians.  2.  Difference  between  her  touch 
that  of  the  crowd.     8.  Her  faith  successful,  though  imperfect  and  mixed  with  error. 


11  ION, 

a  ana 


CHAP.  EC.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  164 

II.  WffJ  DID  NOT  Jesus  leave  the  woman  in  the  conceaiment  she  sought  t  1. 
That  she  may  confess  and  glorify  Christ  before  others.  2.  That  He  may  confess  her 
and  confirm  her  faith,  and  confer  upon  her  further  and  higher  blessings.  (1)  Ha 
confesses  her.  (2)  He  approves  and  confirms  her  faith.  3.  He  adds  a  further  and 
spiritual  blessing — "  Go  in  peace."  This  a  word  of  power.  (T.  M.  Macdonald,  M.A.) 
The  true  Healer  tried  last : — Was  not  the  same  struggle  seen  in  the  case  of  Luther, 
issuing,  too,  in  the  same  result  ?  That  cell  in  Erfurth  heard  sounds  and  saw  sights 
of  conflict  and  sorrow  enough  to  make  our  hearts  bleed.  What  tears  that  monk 
shed,  what  prayers  he  offered,  what  lacerations  he  inflicted  upon  his  flesh  to  chase 
away  its  lusts,  what  hunger  he  endured  that  he  might  starve  his  appetites  to  sub- 
mission, until  he  nearly  killed  the  body  in  seeking  to  kill  its  sins,  and  he  was  found 
once  and  again  nearly  lifeless  on  the  floor  1  But  what  of  his  sins  ?  They  were  as 
vigorous  as  ever.  Plied  by  many  physicians,  they  yielded  not ;  scourge,  hunger, 
thirst,  nightly  vigils,  all  failed ;  and  he  had  spent  nearly  all  that  he  had,  and  was 
"  nothing  the  better,  but  rather  the  worse."  Nearly  all,  I  say,  for  he  had  still  a 
little  left.  One  more  physician  he  had  not  tried,  and  that  was  the  eternal  city  ol 
Rome,  which  he  must  see ;  aud  there,  amid  its  sanctities  and  miracles,  he  must 
find  a  perfect  cure.  He  must  climb  on  his  bare  knees  the  wondrous  stairs  of  the 
Santa  Scala,  and  there  the  burden  will  roll  from  his  soul  for  ever.  But  the  burden 
presses  heavier  as  he  climbs  ;  and  in  the  moment  of  his  blackest  despair,  a  remem- 
bered text  rings  in  his  ears  Uke  mu.=ic  from  heaven's  gate,  "  The  just  shall  live  by 
faith,"  and  he  rushes  from  the  scene  rejoicing  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  putting  no  con- 
fidence in  the  flesh.  Thus  it  is  that  men  must  despair  before  they  can  hope.  (E, 
Mellor,  D.D.)  An  imperfect  faith  no  hindrance  to  moral  cure  : — The  sun  can  send 
some  of  its  light  and  heat  through  very  murky  sides,  and  the  Sun  of  Eighteousnesa 
can  do  the  same,  and  even  more.  (Ibid.)  There  may  be  much  earthly  rubbish 
in  the  soul  that  comes  to  Christ ;  but  if  there  be  in  it  one  gleaming  grain  of  the  gold 
of  faith,  Christ  will  receive  that  soul  with  all  its  rubbish ;  for  He  knows  well  that 
in  due  time  all  that  is  worthless  will  drop  away,  that  the  eye  of  faith  will  sweep  over 
a  vaster  horizon  of  truth  from  day  to  day,  until  we  shall  be  light  in  the  Lord,  and 
shall  not  walk  in  darkness.  (Ibid.)  Moral  hi  aling  sought  from  self!. ■ih  dexire:— 
Most  of  the  religion  of  mankind  begins  in  what  may  be  viewed  as  selfishness,  and 
then  becomes  transformed  into  love.  Most  of  religion  did  I  say?  I  might  have 
said,  the  natural  life  of  every  one  of  us  from  childhood  has  followed  the  same  law. 
Where  is  the  child  that  began  life  with  love  ?  Life  begins  with  hunger  and  other 
needs.  The  infant  is  a  bundle  of  imperious  and  constant  necessities.  It  loves  no 
one,  can  love  no  one.  Love  has  to  be  begotten,  to  be  wakened  up  little  by  little  as 
months  roll  on,  and  the  expanding  babe  learns  who  it  is  that  feeds  and  fondles  it, 
whose  arms  they  are  that  enfold  it,  whose  face  it  is  that  reflects  upon  it  the  very 
light  of  heaven.  Can  anything  be  more  selfish  than  the  cries  of  the  child  which 
seeks  nourishment  and  comfort,  caring  nothing  from  whom  they  come  if  they  do 
but  come  T  But  can  anything  be  more  unselfish  than  the  love  which  at  length  rises 
up  in  the  soul  ?  A  love  which  makes  the  name  of  mother  the  sweetest,  dearest  name 
on  earth ;  a  love  which  will  traverse  seas  and  not  be  chilled  by  distance,  and  which 
feels  that  no  tears  are  too  many  which  are  shed  on  the  grave  where  she  rests  in 
peace.  We  cannot  begin  our  Christian  life  at  the  highest  point,  or  with  the  highest 
motives,  any  more  than  our  natural  life.  {Ibid.)  The  woman's  idea  in  touching 
the  hem: — The  notions  which  the  woman  entertained  of  Clirist  were  very  confused. 
She  was  timid  and  shrinking — a  woman  probably  of  a  sensitive  temperament,  her 
nervous  system  possibly  injuriously  affected  by  her  disease  ;  but  only  ignorance  and 
superstition  could  have  suggested  the  idea  of  a  furtive  touch  of  our  Lords  garments. 
H.  AUon,  D.D.)  Sense  helps  to  faith: — Some  instrimaentality  for  connecting  the 
faith  of  oitr  souls  with  Christ  we  all,  perhaps,  require.  Without  it  the  faith  even  of 
the  strongest  might  have  difficulty  in  realizing  Cnrist.  Sense  is  the  iiiinst«r  of  the 
soul.  We  grasp  Christ  best  when  the  haud  of  spiritual  faith  rests  upon  sensible 
things ;  only  let  us  be  sure  that  it  is  the  Christ  our  spirits  grasp,  and  not  the  mere 
sensible  thing.  {Ibid.)  Brazen  figures  at  Ccesarea  Philippi : — This  woman  was  a 
native  of  Caesarea.  At  the  gates  of  her  house,  on  an  elevated  stone,  stands  a  brazen 
image  of  a  woman  on  her  hended  knee,  with  her  hands  stretched  out  before  her, 
like  one  entreating.  Opposite  to  this  there  is  another  image  of  a  man  erect,  of  the 
same  materials,  decently  clad  in  a  mantle,  and  stretching  out  his  hand  to  the 
woman.  Before  her  feet,  and  on  the  same  pedestal,  there  is  a  certain  strange  plant 
growing,  which,  rising  as  high  as  the  hem  of  the  brazen  garment,  is  a  kind  of  anti- 
dote to  all  kinds  of  diseases.    This  figure  is  a  statue  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  it  hM 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix, 

remained  even  until  our  times,  so  that  we  ourselves  saw  it  whilst  tarrying  in  that 
eity.  {Euselnus.)  Curing  straightway: — The  woman  had  not  to  undergo  a 
tedious  process,  but  was  cuied  straightway.  Physicians  require  time,  and  must  usa 
proper  means.  They  pbysic  you  and  diet  you,  and  thus  cure  you  gradually.  The 
Redeemer  never  piiysicked  or  dieted  His  patients.  He  ciured  them  straight- 
way. (/.  G,  Jones.)  The  cure  was  perfect  —  not  better,  but  whole  —  every 
whit.  All  traces  of  the  disease  vanished.  Complete — perfect.  (Ihid.)  Faith 
goe»  to  Christ : — Can  you  tell  why  the  needle  trembler  to  the  pole  ?  The  buds  fed 
their  way  to  the  spring?  Flowers  to  sunlight?  They  are  made  for  it,  and  souls 
are  so  made  for  Christ.  (Dr.  J.  Ker.)  "  If  I  may:" — I.  "If  I  mat"  bb 
ALLOWKD.  1.  There  is  nothing  to  forbid  your  coming  and  resting  your  guilty  eoul 
upon  Christ.  2.  The  very  nature  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  forbid  youx 
raising  a  doubt  about  your  being  permitted  to  come  and  touch  his  garment's  hem. 

3.  Think  of  the  fulness  of  Christ's  power  to  save  and  make  a  little  argument  of  it. 

4.  Suppc^e  you  do  come,  you  will  not  iujure  Him.  5.  You  shall  rather  benefit  than 
injure  Him.  6.  Others  just  like  you  have  ventured  to  Him,  and  have  not  been 
refused.  II.  But  can  I  ?  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  simplest  action  that  anybody  ever 
performs.  III.  *' I  shall  be  made  whole."  {C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  Confident  timidity  : 
— L   Unobstrusively.     1.  "  She  said  within  herself,"  &c.     2.  Came  behind  Christ. 

II.  Unceremoniously.     1.  Came  when  Christ  was  engaged.    2.  Touched  His  hem. 

III.  Undoubtiugly.  "  I  shall  be  whole."  Her  faith  waB  undoubting,  therefore 
strong  to  overcome  difficulties.  1.  Subjective  difficulty.  2.  Objective  difficulty. 
3.  Undoubting,  hence  stroug  to  draw  blessings  from  Christ.  (J.  S.  Swan.) 
Faith  in  its  manifestations  : — We  may  regard  the  act  of  this  woman  as  an  expression 
of  her  faith.  1.  Faith  is  a  simple  thing  as  an  act.  You  exercise  it  when  you 
consult  your  physicitin.  In  religious  experience  acts  of  faith  are  simple,  but  behind 
them  there  is  a  mental  state,  mysterious  and  sublime.  2.  Great  faith  is  compatible 
with  great  modesty.  There  may  be  great  faith  before  God,  yet  fear  before  men. 
3.  Great  faith  is  compatible  with  great  ignorance,  i.  Faith  eaves  and  then 
becomes  an  incentive  to  holiness.     {F.  C.  Polton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-25.  The  maid  Is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth. — The  healing  of  Jairw*s 
daughter: — On  His  way  to  perform  one  act  of  love,  He  turned  aside  to  give  His 
attention  to  another;  He  had  a  heart  ready  to  respond  to  every  species  of  need. 
Love  is  universal,  humanity  is  the  sphere  of  its  activity.  Delay  was  only  apparent ; 
it  was  impossible  to  convey  a  spiritual  blessing  to  one  who  was  not  spiritually  sus- 
ceptible. The  soul  of  Jairus  by  the  miracle  wrought  on  the  woman  was  made  more 
capable  of  blessing  than  before.  This  is  the  principle  of  the  spiritual  kingdom.  I. 
The  uses  of  ADVErsiTY.  1.  The  simplest  and  most  obvious  use  of  sorrow  is  to  re- 
mind of  God.  2.  The  misuse  of  sorrow.  We  may  defeat  the  purposes  of  God  in 
grief  by  forgetting  it,  or  by  over-indulging  it.  Sorrow  is  the  school  for  all  that  is 
highest  in  us.  II.  To  come  to  the  principles  on  which  a  mibaole  kests.  1. 
The  perception  of  it  was  confined  to  the  few.  Peter,  James,  John,  and  the  parents. 
Spi)  itual  susceptibility  necessary.  2.  It  is  the  intention  of  a  miracle  to  manifest 
the  Divine  in  the  common  and  ordinary.  They  show  that  Christ  is  the  Saviour  ol 
the  body.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  God  confers  Uis gifts  with  distinct  reminder$ 
that  they  are  His: — He  gives  us  for  a  season  spirits  taken  out  of  His  universe: 
brings  them  into  temporary  contact  with  us  :  and  we  call  them  father,  mother,  sister, 
child,  fiieud.  But  just  as  in  some  places,  on  one  day  in  the  year,  the  way  or  path 
is  closed  in  order  to  remind  the  public  that  they  pass  by  sufferance  and  not  by  right, 
in  order  that  no  lapse  of  time  may  establish  "  adverse  possession,"  bo  does  God  give 
warning  to  us.  Every  ache  and  pain :  every  wrinkle  you  see  stamping  itself  on  a 
parent's  brow  :  every  accident  which  reveals  the  uncertain  tenure  of  life  and  poa- 
sessionB :  every  funeral  bell  that  tolls — are  only  God's  reminders  that  we  are  tenants 
at  will  and  not  by  right — pensioners  on  the  bounty  of  an  hour.  He  is  closing  up 
the  right  of  way,  warning  fairly  that  what  we  have  is  lent,  not  given  :  His,  not  ours. 
{Ibid.)  The  simplest  use  of  sorrow  is  to  reniind  of  God: — Jairus  and  the  woman^ 
like  many  others,  came  to  Christ  from  a  senee  of  want.  It  would  seem  that  a  cer- 
tain shock  is  needed  to  bring  us  into  contact  with  reality.  We  are  not  conscious  of 
our  breathing  till  obstruction  makes  it  felt.  We  are  not  aware  of  the  possession  of 
a  heart  till  some  disease,  some  sudden  joy  or  sorrow,  rouses  it  into  extraordinary 
action.  And  we  are  not  conscious  of  the  mighty  cravi))gs  of  our  half  Divine 
humanity;  we  are  not  aware  of  the  God  within  us,  till  some  chasm  yawns  which 
must  be  filled,  or  till  the  rendmg  asunder  of  our  affections  forces  ns  to  become  fear^ 


CHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  161 

fully  conscious  of  a  need.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  moved  by  all  kinds  of  sorrow  : — Here, 
too,  we  find  the  Son  of  man  the  pattern  of  our  humanity.  His  bosom  was  to  man- 
kind v.'liat  the  ocean  la  to  the  world.  The  ocean  has  its  own  mighty  tide ;  but  it 
receives  and  responds  to,  in  exact  proportion,  the  tidal  influences  of  evei-y  estuary, 
and  river,  and  small  creek  which  pours  into  its  bosom.  So  it  was  in  Christ ;  Hia 
bosom  heaved  with  the  tides  of  oiir  humanity  :  but  every  separate  sorrow,  pain,  and 
joy  gave  its  pulsation,  and  received  back  influence  from  the  sea  of  His  being.  (Ibid.) 
The  micros  daughter : — 1.  On  the  way  to  the  Ruler's  house,  Jesus  meets  with  an 
unlooked-for  cause  of  delay.  It  must  have  been  trjing  for  the  ruler  to  see  Jesus 
stop  and  ask,  •' Who  touched  Me?"  But  he  is  patient.  2.  Meanwhile  those  at  home 
are  witnessing  the  death  of  the  child.  Uu'jelief  says  it  is  useless  to  trouide  tha 
Master  any  more.  On  our  providential  blessings  the  Lord  writes  death  before  He 
grants  resurrection  and  life.  Sight  has  gone ;  he  must  walk  by  faith.  The  dead 
chiW  lestored  : — 1.  Jesus  is  the  Eesunection  and  the  Life,  and  He  restores  out  of 
deei.th  in  all  its  stages.  2.  Jesus  bid  them  not  to  weep,  because  the  maiden  is  not 
dead,  but  only  asleep.  The  body  sleeps,  not  the  soul.  3.  Christ  raises  her  with 
His  word  ;  for  the  hour  is  coming  when  all  who  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  the 
voice  of  the  Son  of  God  and  live.  4.  Jesus  commands  that  something  be  given  her 
to  eat.  Let  young  converts  be  duly  nouiished  by  word  and  doctrine,  then  let  them 
go  and  work  for  Christ.  5.  The  parents  are  enjoined  to  ttU  no  man  ;  they  are  to 
make  no  noise  about  her,  but  to  keep  the  child  and  the  matter  quiet.  She  was  to 
be  brought  up  qioiedy  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  [A.  M.  Stuart.) 
The  insolence  of  sense,  as  oppof^ed  to  faith  : — The  eye  of  faith  can  discern  what  to 
the  eye  of  sense  is  often  invisible ;  and  looks  with  simple  conviction  to  what  the 
other  as  simply  rejects.  •'  They  laughed  Him  to  acorn,"  &o.  And  were  they  not 
right  as  far  as  their  knowledge  went  7  Could  not  Jesus  who  had  opened  the  eyes  of 
the  blind  raise  the  dead  ?  They  might  have  reasoned  thus.  They  were  too  wise  ir». 
their  own  conceit  to  think  of  looking  with  the  eye  of  faith.  How  often  does  thie 
strange  levity  of  the  people  of  Capernaum  take  the  rein  of  men's  thoughts  even  iu 
the  most  solemn  subjects — the  doctriues  of  Chiistianity ;  the  sacraments — which 
appeal  to  no  outward  sense — they  will  "laugh  to  scorn."  So  to  with  the  humble 
duties  of  the  Christian  and  the  lowly  means  with  which  he  works  ;  how  often  treated 
with  contempt.  How  much  there  is  in  which  a  devoutly-trained  faith  may  discern 
truth  and  comfort  and  promise  of  good,  where  the  mere  human  eye  might  discover 
nothing  but  perplexity  or  disappointment.      (J.  Puckle,  M.A.)  A  science 

of  pahidstry  : — "Thy  hand — are  not  all  hands  alike?  Is  there  a  science  of 
Palmistry — are  there  those  who  read  the  man  in  the  hand — are  not  all  grips  of 
the  same  intensity  ?  Why  say,  "  Thy  hand  " — could  no  other  hand  be  found  ?  We 
are  sometimes  shut  up  to  the  help  of  one  man,  even  in  our  lower  life.  "  O  for  our 
own  doctor  :  his  very  voice  would  do  the  patient  good.  O  for  our  own  physician  ; 
he  knows  just  what  to  give  when  the  sufferer  is  in  this  crisis  of  agony.  O  for  our 
old  mother :  there  was  healing,  there  was  comfort  in  her  gentle  hand.  0  for  the 
old  father — if  he  had  been  here  he  would  have  found  the  key  to  open  this  gate.  O 
for  the  old  pastor  that  first  showed  us  the  light  and  brouglit  us  to  prayer — he  would 
know  what  to  say  to  us  just  now."  We  have,  therefore,  analogy  to  help  us  in  thia 
matter.  In  the  great  crises  of  life  there  is  often  only  one  hand  that  can  help  na. 
{J.  Parker,  B.D.)  Hired  mourners  : — I  joined  the  mourners  on  the  third  day. 
Directly  I  entered  the  house,  I  heard  the  minstrels  and  the  loud  cries  of  the  people. 
Piofesbional  mourners  were  in  constant  attt-ndance  to  keep  up  the  excitement,  and 
dances  and  dirges  succeeded  each  other,  with  intervals  of  wild  and  hysterical  weep- 
ing and  shrieking.  There  are  girls  who  have  a  morbid  taste  for  the  excitement,  and 
are  celebr.i'^el  for  the  facility  with  which  they  fail  into  fits  of  uncontrollable  weep- 
ing. The  real  mouiTiers  and  the  amateur  actresses  in  these  scenes  are  usually  ill 
afterwards,  but  the  professional  assistants  do  not  appear  to  suffer  from  the  fatigue 
or  excitement,  and  they  do  not  lose  their  self-control  for  a  moment  (Mrs.  Rogers.) 
Differing  expressions  of  grief: — The  South  and  North  differ  greatly  from  each  other 
in  this  respect.  The  nations  of  the  North  restrain  their  grief — affect  the  tearless 
eye,  and  the  stem  look.  The  expressive  South,  and  all  the  nations  whose  origin  is 
from  thence,  are  demonstrative  in  grief.  They  beat  their  breasts,  tear  their  hair, 
throw  dust  upon  their  heads.  It  would  be  unwise  were  either  to  blame  or  ridicule 
the  other,  so  long  as  each  is  true  to  Nature.  Unwise  for  the  nations  of  the  South 
to  deny  the  reality  of  the  grief  which  is  repressed  and  silent.  Unjust  in  the  denize* 
of  the  North  were  he  to  scorn  the  violence  of  the  Southern  grief,  or  call  its  uucon. 
trollable  demonstrations  unmanly.     Much  must  be  allowed  for  temperament.     (F. 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  .  [ohap.  tx, 

W.  Robertson.)  The  death  of  children: — Ahl  we  sometimes,  I  fear,  compel  Jesng 
to  take  away  our  children,  that  through  the  bereavement  He  may  overcome  and 
melt  savingly  our  caUous  hearts.  It  mindeth  one  of  another  little  story  worth 
telling.  A  shepherd  had  folded  safely  and  well  a  flock  of  ewes — all  save  one,  which 
would  not  enter,  do  what  he  would.  The  gate  was  flung  wide  open,  and  with  all 
gentle  restraint  he  sought  to  guide  it  in,  sparing  it  the  rough  bark  of  his  dog.  But 
no  1  still  it  would  run  back.  At  last,  for  the  shades  of  evening  were  falling,  and 
folded  all  must  be,  if  he  were  not  to  be  too  late  for  home  himself,  he  sprang  oat, 
seized  her  lamb,  raised  it  tenderly  to  his  bosom,  laid  it  right  upon  his  heart,  as  ha 
would  his  own  nestling  babe,  and  carrying  it  within  the  fold  placed  it  down  there. 
Then,  ah  I  then,  the  poor  ewe  ran  in  after  her  little  lamb,  and  was  saved  with  it.  It 
is  a  parable.  But  fathers,  mothers,  still  away  from  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  grieving 
Eorely  over  your  Willie  or  Mary,  will  you  not  run  in  after  your  httle  lamb  ?  Will 
you  compel  Him  to  take  another  and  another?  (Grosart.)  A  dying  daughter: — 
Ab  a  little  girl  of  four  lay  dying,  the  following  conversation  took  place  between  her 
father  and  herself.  "Papa,  does  the  doctor  think  I  am  going  to  die?"  With  a 
bursting  heart,  her  father  told  her  the  truth.  "  Papa,  the  grave  looks  very  dark.  Won't 
you  go  down  with  me  into  it  ?  "  "I  cannot  go  until  the  Lord  calls  me."  "  Then, 
papa,  won't  you  let  mamma  go  with  me  ?  "  It  almost  broke  the  father's  heart  to  utter 
the  same  truth  as  before.  Turning  her  face  to  the  wall,  she  wept ;  but  then,  having 
before  this  been  taught  of  God,  prayed.  Soon,  therefore,  she  looked  up  with  a 
joyful  face  and  said,  *'  Papa,  the  grave  is  not  dark  now,  Jesus  will  go  with  me  I  " 

Ver.  29.    Then  touched  He  their  eyes. — The  opened  eye: — The  power,  glory, 
rewards  of  faith  form  the  theme  of  this  chapter.     I.  The  faith  described  in  the 

text   was   THE    FIRST    OUTGROWTH   AND   EXPRESSION    OP   A    DEEP   AND   UVELY    SENSE    0» 

WRETCHEDNESS  AND  DARKNESS.  Faiih  ofteu  Springs  out  of  such  convictions;  it  also 
amounts  to  a  conviction  that  light  is  possible.  II.  The  faith  in  this  instance  was 
INTELLIOF.NT.  They  had  settled  it  in  their  minds  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  David, 
that  He  had  come  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind.  Their  faith  conceived  the  grandeur 
of  His  mission.  Faith  is  not  merely  an  emotion  ;  it  is  a  conviction  of  the  under- 
standing. III.  This  faith  of  the  blind  men  was  eager  and  importunate.  They 
followed  Jesus.  It  was  not  crushed  by  having  to  wait  for  mercy.  IV.  The  faith  of 
these  individuals  was  a  personal  experience.  V.  The  faith  here  referred  to  appre- 
ciated Christ's  power  to  save.  VI.  The  faith  here  mentioned  appropriates  and 
applies  the  Divine  Power  to  its  own  case.  {H.  R,  Reynolds,  B.A.)  The  blind  men 
restored  to  night : — 1.  A  simple  prater.  Their  prayer  was  (1)  united.  Union  is 
strength.  (2)  Earnest.  (3)  Persevering.  II.  An  important  inquiry.  "  Believe, 
ye,"  &c.  1.  What  it  involves.  The  dignity  of  Christ.  2.  On  account  of  the 
principle  it  sets  forth.  He  required  no  personal  worthiness  in  those  He  cured ; 
faith  only.  3.  Because  of  its  spiritual  application.  Faith  stands  in  same  relation 
to  healing  of  the  soul.  III.  A  gracious  act.  1.  When  He  did  so — as  soon  as  they 
professed  faith.  2.  The  words  with  which  the  act  was  accompanied.  3.  The 
result  that  ensued.  IV.  An  express  injunction.  "  See  that  no  man  know  it." 
The  reasons  : — 1.  The  malice  of  His  enemies.  2.  The  misguided  zeal  of  the  multi- 
tude. 3.  The  manner  in  which  it  was  regarded.  {Expository  OutUneg.)  The 
measure  of  the  faith,  the  measure  of  the  gift : — 1.  The  broad  law  of  the  gospel  is  that 
God  gives  all  He  gives  to  faith.  2.  That  the  measure  of  faith  is  the  measure  of  Hia 
gift.  3.  The  chief  ways  to  multiply  faith  are  (1)  to  live  much  on  the  promise;  (2) 
to  love  and  cherish  in  the  heart  the  inward  voices  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  (3)  to  act 
out  whatever  grace  God  has  already  given.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  TJu  wayt  of 
Ka^tem  poor  folk : — Most  of  the  poor  make  their  wants  known  to  the  public  by 
begging.  Paralytics  are  laid  down  at  the  doors  of  the  rich,  or  of  the  church  or 
mosque,  with  the  idea  that  men  are  most  inclined  to  be  charitable  when  they  come 
from  the  house  of  feasting  or  of  prayer.  The  blind  lift  up  their  voices  as  they 
grojie  their  way  from  door  to  door  along  the  streets.  (Van  Lennep.)  Our  Lord's 
question  to  the  blind  men : — I.  The  seekers. — the  two  blind  men.  1.  They  were  in 
downright  earnest.  2.  They  were  thoroughly  persevering.  3.  They  had  a  definite 
object  in  their  prayers.  4.  They  honoured  Christ  in  their  prayers.  5.  They  con- 
fessed their  unworthinese.  II.  The  question  which  was  put  to  them.  1.  It  con- 
cerned their  faith.  2,  It  concerned  their  faith  in  Jesus — "  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able 
to  do  this?"  3.  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  t/its ?  Some  think  their  hoartf 
too  hard.  III.  That  question  was  a  very  reasonable  one.  Else  why  do  you  pray? 
IV.  The   answer.     1.  It    was   distinct.     2     It  was  immediate.     V.  Oub  Lobd'm 


CHAP.  IS.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  169 

KiSPONSE  TO  THEiK  ANSWER.  (C.  H.  SpurgeoTi.)  Faith  receptive  of  blesHng  :— 
Why  is  faith  so  essential  ?  It  is  because  of  its  receptive  power.  A  purse  will  not 
make  a  nian  rich,  and  yet  without  some  place  for  his  money  how  could  a  man 
acquire  wealth  ?  Faith  of  itself  could  not  contribute  a  penny  to  salvation,  but  it  is 
the  purse  which  holds  a  precious  Christ  within  itself,  yea,  it  holds  all  the  treasures 
of  Divine  love.  If  a  man  is  thirsty  a  rope  and  a  bucket  are  not  in  themselves 
of  much  use  to  him,  but  yet,  sirs,  if  there  is  a  well  near  at  hand  the  very  thing 
that  is  wanted  is  a  bucket  and  a  rope,  by  means  of  which  the  water  can  be  lifted. 
Faith  is  the  bucket  by  means  of  which  a  man  may  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation,  and  drink  to  his  heart's  content.  You  may  sometimes  have  stopped  s 
moment  at  a  street  fountain,  and  have  desired  to  drink,  but  you  found  you  could 
not,  for  the  drinking-cup  was  gone.  The  water  flowed,  but  you  could  not  get  at  it. 
It  was  tantalizing  to  be  at  the  fountain-head  and  yet  to  be  thirsty  still  for  want  of  a 
little  cup.  Now  faith  is  that  little  cup,  which  we  hold  up  to  the  flowing  stream  of 
Christ's  grace :  we  fill  it,  and  then  we  driuk  and  are  refreshed.  Hence  the  import- 
ance of  faith.  It  would  have  seemed  to  our  forefathers  an  idle  thing  to  lay  down 
a  cable  under  the  sea  from  England  to  America,  and  it  would  be  idle  now  if  it  were 
not  that  science  has  taught  us  how  to  speak  by  lightning :  yet  the  cable  itself  is  now 
of  the  utmost  importance,  for  the  best  inventions  of  telegraphy  would  be  of  no  use 
for  purposes  of  transatlantic  communication  if  there  were  not  the  connecting  wire 
between  the  two  continents.  Faith  is  just  that;  it  is  the  connecting  link  between 
onr  souls  and  God,  and  the  living  message  flashes  along  it  to  our  souls.  Faith  is 
sometimes  weak  and  comparable  only  to  a  very  slender  thread ;  but  it  is  a  very 
precious  thing  for  all  that,  for  it  is  the  beginning  of  great  things.  Years  ago  they 
were  wanting  to  throw  a  suspension  bridge  across  a  mighty  chasm,  through  which 
flowed,  far  down,  a  navigable  river.  From  crag  to  crag  it  was  proposed  to  hang  an 
iron  bridge  aloft  in  the  air,  but  how  was  it  to  be  commenced  ?  They  shot  an  arrow 
from  one  side  to  the  other,  and  it  carried  across  the  gulf  a  tiny  thread.  That 
invisible  thread  was  enough  to  begin  with.  The  connection  was  established ;  by- 
aud-by  the  thread  drew  a  piece  of  twine,  the  twine  carried  after  it  a  small  rope,  the 
rope  soon  carried  a  cable  across,  and  all  in  good  time  came  the  iron  chains  and  all 
else  that  was  needed  for  the  permanent  way.  Now,  faith  is  often  very  weak,  but 
even  in  that  case  it  is  still  of  the  utmost  value,  for  it  forms  a  communication  be- 
tween the  soul  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Blind  people  swarm  in  Oriental 
cities  : — In  our  own  streets  we  meet  here  and  there  with  a  blind  beggar,  but  they 
Bwarm  in  Eastern  cities.  Ophthalmia  is  the  scourge  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  and 
Volney  declares  that  in  Cairo,  out  of  a  hundred  persons  whom  he  met,  twenty  were 
quite  blind,  ten  wanted  one  eye,  and  twenty  others  were  more  or  less  afllicted  in  that 
organ.  At  the  present  day  every  one  is  struck  with  the  immense  number  of  the 
bl ind  in  Oriental  lauds,  and  things  were  probably  worse  in  our  Saviour's  time.   (Ibid.) 

Vers.  32,  33.  And  when  the  devil  was  cast  out,  the  dumb  spake. — Th^  dumb  made 
t^  tpeak : — Jesus  had  just  touched  the  eyes  of  the  bhnd  ;  now  a  dumb  man  is 
biought  to  Him.  Speech  the  special  gift  and  privilege  of  man.  It  is  the  revelation 
of  thought ;  the  aqueduct  of  the  eoul ;  the  medium  of  companionship.  DumbnesM 
one  of  the  greatest  blights  of  life.  The  highest  privilege  of  speech  is  foimd  in  the 
Divine  sphere.  I.  Spikitdal  dcmbness  is  a  gbeat  calamitt.  Through  four  thou- 
Band  years  God  was  approaching  a  dispensation  of  tongues  for  the  highest  expres- 
eion  of  His  life  to  men.  From  Abraham  to  Christ  was  the  dispensation  of  dreams. 
Not  to  nse  the  tongue  for  the  propagation  of  Divine  truth  is  to  cut  it  off  from  its 
highest  usefulness.  Dumbuess  and  deafness  are  allied :  not  to  speak  for  Christ  is 
not  to  be  able  to  hear  Christ's  words  to  your  own  soul  (Rom.  x.  9).  II.  Spimtdal 
DUMBNESS  IS  OCCASIONED  BY  DEMONIACAL  POSSESSION.  When  Christ  cast  the  devil 
out  the  dumb  spake.  1.  Some  complain  that  their  intellectual  culture  is  not  suflfi- 
cient  to  enable  them  to  speak  to  edification.  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  suck- 
lings God  hath  ordained  praise.  The  demon  of  intellectual  pride  must  be  cast  out. 
2.  Some  say,  "  I  have  very  little  abihty,  others  can  do  so  much  better."  God  does 
not  want  ability  so  much  as  availability.  The  demon  of  selfishness  must  be  oast 
out.  3.  Othei-s  say,  "  I  can't  and  I  won't  use  my  tongue  in  the  Church's  service, 
I  have  not  been  used  to  it."  The  demon  of  wilfulness  must  be  oast  out.  III. 
Christ's  work  amongst  men  is  to  cast  out  deuons  that  possess  ths  auMAif 
SOUL.     (1  John  iii.  8.)     (J.  F.  Clymer.) 

Yet.  35.  Healing  every  sickness. — Chri$t  the  Physician : — Christ's  healing  aotivi^ 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ioziJi.  n. 

had  this  double  value  :  it  was  evidence  of  His  Divine  authority  as  a  Teacher ;  it 
was  a  picture  in  detail  addressed  to  the  sense  of  what,  as  a  restorer  of  our  race,  Ba 
meant  to  do  in  regions  altogether  beyond  the  sphere  of  sense.  But  these  aspects  ol 
His  care  for  the  human  body  were  not  primary,  but  incidental.  Vv'e  mtiy  infer  with 
reverence  and  certainty  that  His  first  object  was  to  show  Himself  as  the  restorer  of 
human  nature  as  a  whole — not  of  the  reason  and  conscience  only,  \vithoat  ihe  body. 
Thus  our  Lord  has  thrown  radiance  upon  the  medical  profession,  associating  it  with 
His  redemptive  work.  1.  The  physician  can  point  out  with  authority  given  to  no 
other  man  the  present  operative  force  of  some  of  the  laws  of  God.  The  conntction 
between  indulgence  and  decay.  He  can  give  physical  reasons  for  moral  truth.  2. 
The  physician  can  point  out  the  true  limiis  of  human  knowledge.  He  knows  tbe 
ignorance  of  science.  3.  The  medical  profession  may  be  a  teacher  of  reverence- 
reverence  for  the  body  as  the  tabernacle  of  the  soul.  4.  The  profession  of  medicine 
is  from  the  nature,  I  had  almost  dared  to  Bay  from  the  necessity,  of  the  case  a  teacher 
of  benevolence.    (Canon  Liddon.) 

Ver.  36.  But  when  He  saw  the  multitudes. — Christ's  look  of  sympathy  : — I.  What 
He  saw.  1.  Not  reasons  for  admiration.  2.  Not  grounds  for  discouragement.  3, 
But  a  call  for  pity.  II.  The  condition  of  the  people.  1.  Faint.  2.  Scattered.  8. 
Shephcrdless.  III.  His  compassion  enlistkd  tor  theib  succour.  1.  The  grace  of 
the  Fa  her.  2.  His  own  prevailing  intercession.  3.  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  4. 
The  service  of  His  messengers.  {H.  A.  Cornell.)  Compassion  for  souls  : — I.  Thb 
SIGHT  WHICH  PRESENTED  ITSELF  TO  ouE  LoRD.  Cliiist  was  moved  with  the  sight  ol 
physical  suffering;  here  it  was  spiritual  disease.  1.  The  number  of  the  sheep.  2. 
The  condition  of  the  sheep.  3.  The  reason  of  their  condition — their  having  no 
Bhepherd.  II.  The  effect  which  this  bight  had  upon  our  Lord.  The  fact  that 
our  Lord  felt  compassion  when  He  saw  the  fearful  sight.  Unless  there  is  a  feehng 
of  compassion  there  will  be  no  spiritual  effort;  {E.  Bayley,  M.A.)  Partial  views 
of  humanity : — There  are  men  who  take  partial  views  and  come  to  partial  and,  ttere- 
fore,  erroneous  conclusions  about  everything.  There  are  those  who  seat  themselvea 
within  some  vernal  enclosure  or  summer  paradise,  and  say,  with  a  foolish  chuckle, 
that  the  earth  is  not  so  bad  a  pkce  after  all.  They  see  a  bed  of  blooming  flowers, 
fiery-hued  or  gentle-tinted,  and  they  hear  birds  in  the  branches  twittering,  trilling, 
singing,  and  makino:  melody  in  their  hearts,  and  they  say  the  earth  is  a  very  lovely 
place,  notwithstanding  all  the  croakers  say  to  the  contrary.  Now  obser\'e  how  they 
confound  the  partiiJ  term  with  the  larger  word.  They  see  a  garden  and  then  speak 
of  the  earth,  they  see  a  bed  of  geraniums  and  then  speak  of  the  globe;  there  is  no 
balance  in  their  sfntences,  their  words  do  not  correspond  with  one  another  at  both 
ends  of  their  declarations.  The  garden  is  beautiful,  the  flowers  are  lovtly  beyond 
all  that  it  is  possible  for  the  colouring  of  human  heart  fully  to  represent.  The 
painter  paints  the  form,  but  he  cannot  touch  the  fragrance.  We  admire  their  poetical 
Bympathy  within  given  limits,  but  go  beyond  the  garden  wall,  go  into  the  rough 
streets,  go  into  the  desolate  places,  take  in  the  wilderness,  throw  the  line  around  the 
entirety,  bring  the  whole  elements  within  your  purview,  and  then  say  what  it  is. 
The  angel  sees  it,  and  says,  '*  Mourning  and  lamf^ntation  and  woe."  Jesus  sees  it, 
and  cannot  cease  His  prayer ;  Jepus  looks  upon  it,  and  is  moved  with  compassion. 
{Dr.  Parker.)  A  Christ-like  judgment  of  men : — I.  Christ  teachino  os  how  to 
LOOK  AT  MEN.  II.  Christ  teaching  ub  how  to  feel  at  such  a  bight.  III.  Chrisi 
TEACHING  OS  WHAT  TO  DO  WITH  THE  EMOTION.  1.  Personal  work.  2.  Prayer.  8. 
Help.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  A  portrait  of  Jesus  : — His  compassion  manifested  in— 
I.  The  great  trnnsactions  of  His  life.  II.  The  foresights  of  compassion.  1.  The 
Bible  for  our  guiilance.  2.  The  minister  to  speak  to  man.  3.  The  Holy  Ppirit  to 
comfort.  4.  Tne  mercy-seat  as  our  resort.  5.  The  promises  as  our  food,  6.  The 
ordinances.  III.  Our  personal  recollections  prove  this  compassion,  1.  He  tern- 
pel  ed  our  convictions  with  intervals  of  hope.  2.  He  has  moderated  our  afliictions. 
3.  He  has  put  us  to  graduated  tasks.  (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  Emotion  leading  to 
action : — You  cannot  indulge  in  the  luxury  of  feeling  (if  you  will  excuse  a  Lancashire 
metaphor),  that  you  do  not  use  to  drive  your  spindles,  wthout  doing  yourselves  harm ; 
it  is  never  intended  to  be  blown  off  as  waste  steam  and  allowed  to  vanish  into  the  air< 
It  is  meant  to  be  conserved  and  guided,  and  to  have  something  done  with  it.  There, 
fore,  do  not  get  into  the  habit  of  indulging  in  that  sentimental  contemplation  of  the 
missionaries  and  heathenism.  ( Ibid.)  Compassion  sustains  service  : — Nothing  but 
compassion  will  carry  you  through  any  tragedy  in  hfe ;  you  cannot  go  through  it 
merely  for  its  own  sake.     The  hirehng  will  fall  asleep  over  the  sick  child,  but  tha 


0HAJ>.  CL]  ST.  MATTHEW.  171 


mother  will  drive  sleep  away  from  her  dwelling-place  till  she  has  rescneil  her  little  one 
from  the  power  of  the  enemy,  if  it  be  within  the  scope  of  her  erdnnince  and  skill  to 
win  60  great  a  triumph.  Ker  compassion  keeps  her  awake,  her  love  makes  the  night 
as  the  day,  her  pity  stops  the  clock,  so  that  she  takes  no  note  of  time.  Every  other 
emotion  grows  dumb  ;  wonder  must  sometimes  close  its  eyes,  admiration  palls  upon 
itself,  sates  its  appetite  and  dies  of  the  satiety,  but  compassion  grows  by  what  it 
feeds  on,  and  is  of  the  vei-y  nature  of  the  love  of  God.  He  grows  in  the  development 
of  his  compassion  ;  he  will  succeed  yet.      (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  38.  Pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest. — The  spiritual  harvest' 
field : — 1.  How  closely  connected  the  spiritual  commis-sion  of  the  apostles  was  with 
deep  sympathy  for  the  physical  wants  of  humanity.  2.  That  it  is  the  Lord  of  the 
harvest  who  has  power  to  send  forth  labourers  into  His  harvest.  We  rely  too  much 
on  our  own  ajrencies.  3,  The  strong  expression  of  constraint  which  the  Lord  here 
nses — "  that  He  may  cast  out."  It  has  been  so  with  the  more  eminent  saints  at  all 
times.  {S.  Leathes,  D.D.)  The  harvi'st-Jield  and  the  harvest  labourers  : — I.  Thb 
BTELD  is  the  world.  1.  It  is  precious,  in  the  very  fact  that  it  is  a  harvest-field.  Men 
are  the  fruit  for  the  sake  of  which  the  world  was  made.  2.  It  is  plenteous.  (1) 
Pagans.  (2)  j^.lahomedaus.  (3)  Papists.  3.  It  is  ripe.  4.  It  is  perishing.  XL 
The  harvest  labodkehs.  1.  AU  who  try  to  win  souls  are  in  His  eye  as  reapers 
gathering  the  wheat  into  the  garner.  Labourers  are  not  a  high  class  of  functionaries, 
and  need  not  expect  to  get  all  their  own  will  as  to  the  times  and  places  of  their  toils. 
2.  In  the  judgment  of  our  Lord  labourers  are  few.  His  heart  is  so  enlurged  toward  a 
lost  world  that  He  will  complain,  Few  are  coming.  Few,  in  proportion  to  the  world** 
need — a  contrast  to  the  multitude  pressing  to  the  natural  harvest.  3.  When  additional 
labourers  enter  the  Suld,  they  are  sent  into  it  by  the  Lord  of  the  harvest.  They 
are  grasped  by  the  Providential  hand  of  God.  4.  The  Lord  of  the  han'est  presses 
labourers  into  the  field  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  His  people.  [W.Arjiot.)  The  multi- 
tudes pressing  to  the  natural  harvest : — The  pressure  has  slackened  of  late;  bat  a  few 
years  ago  you  might  have  seen,  any  day  about  the  beginning  of  autumn,  dense  crowda 
of  Irish  labourersclnstering  like  beesaboutthewharvesof  Liverpooland  Glasgow.  On 
one  occasion  the  master  of  a  Londonderry  steamer,  on  arri\ang  at  Glasgow,  was  prose- 
cuted for  admitting  a  much  greater  i. umber  of  pas-engers  than  his  ship  was  legally  en- 
titled to  carry.  His  defence  was  that  the  men  mshed  on  board  in  spite  of  his  eii'oristo 
prevent  them,  and  took  forcible  possession  of  the  deck.  Such  were  the  numbers  that 
poured  into  the  Scottish  harvest-fields  at  that  time,  and  such  the  eagerness  of  each 
man  to  get  a  share  of  thewoik  and  the  reward.      {Ibid.)  The  harvest-field 

near : — Exercise  is  provided  for  the  spiritual  life.  None  shall  be  able  to  say  that 
the  field  was  too  distant,  and  that  he  consequently  had  not  an  opportunity  of  ren- 
dering service  as  a  reaper.  A  man  cannot  sit  at  meals  in  his  own  fanaily,  walk  along 
the  streets,  or  pursue  his  daily  toil  on  the  farm  or  in  the  workshop,  without  passing 
along  this  laden  harvest-field.  Everywhere  precious  fruit,  ready  to  perish,  offers 
itself  to  the  reaper's  hand.     (Ibid.)        Labourers  wanted: — I.  Christ  manifested 

AN  rSTENSE  ZEAL  FOB  THE  EVANGELIZATION  OF   THE  WORLD.       "  And   JeSUS   Went  aboUt 

all  their  cities,"  &c.  1.  Christ  was  the  great  Teacher — "  Teaching  in  their  syna- 
gogues," &Q.  2,  Christ  was  the  great  Physician — "  and  healing  every  sickness."  IL 
Christ  displayed  the  tenderest  sympathy  while  evangelizinq  the  world.  The 
spirit  in  which  Christ  did  Ilia  work,  almost  as  important  as  the  work  itself.  1. 
Christ  was  deeply  affected  by  the  spiritual  depression  of  the  peopls — "  they  fainted.*' 

2.  Christ  was  deeply  affected  at  the  spiritual  de£titution  of  the  people — "  were 
scattered  abroad."  III.  Christ  enjoined  a  devoct  spirit  fob  evangelizing  thb 
WORLD — •*  Pray  ye  therefore,"  &c,  1.  Christ  indicated  the  right  spirit  for  the  work — 
"Pray  ye."  2.  Christ  indicated  the  right  men  for  the  work — "Labourers  in  His 
harvest,"  <feo.  (J.  T.  Woodhmise.)  Harvest-mm  wanted : — I.  Oca  Lord  states 
THE  CASE.  The  people  who  gathered  round  Him  He  likened  to  harvest-fields :  wherein 
lay  the  similarity  ?  1.  The  thought  of  multitude  rises  naturally  from  the  sight  of  a 
harvest-field.  You  cannot  count  the  ears  of  com,  neither  will  you  be  able  to  count 
the  sons  of  men.  2.  The  second-  idea  was  that  of  value.  He  did  not  speak  of 
blades  (d  frass,  but  ears  of  corn.     The  souls  of  men  precious  in  the  sight  of  God. 

3.  The  idea  of  danger.  Fear  lest  it  should  perish.  4.  Accessible.  Multitudes  are 
near  at  hand.  5.  Immediate  need.  II.  The  service  needed.  Labourers  are 
wanted.  We  must  not  despi.  e  instrumentalities.  God  could  do  without  them,  but 
does  not.  1.  They  must  be  labourers.  Idler  no  use.  2.  They  must  go  down  into 
the  wheat.     3.  He  cuts  right  through.      DeUcate  words  useless.     The  preachei 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

must  not  file  off  the  edge  of  his  scythe  for  fear  it  should  hurt  Bomebody.  4.  He 
binds  it  together.  III.  Our  Lord  directed  His  disciples  how  to  obtain  a.  supply. 
1.  Pray  ye.  2.  Pray  ye  threfore.  3.  Pray  to  the  Lord.  IV.  The  Lord  jEsoa 
HEARD  TBEiB  PRAYERS.  "And  wheQ  He  had  called  onto  Him  Hia  twelve  disoiplss. 
He  gave  them  power,"  <&o.    {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

YsB.  1.    And  wben  He  had  called  nnto  Elm  Els  twelve  dlsdples. — Ths  pn- 

paratory  mission  of  the  apostles : — I.  Their  mission.  II.  Their  ohabob.  1. 
He  prescribes  their  route.  2.  He  prescribes  their  doctrine.  3.  He  prescribee 
their  work.  4.  He  prescribes  the  spirit  they  should  display.  III.  Their  return, 
{J.  Bennett,  D.D.)  Gave  tliem  power  : — At  first  the  apostles  had  a  smaller 
gospel  (they  had  not  got  the  cross  to  preach)  and  a  larger  power  of  miracles; 
afterwards  less  miracles  but  more  gospel;  but  always  a  suflScient  equipment. 
You  have  not  to  make  bricks  without  straw ;  Christ  gives  you  power  for  every 
duty.     {R.  Glover.)  H'-aling  the  sick: — Medical  missions.     Dr.  Duncan  Main 

of  the  Mid-China  Medical  Mission,  gives  a  remarkable  instance,  quoted  in  the 
Church  Missionary  Society's  Eeport,  of  what  he  terms  a  remarkable  case  of  cure 
Loth  of  body  and  soul.  The  Chinese  woman  he  tended  is  the  wife  of  a  tailor, 
Jiving  at  Ju-yang.  "  She  was,"  says  the  doctor,  "  brought  to  our  hospital  in  the 
beginning  of  1883,  suffering  from  an  ulcerated  leg  of  the  very  worst  description. 
As  soou  as  I  saw  the  advanced  state  of  the  disease,  I  told  the  husband  that  there 
was  nothing  for  the  limb  but  amputation."  To  this  the  man  most  decidedly 
refused  his  consent,  "and,"  continues  Dr.  Main,"  pleaded  with  me  to  allow  her  to 
remain  m  the  hospital  and  attempt  a  cure  on  other  terms.  She  remained  six 
•weeks,  and  at  the  end  of  that  period  no  signs  of  healmg  were  apparent,  and  as  the 
husband  could  not  consent  to  the  operation,  he  reluctantly  took  his  poor  wife 
home,  carrying  her  on  his  back  from  the  hospital,  both  of  them  in  tears.  A  few 
months  later  I  visited  Ju-yang,  where  the  patient  was  carried  to  the  Mission- 
room  in  a  large  basket.  She  was  by  this  time  worse  in  every  way,  so  that  when 
they  entreated  me  to  re-admit  her  and  perform  the  amputation,  I  decUned  the 
risk,  until  overpowered  by  their  pitiful  condition.  A  week  later  she  was  again  in 
the  female  ward,  and  after  some  time  devoted  to  raising  her  system  by  diet  and  tonics, 
i  decided  at  the  husband's  renewed  request  to  attempt  the  operation.  Whilst 
attending  her  daily  in  this  interval,  Mrs.  Main  had  spoken  frequently  to  her  about 
ealvation  through  Christ,  and  she  gave  good  evidence  of  being  a  new  creature  in 
Christ  Jesus,  which  seemed  to  justify  our  acceding,  with  the  bishop's  approval  and 
assistance,  to  her  request  for  baptism,  before  she  underwent  the  hazardous  triaL 
This  was  done,  and  special  prayer  was  offered  in  the  ward  next  day  before  the 
operation  commenced.  Her  cheerfulness  at  the  time  was  remarkable,  and  con- 
tributed to  secure  the  extremely  favourable  result.  The  stump  healed  rapidly,  and 
a  fairly  satisfactory  wooden  leg  being  made  by  a  native  joiner,  under  my  directions, 
she  was  actually  taken  to  church,  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  to  return  thauka 
and  confess  her  faith  in  Christ,  so  we  had  the  joy  of  seeing  her  walking  and 
praising  God.  H*^r  husband,  who  wished  to  be  baptized  on  that  occasion,  but  waa 
deferred  for  further  instruction,  has  since  been  admitted  to  the  church  at  Ju-yang, 
whither  they  returned  shortly  after  the  completion  of  the  cure.  Her  age,  as  well 
as  the  extremity  to  which  suffering  had  reduced  her  system,  made  the  successful 
amputation  a  subject  of  special  thankfulness  to  myself  and  all  connected  with 
the  hospital."  And  we  have  many  well-authenticated  instances  on  record  of  mar- 
vellous answers  to  prayer  in  the  cure  of  sickness,  even  when,  from  some  circum- 
stance or  other,  medical  aid  was  not  at  hand.  Of  course,  fanaticism  has  exaggerated 
this,  and  has  tried  to  prove  that  medicine  is  of  no  use,  and  that  it  is  sinful  to  con- 
enlt  pliysicians.  As  is  well  known  a  sect  has  arisen,  professing  these  doctrines, 
and  caUing  itself  "  The  Peculiar  People,"  but  this  must  not  blind  us  to  real  facts. 
Here  is  an  instance  from  a  German  tract.  "  A  remarkable  answer  to  prayer  it 
furnished  to  us  by  the  true  Christian  and  upright  statesman,  J.  J.  von  Moser, 
during  the  time  of  his  long  and  unjust  imprisonment  in  the  fortress  of  Hohentivial 
in  Wurtemberg,  from  1759  to  1761.     •  In  Hohentivial '  he  writes,  •  I  was  for  a  long 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  17| 

time  seriously  ill  from  lumbago  and  other  severe  pains  in  the  limbs.  I  could 
scarcely  move,  and  had  to  support  myself  with  a  stick  in  one  hand  and  a  crutch 
in  the  other.  On  one  occasion,  three  gentlemen  paying  me  a  visit  in  my  prison, 
I  apologized  to  them  for  not  being  able  to  rise  and  receive  them.  One  of  my 
visitors.  Dr.  Eppli,  perceiving  the  crutch  and  staff  lying  on  the  table,  exclaimed, 
"  Heaven  preserve  us.  What  horrible  tools  1  "  I  replied,  "  I  thank  God  that  H« 
has  made  the  wood  which  furnishes  these  useful  supports."  Scarcely  had  my 
visitors  gone,  ere  I  found  myself  able  to  stand.  I  walked  up  and  down  a  step  or  two, 
and  found  myself  perfectly  able  to  dispense  with  crutches.'  He  never  used  them 
•gain."  Christ  the  preacher's  power : — Let  oior  one  theme  be  Christ,  not  our  own 
whims  and  fancies  and  crotchets,  but  Him.  Rather  ourselves  out  of  sight,  unknown, 
unthought  of.  hidden  in  the  excess  of  light  which  streams  from  Him.  Yon  are 
familiar  with  the  story  of  the  aitist  who  undertook  the  task  of  painting  the  portrait 
of  our  Lord.  When  complete,  you  remember,  he  thought  it  needed  some  em- 
bellishments, which  were  therefore  supplied.  When  the  picture  was  exhibited,  to 
his  horror  and  disappointment  the  attention  of  the  beholders  was  diverted  from 
the  grand  central  figure  to  the  flowers  and  t^ees  which  grew  around.  Without  the 
slightest  hesitation  or  remorse,  he  grasped  his  brush  and  obliterated  everything 
that  withdrew  the  mind  from  that  which  should  fascinate  every  eye.  The  'moral 
ia  obvious.     (Burr.) 

Ver.  2.  Now  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles. — Thoughtt  on  a  li$t  of  name*  .■ — 
A  good  deal  may  be  made  out  of  a  Ust  of  names,  but  it  depends  on  whose  names 
they  are.  There  is  a  book  which  has  nothing  in  it  but  names — that  book  would 
interest  the  universe — "  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."  We  may  look  on  the  men — L 
Officially.  1.  They  are  selected,  chosen,  set  apart  by  Christ  as  apostles.  The 
marvellous  results  which  have  flowed  from  this  selection.  Their  story  has  moved 
the  world.  The  world  persecuted  them,  but  now  falls  at  their  feet.  2.  The  Little 
power  naturally  there  would  seem  to  have  been  in  these  men  to  have  produced  any 
great  results.  Men  of  no  rank.  If  the  work  had  not  been  of  God,  it  could  not 
have  been  done.  3.  There  is  the  list  complete.  Twelve  men  are  selected,  yet  few 
of  them  stand  out  in  full  length  in  the  history.  Every  true  worker  God  observes 
4.  The  name  may  be  in  the  hst  of  the  apostles,  but  the  man  may  not  be  there, 
Judas  in  the  list,  he  not  there.  II.  Personally.  We  may  read  it  as  a  list  of  persons 
in  the  Church.  1.  The  gospel  embraces  persons  of  different  tempers  and  tastes,  yet 
all  part  of  one  Church.  2.  How  the  good  cause  may  be  advanced  by  relationship. 
Here  are  three  pairs  of  brothers  in  the  list.  3.  That  a  catalogue  might  be  made 
out  of  a  church  book  of  those  whose  previous  lives  had  been  rather  questionable.  4. 
How  we  can  understand  the  Christian  mellowing  with  age,  the  better  nature  grows 
and  is  perfected.  (T.  Bimiey.)  Called  to  the  ministry: — The  attorney  that 
pleads  at  the  bar  may  have  as  good  gifts  as  the  judge  that  sits  upon  the  bench ;  but 
he  mu!^t  have  a  lawful  commission  before  he  sit  as  a  judge  :  if  it  be  thus  in  civil 
matters,  much  more  in  church  matters,  which  are  of  higher  concern.  Those,  there- 
fore, who  usurp  the  work  of  the  ministry  without  being  solemnly  set  apart  for  it, 
discover  more  pride  than  zeal,  and  they  can  expect  no  blessing.  CT.  Watson.) 
Groupi  of  apostles : — It  can  hardly  be  without  significance  that  in  all  the  apostolic 
lists  they  are  divided  into  the  same  three  groups.  In  the  first  group  we  should 
naturally  expect  to  find  the  men  of  the  largest  and  strongest  make — those  whose 
capacity  and  force  of  character  would  fit  them  to  lead  the  rest.  And  this  expecta- 
tion is  justified  by  the  event.  Peter  and  Andrew,  James  and  John,  are  the  natural 
leaders  of  the  apostohc  company.  We  might  almost  call  them  the  Boanergio  group, 
BO  marked  and  emphatic  is  the  strain  of  passion  in  their  service.  In  the  second 
group  are  well-known  and  well-marked  men.  They  are  all  reflective  men,  all 
sceptical  men.  Philip  is  the  leader,  and  he  was  a  man  that  would  rather  see  than 
beheve.  They  are  excellent  and  thoughtful  men,  but  they  will  not  do  much  for  the 
vorld  apart  from  men  of  a  more  forward  and  adventurous  spirit  than  their  own. 
They  all  believe,  but  they  all  have  a  good  deal  of  unbeUef  in  them.  The  third 
group  we  may  call  the  Hebraistic  or  practical  group — Hebraistic  in  virtue  of  one 
set  of  qualities  which  they  have  in  common,  and  practical  in  virtue  of  another  set 
of  qualities.  They  held  stoutly  to  the  older  Hebrew  forms  of  truth  and  righteous- 
ness ;  and  they  were  at  least  as  much  Hebrew  as  Christian  even  to  the  end.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  all  the  apostles  of  this  group  were  men  of  evidently  practical 
gifts;  and  this  is  especially  seen  in  Judas  "of  tlie  apron,"  Judas  "of  the  bag,"  a 
man  chosen  to  carry  the  bag  because  he  was  careful,  prudent,  busy,  good  at  buying 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «, 

and  selling,  conversant  with  the  world.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Early  Church  symboU 
of  thii  apostles  : — In  a  series  of  enamels,  by  Leonard  Limousin,  in  the  Church  of  St. 
Peter,  at  Chartres,  the  apostles  are  represented  with  dillerent  insignia.  St.  Petor 
with  the  keys,  as  commissioned  with  the  power  to  bind  and  to  loose.  St.  Paul  with 
ft  sword,  as  a  soldier  of  Christ,  armed  with  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit."  St.  Andrew 
with  a  cross,  shaped  as  the  letter  X,  the  form  of  the  cross  on  which  he  is  supposed 
to  have  been  martyred.  St.  John  with  a  chalice,  in  allusion  to  Matt.  xx.  23.  St. 
James  tht>  Less  with  a  book  and  a  club,  in  allusion  to  the  supposed  manner  of  his 
death.  St.  James  the  Elder  with  a  pilgrim's  staff,  a  broad  hat  with  scallop  shells, 
and  a  book,  he  being  regarded  as  the  patron  of  pilgrims.  St.  Thomas  with  an 
architect's  square,  as  patron  of  architects  and  builders.  St.  Philip  with  a  small 
cross,  the  staff  of  which  is  knotted  like  a  reed,  and  indicates  tho  traveUer'a  staff, 
and  marks  the  apostle  as  the  preacher  of  Christ  crucilied  to  distant  nations.  St. 
Matthew  with  a  pike  (or  spear) ;  St.  Matthias  with  an  axe ;  St.  Bartholomew  with 
a  book  and  a  knife ;  St.  Simon  with  a  saw ;  these  indicating  the  different  modes  ol 
their  death,  according  to  the  legendary  accounts.  {Diet,  of  Antiquities.)  John 
Ills  brother. — God  often  unites  by  grace  those  whom  He  has  before  united  by 
nature  ;  to  show  us,  that  although  nature  be  not  a  step  towards  grace,  yet  it  is  not 
always  a  hindrance  to  it.    {Quediiel.) 

Yet.  3.  Matthev  the  publican. — Matthew  the  publican : — L  The  poweb  akd  gracb 
OF  THE  Divine  call.  Power  is  measured  by  the  amount  or  degree  of  resistance  which 
it  is  able  to  overcome.  There  were  three  chief  o))stacle8  in  the  way  of  this  man'g  con- 
version. 1.  His  business  exposed  him  constantly  to  temptations  which  were  well  nigh 
irresistible.  2.  The  standard  of  morality  recognized  by  his  associates  was  proverbially 
low.  3.  He  had  no  character  to  sustaLa.  H.  A  sinnee's  conversion  is  a  cadse  oi 
JOY.  III.  Converted  souls  desire  to  promote  iue  conversion  of  othiRS.  IV. 
Matthew's  cuief  characteristic  was  humility,  (W.  F.  Bishop.)  The  tax-col- 
lector icho  became  a  bishop  : — St.  Matthew's  example  led  to  one  of  the  hohest  Uvea 
recorded  in  the  annals  of  the  early  Church.  One  of  the  most  able  and  useful  men 
of  the  North  African  Church  was  the  Bishop  Nulgertius.  He  liad  originally  been  a 
receiver  of  taxes,  but  it  one  day  occurred  to  him :  "  May  I  not  be  like  Matthew, 
become  from  a  tax-gatherer  a  preacher  of  the  gospel."  He  accordingly  left  hia 
worldly  employment,  became  an  ecclesiastic,  and  was  ultimately  a  most  useful 
bibhop.  A  humble  acknowledger  of  an  unworthy  past : — We  read  the  histories  of 
such  persons  with  vast  interest  and  pleasure  ;  and  there  is  one  circumstsmce  which 
you  generally  meet  with,  and  which  always  peculiarly  engages  our  attention,  and 
that  is,  the  remembrance  which  these  men  had  in  their  elevation  of  the  poverty  and 
obscurity  from  which  they  had  been  raised.  You  will  commonly  find  that  they  had 
kept  about  them  some  memento  of  the  insignificance  of  their  origin,  as  though  they 
felt  a  pride  in  reminding  others  and  themselves  how  little  they  owed  to  the  achiev- 
ments  of  ancestors.  In  the  splendid  halls  in  which  their  latter  days  were  spent, 
they  have  delighted  to  hang  pictures  of  the  hovels  in  which  they  were  born :  bo 
that  the  stranger  passing  througli  the  magnificent  scene,  after  admiring  a  thousand 
gorgeous  works  of  art,  and  confessing  the  grandeur  and  taste  of  thtar  owner,  might 
come  suddenly  on  the  representation  of  a  lowly  cottage,  and  learning  that  thia 
cottage  was  the  home  of  the  parents  of  the  man  who  had  possessed  himself  of  all 
this  glory,  might  have  a  feehng  of  far  higher  reverence  and  wonder,  than  if  there 
had  been  spread  before  him  the  evidences  of  a  most  illustrious  pedigree.  And  it  is 
very  curious  to  observe  how  the  biographers  of  such  a  man  will  labour  to  throw 
gome  kind  of  lustre  around  his  origin,  as  though  they  could  not  bear  that  their 
hero  should  be  deficient  in  aught  to  wiiich  the  world  attaches  worth.  {H. 
Melvill.) 

Ver.  4.  Judas  lacarlot,  who  also  betrayed  Him. — A  chapter  in  human  biography  : 
— I.  Early  opportunity.  Called  to  be  an  apostle.  Sharing,  too,  in  the  prayers  of 
Christ  (Luke  vi.  12,  13).  His  gifts  marked  him  out  for  certain  work.  That 
work  fell  to  his  lot.  Possihihties  of  such  a  calling.  H.  Growth  of  evil  (John 
vi.  64-71 ;  xii.  1-6).  HI.  Thb  price  of  a  soul  (John  xiii.  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  14-16). 
rV.  Thb  end  (John  xviii,  2-5;  Matt,  xxvii.  3-6;  Acts  i.  18-25,  with  Matt, 
xxviL  6).  The  sentence  of  the  Master  upon  his  life  and  his  work  is  thia,  "  It  were 
better  for  this  man  that  he  had  never  been  born.  (G,  T,  KerbU.)  A  wicked 
minister: — Let  us  adore  the  unsearchable  judgment  of  God,  in  the  choice  of  ■ 
wicked  minister,  whoso  unworthiness  He  knew.    Let  us  learn  from  hence  that  n« 


CHAT.  X.]  SI,  MATTHEW.  171 

merit  gives  a  right  to  the  ministry,  bat  the  sole  choice  of  God  alone.  Jesus  Christ 
wonlJ  not  put  saints  into  it,  to  oblige  us  not  to  judge  of  the  holiness  of  the  Church 
by  certain  of  her  miuisteri  He  would  not  put  into  it  any  of  the  rich,  noble,  power- 
ful, or  learned,  for  fear  lest  men  should  affix  ecclesiastical  dignities  to  temporal 
advantages.  Let  ns  bear  with  the  bad  patiently ;  let  us  adore  Jesus  Christ  and  Hia 
authority  degraded  in  them,  yet  without  the  virtue  of  His  ordinances  thereby  suf- 
fering anything;  and  herein  let  us  be  assnred  that  it  ia  Jesus  Christ  who  eJf^a 
all  in  them,  even  by  the  most  unworthy  workmen.     (Quesnel.) 

Ver.  6.  These  twelva  Jesus  S9nt  forth. — Unrecorded  worlcers  and  heroet: — Half  of 
"these  twelve  "  are  never  beard  of  again  as  doing  any  work  for  Christ.  That  fact 
may  suggest  some  con-^iderations  worth  pondering.    I.  This  peculiab  and  unex- 

PECrED  SILEXCE  SUGGESTS  THE  TRUE  WOKKEB  IN  THE  ChTTBCH'S  PROGRESS.       Let  U8  not 

over  estimate  men.  What  confidence  it  ought  to  give  us  as  we  think  of  the  tasks 
and  fortunes  of  the  Church !    II.  Sogoests  what  the  beai.  work  of  those  delb- 

9ATED    WORKERS   WAS.        III.   HoW    OFTEN   FAITHFUI.   WORK     18   UNRECORDED   AND   FOB- 

flOTTEN.  IV.  Forgotten  wore  is  bsmembersd,  and  unbecobdeo  kamxs  abb 
BzcoBDED  ABOTB.     (I)T.  A.  Muclaren.) 

Ver.  7.  And  as  ye  go,  preaclL — Preaching  and  going: — L  Who  are  to  preach? 
n.  What  are  they  to  preach  ?  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven."  &c.  Then  we  must  speak 
of  the  King.  Tell  them  Ho  is  King  of  gnef,  grace,  and  glory.  IIL  When  are  they 
to  preach  ?  •'  As  ye  go."  1.  We  are  always  on  the  go  in  this  busy  world.  2.  ••  Aa 
ye  go" — travelUng.  3.  While  you  are  \(alking.  4.  As  long  as  you  live.  IV. 
Where  are  we  to  preach  ?  "  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,"  &c.  To  kith  and 
kin  first.  V.  Why  are  we  to  preach  ?  *•  Freely  ye  have  received."  {T.  Spiirgeon.) 
Preaching  first  to  our  own  kith  and  kin : — Do  you  remember  how  it  was  with  Samson  ? 
He  found  honey  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion  which  he  had  himself  destroyed ;  and 
when  he  found  the  honey  he,  like  a  very  sensible  man,  took  of  it  and  did  eat ;  and 
he  went  along  eating,  with  his  hands  full  of  honey.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  had 
not  time  to  eat  it  all  up  before  he  got  to  the  end  of  the  journey ;  but  I  am  inclined 
to  think  that  he  was  not  so  selfish  as  to  wish  to  keep  it  all  to  himself.  At  all 
events,  we  read  that  when  he  got  to  the  house  of  his  father  and  of  his  mother  he 
gave  them  of  the  honey,  and  they  did  eat.  Hast  thou  found  honey?  Have  it  not 
to  thyself  ?  Take  it  home  to  those  who  have  it  not.  And,  Saviour,  there  is  no 
honey  that  drops  from  earthly  honeycombs  like  Thy  love — "  sweeter  than  honey 
and  the  honeycomb."    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  8.  Heal  the  sick. — Heal  the  sick  : — I.  A  confirmation  of  our  sincbbitt.  IL 
An  illustration  of  the  completeness  of  Christianity.  1.  Its  concern  vrith  the  whole 
nature  of  man.  2.  Its  care  for  the  individual.  IIL  A  revelation  of  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord.  IV.  An  undoubted  mode  of  serving  the  Christ  Himself.  (U.  R. 
Thomas.)  Cleanse  the  lepers. — History  of  leprosy  : — Leprosy  is  a  disease  with 
which  we  are  happily  so  Uttle  acquainted  in  Western  lands  that  the  miraculous 
power  exerted  by  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  in  connection  with  it  does  not  strike  us 
with  the  wonder  and  a<lmiration  it  must  have  occasioned  in  early  times.  It  is,  in 
the  passage  before ns.digtinguished from  sickness — "Heal  the  sick"  and  "Cleanse  the 
lepers,"  being  distinct  commands.  For  leprosy  was  the  special  disease  of  Palestine ; 
was  look"d  upon  as  a  type  of  sin,  was  in  most  cases  incurable,  and  was  one  that 
necessitated  separation,  as  indeed  it  does  at  the  present  day,  though  what  is  now 
termed  leprosy,  Elepliantiasia  Grcecorum,  is  distinct  from  the  Lepra  Mosaici  to 
whicfi  the  Israelites  from  the  period  of  their  bondage  in  Egypt  to  the  time  of  our 
Lord,  were  subject.  But  the  former  disease,  like  the  latter,  is  of  Eastern  origin, 
and  is  thought  to  have  been  brought  into  Eutope  by  the  Crusaders,  while  others 
afiirm  that  it  was  introduced  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries  by  the  Moors  and 
Arabs,  who  not  only  conquered  the  larger  part  of  Spain,  but  penetrated  much 
further  into  Europe  than  is  generally  known,  reaching,  it  is  believed,  even  as  far  as 
Switzerland.  Its  frequency  in  various  parts  of  Europe  through  the  Middle  Ages  ia 
shown  by  the  word  '*  Lazar,"  for  hospital,  which  referred  to  Lazarus,  because  he 
■was  "  full  of  sores,"  and  these  hospitals  were  intended  primarily  for  lepers.  Most 
great  towns  in  England  had  their  "  St.  Giles's  Gate,"  outside  which  these  wretched 
beings  were  housed  to  avoid  infection,  St.  Giles  being  the  patron  saint  of  lepers. 
Tliis  was  generally  a  particularly  low  and  wretched  part  of  the  town — St.  Giles's 
Church  in  London  and  theGiliigate  at  Durham  are  instances.     The  laws  to  prevent 


176  xHE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


the  spread  of  leprosy  were  very  stringent,  sometimes  even  cruel.  At  Edinbnrgh, 
for  instance,  there  was  at  one  time  a  statute  that  if  any  person  harboured  a  leper 
in  their  house,  he  was,  among  other  penalties,  to  be  branded  in  the  cheek.  There 
is  only  one  country  in  Northern  Europe  in  which  this  dire  disease  is  still 
frequent,  Norway.  From  want  of  vigorous  measures  to  stamp  it  out  leprosy  is 
common  in  that  country,  and  there  is  a  large  kper  hospital  at  Christiania,  the 
capital  In  England  isolated  instances  are  met  with — for  instance,  at  Marazide,  in 
Cornwall,  there  lived  some  years  ago  a  person  most  grievously  aflSicted  with 
Elephamicmis  Grcecorum,  a  form  of  the  disease  in  which  the  extremities  swell  to  a 
great  size,  and  sometimes  fall  off.  In  the  Holy  Land,  at  the  present  day,  as  well 
as  in  Greece  and  Spain,  this  form  of  leprosy  is  far  from  uncommon.  Ewald  gives 
a  thrilling  account  of  a  village  near  Jerusalem  which  is  exclusively  inhabited  by 
lepers — about  one  hundred  in  number  at  the  time  he  visited  it.  "  This  unfortunate 
and  pitiable  race,"  he  says,  "  are  compelled  to  live  separate  from  all.  The  malady 
appears  generally  when  they  are  about  twelve  or  fourteen  years  old,  and  increases 
every  year,  till  they  lose  literally  one  limb  after  the  other.  As  they  grow  older 
their  sight  fails,  their  throat  and  lungs  become  infected,  till  death  ends  their  pro- 
tracted sufferings.  They  live  upon  the  alms  which  they  receive  from  pilgrims  and 
othern."  In  South  Africa  the  disease  is  very  frequent,  more  especially  among  the 
negro»r!  and  Hottentots.  Very  little  care  was  taken  to  tend  or  isolate  these  unfor- 
tunate sufferers  while  the  Dutch  were  in  possession  of  Cape  Colony,  since  they 
mostly  :^elonged  to  the  despised  black  race,  but  when  the  English  came  into  power 
in  1810  a  settlement  was  appointed  for  tlae  lepers  at  a  place  called  by  the  Dutch 
Hemel  en  Aaede  (Heaven  on  Earth),  which  seems  a  most  inappropriate  name,  but 
that  the  devoted  labours  of  the  Moravian  missionary  Lehmann  sweetened  the  lot  of 
these  unhiippy  ones.  In  1845  the  settlement  was  removed  to  Robber  Island,  nearly 
opposite  Cape  Town,  where  the  lepers,  it  was  thought,  would  be  more  completely 
isolated,  and  would  enjoy  the  benefit  of  sea-air.  There  the  devoted  Lehmann  con- 
tinued his  ministrations,  having  under  liis  spiritual  charge  a  motley  assemblage  of 
English,  Germans,  Frenchmen,  Malays,  Swedes,  Africans,  only  aUke  in  their  misfor- 
tnne.  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give. — Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give : — I. 
A  TEBY  PEOFiTABLE  KECOLLECTioN.  Have  you  received  at  all  ?  How  have  we  received  f 
"Freely."  1.  Look  at  your  own  personal  salvation.  2.  Look  at  the  abundance  of 
grace  given  you.  3.  Look  at  the  treasures  set  before  you.  XL  The  cosstbaindj* 
OBLIGATION — "  Freely  give."  1.  Think  what  you  have  to  give,  give  your  own  selves, 
your   substance,   your  prayers.     2.  How  you   are  to  give.      (G.  Bridges,  M.A.) 

I.    CONSIDEB  THE  PRIVILEGES  WHICH   HAVE  BEEN    SO   FEEELY    BESTOWED   UPON  US.       The 

value  of  the  gospel  seen — 1.  From  our  Lord's  commission  to  His  disciples.  2.  The 
labours  attendant  on  the  execution  of  that  commission.  II.  The  dott  eesttltino 
rBOM  these  privileges.  1.  Freely  give  your  money,  influence,  and  ability.  2. 
Freely  give  your  friends  and  relatives  to  engage  in  this  great  missionary  work. 
8.  Freely  give  yourselves,  your  lives  to  this  great  work.  4.  Freely  give  your  prayers. 
(J.  B.  Sumner,  M.A.)  The  philosophy  of  benevolence  : — I.  Giving  is  an  act  of 
consecration.  II.  It  is  an  act  of  grace.  IIL  It  is  an  act  of  communion.  IV.  It 
is  a  privilege.  {^V.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Freely  ye  have  received: — 1.  Manifested 
in  creation.  2.  Kedemption.  3.  Assurance.  4.  All  these  blessings  come  freely. 
6.  The  favourable  administrations  of  providence.  {R,  AUiott.)  The  best  place 
for  a  fortune  : — When  a  gentleman,  who  Lad  been  accustomed  to  give  away  some 
thousands,  was  supposed  to  be  at  the  point  of  death,  his  presumptive  heir  inquired 
where  his  fortune  was  to  be  found.  To  whom  he  answered,  *'  that  it  was  in  the 
pockets  of  the  indigent."  The  gospd  gratis  : — In  The  Indian  Female  Evangelist 
for  September  of  this  year,  we  meet  with  rather  a  pleas?ing  illustration  of  this  verse, 
in  the  report  given  by  a  native  Bible-woman,  who  accompanied  the  missionary,  Mr. 
Harding  and  his  wife,  on  an  evangelizing  tour  of  180  miles  in  the  Bombay  Presi- 
dency, in  a  bullock-cart.  At  one  place  they  came  to,  ehe  says,  "  We  had  so  many 
openings  in  the  town  here  to-day.  There  were  several  of  us  \.ho  went,  and  at  times 
we  divided  into  two  companies.  We  must  have  gone  to  six  places.  One  interesting- 
looking  lad  followed  us  around,  waiting  patiently  for  his  turn  to  come,  when  we 
could  follow  him  to  his  home.  We  gladly  did  so,  and  had  a  large  company  in  front 
of  his  mother's  house  and  yard.  He  tried  to  slip  a  few  coppers  into  our  hands  but 
we  refused,  for  as  we  have  received  freely,  we  are  glad  to  give  freely."  But  the 
boy's  offer  was  gratifying,  as  showing  how  the  work  was  appreciated.  Freely.  .  ,  . 
St.  Helanon  healed  very  many  eick  persons,  but  would  not  receive  any  gilts  froxn 
them  not  so  much  as  a  morsel  of  bread ;  for  he  was  wont  to  say,  "  Gratis  ye  hav« 


OBAP.  x.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  177 

received,  gratis  give."  He  replied  to  a  certain  nobleman  whom  he  had  delivered 
from  a  legion  of  devils,  and  who  urgently  pressed  him  to  receive  a  gift,  at  least  that 
he  might  distribute  it  among  the  poor,  "  Be  not  grieved,  my  eon,  at  what  I  do, 
for  I  do  it  for  thy  sake  as  well  as  my  own.  If  I  should  receive  this  I  should  offend 
Ood,  and  the  legion  would  return  to  thee." 

Ver.  9.  Provide  neither  gold. — The  enthusiasm  of  poverty : — It  is  impossible  not 
to  admire  the  noble  enthusiasm  of  poverty  which  showed  itself  in  the  Uteral  adop- 
tion of  such  rules  by  the  followers  of  Francis  of  Assisi,  and,  to  some  extent,  by 
those  of  Wiclif ;  but  the  history  of  the  Mendicant  Orders,  and  other  like  fraternities, 
forms  part  of  that  teaching  of  history  which  has  led  men  to  feel  that  in  the  long- 
run  the  beggar's  life  will  bring  the  beggar's  vices.  Yet  here,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
precepts  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the  spirit  is  binding  still,  though  the  letter 
has  passed  away.  The  mission  work  of  the  Church  has  ever  prospered  in  proportion 
as   that  spirit  has  pervaded  it.     {E.  H.  Plumptre.)  Without  a  purse: — The 

word  purse  here  literally  signifies  girdle^  those  worn  by  the  Jews  were  made 
hollow,  so  as  to  contain  money.  A  sort  of  purse  convenient,  light,  and  secure.  In 
like  manner,  the  long  sleeves  worn  by  the  Japanese  serve  them  in  lieu  of  purses. 
This  custom  of  missionaries  going  out  with  little  store  of  money  is  carried  out  in 
its  greatest  literality  among  the  Moravians,  who  give  their  missionaries  the  in- 
credibly small  salary  of  five  pounds  a  year.  For  anything  they  require  beyond  what 
this  sum  will  procure,  they  have  to  apply  to  the  committee  of  the  missionary  society. 
Once,  when  St.  Antony  was  on  a  journey,  he  saw  an  immense  piece  of  gold.  He 
admired  the  size  of  the  piece  of  metal,  and  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  to  his  mountain, 
AS  though  he  were  running  from  a  fire.  Whenever  money  was  offered  to  St.  Vincenl 
as  he  was  preaching  through  the  villages,  he  refused  it,  and  forbade  his  companionsr 
accepting  it.  St.  Francis  was  wont  to  say  that  *♦  money  to  the  servants  of  God  is 
nothing  else  than  a  devil  and  a  poisonous  snake."  Our  Lord  gave  His  disciples 
this  precept  for  three  reasons ;  (1)  That  being  free  from  all  earthly  affections  and 
cares,  they  should  depend  entirely  upon  God's  providence  ;  (2)  That  they  should  be 
wholly  intent  upon  preaching  the  gospel,  and  give  all  their  thoughts  and  cares  to 
that;  (3)  That  they  might  give  to  all  nations  an  illustrious  example  of  simplicity, 
poverty,  and  contempt  of  riches,  whereby  they  might  draw  all  men  to  love  and 
admiration  of  the  heavenly  life. 

Ver.  10.  Neither  two  coats. — No  need  for  two  eoats  : — Eastern  people  are 
accustomed  to  sleep  in  the  garments  they  have  on  during  the  day ;  and  in  this 
climate  such  plain  people  experience  no  inconvenience  from  so  doing,  {W,  M. 
Thomson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  And  there  abide. — Why?  (1)  That  they  might  not  appear  changeable; 
(2)  That  they  might  not  hurt  the  feeUngs  of  their  first  host ;  (3)  That  they  might 
not  incur  the  charge  of  being  gluttonous  hankerers  after  the  boards  of  the  rich. 
(Lapide.)  Free  hospitality  in  the  East : — When  travelling  in  the  East  no  one 
need  scruple  to  go  into  the  best  house  of  any  Arab  village  to  which  he  comes,  and 
he  will  be  received  with  profuse  and  gratuitous  hospitality.  From  the  moment  we 
entered  any  house,  it  was  regarded  as  our  own.  There  is  not  an  Arab  you  meet 
who  will  not  empty  for  you  the  last  drop  in  his  water-skin,  or  share  with  you  his 
last  piece  of  black  bread.  The  Babbis  said  that  paradise  was  the  reward  of  willing 
hospitality.'    (Ernest  Renan.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  And  If  the  house  be  worthy. — TJie  happy  family ; — ^Illustrate  the 
transcendent  importance  of  religion  by  presenting  some  of  the  leading  characteristics 
of  the  family  which   is  governed  by  its  influence.    I.  The  genebal  aim  of  its 

ABBANGEMENT8.       H.    ItS   DEPABTMENT    OF    EDUCATION.       IH.   IlS   EVEBT-DAY   PUB8DIT8 

— its  ordinary  habits  and  dispositions.  IV.  Amid  the  sacred  employment  of  the 
Sabbath.  V.  In  its  seasons  of  pbospebity  and  advebsitt.  VL  In  its  final  union 
IN  HEAVEN.  (J.  Nilson,  A.M.)  The  peaceful  salutation : — 1.  The  clergyman  is 
to  be  the  minister  of  peace.  2.  But  it  all  depends  upon  adaptation — the  peace  is 
to  the  house,  but  the  question  whether  "  the  house  "  or  any  one  in  it  can  have  the 
"  peace  "  turns  upon  the  point  of  adaptation.  "  If  the  house  is  worthy  " — i.e.,  ii 
there  be  fitness  in  the  house  to  receive  it.  What  that  peace  means  :  1.  It  is  peace 
with  God.  2.  It  is  peace  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  It  is  a  peace  within. 
4.  It  is  peace  with  the  whole  world.     (eT'.  Vaughan,  M.A.)        Spiritual  adaptation  i 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHO,  K, 

— It  is  a  principle  which  pervacies  everything.  To  select  the  congenial  soil,  or  by 
art  to  make  it  congenial  to  the  seed,  is  the  secret  of  husbandry.  The  man  ol 
physical  science  is  certain  of  the  properties  and  powers  of  natural  substances  ;  but 
his  difficulty  is  to  secure  that  the  state  of  the  recipient  match  with  its  virtues.  In 
the  most  exquisite  and  delicate  of  modern  inventions,  the  capability  of  the  ray 
of  light  to  leave  its  impression,  is  invariable  and  undoubted;  the  science 
lies  in  procuring  a  material  which  is  capable  to  take  and  to  retain  it.  Nothing 
lives,  nothing  really  exercises  its  being,  but  in  that  to  which  it  stands  in  a  certain 
sympathy  and  proportion.  So  grace  is  to  the  gracious,  and  "  peace  to  the  men  of 
peace."  (Ibid.)  Saluting  a  house : — When  a  Persian  enters  an  assembly,  after 
naving  left  his  shoes  without,  he  makes  the  usual  salutation  of  *'  Peace  be  onto 
you,"  which  is  addressed  to  the  whole  assembly — aa  it  were,  saluting  the  houae. 
(Morier.) 

Ver.  14.  Shake  off  the  dust  of  your  feet. — The  sin  of  the  Sodomites  was  single, 
but  that  of  those  rejecting  the  apostles  would  be  manifold,  including  (1)  infidelity ; 
(2)  disobedience ;  (3)  ingratitude ;  (4)  inhospitality ;  (5)  rebelhon  and  contumacy 
against  God,  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature,  and  in  defiance  of  the  grace  of  Qod. 
(Lapide.)  The  danger  of  defilement : — The  danger  of  course  was  not  from  dust  on 
the  feet,  but  from  defilement  on  the  life  aud  in  the  heart.  Every  apostle  was  to  let 
his  impenitent  countrymen  know  that  they  were  ♦'  as  heathen  men  in  the  sight  of 
the  Messiah,"  impure  in  the  estimation  of  the  infinitely  Holy  One.  The  spirit  of 
the  injunction  runs  through  all  the  ages,  and  has  come  down  to  our  day.  Its  spirit, 
hut  its  spirit  only.  And  hence  a  very  heavy  responsibility  rests  on  that  minister  of 
the  gospel  who  gives  no  intimation  of  any  kind  to  the  impenitent  with  whom  ha 
associates,  that  they  are  impure  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  in  danger  of  eternal  sepa* 
ration  from  the  good,     {Jas.  Morison,  D.D.) 

Yer.  16.  Behold,  I  send  you  forth. — Christ  foretells  coming  evils  and  perseon* 
tions  to  His  apostles  (1)  that  they  may  learn  His  foreknowledge;  (2)  that  ttiey  may 
not  suppose  such  things  happen  through  lack  of  power  in  their  Master ;  (3)  that 
they  may  not  be  suddcfnly  overcome  ;  (4)  that  they  may  not  be  troubled  at  the  time 
of  t)ie  Cross.  (Chryxostom.)  The  forlorn  hope: — Albanus,  the  Captain-General 
of  the  anny  of  Charles  V.,  bad  four  hundred  stout  and  resolute  youths,  who  were 
prodigal  of  hie  and  devoted  to  death,  called  the  forlorn  hope.  In  a  battle  he 
despatched  these  against  the  strongest  part  of  the  enemy's  ranks,  that  by  their 
audacity  and  determination  to  die,  tliey  might  throw  those  ranks  into  confusion, 
and  so  prepare  the  way  for  victory.  Thus  devoted  and  prodigal  of  his  life  let  the 
messenger  of  Chiist  deem  hnuself,  that  he  may  subdue  unbelievers  to  Christ  the 
Conqueror.  Such  a  one  did  Xavier  deem  himself,  when  he  was  going  to  India,  and 
said  to  his  weeping  friends,  "Do  merchants  at  such  expense  and  such  peril, 
prodigal  of  Ufe,  sail  to  India  from  zeal  for  earthly  merchandize ;  and  shall  not  I  go 
thither  for  the  sake  of  God  and  souls  ?  "  Wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  aa 
doves. — The  union  of  simplicity  and  prudence: — These  words  were  addressed  by 
Christ  to  His  disciples  when  He  sent  them  for  the  first  time  to  publish  the  kiugdom 
of  God.  The  dove  has  been  regarded  by  all  nations  as  the  symbol  of  innocence. 
Harmless  signifies  properly  in  the  original  what  is  not  armed  with  horns  to  attack, 
what  has  not  teeth  to  bite,  what  has  not  a  sting  to  wound ;  in  a  moral  point  of 
view,  what  has  no  intention  to  injure.  Thus  simplicity  is  unsuspecting,  and  is  the 
companion  of  innocence.  It  extends  to  all  the  parts  of  our  being.  It  knows  the 
truth  by  intuition.  It  trusts  itself  calmly  to  God.  It  passes  through  the  most 
impenetrable  labyrinths  without  embarrassment.  Pkudence,  on  the  contrary, 
Bnpposes  the  existence  of  evil  in  man  and  in  the  world.  We  have  to  "  beware  of  the 
leaven  of  the  Pharisees  "  (Matt.  xvi.  6).  We  must  combine  simplicity  with  prudence. 
Borne  Chiistians  are  simple  without  having  prudence ;  some  are  prudent  witliout 
simplicity.  Without  knowing  how  to  unite  the  two,  you  may  by  a  badly  enlightened 
and  rash  confidence  in  Divine  Providence  reckon  on  help  which  you  ought  to  have 
■ought  by  the  right  use  of  means,  and  so  compromise  success  in  the  family,  or  plan, 
or  Church.  Through  not  having  tact  to  choose  your  means  of  action,  and  apply 
them  to  different  persons,  you  may  do  more  harm  than  good  for  Christ.  Through 
over-confidence  you  may  commit  yourself  to  the  first  hypocrite.  On  other  occasions 
the  goodness  of  your  heart  leads  you  astray.  At  other  times  you  hurry  on  what 
ought  to  have  been  done  grauualiy.  Prudence  may  go  too  far  (1)  when  yon  have 
ondue  fear  of  the  approuution  of  the  \\orld  for  all  yon  do;  or  when  yon  aredestitut« 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  171 

of  all  fear  of  its  opposition  ;  (2)  when  it  gives  undue  attention  to  difficnlties  •which 
the  imagination  liies  to  magnify.  {Dr.  Grandpierre.)  The  serpent : — The  serpen! 
aa  a  teacher.  Jesus  says  that,  in  view  of  every  land  of  danger,  we  are  to  be  as 
sagacious  and  prudent  as  the  serpent.  The  serpent  is  very  careful  about  its — I. 
Heabt.  Be  anxious  for  the  safety  of  your  bodies  and  minds.  Be  dcubly  anxious 
about  tba  safety  of  your  hearts.  Why  the  Bible  says  so  much  about  the  heart.  II. 
Etes.  As  your  bodies  have  eyes,  so  have  your  souls.  It  is  with  the  eyes  of 
your  souls  that  you  are  to  see  your  duties  to  God  and  man,  and  the  way  in  which 
you  are  to  be  saved — "  Open  thou,"  &c.  Read  a  part  of  the  Bible  every  day.  III. 
An  approaching  stobm.  Knows  when  a  storm  is  coming,  &c.  There  are  moral  as 
well  as  physical  storms.  Jesus  is  the  refuge  from  the  storm.  IV.  Temptation. 
la  the  East  there  are  a  great  number  of  serpent  charmers,  &c.  Guard  against  every 
form  of  music  which  is  not  healthy,  pure,  and  godly,  &c.  {Dr.  Alex.  3IcAuslane.) 
Sheep  among  wolves  : — I.  Their  Prominent  vocation — "  Behold,  I  send  you  forth." 

I.  These  disciples  had  been  with  Him,  and  had  been  taught  by  Him,  that  they 
might  teach  in  His  name.  The  mode  of  operation  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is,  first 
make  disciples,  teach  them,  and  then  let  them  go  forth  and  do  the  same  with 
others.  When  one  light  is  kindled  other  candles  are  lit  therefrom.  Drops  of 
heavenly  water  are  flashed  aloft  and  scattered  all  around  like  dew  upon  the  face  of 
the  earth,  and  behold  each  one  begetteth  a  fountain  where  it  falls,  and  thus  the 
desert  is  made  to  rejoice  and  blossom.  2.  To  go  after  the  lost  sheep.  3.  He  sent 
them  forth  to  work  miracles.  We  have  not  this  power ;  it  is  more  to  God's  glory  that 
the  world  should  be  conquered  by  the  force  of  truth  than  by  the  blaze  of  miracles. 

II.  Theib  imminent  peril — "  Aa  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  1.  Amongst  those 
who  will  not  in  any  way  sympnthize  with  your  efl'orts.  The  bleating  shoep  finds  no 
harmony  in  the  howl  of  the  wolf.  2.  Amr>ngst  those  who  would  rend  them.  3. 
Amongst  those  who  would  hinder  their  endeavours.  4.  We  are  powerlesa 
against  them.  What  can  a  sheep  do  if  a  wolf  sets  upon  it?  5.  It  is  trying 
work  for  the  sheep.  6.  It  is  testing  work.  7.  It  is  teaching  work.  III.  Theib 
EMINENT  authority  —  **  I  scnd  you  forth."  1.  The  Lord  of  the  harvest.  2. 
•♦  I,"  who  prize  you.  3.  "  I,"  who  have  gone  on  the  same  errand  Myself. 
4.  •*  I,"  who  overcame  in  the  very  character  in  which  I  send  you."  "  The 
Lamb  shall  overcome  them."  IV.  Tueir  permanent  instructions.  1.  Be 
prudent  and  wise  as  a  serpent.  (1)  It  gets  out  of  the  way  of  man  as  much  as  it  can. 
(2)  It  glides  along  very  quietly.  (3)  Famous  for  finding  his  way  where  no 
other  creature  could  enter.  2.  The  innocence  of  the  dove.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Grace  blending  the  subtle  with  the  gentle  ; — Grace  knows  how  to  pick  the  good 
out  of  the  evil,  the  jewel  out  of  the  oyster  shell,  the  diamond  from  the  dunghill,  the 
sagacity  from  the  serpent ;  and  by  a  Divine  chemistij  it  leaves  the  good  which  it 
takes  out  of  the  foul  place  as  good  as  though  it  had  never  been  there.  Grace  knowg 
how  to  blend  the  most  gentle  with  the  most  subtle ;  to  take  away  from  prudence 
the  base  element  which  makes  it  into  cunning,  and,  by  mingling  innocence  with  it, 
produce  a  sacred  prudence  most  valuable  for  all  walks  of  lile.  {Ihid.)  Wherein 
we  should  not  be  like  the  serpent : — 1.  The  serpent  eats  dust  (Isa.  Ixv.  24.)  2.  The 
■erpent  ia  deceitful.  3.  The  serpent  casts  the  coat,  but  another  new  coat  comes  in 
the  room  ;  we  should  not  cast  off  one  sin,  and  anot)ier  as  b«d  come  in  the  room. 
A.  The  serpent  is  a  venomous  creature,  and  is  full  of  poison  (Psa.  Iviii.  4.)  6.  The 
serpent  is  given  to  hissing ;  we  should  not  hies  out  reproaches.  6.  The  serpent 
Btops  her  ear.  7.  The  serpent  casts  her  coat,  but  keeps  her  sting ;  we  should  not 
east  off  outward  acts  oi  sin,  and  keep  t)ie  love  of  sin.  8.  Serpents  are  chased  away 
with  sweet  perfumes.  Wherein  we  should  be  like  the  serpent : — 1.  The  sci-pent  hath 
a  subtlety  in  his  eye,  a  singular  sharpness  of  sight.  Get  the  serpent's  eye,  have  a 
quick  insight  into  the  mysteries  of  religion.  2.  The  serpent  hath  a  prudence  and 
subtlety  in  his  ear  :  will  not  be  deluded  by  the  voice  of  the  charmer.  3.  The  serpent 
hath  a  chief  care  to  defend  his  head ;  so  we  our  head  from  error.  We  should  be  as 
dmies  : — 1.  In  respect  of  meekness.  2.  In  respect  of  innocency.  3.  In  respect  of 
purity.  Wherein  does  the  Christian  join  these  two  together : — 1.  To  be  sensible  ol 
injury  but  not  revenge  it.  2.  To  be  humble  but  not  base.  3.  To  defend  the  truth 
by  argument,  and  adorn  it  by  life.  {J,  Watson.)  In  doves  there  are  many  things 
tommendabU : — 1.  Beauty.  2.  Chastity.  3.  Fruitfulnesa.  Most  months  in  the 
year  they  bring  forth  young.  4.  Amity.  They  love  their  mates,  o.  Unity.  They 
live  in  companies.  6.  Tlieir  innocence.  (T.  Adams.)  Prudence  of  serpent  arid 
wisdom  of  dove : — I.  What  odb  Lord  beoommends  to  our  thoughts,  esteem,  and 
practice.    Wisdom  is  a  solid  knowledge  of  things  spiritual,  especially  such  as  relate 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  :ch4P.  X. 


to  practice.  HarmlesFness  or  innocence  intimates  purity,  and  meeknoas,  mildneSB, 
and  'RTathlessness.  II.  The  way  odr  Lord  takes  to  insinuate  His  advice.  1. 
The  Btandard  that  is  fixed,  or  the  creatures  of  whom  we  are  to  leani  the  things 
recommended,  2.  The  conformity  that  is  required  to  that  standard.  III.  Thb 
connection  fixed  between  the  two  things  recommended.  1.  There  is  no  real 
inconsistency  between  them.  2.  They  mutually  help  each  other  to  appear  with 
greater  lustre.  (E.  Calamy.)  Prudence  combined  with  innocence : — This  beautifies 
a  Christian,  when  he  hath  the  serpent's  eye  in  the  dove's  head.  We  must  have  tho 
innocency  of  the  dove,  that  we  may  not  betray  the  truth ;  and  the  wisdom  of  tha 
serpent,  that  we  may  not  betray  ourselves.  In  short,  religion  without  policy,  is  too 
weak  to  be  safe  ;  policy  without  religion  is  too  subtle  to  be  good.  When  wisdom 
and  innocency,  like  Castor  and  Pollux,  appear  together,  they  presage  the  soul's 
happiness.  (T.  Watson.)  Wise — not  as  foxes,  whose  cunning  is  to  deceive  others ; 
but  as  serpents,  whose  policy  is  only  to  defend  themselves,  and  to  shift  for  their 
own  safety.  (Matthew  Hetiry.)  The  'dove'  qualification  helpful  in  Christian 
work : — As  Francis  Xavier  was  preaching  in  one  of  the  cities  of  Japan,  a  man  went 
up  to  him,  pretending  he  had  something  to  communicate  in  private.  Upon  hia 
approach  Xavier  leaned  his  head,  to  hear  what  he  had  to  say.  The  scomer  thai 
gained  his  object,  which  was  to  spit  freely  upon  the  face  of  the  devoted  missionary, 
and  thus  insult  him  in  the  most  public  manner.  Xavier,  without  speaking  a  word 
or  showing  any  sign  of  annoyance,  took  out  his  handkerchief,  wiped  his  face,  and 
went  on  with  his  hermon,  as  if  nothing  had  happened  to  interrupt  him.  By  such  a 
heroic  control  of  his  passions,  the  scom  of  the  audience  was  turned  into  admiration. 
Tne  most  learned  doctor  of  the  city,  who  happened  to  be  present,  said  to  himself 
that  a  law  which  taught  men  such  virtue,  inspired  them  with  such  courage,  and 
gave  them  such  complete  mastery  over  themselves,  could  not  but  be  from  God. 
Afterwards  he  desired  baptism,  and  his  example  was  followed  by  many  others.  So 
effectually  did  the  meekness  of  the  missionary  promote  the  success  of  his  work. 

Ver.  20.  For  it  1b  not  ye  that  speatc — The  Christian  ministry  a  ministry  of  the 
Spirit : — The  text  applied — I.  To  the  apostles.  1.  The  primary  reference  is  to  f he 
apostles.  2.  The  fact  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  speaking  in  the  apostles  is  evi- 
dent from  the  effects  produced  by  their  word.  II.  To  oursflves.  1.  This  is  tha 
dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  2.  The  minister  of  the  Spirit  prepares  diligently  for  hia 
pulpit  ministrations.  {C.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  intuitional  element  in  life: — 
The  disciples  were  a  helpless  body  of  men  for  thinking  purposes,  and  could  not 
imagine  beforehand,  in  their  simplicity  and  ruiJeness  and  ignorance,  what  would  be 
best  for  them  ;  but  if  they  gave  themselves  wholly  to  the  ministry  of  Christ,  and 
then  were  called  before  magistrates,  it  would  be  given  them  in  that  hour  what  they 
should  say.  The  range  of  saying  was  very  limited.  It  was  not  that  they  should 
understand  all  theology,  providence,  learning  ;  but  the  power  of  self-defence  against 
magistrates.  They  were  to  maintain  innocency  and  simplicity ;  not  to  be  tricked 
into  casuistry.  1.  The  nation  and  times  from  which  the  sacred  Scriptures  came 
were  anterior  to  the  philosophizing  period  which  was  ushered  in  later.  Faota, 
events,  things,  emotions,  belong  to  the  periods  which  generated  the  Scriptures.  8. 
Every  man  recognizes  the  fact  that  the  mind  acts  with  different  degrees  of  clear- 
ness and  certainty  under  different  conditions.  The  range  of  the  eye  is  Umited,  bat 
in  perfect  health  you  can  see  more  clearly  than  when  health  is  impaired  ;  also  wUen 
atmospheric  conditions  are  favourable.  So  it  is  with  faculty.  The  faculties  i(  the 
mind  have  a  wonderful  power  of  development.  The  hmit  to  which  you  can  draw 
out  the  mind — for  that  is  the  meaning  of  education — is  immense.  But  that  is  not 
the  only  limit  of  the  expansible  faculties  of  the  mind.  They  are  subject  to  instan- 
taneous development.  As  a  grain  of  powder,  which  is  small,  but  which,  when 
touched  by  fire,  expands  instantly  into  a  thousand  times  its  bulk  and  diameter,  and 
generates  a  power  that  was  unsuspected  before,  so  the  mental  faculties  can  be 
touched  with  a  fire  that  shall  give  them  an  immense  flash  and  scope  and  pene- 
tration utterly  unlike  the  ordinary  experience  of  men  in  life.  {Beecher.)  A 
latent  prophetic  gift  in  man : — There  is  a  latent  spirit  of  prophecy  in  everybody 
who  is  nighly  organized.  This  action  of  the  mind  is  seen  in  lower  forms.  Take,  for 
example,  the  inspiration  which  fear  breeds.  If  a  man's  leading  idea  is  gold,  he 
has  an  instinct  by  which  he  avoids  things  unfavourable.  Others  work  on  the  plant 
of  philosophical  power.  Scholars  have  the  "  critical  judgment."  These  flashingg 
of  inspiration  are  ol  the  highest  value  ;  in  business,  art.  There  may  be  error  ia 
these  intuitions;  so  there  is  in  ordinary  experience.     These  flashes  of  prophecy 


•HAP.  xj  ST.  MATTHEW.  181 

should  be  corrected.  1.  The  primary  benefit  that  comes  from  these  moral  intui- 
tions is  comfort  and  direction  of  the  individual.  They  clear  his  reason,  they  fur- 
nish an  ideal ;  they  redeem  him  from  bondage.  2.  These  inspirations  work  mostly 
beyond  the  senses,  in  the  invisible.  Is  it  unreasonable  to  expect  a  certain  degree  of 
exoitabiUty  of  mind  in  the  Divine  realm  ?  (Ibid.)  Intuition  begotten  of  fear : — A 
man  is  ^valking  sluggishly  home,  and  thinking  of  the  drudgery  of  the  day,  and  he 
hears  the  fire-bell,  and  instantly  he  says,  "  Why,  that  is  my  distiict ;  how  did  I 
leave  things  ?"  Instantly  he  thinks  of  the  way  in  which  he  left  his  shop  and  the 
fire ;  and  then  he  says  to  himself,  "  If  it  is  there,  what  treasure  I  have  in  that  shop, 
open  and  exposed  I  Why,  there  is  powder  there  I  "  In  an  instant  that  man,  not 
by  any  slow  process  of  analyzing,  but  with  a  flash,  thinks  of  a  thousand  things ; 
and  they  are  all  material  things  ;  they  are  not  higher  thoughts  and  realities  at  alL 
{Ibid.)  l7ituition  illuminates,  but  does  not  create,  facts : — Of  course,  when  the 
flash  of  inspiration  comes  to  a  man  in  practical  matters,  there  must  be  material  for 
it  to  illuminate  or  act  npon.  If  in  a  gallery  of  pictures  Ihere  is  a  central  electric 
fire,  and  the  light  flashes  into  the  room,  a  spectator  who  has  a  liking  for  pictures, 
standing  there,  feels  the  inspiration  in  a  minute;  and  if  the  light  instantly  goes  out, 
he  exclaims,  "I  have  seen  them  :  I  know  them  ;  let  the  light  go  out ;"  but  if  a  man 
is  in  an  empty  room,  where  there  is  nothing  on  the  walls,  if  the  light  were  to  flash, 
he  might  look  around  and  not  know  anything  more  than  he  did  before.  Let  a  man 
store  his  mind  with  knowledge,  with  facts,  with  realities,  with  materials  of  various 
kinds,  and  then,  when  swelling,  flashing  revelations  come,  he  has  something  for 
tbem  to  inspire ;  but  they  never  inspire  emptiness  or  ignorance ;  they  merely  give 
Ht  what  a  man  does  know,  facts,  principles,  materials,  spiritual  or  ethical  form's  and 
in  oportions  and  revelatory  power  for  the  future.  (Ibid.)  Intuition  needs  correc- 
iitm: — We  know,  too,  that  these  intuitions,  these  flashes  of  prophecy  should  be 
corrected.  We  dig  gold  out  of  a  vein,  and  we  know  that  there  is  dross  in  it.  Gold 
a)»Bolutely  pure  is  seldom  found  anywhere;  but  we  do  not  reject  the  ore  11 
Diere  is  only  ninety  per  cent,  of  gold  in  it.  I  think  that  men  who  bny  dry  mines, 
&ad  spend  good  money  on  nothing  at  all,  ought  to  be  willing  to  take  a  mine  that 
has  ninety  per  cent,  of  pure  metal  in  it.  If  it  has  fifty  per  cent,  or  forty  per  cent., 
or  even  twenty  per  cent.,  it  is  worth  working  :  it  more  than  pays  expenses.  {Ibid.) 
Luther  before  the  Diet  of  Worms: — Never  perhaps  has  this  promise  been  mora 
clearly  fulfilled  than  in  the  case  of  Luther  before  the  Diet  of  Worms.  The  intrepid 
monk,  who  had  hitherto  boldly  braved  all  his  enemies,  spoke  on  this  occasion,  when 
he  found  himself  in  the  presence  of  those  who  thirsted  for  his  blood,  with  calmness, 
dignity,  and  hmnility.  There  was  no  exaggeration,  no  mere  human  enthusiasm, 
no  anger ;  overflowing  with  the  liveliest  emotion,  he  was  still  at  peace ;  modest, 
Uiough  withstanding  the  powers  of  the  earth  ;  great  in  presence  of  all  the  grandeur 
oi  the  world.  This  is  an  indisputable  mark  that  Luther  obeyed  God,  and  not  thtt 
iQggestions  of  his  own  pride.  In  the  hall  of  the  Diet  there  was  One  greater  than 
CTiarles  and  than  Luther. 

Ver.  22.  But  he  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  he  saved. — Enduring  to  the  end  : 
— We  must  not  enter  the  work  of  the  ministry  without  counting  the  cost.  L  Pebsb- 
TEBANCE  IS  THE  BADOB  Of  THE  SAINT.  1.  It  is  the  Scriptural  mark.  2.  Analogy 
shows  us  that  it  is  perseverance  which  must  mark  the  Christian.  The  winner  in 
the  race.  3.  The  common-sense  judgment  of  mankind  tells  us,  that  those  who 
merely  begin  and  do  not  hold  out,  wiU  not  be  saved.  II.  Persevebancb  is  thebk- 
FOBK  the  taboet  OF  ALL  OUR  SPIRITUAL  ENEMIES.  1.  The  world.  2.  The  flesh. 
8.  It  will  try  our  perseverance  in  service,  in  suffering,  in  steadfastness,  in  doctrine. 
IIL  Persx'.erance  is  the  glort  of  Christ.  IV.  Perseverance  should  be  thb 
GREAT  CABK  OF  EVERY  CHRISTIAN.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Only  he  who  reaches  the 
goal  may  be  accounted  a  Christian : — A  ship  starts  on  a  voyage  to  AustraHa — if  it 
stops  at  Madeira,  or  returns  after  reaching  the  Cape,  would  you  consider  that  it 
ought  to  be  called  an  emigrant  ship  for  New  South  Wales  7  It  must  go  the  whole 
voyage,  or  it  does  not  deserve  the  name.  A  man  has  begun  to  build  a  house,  and 
has  erected  one  side  of  it — do  yon  consider  him  a  builder  if  he  stops  there,  and  fails 
to  aover  it  in  or  to  finish  the  other  walls  ?  Do  we  give  men  praise  for  being  war- 
riors because  they  know  how  to  make  one  desperate  charge,  but  lose  the  campaign  f 
Have  we  not,  of  late,  smiled  at  the  boasting  despatches  of  commanders,  in  fights 
where  both  combatants  fought  with  valour,  and  yet  neither  of  them  had  the  common 
sense  to  push  on  to  reap  the  victory  f  What  was  the  very  strength  of  Wellington, 
but  that  when  a  triumph  had  been  achieved,  he  knew  how  to  reap  the  hiuveil 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

which  had  been  sown  in  blood?  And  he  only  is  a  true  conqueror,  and  shall  b« 
crowned  at  the  last,  who  continueth  till  war's  trumpet  is  blown  no  more.  It  is  with 
a  Christian  as  it  was  with  the  great  Napoleon :  he  said,  "  Conquest  has  made  me 
■what  I  am,  and  conquest  must  maintain  me."  So,  under  God,  conquest  has  mad« 
you  what  you  aro,  and  conquest  must  sustain  you.  {Ibid.)  Perseverance  i^z  the 
midst  of  trial : — When  Mr.  Smeaton  had  built  the  lighthouse  upon  the  Eddy  sic  na, 
he  looked  out  anxiously  after  a  storm  to  see  if  the  edilice  was  still  there,  and  it  was 
his  great  joy  when  he  could  see  it  still  standing,  for  a  former  builder  had  constructed 
an  edifice  which  he  thought  to  be  indestractible,  and  expressed  a  wish  that  he  might 
be  in  it  in  the  worst  storm  which  ever  blew,  and  he  was  so,  and  neither  himself  nor 
his  lighthouse  were  ever  seen  afterwards.  Now  you  have  to  be  expijsed  to  multi- 
tndes  of  storms ;  you  must  be  in  your  lighthouse  in  the  worst  storm  wJaich  ever  blew ; 
build  firmly  then  on  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and  make  sure  work  for  eternity,  for  if  you 
do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall.  For  this  Church's  sake,  I  pray  you  do  it;  for 
nothing  can  dishonour  and  weaken  a  Church  so  much  as  the  falls  of  professors.  A 
thousand  rivers  flow  to  the  sea,  and  make  rich  the  meadows,  but  no  man  heareth 
the  sound  thereof ;  but  if  there  be  one  cataract,  its  roaring  will  be  heard  for  milea, 
and  every  traveller  will  mark  the  fall.  A  thousand  Christians  can  scarcely  do  such 
honour  to  their  Master  as  one  hypocrite  can  do  dishonour  to  Him.  {Ibid.)  Final 
perseverance : — It  cannot  be  guaranteed  by — 1.  Habit,  which  may  extend  only  to 
the  outer  framework,  and  not  to  the  spirit,  motive,  temper  of  the  religions  life. 

2.  Determination.  The  will  can  do  almost  everything  except  be  sure  of  itself  amid 
circumstances  which  go  against  the  grain.  3.  Indefectible  Grace.  This  doctrine  is 
no  part  of  the  New  Testament  teacbing.  It  reduces  the  sacraments  and  ordinancea 
of  religion  to  mere  charms.  It  brings  probation  to  an  end,  for  it  practically 
abolishes  freewill.  The  Christian's  perseverance  may  be  morally,  but  it  is  assuredly 
not  mechanically,  certain,  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  causes  which  make  endurance 
difficult: — 1.  Persecution  arising  because  of  the  Word.  2.  False  christs  and  false 
prophets,  which  in  our  day  may  mean  a  sceptical  friend,  an  insidious  article  in  a 
magazine,  or  merely  the  dangerous  atmosphere  of  the  social  circle  in  which  we 
live.  3.  The  spiritual  weariness  wbich  steals  over  the  soul  with  the  lapse  of  time. 
We  cannot  sustain  ourselves  for  ever  on  the  mountains ;  we  must,  sooner  or  later, 
descend  to  the  plain.  Depression  ensues,  and  we  find  it  difl&cult  to  stmggle  on. 
4.  Trifling  with  conscience — not  necessarily  in  great  matters,  but  in  a  number  of 
httle  matters — omissions  or  curtailments  of  daily  prayers,  neglect  of  a  regular 
review  of  conscience,  carelessness  as  to  objects  on  which  money  is  spent,  reckless- 
ness in  intercourse  with  others.  These,  and  like  matters,  help  forward  a  dull  and 
inoperative  state  of  conscience,  which  is  itself  preparatory  to  a  great  failure.  (Ibid.) 
How  to  secure  perseverance  : — 1.  A  sense  of  constant  dependence  on  God.  To  be 
self-confident  is  to  be  in  danger,  for  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to 
the  humble.  2.  Prayer  for  this  special  grace.  To  vrin  perseverance,  pra;v  er  must 
persevere.  Be  not  discouraged,  although  your  prayer  does  not  seem  to  be  answered 
all  at  once.  God  may  be  testing  your  integrity  of  purpose.  It  is  after  describing 
all  the  parts  of  a  Christian's  armour — the  girdle  of  truth,  the  breastplate  of  right- 
eousness, the  sandals  of  preparation,  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet  of  salvation, 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit — that  the  apostle  adds,  '  *  Praying  alway,  with  all  prayer 
and  supplication  in  the  Spirit,  and  watching  thereunto  with  all  perseverance." 

3.  Keeping  the  mind  fixed,  as  much  as  possible,  on  the  end  of  life,  and  on  that  which 
follows  it.  Death  is  as  certain  for  each  one  of  us  as  the  how,  the  when,  and  the 
where  of  its  occurrence  are  uncertain.  Let  ns  then  set  lightly  by  this  life,  and 
embark  something  less  than  the  best  half  of  our  hearts  in  its  concerns  and  interests. 
The  shore  may  still  be  distant,  but  the  sailor  keeps  his  eye  on  it  as  he  prays  for  the 
skill  and  the  strength  to  weather  the  passing  storm.  On  those  heights  wliich  aro 
beyond  the  valley  of  death,  the  eyes  of  the  predestinate  constantly  rest,  and  tbe 
sight  sustains  them  in  times  of  trouble,  darkness,  and  despair,  which  would  other- 
wise  prove  beyond  the  powers  of  their  endurance.  The  end  is  well  worth  the  effort ; 
and,  since  we  are  in  the  hands  of  infinite  Love,  the  effort  will  be  enduring,  if  the 
end  be  kept  steadily  in  view.  (Ibid.)  Starjing  power : — It  is  not  the  fiery,  head- 
long running  in  the  course,  nor  trie  rapid,  hurried  stroke  in  the  boat,  which  mean 
victory.  The  man  who  has  what  is  called  staying  power,  who  "  eudnreth  to  the 
end,"  wins.  [Wilmot  Buxton.)  Perseverance  is  the  only  triumphing  grace. 
{St.  Bernard.) 

Vex.  23.    But  wben  they  persecute  you  In  this  dty.— They  may  go  out  of  tht 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  181 

way  of  danger,  though  they  must  not  go  out  of  the  way  of  dutj.  (MattJiew  Henry.) 
An  exception  to  Jlight : — Polycarp  (the  friend  and  pupil  of  St.  John)  was  eighty-six 
years  old  at  the  date  of  his  martyrdom,  and  this  took  place,  it  seems  almost  cer- 
tain, in  155  or  156.  There  had  been  a  long  and  bitter  persecution  of  the  Christiana 
in  the  East,  and  the  reports  of  martyrdom  after  martyrdom  reached  the  aged  man 
in  his  bishopric  of  Smyrna,  *'  but,"  we  are  quoting  Mr.  Holland,  "  he  was  not  dis. 
turbed  at  the  reports,  and  wished  to  stay  in  the  city  at  home ;  but  at  the  entreaties 
of  his  friends,  he  withdrew  to  a  little  field-house,  not  far  from  the  town,  and 
stopped  there,  with  a  few  companions,  praying  continuously  for  all  men,  and  for 
the  Churches  ....  as  was  was  his  habit.  As  he  prayed,  he  saw  a  vision  .  .  .  hia 
pUlow  seemed  to  him  all  burning  in  fiaLues,  and  he  turned  to  those  with  him,  and 
eaid,  '  I  shall  be  burnt  ahve.'  And  to  escape  the  preseiare  of  his  pursuers  he 
moved  to  another  field-house,  and  they,  the  pursuers,  came  just  after  to  his  first 
hiding-place,  and  caught  two  boys,  one  of  whom,  under  torture,  confessed  where  his 
hiding-place  was.  ...  It  was  the  hour  of  the  evening  meal  .  .  .  when  the  officer 
of  the  peace  came  with  fourteen  horse  and  arms,  as  if  against  a  thief.  .  .  .  Polycarp 
could  have  fled  again,  but  he  refused."  His  prediction  came  true,  he  was  burnt, 
but  God  caused  his  sufferings  to  be  brought  to  a  speedy  end  by  a  providential  cir- 
cumstance, which,  on  first  reading  it,  one  is  inclined  to  tliiuk  too  miraculous  to  be 
true,  but  which  seems  well-authenticated,  though  the  description  given  by  his  bio- 
grapher is  probably  uirintentionally  exaggerated.  The  wind  so  caught  the  flames 
that  were  to  consume  him  that  they  took  the  shape  of  a  hollow,  or  a  sail  swollen  by 
the  wind,  and  they  despatched  him  with  a  sword.  Polycarp  is  thought  to  have  been 
the  angel  (i.e.,  messenger)  of  the  Church  of  Smyrna  addressed  in  Ilevelation  ii.  8. 

Ver.  24.  The  disciple  is  not  above  bis  Master. — The  Master  and  His  disciple. 
— Jeremy  Taylor,  in  exhorting  to  patience  the  afflicted  of  his  day,  many  of  whom 
were  sufferers  for  conscience'  sake  from  loyalty  to  Church  and  king,  reminded  them 
that  they  had  seen  their  sovereign  (the  unfortunate  Charles  the  First)  imprisoned 
and  put  to  death,  and  that  he  had  borne  his  misfortunes  with  exemplary  fortitude. 
Guatemala  the  sovereign  of  Mexico,  whom  the  Spanish  conquerors  in  their  cruel 
greed  tortured  to  make  him  shew  them  treasures  they  believed  him  to  have  con- 
cealed, bore  all  they  inflicted  upon  him  with  stoical  heroism.  One  of  his  followers, 
also  put  to  the  torture,  complained  of  his  treatment,  and  was  disposed  to  give 
way,  at  which  the  chief  reproachfully  exclaimed,  "And  I  too,  am  I  upon  a  bed  of 
roses  ?  "  or,  as  it  ought  perhaps  to  be  more  literally  rendered,  "  Am  I  enjojang  the 
luxury  of  thft  bath  ?  "  If  the  example  of  svdieriug  patience  in  an  earthly  monarch 
be  so  powerful,  how  much  more  when  it  is  set  us  by  the  King  of  kings  t 

Ver.  27.  What  I  tell  you  In  darkness. — God's  message  and  its  proclamation : — 
I.  Here  is  a  preparatory  privileoe  fob  all  Christians.  "  What  I  tell  you  in  dark- 
ness," *'  and  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear."  1.  It  is  the  great  privilege  of  Christians  to 
reahze  that  Christ  is  still  Uving  with  and  conversing  with  them ;  this  conscionsnesB 
fits  for  service.  2.  Feeling  the  gospel  spoken  by  Christ  directly  and  distinctly  to  our 
own  soul.     II.  How  this  privilege  really  does  become  a  preparatory  process. 

1.  If  you  get  your  message  duectly  from  Christ  there  will  be  a  personality  about  it. 

2.  It  uill  also  give  us  the  truth  of  God  in  proportion  and  purity.  3.  If  you  go  to 
Christ  for  all  you  preach  you  will  preach  with  unction.  4.  It  will  enable  you  to  ba 
certain  about  the  truth.     IH.  Close  by  trying  to  fulfil  the  command  to  publish 

UPON  THE  HOUSETOPS  WHAT  THE  MaSTER  H-'.S  F.rOKEN  TO  US  IN  SECRET.       1.    That  therO 

is  pardon  for  the  greatest  guilt.  2.  That  by  i  .,th  the  ruUng  power  of  sin  is  broken. 
8.  That  faith  in  Christ  can  save  a  man  from  every  sort  of  fear  in  hfe  and  death. 
These  things  have  been  whispered  in  my  ear.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Proclamation* 
from  Housetops  : — On  the  occurrence  of  a  death  in  the  dwelUng,  mourners,  espe- 
cially priests,  are  stationed  upon  the  housetops,  and  attract  public  attention  by  their 
lamentations.  And  a  proclamation  is  oiten  made,  as  well  as  an  address  to  the  people, 
from  the  flat  roof  of  a  government-house  which  looks  down  upon  the  meidan,  or 
public  square.  Even  the  call  to  prayer  is  proclaimed  from  the  housetop,  where  there 
is  no  minaret  or  church-bell.  (Van  Lennep.)  Hluininating  words  : — You  sometimes 
see  a  man  in  the  community  who  is  always  a  source  of  light  to  his  fellow-citizens.  Hia 
words  cast  their  illumination  round  every  subject.  When  a  great  crisis  comes  men 
stand  and  Usten  until  they  hear  him  speak,  and  when  he  has  spoken  the  city  knows  ita 
duty.  But  do  we  think  that  every  conviction  leaped  in  a  moment  into  his  oon« 
•ciouaness  ?  that  he  has  never  struggled  into  the  certainties  which  he  gave  to  other 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

men  so  clearly  ?  that  it  is  not  by  some  transmission  through  his  experience,  often 
clouded  by  doubt  and  bewilderment,  that  the  abstract  truth  has  passed  into  the 
clear,  sharp,  tangible  statement  of  duty  which  his  fellow  citizens  catch  from  himf 
But  nowhere  was  this  more  evident  than  in  the  history  of  Christ's  disciples.  Two 
books  stand  next  to  one  another  in  the  New  Testament — The  Gospel  of  St.  John 
and  the  Book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  What  are  the  pictures  in  the  two  books  ? 
In  the  one  the  disciples  are  hearing  Christ  speak,  and  always  missing  His  real 
meaning.  Again  and  again,  on  page  after  page,  we  seem  to  see  that  wistful,  disap. 
pointed  look  upon  the  Preacher's  face.  They  will  not  understand  Him.  He  is  speak- 
ing  to  them  in  darkness.  In  the  other  book  those  same  apostles  are  preacliing 
clear,  strong,  definite  truth  from  Jerusalem  to  Rome ;  that  which  was  vague  and 
dim  has  passed  into  them  and  come  out  from  them  sharp  and  bright ;  the  light  has 
been  focussed  in  tht-ir  natures  and  characters,  and  the  hearts  of  men  are  springing 
up  under  its  influence  as  it  comes  to  them.  What  Jesus  had  told  them  in  darkness 
they  are  now  speaking  in  Ught.  {Phillipg  Brooks,  D.D.)  There  is  a  higher 
motive  than  fear,  viz.,  trust  in  the  Fat/ier  who  cares  even  for  the  sparrowik 
(Benliam.) 

Ver.  28. — Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body. — It  is  prudent  to  give  np  the  body 
in  order  to  save  the  toul ;  it  is  like  casting  the  cargo  of  the  vessel  into  the  sea  to 
preserve  the  cr«tc  from  destruction.  (Quesnel.)  Body  and  soul: — I.  That  human 
nature  is  made  np  of  body  and  soul.  II,  That  the  body  may  be  destroyed,  while 
the  soul  remains  uninjured.  Ill,  That  the  honest  working  out  of  duty  may  expose 
the  body  to  destruction.  IV.  That  the  neglect  of  the  duty  exposes  both  body 
Ond  soul  to  destruction.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God  to  be  feared  rather  thanman : — 
Christ  cautions  His  disciples  against  three  particular  things.    1.  Bodily  torments. 

2.  Disgrace.  3.  Death.  Which  last  He  cautions  against  for  these  three  reasons. 
1.  Because  it  is  but  the  death  of  the  body.     2.  Because  hell  is  more  to  be  feared. 

3.  Because  they  live  under  the  sppcial  care  of  God's  ever-seeing  Providence,  and 
cannot,  therefore,  be  taken  away  without  His  permission.  The  words  of  the  text 
pregnant  with  great  truths.  1.  That  it  is  within  the  power  of  man  to  divest  us  of 
bU  our  temporal  enjoyments.  2.  That  the  soul  of  man  is  immortal.  3.  That  God 
has  absolute  power  to  destroy  the  whole  man.  4.  Tliat  the  thought  of  damnation 
ought  to  have  greater  weight  to  engage  our  fears  than  the  most  exquisite  miseries 
that  the  malice  of  man  is  able  to  inflict.     The  prosecution  of  this  lies  in  two  things. 

1.  In    showing    what    is    in    those    miseries   which    men   ABE   ABLE  TO  INFLICT    THAT 

HAY  LESSEN  ODR  FEABS  OF  THEM.  1.  They  are  temporal,  and  concern  only  this  Ufe. 
S.  They  do  not  take  away  anything  from  a  man's  proper  perfections.  3.  They  are 
all  limited  by  God  s  overruling  hand,  4,  The  good  that  may  be  extracted 
out  of  such  miseries  as  are  inflicted  by  men  is  often  greater  than  the  evil  that 
is  endured  by  them.  5.  The  fear  of  thos^e  evils  seldom  prevents  them  before  they 
come,  and  never  lessens  them  when  they  are  come.  6,  The  all-knowing  God,  who 
knows  the  utmost  of  them  better  than  men  or  angels,  has  pronounced  them  not  to 
be  feared.  7.  The  greatest  of  these  evils  have  been  endured,  and  that  without  fetur  or 
astonishment.  II.  In  showing  what  is  implied  in  the  destruction  of  the  body 
AND  SOUL  IN  hell  WHICH  MAKES  IT  80  FORMIDABLE.  It  is  the  utmost  Almighty  God 
can  do  to  a  sinner.  WTien  tempted,  ponder  man's  inability  and  God's  mfinite 
ability  to  destroy.  The  case  of  Shadrach,  Meshech,  and  Abednego.  (R.  South, 
D.D.)  Fear,  anxious  and  prudential: — There  are  two  kinds  of  f(«,r.  1.  A  fear 
of  solicitous  anxiety,  such  as  makes  us  let  go  our  confidence  in  God's  providence, 
causing  our  thoughts  so  to  dwell  upon  the  dreadfulness  of  the  thing  feared  as  to 
despair  of  a  deliverance.  And  with  such  a  kind  of  fear  Christ  absoln-elv  forbids 
us  to  fear  those  that  kill  the  body  ;  it  being  very  derogatory  to  God,  as  L'  His  mercy 
did  not  afford  as  great  arguments  for  our  hope  as  the  cruelty  of  man  foi  our  fear. 

2.  The  second  kind  of  fear  is  a  prudential  caution,  whereby  a  man,  f'om  the 
due  estimate  of  an  approaching  evil,  endeavours  his  own  security.  Ard  this 
kind  of  fear  is  not  only  lawful,  but  also  laudable.  For,  to  what  purpose  sUould 
God  have  naturally  implanted  in  the  heart  of  man  a  passion  of  fear,  if  it  nright 
not  be  exercised  and  affected  with  suitable  objects — that  is,  things  to  be  feared  ?  Now 
under  this  sort  of  fear  we  may  reckon  that  to  which  Christ  advises  His  discipler  in 
these  expressions — "  Beware  of  men,"  and  "  Flee  from  oue  city  into  another.  (/7>i-l.) 
Prison  better  tluin  hell : — Pardon  me,  Emperor,  thou  threatenest  me  only  witl  • 
prison;  but  God  threatens  me  with  bell,  (A  Primitive  Martyr.)  Fearimj  Ood  rath*r 
titan  man : — Biahop  Latimer  having  one  day  preached  before  Henry  Vlll.  a  sermoq 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  185 

which  displeased  hia  majesty,  he  was  ordered  to  preach  again  the  following  Sunday, 
and  to  make  an  apology  for  the  offence  he  had  given.  After  reading  his  text  the 
bishop  thus  began  his  sermon : — ' '  Hugh  Latimer,  dost  thou  know  before  whom 
thou  art  this  day  to  speak  ?  To  the  high  and  mighty  monarch,  the  king's  most 
excellent  majesty,  who  can  take  away  thy  life  if  thou  offendest ;  therefore  take 
heed  that  thou  speakest  not  a  word  that  may  displease.  But  then,  consider  well, 
Hugh  ;  dost  thou  not  know  from  whence  thou  camest — upon  whose  message  thoa 
art  sent  ?  Even  by  the  great  and  mighty  God,  who  is  aU-present,  who  beholdeth  all 
thy  ways,  and  who  is  able  to  cast  thy  soul  into  hell !  Therefore,  take  care  that 
thou  deliver  thy  message  faithfully."  He  then  proceeded  with  the  same  sermon 
he  had  preached  the  Sunday  before,  but  with  considerably  more  energy.  Afterwards, 
the  king  sent  for  him,  and  demanded  of  him  how  he  dared  preach  in  such  a 
manner.  He,  falling  on  his  knees,  replied,  his  duty  to  his  God  and  his  Prince  had 
enforced  him  thereto,  and  he  had  merely  discharged  his  duty  and  his  conscience  in 
what  he  had  spoken.  Upon  which  the  king,  rising  from  his  seat,  and  taking  the 
good  man  by  the  hand,  embraced  him,  saying,  "  Blessed  be  God,  I  have  so  honest  a 
servant."  Persecution: — The  devil  drives  but  a  poor  trade  by  the  persecution  of 
the  saints ;  he  tears  the  nest,  but  the  bird  escapes ;  he  cracks  the  shell,  but  loses 
the  kernel.     (Flavel.) 

Yet.  29.  And  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  to  the  ground. — I.  Thb  dootbine  or 
PBOviDEMCE.  It  is  involved  in  difficulties.  The  text  justiiies  the  assertion  that  it 
is  comprehensive  and  even  universal,  especially  engaged  on  behalf  of  man,  more 
particularly  directed  to  the  safety,  prosperity,  and  increase  of  the  Church.  The 
special  providence  of  God  extends  to  every  individual  among  His  people.     II.  Thb 

SUBJECT  IS  CAPABLE  OF  VERY   EXTENSIVE  AND   IMPOKTANT   APPLICATION.       EsCOgnize   the 

hand  of  God  in  all  the  events  of  life.  No  such  thing  as  chance.  Submit  to  God 
amid  all  trials.  For  comfort  and  confidence.  Let  it  guide  your  practice.  A 
powerful  argument  to  recommend  religion  to  the  choice  of  all  men.  (D.  Kattertu.) 
A  particular  providence : — I.    To   illustrate  and  confirm  the  doctrine    which 

THESE    WORDS    EXHIBIT  THAT  THERE  IS  A  PARTICULAR  PROVIDENCE.       The    Bible  rOVeals 

»nis  doctrine — "His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all,"  1.  The-providence  of  God  extends 
to  a  meaner  order  of  things — to  raiment,  birds,  lilies  ;  thus  it  is  concerned  with 
events  great  and  small.  2.  The  providence  of  God  is  more  extensive  and  minute 
than  the  care  of  any  one  part  of  the  creation  over  another.  The  most  tender 
mother  never  counted  the  hairs  of  her  child,  but  God's  providence  extends  to  this. 
3.  The  notion  which  the  Scriptures  give  us  of  God.  He  is  said  to  be  Governor, 
but  how  can  He  be  unless  He  attend  to  all  the  concerns  of  those  over  whom  He 
rules.  Where  is  His  wisdom  if  events  take  place  to  meet  which  He  is  not  pro- 
rided ;  or  His  power,  if  cucumstances  transpire  over  which  He  has  no  control.  4.  II 
we  reject  providence,  one  great  part  of  Scripture  must  be  resigned,  that  which  we 
tall  prophecy.  II.  To  point  out  the  purposes  of  utility — experimental  and 
PRACTICAL — to  WHICH  THIS  DOCTRINE  IS  TO  BE  APPLIED.  1.  It  is  Calculated  to  cheer 
the  ministers  of  Christ  under  the  various  difficulties  to  their  success  to  which  they 
are  exposed.  2.  It  is  calculated  to  console  the  true  Church  of  God  in  all  parts  of 
the  earth.  3.  It  may  serve  to  sustain  the  heart  of  every  individual  disciple  of 
Christ.  4.  It  tends  to  calm  the  mind  while  watching  the  various  dispeusations  of 
Providence  as  it  respects  nations  or  individuals.  (J.  Clayton.)  Particular  pro- 
ridence  of  God: — In  viewing  the  attributes  of  God  and  His  relations  to  us,  there  are 
two  questions  to  be  considered.  1.  Has  God  the  gracious  will,  the  benevolent 
inclination,  to  observe  and  direct  the  works  of  creation  ?  and  has  He  sufficient 
power  to  discern  all  His  creatures,  and  to  regulate  everything  respecting  them 
according  to  His  will?  2.  What  is  thus  taught  us  from  the  consideration  of  God 
is  confirmed  by  an  attention  to  our  feelings ;  a  persuasion  of  the  superintending 
providence  of  God  is  incorporated  with  our  very  nature.  3.  An  attention  to  the 
history  of  the  world  shows  us  that  the  providence  of  God  is  universal.  God  has 
used  the  smallest  things  to  produce  the  greatest  consequences.  4.  In  the  ho^ 
volume  (1  Sam,  ii,  6 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  11,  12 ;  Job  v.  9 ;  Psa.  Ixxv.  6,  7).  (1)  It  is 
of  unspeakable  importance  to  keep  the  remembrance  of  God's  providence  fresh 
upon  the  mind;  the  forgetfulness  of  it  is  ofteti  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  an 
occasion  of  sin.  (2)  This  subject  excites  deep  melancholy  when  we  reflect  how 
many  oppose  the  providence  of  God,  and  sin  against  it.  (3)  This  subject  is  full  of 
consolation  to  the  pious.  (H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  Sparrows  turned  preachers: — 
I.    "  Thoogh  common  in  human  eyes,  God  cares  for  me,"  chirpi  the  sparrow  { 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 

"then,  man,  fear  not."  II.  "  Though  ignorant,  God  cares  for  me,"  chirps  the  spar' 
row;  "  then,  man,  fear  not."  III.  "  Though  feeble  and  mortal,  God  cares  for  me," 
chirps  the  sparrow;  "  then,  man,  fear  not."  (G.  T.  Colter.)  Sale  of  sparrows  ;— 
At  the  present  day  the  markets  of  Jerusalem  and  Jaffa  are  attended  by  many 
fowlers,  who  offer  for  snle  long  strings  of  little  birds  of  various  species,  chiefly 
sparrows,  wagtails,  and  larks.  Thfise  are  also  frequently  sold,  ready  plucked,  trussed 
in  rows  of  about  a  dozen  on  slender  wooden  skewers.  (H.  B.  Tristram,  LL.D.)  A 
minute  providence  not  unioorthy  of  the  Divine  Majesty : — The  continued  and  universal 
exercise  of  wisdom  and  goodness  cannot  be  inconsistent  with  majesty.  The  sun, 
the  brightest  natural  emblem  of  its  Creator,  loses  none  of  its  excelicnce,  because  it 
not  only  enlightens  powerful  emperors,  but  also  permits  insects  to  sport  in  its 
beams.  {H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  Special  providence  in  peril : — When  George  Wash- 
ington  had  been  graciously  preserved  amidst  the  terrible  carnage  which  attended 
Braddock's  defeat,  he  was  not  ashamed  to  leave  on  record  this  evidence  of  hia 
faith: — ''Bytbe  all-powerful  dispensations  of  Providence  I  have  been  protected 
beyond  all  human  probability  or  expectation ;  for  I  had  four  bullets  through  my 
coat,  and  two  horses  shot  under  me,  yet  escaped  unhurt,  although  death  was  level- 
ing my  companions  on  every  side  of  me."  His  friend.  Dr.  James  Craik,  who  wai 
with  him  in  the  battle,  was  often  afterward  heard  to  say : — "  I  expected  every 
moment  to  see  him  falL  Nothing  but  the  superintending  care  of  Providence  could 
have  saved  hiia  from  the  fate  of  all  around  him."  Let  unlielievers  in  the  special 
providence  of  God  listen  also  to  the  language  of  the  matter-of-fact  Dr.  Franklin, 
whom  no  one  will  Buspect  of  giving  the  least  countenance  to  vain  theories  and  "  old 
wives'  fables."  The  Convention  was  in  session  at  Philadelphia  to  frame  our  Federal 
Constitution.  Weeks  and  weeks  had  passed,  but  strife  and  confusion  so  far  pre- 
vailed that  no  perceptible  good  was  done.  A  proposition  was  then  made  for  daily 
prayers,  and  Franklin  rose  in  his  place  and  said :  "  In  the  beginning  of  the  contest 
with  Britain,  when  we  were  sensible  of  danger,  we  had  daily  prayers  in  this  room 
for  the  Divine  protection.  Our  prayers  were  heard  and  graciously  answered.  All 
of  ns  who  were  engaged  in  the  struggle  must  have  observed  frequent  instances  of  a 
superintending  Providence  in  our  favour.  To  that  kind  Pro\idenee  we  owe  this 
happy  opportunity  of  consulting  in  peace  on  the  means  of  establishing  our  future 
nationnl  felicity.  And  have  we  forgotten  this  powerful  Fbiend  ?  or  do  we  no  longer 
need  His  assistance?  I  have  lived  a  long  tiuie,  and  the  longer  I  live,  the  more 
convincing  proof  I  see  of  this  truth,  that  God  governs  in  the  affairs  of  men.  (J. 
H.  Norton.)  God's  care  removes  our  fear  : — I  remember  once  en  term  g  a  room 
where  a  little  blind  girl  sat  on  her  father's  knee,  with  one  of  his  arms  clasping  her. 
Without  saying  a  word,  or  making  a  sign,  I  stepped  quietly  up,  unclasped  his  arm, 
and  hfted  tlie  child  away.  As  I  took  her  out  of  the  room,  her  father  said,  "  Louie, 
are  you  not  afraid  ?  You  don't  know  who  has  you."  She  answered  at  once,  "No, 
I  don't  know  who  has  me,  and  I'm  not  afraid,  for  I  know  that  you  know."  (J. 
Cnlross,  D.D.)  Said  Martin  Luther,  aa  his  eye  caught  sight  of  a  little  bird 
among  the  leaves  of  a  tree,  one  evening,  "  This  little  fellow  has  chosen  his  shelter 
for  the  night,  and  is  quietly  rocking  himself  to  sleep,  without  a  care  for  to- 
morrow's lodgings,  calmly  holding  by  his  little  twig,  and  leaving  God  to  think 
for  him."  Small  value  of  sparrows  : — The  value  of  a  sparrow  is  just  about 

as  little  as  anything  that  could  come  under  appraisement.  Two  of  them  are  sold 
for  a  farthing  (less  than  a  penny  of  our  money).  Two  for  a  farthing,  says  one 
evangelist ;  five  for  two  farthings,  says  another.  "A  charming  discrepancy,"  says 
some  one — and,  indeed,  when  we  think  of  it,  the  discrepancy  takes  us  into  the  very 
market  place,  and  we  see  the  humble  trading  going  on.  "  How  much  T"  "  Two 
for  a  farthing ;  but  if  you  take  two  farthings'  wf)rth,  you  shall  have  one  thrown 
into  the  bargain  ;  you  shall  have  five.     {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  But  the  very  hairs  of  your  head. — Hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered  .•>— 

1.  Tliis  is  spoken  in  relation  to  the  body.     "  Fear  not  them  which  lull  the  body." 

2.  Our  Lord  is  giving  His  disciples  arguments  against  fear.  (I)  He  is  their  avenger. 
(2)  Be  sure  that  you  are  never  afraid  to  pray  about  the  smallest  thing.  (3)  Do  not 
shrink  from  feeling  yourself  a  centre  about  which  God  is  making  all  manner  of  kind 
things  to  circulate.  Love  never  hurts  any  one.  (4)  Go  without  anxiety,  for  it  not 
only  hurts  you,  but  grieves  God.  8.  That  man  may  be  said  to  have  the  most  of 
the  mind  of  God  who  attaches  the  greatest  importance  to  the  trifles  of  life.  {J. 
Vauijhan,  M.A.).  Jetrels  cataloged  : — God  does  not  expose  His  jewels  till  Ht 
has  catalogued  them.     (Ibid.)        The  exquisite  mechanism  of  the  hair : — A  •*  hair '' 


OHAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  187 

IB  a  very  little  thing ;  but  its  structure  is  made  up  of  a  world  of  parts.  There  ifl 
a  root  and  there  is  a  stem,  and  there  is  a  vein,  and  there  is  a  fluid,  and  there  is  a 
membrane ;  and  every  part  is  arranged,  fitted,  guarded,  and  fed ;  and  a  thousand 
functions  are  going  on  to  sustain  that  little  thread-like  thing.  (Ibid.)  Provi- 
dence : — I.  The  misdtekess  of  providence.  PrcTvidence  over  little  circumstances  ; 
over  minutes  of  time ;  in  the  use  of  little  things.  The  minuteness  of  providence 
seen  in  the  fact  that  even  the  thou^'hta  of  men  are  under  God's  hand.  II.  Thb 
KIND  CONSIDERATION  OF  GoD  IN  TAKING  CAKE  or  His  PEOPLE.  1.  In  keeping  them 
ahve  before  they  were  converted.  2.  In  keeping  them  out  of  temptation.  3.  In 
arranging  their  places.    4.  In  providing  their  daily  bread,     IIL  What  should  bk 

THE   SPIRIT   AND   TEMPEB   OF  THE    MEN   WHO   BELIEVE   THIS   TRUTH.        1.    We   OUght    tO 

be  a  bold  race  of  people.  2.  In  bereavement,  not  excessive  grief.  3.  A  calm  which 
renders  life  happy.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  difference  between  fate  and  provi' 
dence  : — Fate  is  blind  ;  providence  has  eyes.  Fate  is  blind,  a  thing  that  must  be ; 
it  is  just  an  aixow  shot  from  a  bow,  that  mu?:t  fly  onward,  but  hath  no  target.  No* 
BO,  providence :  providence  is  full  of  eyes.  There  is  a  design  in  everything,  and  an 
end  to  be  answered ;  all  things  are  working  tf^gether,  and  working  together  for  good. 
They  are  not  done  because  they  must  be  done,  but  they  are  done  because  there  ia 
some  reason  for  it.  It  is  not  only  that  the  thing  is,  because  it  must  be  ;  but  the 
thing  is,  because  it  is  right  it  should  be.  God  hath  not  arbitrarily  marked  out  the 
world's  history ;  He  had  an  eye  to  the  great  architecture  of  perfection,  when  He 
marked  all  the  aisles  of  history,  and  placed  all  the  pillars  of  events  in  the  building 
of  time.  (Ibid.)  Taken  by  the  Master  : — You  have  taken  great  care  with  a  cer- 
tain number  of  roses  ;  you  have  trained  them  up,  and  there  they  are,  blooming  in 
their  beauty.  You  pride  yourself  upon  them.  You  come  one  morning  into  the 
garden,  and  yon  find  that  the  best  rose  has  been  taken  away.  You  are  angry  :  you 
go  to  your  fellow-servants,  and  charge  them  \\ith  having  taken  the  rose.  They  will 
declare  that  they  bad  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  it ;  and  one  says,  "  I  saw  the  master 
walking  here  this  morning ;  I  think  he  took  it."  Is  the  gardener  angry  then  ?  No, 
at  once  he  says,  ••  I  am  happy  that  my  rose  should  have  been  so  fair  as  to  attract 
the  attention  of  the  master.  It  is  his  own  :  he  hath  taken  it ;  let  him  do  what 
seemeth  him  good."  {Ibid.)  Tlie  numberi'd  hairs  : — I.  Foreordination.  1.  Its 
extent.  2.  Its  source.  3.  Its  lessons.  4.  Its  influence.  II.  Knowledge.  1.  Its 
character  (T)  Minute;  (2)  Pre-eminent;  (3)  Tender;  (4)  Constant,  III.  Valua- 
tion. IV.  Preservation — from  loss,  accident,  persecution,  &q.  {Ibid.)  Heads 
tiuyre  than  hairs : — If  God  numbers  their  hairs,  much  more  does  He  number  their 
heads,  and  take  care  of  their  lives,  their  comforts,  their  souls.     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  31.  Ye  aro  of  more  value. — The  value  of  man's  nature: — Causes — I.  From 
the  capacities  of  that  nature.  II.  From  the  fact  that  he  is  the  object  of  the  special 
regard  and  care  of  Divine  providence.  III.  From  its  everlasting  destiny.  IV.  From 
the  fact  that  it  has  been  redeemed  with  the  blood  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God. 
{Dr.  H.  JV.  Williams.)  Bought  at  a  great  price  :— Do  we  not  hold  those  things 
precious  which  we  have  bought  at  a  great  price.  Count  we  not  those  things  among 
our  treasures,  for  which  we  make  the  most  careful  provision.  Are  not  those  thingi 
reckoned  the  most  valuable  things  upon  earth,  which  receive  and  give  out  again  to 
our  eyes  the  beams  of  light,  the  rays  of  the  sim,  as  gold  and  silver,  jewels  and  pre- 
cious stones?  Will  not  men  venture  everything,  Ufe  and  all,  for  them  T  And  shall 
not,  therefore,  Almighty  God  reckon  for  precious,  them,  whom  His  only  begotten  Son 
hath  redeemed  with  His  most  precious  blood  ?  Shall  He  not  hold  in  exceeding 
value  those  for  whom  He  has  reserved  mansions  in  His  heavenly  house,  where  they 
may  abide  for  ever  ?  Shall  they  not  be  to  Him  as  pearls  of  great  price,  as  jewels  to 
be  numbered  np  with  joyful  care,  who,  being  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son, 
who  is  their  light  and  their  righteousness,  shine  in  their  works,  and  glorify  their 
Father,     {R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.) 

Ver.  32.  Shall  confess  Ue  before  men.— I.  The  naturs  of  that  confession 
which  Christianity  requires.  An  open  avowal  of  the  Person  and  Messiahship  of 
Jesus.  A  conscious  adherence  to  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  Christianity.  ^  A 
declaration  of  the  benefits  received.  Zealously  promoting  the  cause  of  Christian 
truth.  IL  The  honourable  distinction  with  which  a  steady  course  of  Christian 
fortitude  will  be  crowned.  By  an  act  of  reparation.  By  an  approving  plaudit. 
By  making  them  the  partakers  of  His  glory.  Learn :  That  the  human  heart 
is,  by  nature,  decidedly  hostile  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.     That  entire  change  ia 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [cmat.  \ 

essential  to  a  scriptural  confession  of  Christ.  That  the  Christian  cannot  ultimately 
be  a  loser  by  suffering  for  righteousness' sake.  (Oniricon.)  Confension  of  Christ: 
— I.  What  does  our  text  eeqdike  ?  Our  confession  of  Christ  before  men.  The 
subject  of  this  confession.  The  persons  before  whom  this  confession  is  to  be  made. 
The  manner  in  which  this  confession  is  to  be  made — verbally,  practically,  paseively. 
Why?  Because  it  falls  in  with  the  nature  and  design  of  Christianity,  to  prova 
your  sincerity,  in  order  to  be  useful,  and  because  He  deserves  it.  II.  What  it 
ENSURES?  His  confession  of  us.  Mure  than  recognition.  The  confessor  before 
wliom  this  confession  is  to  be  made  ;  the  season  when  this  confession  shall  be  made. 
(W.  Jay.)  Confessing  Chrint : — I.  A  great  duty  recommended  to  us.  1.  What 
is  meant  by  our  confession  of  Christ.  2.  What  by  confessing  Him  before  men.  11. 
A  suitable  bewabd  and  encouragement  annexed  to  it.  What  is  implied  in  Christ's 
conffssing  us  before  His  Father.  To  confess  Christ  aright  is  (1)  To  acknowledge 
and  adore  the  Divinity  of  His  Person  ;  (2)  To  believe  the  Divinity  of  His  doctrine  ; 
(3)  To  acknowledge  and  lely  upon  the  all-sufficiency  of  His  merits  and  mediation 
for  us ;  (4)  To  show  the  efficacy  of  our  belief  upon  our  lives.  We  must  confess 
Christ  both  before  good  men  and  bad  men.  (Matthew  Hole.)  Mutual  confes$ion 
of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  disciples : — I.  This  confession  op  Christ  by  men.  1. 
Before  we  can  speak  openly  of  Christ  according  to  His  true  character,  we  must 
know  and  appreciate  Him.  Knowledge  is  ability  to  confess  ;  appreciation  is  dis- 
position to  confess ;  both  are  power.  2.  This  confession  is  variously  made.  (1^ 
In  season  it  is  a  verbal  acknowledgment  of  Christ ;  (2)  By  the  observance  of  Hia 
ordinances ;  (3)  By  the  reception  of  His  disciples  and  servants,  especially  of  such 
as  most  .represent  Him;  (4)  By  the  worship  of  His  holy  name;  (5)  By  the 
endurance  of  shame  and  persecution  for  His  sake ;  (6)  By  living  to  Him  and  Uving 
for  Him.  II.  The  confession  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ.  1.  It  is  connected  here 
with  the  confessing  of  Christ  by  men.  2.  It  is  both  present  and  future.  3.  It  is 
full  and  complete.  Lessons:  secret  discipleship  can  never  fulfil  our  duties,  or 
exhtiust  our  obligations.     (S.  3Iartin.)       The  duty  of  confessing  Christ  before  men : — 

1.  The  duty  specified  (Eom.  x.  10).  1.  To  confess  Christ  before  men  is  to  show 
that  we  are  uniformly  influenced  by  a  supreme  regard  to  His  will  (Titus  i.  16 ;  Luke 
yi.  46;  John  xv.  14  ;  Neh  v,  i.),  2.  To  publiclj'  attest  the  reality  of  those  hopes 
and  ji.ys  which  Christianity  professes  to  inspire,  and  claims  as  pecuUarly  her  own. 
3.  To  manifest  a  decided  attachment  to  His  people  (Matt.x,  40  ;  xxv.  40).  IL  The 
DiFricuLTiES  attendant  ON  THIS  DUTY.  Such  a  decided  and  consistent  testimony 
to  Christ  will  be  attended  with  difficulties  (Matt.  x.  36).     1.  Common  temptations, 

2.  Eidicule.  3.  Calumny.  III.  The  promise  annexed  to  the  discharge.  Christ 
will  confess  His  people ;  it  is  not  said  He  will  do  so  before  men  ;  by  striking  inter- 
posiLious  of  providence.  While  they  are  partially  confessing  Him  on  earth.  He  ia 
graciously  coufessing  them  in  heaven.  {E.  Cooper.)  Double  confession: — L 
Man's  confession  of  Christ.  It  implies  (1)  Knowledcre  of  Christ ;  (2)  Belief  in 
Christ ;  (3)  Love  to  Christ :  (4)  Reception  of  Christ.  Its  characteristics.  1.  It  is 
a  personal  confession.  2.  It  is  a  public  confession.  3.  It  is  an  honourable  con- 
feshion — "Me."  H.  Christ's  confession  of  man.  1.  It  is  a  return  for  our  con- 
fession. 2.  It  18  a  personal  confession.  3.  It  is  a  confession  on  the  greatest 
occasion.  4.  It  is  a  confession  before  the  greatest  Being.  (T.  O.  Griffiths.)  Con 
fessing  Christ: — Something  more  than  fifty  years  ago  there  was  a  small  dinner  party 
at  the  other  end  of  London.  The  ladles  had  vrithdrawn,  and  under  the  guidance 
of  one  member  of  the  company  the  conversation  took  a  turn,  of  which  it  will  be 
enough  here  and  now  to  say  that  it  was  utterly  dishonourable  to  Jesus  Christ  oul 
Lord.  One  of  the  guests  said  nothing,  but  presently  asked  the  host's  permission 
to  ring  the  bell,  and  when  the  servant  appeared  he  ordered  his  carriage.  He  then, 
with  the  courtesy  of  perfect  self-command,  expressed  his  regret  at  being  obliged  to 
retire  ;  but  explained  that  he  was  still  a  Cliristian.  Mark  the  phrase,  for  it  made 
a  deep  impression  at  the  time — "  Still  a  Christian."  Perhaps  it  occurs  to  you  that 
the  guest  who  was  capable  of  this  act  of  simple  courage  must  have  been  a  bishop, 
or  at  least  a  clergyman.  He  was  not.  The  party  was  made  up  entuely  of  laymen, 
and  the  gnest  in  question  became  the  great  prime  mini.<;ter  of  the  early  years  of 
Queen  Victoria.  He  was  the  late  Sir  Eobert  Peel.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  greatest 
King : — On  a  certain  occasion  one  of  the  bravest  officers  of  Frederick  the  Grea* 
declined  the  king's  invitation  to  dinner,  because  he  intended  next  morning  to  receive 
the  Holy  Communion.  The  next  time  he  was  present  at  the  rOyal  table  the  king 
and  his  guests  began  to  rally  him  for  his  scruples,  and  to  mock  at  the  sacred 
ordinance.    The  old  man  rose,  saluted  the  king,  who  was  no  man  to  be  trifled  witl^ 


CHAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  18S 

»nd  told  him  respectfully  bat  firmly  that  there  was  a  greater  King  than  Frederick, 
and  that  he  never  allowed  that  Holy  One  to  be  insulted  in  his  presence.  The 
courtiers  looked  on  in  amazement,  trembling  for  the  safety  of  the  general;  but 
Frederick,  instead  of  resenting  the  rebuke,  clasped  the  hand  of  his  brave  servant, 
and  expressed  his  sorrow  that  he  could  not  believe  so  firmly,  or  declare  his  faith  so 
fearlessly.  (Canon  Ashwell.)  Confessing  Christ. — Signing  the  Scotch  Covenant: 
— As  the  honr  drew  near,  people  from  all  quarters  flocked  to  the  spot,  and  before 
the  commissioners  appeared,  the  Grejfriars  Church  and  Churchyard,  Edinburgh, 
were  densely  filled  with  the  gravest,  the  wisest,  and  the  best  of  Scotland's  pioas 
Bong  and  daughters.  The  long  roll  of  parchment  was  brought,  the  meaning  and 
purpose  of  the  covenant  explained.  Then  a  deep  and  solemn  pause  ensued:  not 
the  pause  of  irresolution,  but  of  modest  diffidence,  each  thinking  every  other  more 
worthy  than  himself  to  place  the  first  name  upon  the  sacred  bond.  An  aged  noble- 
man, the  venerable  Earl  of  Sutherland,  at  last  stepped  slowly  and  reverentially 
forward,  and  with  throbbing  heart  and  trembling  hand,  subscribed  Scotland's 
Covenant  with  God.  All  hesitation  in  a  moment  disappeared.  Name  followed 
name  in  quick  succession,  till  all  within  the  church  had  given  their  signatures. 
It  was  then  removed  into  the  churchyard,  and  spread  out  on  a  level  gravestone. 
Here  the  scene  became  still  more  impressive.  The  intense  emotions  of  many 
became  irrepressible.  Some  wept  aloud :  some  burst  into  a  shout  of  exultation  ; 
some  after  their  names  added  the  words  "  till  death ;  "  and  some,  opening  a  vein, 
subscribed  with  their  own  warm  blood.  When  every  particle  of  space  was  filled 
there  was  another  solemn  pause.  The  nation  had  framed  a  covenant  in  former 
days,  and  had  violated  its  engagements ;  if  they  too  should  break  this  sacred  bond, 
how  deep  would  be  their  guilt  I  Such  seems  to  have  been  their  thoughts,  for,  as  if 
moved  by  one  spirit — the  One  Eternal  Spirit — with  low,  heart-wrung  groans,  and 
faces  bathed  in  tears,  they  Ufted  up,  with  one  consent,  their  right  hands  to  heaven, 
avowing  by  this  sublime  appeal  that  they  had  now  joined  themselves  unto  the  Lord 
in  an  everlasting  covenant,  which  should  not  be  forgotten.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
True  confession  of  Christ: — Some  confess,  but  beheve  not,  as  hypocrites;  others 
believe,  but  confess  not,  as  timorous  and  Peter-like  professors  in  the  days  of  perse- 
cution ;  others  do  neither  confess  nor  beheve  in  Christ,  as  atheists ;  others  both 
confess  and  beheve,  and  they  be  true  Christians.  (D.  Willet.)  The  best  use  oj 
the  mouth  : — Had  the  faith  of  the  heart  been  sufficient,  God  would  not  have  given 
thee  a  mouth.  {Chrysostom.)  The  sin  of  denying  Christ : — L  What  is  meant  bt 
DENTING  OF  Chbist  bcfore  men  ?  It  is  (1)  to  deny  His  mission  and  Messiahship  ; 
(2)  to  disown  Him  for  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  the  world ;  and  (3)  not  to 
receive  Him  for  the  person  annointed  and  appointed  of  God  for  the  redemption  of 
mankind.  It  is  (a)  to  deny  the  Divinity  of  Christ ;  (6)  the  Incarnation  or  manhood 
of  Christ ;  (e)  the  satisf dction  of  Christ  for  sin  ;  (d )  the  resurrection  of  Christ ;  (e) 
the  authority  of  Christ  over  His  Church  and  kingdom.  II,  What  are  the  motives 
or  inducements  that  lead  men  thus  to  deny  Christ  ?  The  two  principal  are  (1)  Pear 
of  persecution ;  (2)  Hopes  of  preferment.  Both  clap  a  vnrong  bias  upon  the  mind, 
that  tnms  it  from  Christ  to  Belial.  III.  How,  ob  in  what  manneb,  is  this  DENTise 
DONE?  {!)  Sometimes  in  verfcis,  by  words  and  oral  expressions  ;  (2)  Sometimes  iti 
tcriptis,  by  blasphemous  writings ;  and  (3)  sometimes  in  operibm,  by  wicked  works. 
IV,  What  is  meant  bt  Christ  DENi:iNQ  of  men  before  His  Father  in  heaver? 
It  must  be  His  disowning  the  deniers  of  Him,  as  false  and  deceitful  followers  of 
Him,  the  misery  whereof  is  inexpressible.  (Matthew  Hole.)  Interest  deposed 
and  truth  restored : — I.  How  many  wats  Christ  and  His  truths  mat  be  denied  ; 
AND  WHAT  is  the  DENIAL  HERE  CHiEFLT  INTENDED.  1.  By  erroneous,  heretical 
judgment.  2.  By  oral  confession.  3.  By  our  actions  and  practice.  II.  What  abb 
THE  CAUSES  INDUCING  MEN  TO  DENT  Chriot  IN  His  TRUTHS.  1.  The  seeming  sup- 
posed absurdity  of  many  truths.  2.  Theii  unprofitableness.  To  be  pious  is  the 
way  to  be  poor.  3.  Their  apparent  danger.  III.  How  fab  a  man  mat  consult  his 
SAFETT  IN  time  OF  PERSECUTION  WITHOUT  DENTING  Christ.  1.  By  withdrawing  his 
person.  2.  By  concealing  his  judgment.  IV.  What  it  is  fob  Christ  to  dent  us 
BEFORE  His  Father  rs  heaven.  1.  The  action  itself — "  He  will  deny  them."  2. 
The  circumstance — "  Before  His  Father,"  &c.  A  man's  folly  will  be  spread  before 
the  angels.  V.  The  uses  which  may  be  drawn  from  the  truths  delivered.  1. 
Confess  Him  in  His  truth.  2.  In  His  members.  3.  The  baseness  of  a  dastardly 
spirit.  (R.  South,  D.D.) 
Ver.  84.  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace. — I.  Wht  it  mioht  haturallt 

SB    SUPPOSED   that    ChBIST   DID   COME   FOB   THE   EXPRESS   PUBPOSK   OF   BBNDINO    PBAOa 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x, 

OK  EABTH.  Consider  the  way  in  ^rhich  His  kingdom  was  ushered  into  the  world— 
"  Glory  to  God,"  &e.  The  tenor  of  much  of  His  teaching,  and  the  final  result  of  the 
preaching  of  ths  goppel,  would  lead  us  to  suppose  it.     II.  That  notwithstandiuq 

DUB   NATURAL  THINKINGS   ON   THB   SUBJECT  ChRIST    CAME,    NOT   TO   SEND    PEACK,    BDT   A 

swoBD.  Christ's  own  life  an  illustration.  Also,  the  entire  history  of  the  Church, 
and  the  Ufe  of  every  individual  Christian.  (R.  Abercromhie,  M.A.)  Christian 
eonjlict: — These  words  rnpresent  the  aggressive,  combative  side  of  Christianity. 
1.  Sin  is  a  fixed,  unyielding  power.  2.  There  is  an  overpowering  force  which  can 
and  will  conquer  sin.  It  is  Christianity.  3.  What  results  from  this  conflict, 
heroically  maintained  ?  1.  Victory.  2.  Moral  beauty.  (Bishop  Hurst.)  M:\ral 
heautxj  derired  from  victory : — What  results  from  this  conflict,  heroically  main- 
tained  ?  Victory.  Moral  beauty  as  well.  More  keenly,  perhaps,  than  any  other 
American  writer,  has  Hawthorne  seen  into  the  human  heart,  and  he  somewhere 
remarks  that  the  human  face  never  is  so  beautiful  as  when  the  soul  has  passed 
through  some  great  struggle ;  when  it  has  triumphed  in  this  unseen  battlefield,  and 
there  is  a  divine  irradiation  of  the  countenance,  such  as  Jacob's  face  must  have 
had,  when,  after  that  night  of  wrestling  witli  the  angel,  the  morning  light,  breaking 
over  the  mountains  of  Gilead,  revealed  in  his  features  the  celestial  halo  that 
crowned  them.  All  moral  beauty  ie  secondary.  It  comes  from  conflict  and  victory. 
Thus  was  the  shepherd  David  fitted  to  become  the  monarch  of  the  nation,  and  the 
persecuting  Saul  the  preacher  PanL  Linnreus  and  Humboldt  have  found,  on  ice- 
bergs, in  far-oiJ  forests  and  on  Alpine  peaks,  flowers  that  had  no  fragrance ;  but  to 
which,  when  care,  skill,  and  patience  had  been  lavished  on  them,  a  secondary  nature 
was  given,  so  that  to-day,  under  wintry  skies,  we  have  them  in  our  conservatories, 
Bweet,  as  well  as  fair.  (Ibid.)  Christ's  Mission : — I.  The  strangeness  op  thb 
»ACT.  This  appears  when  you  remember — 1.  The  object  of  Christ's  coming.  2.  The 
law  of  Christ's  kingdom.  3.  The  character  of  the  King,  II,  Explanation  op  thb 
pact.  1.  By  the  position  Christ  assumed  towards  sin,  2,  By  the  character  of  the 
gospel.  8.  By  the  natural  character  of  mau.  IH.  Practical  lessons.  1.  The 
greatness  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  set  the  world  on  fire.  2.  The  slowness  of  the 
progress  of  the  gospel  in  the  world,  and  of  sanctification  in  the  believer,  is  accounted 
for.     (C.  Lankester,  B.A.) 

Ver.  35.  To  set  a  man  at  variance  against  hla  Father. — TJie  great  $eparation.  L 
That  union  of  families  in  religion  is  desirable.  Because  all  its  members  have 
the  same  interests  at  stake  ;  they  are  all  under  substantially  the  same  obligations ; 
it  promotes  the  happiness  of  a  family,  gives  consolation  in  times  of  affliction,  pro- 
motes the  eternal  welfare  of  all.  II.  That  religion  does,  in  fact,  make  a  separa- 
tion IN  families.  It  divides  families  at  the  Communion  table  ;  in  respect  of  their 
prospects  of  future  glory,  and  at  the  judgment-bar  with  unerriu?  accuracy,  Lessona: 
Pray  more  for  impenitent  children,  &c.;  contemplate  the  possibility  of  a  family  being 
united  in  heaven.  (Dr.  A.  Barnes.)  Those  who  are  most  near,  are  most  easily 
divided.  (Bcngel.)  Children  and  parents : — There  is  a  climax  of  three  degrees. 
Brother  shall  be  against  brother,  parent  against  child,  child  against  parents — oach 
worse  than  the  preceding.  The  history  of  the  Church  has  many  illustrations  of 
this.  Such  were  the  histories  of  Perpetua  and  Felicitas,  in  the  persecution  ol 
Beverus,  where  the  children  refused  to  listen  to  parents'  entreaties  to  give  up  Christ, 
and  died  in  thoir  steadfastness ;  and  such  was  the  dreadful  speech  recorded  of 
Philip  II,  of  Spain,  who  thought  that  he  was  showing  zeal  for  God  by  declaring  of 
the  Protestants,  "  If  it  were  ray  own  son,  I  would  bring  the  faggot,"  (W.  Benluim.) 
Domestic  variance  occasioned  by  religion : — Too  often  is  this  prediction  fulfilled  in  the 
ease  of  converts  (especially  those  from  Judaism)  even  at  the  present  day — the  most 
devoted  son  or  daught(;r  has  too  often  to  feel  that  their  tidopting  Christianity  has 
severed  them  from  beloved  parents.  The  Bev.  Moses  Margdionth,  in  a  narrative 
drawn  up  in  the  year  18-12,  illustrates  this  by  his  own  experience,  Mr,  Margdionth 
had  been  led,  by  a  remarkable  chain  of  circumstances,  to  embrace  Christianity. 
Ho  was  a  native  of  Poland,  but  did  not  receive  baptism  until  his  arrival  in  London, 
having  left  his  country  for  the  purpose  of  study,  and  more  especially  of  acquiring 
religious  knowledge.  He  felt  it  his  duty  as  soon  as  possible  to  acquaint  his  parenti 
\rith  his  change  of  faith,  and  his  father  at  first  wrote  him  an  afifeotionate  answer, 
entreating  him  to  come  homo  and  recant  his  apostaoy,  but  finding  that  nothing 
wonld  induce  him  to  renounce  Chri-t'nnity  and  return  to  his  house,  ceased  to  answer 
his  letters,  and  for  a  long  time  seemed  to  ignore  his  existence.  Still,  however, 
Margdionth  persevered  in  writing,  and  at  length,  to  nse  his  own  word« — '*  I  received 


ST.  MATTHEW.  191 


a  most  severe  letter  from  my  father,  telling  me  that  if  I  did  not  return  immediately 
to  his  house,  I  should  never  be  permitted  to  call  myself  his  son,  that  he  ohoold 
hate  me  with  perfect  hatred,  and  that  he  should  prohibit  my  writing  to  him  any 
more.  My  dear  mother  wrote  again  with  affectionate  sadness,  telling  me  that  she 
had  not  ceased  to  weep  for  me,  and  had  even  injured  her  eyes  vrith  weeping."  It 
is  consolatory  to  find  that  Mr.  Margdionth,  who  spared  no  effort  or  exertion  to  win 
back  the  heart  of  his  father,  was  rewarded  at  length  by  a  complete  reconciliation, 
though  we  have  no  ground  to  believe  that  his  parents  ever  embraced  Christianity. 
Yet  sadder  tales  meet  us  in  the  annals  of  missions  among  the  heathen.  Harriet 
Winslow,  the  devoted  American  missionary  in  Ceylon,  mentions  the  very  sad  ease 
of  a  youth  named  Tupyen,  who  had  become  interested  in  Christianity  by  reading 
part  of  a  Tamil  Bible,  lent  him  by  another  young  man.  He  begged  permission 
to  attend  the  mission  school  at  Tillipally,  but  when  it  came  to  hia  father's  knowledge 
that  he  had  there  avowed  himself  a  Christian,  the  poor  fellow  was,  when  he  next 
returned  home,  shut  up,  and  otherwise  most  severely  treated.  Once  he  made  hia 
escape  to  Tillipally,  and  there  told  the  missionary,  lit.  Peel,  what  had  befallen  him. 
He  took  a  Testament,  and  pointing  to  this  very  passage  (Matt.  x.  84-39),  said,  with 
tears — "  That  very  good."  But  again  falling  into  the  hands  of  his  father,  Tupyen 
was  beaten,  tabooed,  threatened,  insulted  in  every  possible  way,  so  that  at  length, 
alas,  he  signed  a  recantation  of  Christianity.     Social  obstacles  to  religion: — I.  Thb 

SEASONS    WHY    MEN    LABOCB    TO    PBEVENT    THKIB    FELLOWS    FBOM    BISXNQ    TO    A    TtlAL 

Christian  expebiencb.  1.  We  are  to  remember  that  social  life  is  not  merely  th« 
accidental  juxtaposition  of  man  with  man;  it  organizes  itself.  Men  stand  related 
to  each  other  in  such  a  way  that  if  one  goes  out  of  the  circle,  it  is  like  the  going  of 
one  out  from  a  quartette  of  singers.  2.  It  is  frequently  the  case  that  the  escape 
of  one  from  a  circle  towards  a  true  and  high  religious  life,  is  hindered  on  account  of 
the  social  ambitions  which  prevail.  Circles  defend  themselves  against  men  going  to 
desert  for  religion.  3.  Another  reason  why  persons  endeavour  to  prevent  the  escape 
of  men  to  a  higher  religious  plane,  is  the  judgment  and  rebuke  which  is  always 
reflected,  by  such  a  course,  upon  their  own  career.  II.  What  the  mottvbs  abb  bt 
WHICH  THIS  SOCIAL  HINDRANCE  WORKS.  1.  There  ifl  the  battle  of  fear  into  which 
men  go.  2.  Next  is  the  battle  of  interest.  Men  try  to  dissuade  their  fellow-men 
from  true  religion  on  account  of  the  effects  which  it  will  have  upon  their  interests  in 
life.  3.  Then  there  are  persons  who  are  peculiarly  sensitive  to  praise.  They  cannot 
bear  the  shady  side  of  men's  opinions.  A  circle,  by  a  judicious  silence,  can  make  a 
man  feel  as  though  the  fogs  of  Newfoundland  were  on  him.  4.  Then  there  is  the 
battle  of  dissuasion.  III.  The  modes  of  bksistanck  that  one  mat  lawfully  set 
vr  AGAINST  THESE  THiNQB.  1.  It  should  be  made  clear  that  you  are  in  earnest 
and  sincere.  2.  That  that  which  is  upon  you  is  not  a  mere  whim.  3.  Kemember 
that  you  need  and  shall  have  the  help  of  God.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  ioufB 
longing  for  God  not  hindered  by  tocial  obstacles : — As  buds,  when  their  time  of 
emigration  comes,  and  they  feel  the  impulse  to  fiy  to  the  summer-land,  and  will  not 
be  stopped,  either  by  the  snap  of  the  fowler's  gun  or  by  the  sweep  of  the  hawk,  or 
by  any  solicitation,  but  rise,  and  fly  through  night  and  through  day,  to  find  that 
summer-land :  so  souls  feel  the  fascinating  call  of  God,  and,  rising,  soar — and  mast, 
because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  upon  them.  {Ibid.)  Society  troubled  by  men  leaving 
it  for  a  better  life  : — The  smallest  wheel  in  piy  watch,  emigrating,  would  leave  aU 
the  rest  of  the  wheels,  big  and  little,  in  a  very  sorry  plight.  Although  it  may  be 
very  small,  and  stand  on  its  own  rights  as  a  wheel,  yet,  after  all,  it  has  been  cogged, 
and  notched,  and  adjusted,  so  that  the  whole  structure  depends  on  that.  You  might 
as  well  smash  the  watch  as  to  take  that  out.  Frequently  it  is  the  case  that  the 
members  of  a  circle  are  so  affiliated,  so  exactly  fitted  to  each  other,  that  if  you  take 
one  out,  all  the  rest  are  dissevered.  And  it  is  not  surprising,  it  does  not  imply  any 
great  degree  of  depravity,  to  say  that  where  a  number  of  men  are  living  an  ordinary, 
an  average,  social  hfe,  and  one  of  them  is  inspired  with  a  higher,  a  holier  religions 
purpose,  and  desires  and  means  to  go  up  on  a  level  that  none  of  them  have  been 
standing  on,  his  emigration  upward  wrenches  them  all.  And  it  is  not  strange  that 
they  try  to  stop  it.  (Ibid.)  Unrest  a  vital  process  : — The  unrest  of  a  Christless 
Boul,  a  Christless  nation,  a  Christless  world,  is  really  the  beginning  of  a  vital  pro- 
cess, which  in  its  first  stages  is  always  a  travail.  The  Lord  is  not  afraid  of  the 
Btorm  of  strife  and  frenzy  which  He  stirs  in  the  world.  We  think  that  these  ar« 
death  pains ;  He  knows  that  they  are  birth  pains,  through  which  the  glorious  golden 
future  is  being  bom.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  A  boy's  foes  at  school : — When  a  boy 
first  comes  from  home,  fall  of  the  natural  desire  of  doing  his  duty,  of  Improving 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  », 

himself,  of  getting  on  well,  he  is  presently  beset  by  the  ridicule  of  all  the  -worthiess 
and  foolish  boys  around  him,  who  want  to  tink  him  to  their  own  level.  How  com- 
pletely true  it  is  that  his  foes  are  they  of  his  own  household — that  is,  they  who  are 
most  immediately  about  him,  those  of  his  own  age,  and  his  own  place  in  the  schooL 
They  beceme  his  idol ;  before  their  most  foolish,  most  low,  and  most  wicked  voices, 
he  gives  up  his  affections,  his  understanding,  and  his  conscience ;  from  this  mass  of 
ignorance,  and  falsehood,  and  selhshnesa,  he  looks  for  the  guide  of  his  opinions  and 
tds  conduct.    (2'.  Arnold,  D.D.) 

Yet.  87.  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  Me. — The  Saviour's  elaim» 
on  our  supreme  ajfections : — There  are  three  sources  from  which  love,  considered  sa 
A  sentiment,  originates  in  the  heart : — 1.  The  love  of  sympathy.  2.  The  love  of 
gratitude.  3.  The  love  of  moral  esteem.  In  all  these  respects  Christ  is  entitled  to 
supreme  affection.  Is  love  valued  in  proportion  as  it  is  disinterested  ?  Compared 
with  Christ's  love  man's  is  selfishness.  Or  does  the  greatness  of  sacrifice  testify  to 
the  greatness  of  love  7  On  this  ground  Christ  claims  our  supreme  love,  as  no  human 
being  has  sacrificed  so  much  for  us  as  He,  no  earthly  benefactor  so  great  as  He. 
(H.  White,  M.A.)  Christ  worthy  of  our  highest  esteem: — Our  Saviour  puts  Him- 
self and  the  world  together  as  competitors  for  our  best  affections,  challenging  a 
transcendent  affection  on  our  part,  because  of  a  transcendent  worthiness  on  His. 
By  "  father  or  mother  "  are  to  be  understood  whatever  enjoyments  are  dear  to  ns  ; 
and  from  the  expression,  "  he  is  not  worthy  of  Me,"  the  doctrine  of  merit  must 
not  be  asserted.  I.  What  is  included  and  compbehended  in  that  love  to  Chbibi 
HEBE  mentioned  ?  1.  An  esteem  and  valuation  of  Christ  above  all  worldly  en 
joyments.  2.  A  choosing  Him  before  all  other  enjoyments.  3.  Service  and' 
obedience  to  Him.  4.  Acting  for  Him  in  opposition  to  all  other  things.  5.  It 
imparts  a  full  acquiescence  in  Him  alone,  even  in  the  absence  and  want  of  all  other 
felicities.  II.  The  eeason  and  motives  which  may  induce  us  to  this  love.  L 
He  is  the  best  able  to  reward  our  love.  2.  He  has  shown  the  greatest  love  to  us. 
III.  The  signs  and  chabactebs  whebebt  we  may  discisbn  His  love.  1.  A  frequent 
and,  indeed,  continual  thinking  of  Him.  2.  A  willingness  to  leave  the  world, 
whenever  God  sl.all  think  fit,  by  death,  to  summon  us  to  nearer  converse  with 
Christ.  3.  A  zea!  for  His  honour,  and  impatience  to  hear  or  see  any  indignity 
oll'ered    Him.      (R.    South,  D.D.)  No    divided    devotion: — 1.   The    audacity 

of  the  claim — seemingly  opposed  to  natural  affection.  2.  Its  naturalness  on  the 
lips  of  Christ — all  of  a  piece  with  His  other  words  and  deeds.  3.  Either,  then, 
Jesus  is  God  and  deserves  all  He  claims,  or  else  an  impostor  and  blasphemer. 
4.  The  dilemma  —  we  must  either  crucify  Him  or  acknowledge  His  pretensions. 
{Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  Christ  more  than  the  nearest  relatives : — A  striking  illus- 
tration of  the  love  to  Christ,  that  proves  so  ardent  as  to  supersede  that  felt  for 
parent  or  child,  is  furnished  by  the  history  of  Vivia  Perpetua,  the  martyr  of  Car- 
thage. This  lady,  who  was  a  matron  of  high  position,  young  (not  being  more  than 
twenty-two  at  her  death)  beautiful,  and  witii  everything  to  make  life  desirable  and 
attractive  to  her,  met  death  with  dauntless  heroism.  We  are  not  told  whether  her 
husband  was  a  Pagan  or  a  Christian ;  but  her  aged,  and  still  heathen,  father, 
obtaining  entrance  into  her  prison,  endeavoured  by  every  possible  argument  to  shake 
her  constancy,  and,  as  a  last  appeal,  brought  her  infant  son,  and  conjured  her,  by 
her  love  for  himself  and  for  her  child,  to  abjure  Christianity  and  Uve.  But  to  all 
these  entreaties  Perpetua  turned  a  deaf  ear ;  Christ  was  dearer  to  her  than  either 
her  parent  or  her  son,  and  she  bravely  met  death  by  being  exposed  to  an  infuriated 
animal  in  the  arena.  She  suffered  about  a.d.  205.  Even  in  these  modem  days 
instances  might  be  brou^'ht  forward,  from  the  annals  of  missionary  labour,  of  those 
who  from  love  of  Christ  are  willing  to  leave  dearest  earthly  friends ;  but  in  some 
instances  these  close  human  ties  become  the  great  obstacles  to  the  reception  of  the 
gospel.  Speaking  of  a  school  at  ChumdicuUy,  Ceylon,  the  missionary,  Mr.  Fleming, 
says  (quoted  in  the  Church  Missionary  Society's  report  for  1881-82) :  "  There  are 
secret  believers  in  Christ  who  are  not  ready  to  give  up  all  for  Him.  One  of  them 
has  confessed  that  he  would  like  to  follow  his  sisters,  who  have  oome  out,  but  hia 
parents  look  to  him  to  perform  the  funeral  rites  for  them  when  they  die,  and  ha 
shrinks  from  causing  them  grief  .  .  .  like  the  man  whom  Christ  called,  but  who 
said,  '  Suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father.' "  Christian  love  triumphant  over 
maternal:  —  Leclerc,  says  D'Aubign6,  was  led  to  the  place  of  execution.  The 
executioner  prepared  the  fire,  heated  the  iron  which  was  to  sear  the  flesh  of  the 
Bunister  of  the  gospel,  and,  approaching  him,  branded  him  as  a  heretic  on  th« 


CHAP.  X.'  ST.  MATTHEW.  193 

forehead.  Just  then  a  shriek  was  uttered — but  it  came  not  from  the  martjr.  His 
mother,  a  witness  of  the  dreadful  sight,  wrung  with  anguish,  endured  a  violent 
struggle  between  the  enthusiasm  of  faith  and  maternal  feelings ;  but  her  faith  over- 
came, and  she  exclaimed,  in  a  voice  that  made  the  adversaries  tremble,  "  Glory  ba 
to  Jesus  Christ,  and  His  witnesses  1 "  Thus  did  this  French  woman  of  the  sixteenth 
century  have  respect  to  the  word  of  the  Son  of  God  :  "  He  that  loveth  eon  or 
daughter  more  than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me."  So  daring  a  courage  at  such  a 
moment  might  have  seemed  to  demand  instant  punishment,  but  that  Christian 
mother  had  struck  powerless  the  hearts  of  priests  and  soldiers.  Their  fury  was  re- 
strained by  a  mightier  arm  than  theirs.  The  crowd  falling  back  and  making  way 
for  her,  allowed  the  mother  to  regain,  with  faltering  step,  her  humble  dwelling. 
Monks,  and  even  the  town  sergeants  themselves,  gazed  ou  her  without  moving. 
"  Not  one  oi  her  enemies,"  says  Beza,  "  dared  put  forth  his  hand  against  her.* 

Ver.  38.  He  that  taketh  not  his  cross. — Cross-bearing: — I.  What  is  mt  pectiliab 
CROSS?  "He  that  taketh  not  his  cross."  1.  It  may  be  the  giving  up  of  certain 
pleasures.  2,  The  endurance  of  reproach  or  poverty.  3.  The  suffering  of  losses 
and  persecutions  for  Christ's  sake.  4.  The  consecrating  all  to  Jesus.  6.  The 
endurance  of  my  heavenly  Father's  will.  II.  What  am  i  to  do  with  it  ?  1.  I  am 
deliberately  to  take  it  up.  2.  I  am  boldly  to  face  it.  It  is  only  a  wooden  cross  after 
all.  3.  I  am  patiently  to  endure  it,  for  I  have  only  to  carry  it  a  little  way.  4.  I 
am  cheerfully  to  resign  myself  to  it,  for  my  Lord  appoints  it.  6.  I  am  obediently 
to  follow  Christ  with  it.  What  an  honour  and  a  comfort  to  be  treading  in  His 
Bteps  1  This  is  the  essential  point.  It  is  not  enough  to  bear  a  cross,  we  must  bear 
it  after  Jesus.  I  ought  to  be  thankful  that  I  have  only  to  bear  it,  and  that  it  does 
not  bear  me.  It  is  a  royal  burden,  a  sanctified  burden,  a  sanctifying  burden,  a 
burden  which  gives  communion  with  Christ.  III.  What  should  encodbage  mk  ? 
1.  Necessity  :  I  cannot  be  a  disciple  without  cross-bearing.  2.  Society :  better  men 
than  I  have  carried  it.  3.  Love :  Jesus  bore  a  far  heavier  cross  than  mine.  4. 
Faiib  :  giuoe  will  be  given  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  cross.  5.  Hope :  good  to  my- 
self will  result  from  my  bearing  this  load.  6.  Zeal :  Jesus  will  be  honoured  by  my 
patient  emduraace.  7.  Experience  :  I  shall  yet  tiud  pleasure  in  it,  for  it  will  pro- 
duce in  me  much  blessing.  The  cross  is  a  fruitful  tree.  8.  Expectation  :  glory  will  be 
the  reward  of  it.  Let  not  the  ungodly  fancy  that  theirs  is  a  better  lot :  the  Psalmist 
says,  *•  many  sorrows  shall  be  to  the  wicked."  Let  not  the  righteous  dread  the  cross, 
for  it  will  not  crush  them  :  it  may  be  painted  with  iron  colours  by  our  fears,  but  it 
is  not  made  of  that  heavy  metal ;  we  can  bear  it,  and  we  will  bear  it  right  joyously. 
(G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Following  Christ  by  way  of  the  cross : — When  Alexander  the 
Great  marched  through  Persia,  his  way  was  stopped  with  ice  and  snow,  insomuch 
that  bis  soldiers,  being  tired  out  with  hard  marches,  were  discouraged,  and  would 
have  gone  no  further,  which  he  perceiving,  dismounted  his  horse,  and  went  on  foot 
through  the  midst  of  them  all,  making  himself  a  way  with  a  pickaxe ;  whereat 
they  all  being  ashamed,  first  his  friends,  then  the  captains  of  his  army,  and,  last  of 
all,  the  common  soldiers,  followed  him.  So  should  all  men  follow  Christ  their 
Saviour,  by  that  rough  and  unpleasant  way  of  the  cross  that  He  hath  traversed 
before  them.  He  having  drunk  unto  them  in  the  cup  of  His  passion,  they  are  to 
pledge  Him  when  occasion  is  offered ;  He  having  left  them  an  example  of  His 
Buffering,  they  are  to  follow  Him  in  the  selfsame  steps  of  sorrow.  (John  Spencer.) 
The  cross  taken  up  : — The  cross  is  easier  to  him  who  takes  it  up  than  to  him  who 
drags  it  along.  (J.  E.  Vaux.)  Tlie  cross  not  to  be  made: — We  are  bid  to  take, 
not  to  make  our  cross.  God  in  His  providence  will  provide  one  for  us.  And  we 
are  bid  to  take  it  up ;  we  hear  nothing  of  laying  it  down.  Our  troubles  and  onr 
bves  live  and  die  together.  (W.  Gurnall.)  "No  man,"  said  Flavel,  "hath  a 
velvet  cross. "  As  an  old  Yorkshire  workiag-man,  a  friend  of  mine,  said,  "Ah! 
it  is  blessed  work  cross-bearing  when  it's  tied  on  with  love."  {Newman  Hall.) 
Welcome  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  bear  it  triumphantly ;  but  see  that  it  be  indeed 
Christ's  cross,  and  not  thine  own.  (Wilcox.)  The  cross  a  sweet  burden: — Christ's 
cross  is  the  sweetest  burden  that  ever  I  bore  ;  it  is  such  a  burden  as  wings  are  to  a 
bird,  or  sails  to  a  ship,  to  carry  me  forward  to  my  harbour.  (Samuel  Rutherford.) 
A  procession  of  cross-bearers : — The  Saviour  here,  in  His  character  of  Seer,  looks 
into  His  own  future,  and  moulds  His  language  accordingly.  He  sees  the  cross  in 
the  distance.  He  connects  Himself  with  it.  He  comes  out  of  Himself,  as  it  were, 
to  look  at  Himself  with  His  cross.  He  sees  Himself  bearing  His  cross.  The  vision 
grows  into  a  complete  picture.    His  followers  are  bearing  crosses  too  1    And  thus 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  s. 

the  heavenly  procession  moves  on,  until  a  point  is  reached  where  time  melts  into 
eternity,  and  earth  is  the  stepping-stone  to  heaven.  At  that  point  there  may  occnr 
what  men  call  execution ;  but,  looked  at  on  its  upper  side,  the  event  is  coronation 
and  glorification.    The  crown  surmounts  the  cross.     [James  Morison,  D.D.) 

Ver.  39.  He  that  flndeth  hla  life. — T7i€  love  of  life : — I.  The  natukb  and  ind  o» 
THIS  LOVE  OF  LIFE.  This  attachment  not  engendered  since  the  tall — a  degraded 
exhibition  of  some  early  beauty.  Adam  loved  life ;  but  the  life  he  loved  was  a 
fragment  cf  immortality.  He  loved  it  as  an  unbroken  walk  with  the  Eternal ;  we 
commonly  cling  to  life  as  a  removal  from  His  presence.  Adam  loved  an  immor* 
tahty  begun ;  we  an  immortality  put  off.  But  a  Divine  purification  of  our  nature 
and  the  old  lineaments  shall  start  forth  from  the  canvass.  This  love  of  life  of 
Divine  implantation ;  it  survives  all  pleasure  in  life ;  and  is  not  accounted  for  by 
dread  of  the  future.  The  Almighty  appointed  that  it  should  act  as  a  powerful 
engine  in  the  furtherance  of  His  several  dispensations.  Take  it  away,  and  society 
is  shaken  in  every  part.  Evidence  that  man  is  far  even  from  original  righteousness 
in  the  eagerness  with  which  he  clings  to  absence  from  his  Maker.  The  love  of 
life  a  perpetual  source  of  honour  to  God  by  the  opportunity  afforded  for  the  display 
of  His  grace.  II.  When  the  principle  takes  a  right  direction,  and  when  a  wrong 
DniECTioN.  We  have  shown  that  the  principle  which  in  fallen  man  is  the  love  of 
life,  was  in  unfallen  man  the  love  of  immortality ;  hence  as  it  is  our  own  aim  to 
return  to  the  privileges  of  the  unfallen  state,  we  give  the  principle  its  right  direction 
when  we  draw  it  off  from  the  mortal,  and  fasten  it  upon  the  immortal.  To  find  by 
losing  is  the  principle  rightly  applied ;  for  this  is  the  mortal  surrendered  to  the 
immortal.  To  lose  by  finding  is  the  principle  wrongly  applied;  for  this  is  the  im- 
mortal  basely  exchanged  for  the  mortal.  We  call  upon  you  to  love  life,  but  yon 
must  understand  what  life  is;  not  mere  existence.  (H.  Melvill.)  Nothing  to 
Icte: — He  that  would  lose  nothing,  must  learn  to  fiave  nothing.  [Farindon.) 
Finding  by  losing : — A  remarkable  instance  of  the  hteral  fulfilment  of  this  promise, 
even  with  regard  to  this  life,  is  furnished  by  a  circumstance  lately  mentioned  to  ufl 
by  one  who  knew  the  subject  of  it  well,  A  devoted  Christian  woman  had  been  in 
the  habit  of  canying  on  extensive  religious  work  in  a  large  and  important  town, 
especially  in  the  infirmary  of  the  workhouse,  which  she  was  constantly  in  the  habit 
of  visiting.     When  no  longer  young,  in  fact  she  must  have  been  nearly  fifty.  Miss 

0 became  seriously  ill,  and  her  medical  advisers  pronounced  it  their  opinion 

that  she  could  not  recover.  She  requested  to  be  told  how  long,  according  to  their 
calculation,  she  could  possibly  Uve,  and  the  reply  was,  "  At  the  longest  about  a  year, 
hut  you  must  take  perfect  rest,  and  give  up  all  work  and  exertion."     "  No,"  replied 

Miss  G ;   "if    I   am  to   live    so   short   a   time,  I  must  work  all  the  more 

heartily  for  my  Master."     She  did  so,  continuing  her  classes,  visits,  &c.,  but  it  did 

not  shorten  her  life.     At  the  present  time,  fifteen  years  after,  Miss  G still  lives, 

and  still  works  actively,  though  between  sixty  and  seventy  years  of  age.  Losing 
life  for  others: — Ernest  entered  heartily  into  the  sport  of  marble-playing  when  that 
season  came  round ;  and,  as  he  played  for  "  keeps,"  it  was  not  long  before  complaints 
began  to  be  made  against  him.  He  was  a  good  player  and  did  win  a  good  many 
marbles ;  an<l  nobody  likes  to  lose  at  play,  be  it  money  or  marbles,  Ernest  resented 
the  hard  talk  about  his  playing,  and  one  day  when  he  met  his  pastor  he  told  him 
how  unjust  and  unkind  the  boys  were.  The  pastor  listened  kindly;  he  was  one  of 
the  men  who  have  the  good  sense  and  the  good  taste  to  love  boys.  When  Ernest 
paused  he  said :  "Well,  Ernest,  you  do  win  a  good  many  marbles,  don't  youy" 
"  Why,  yes,  sir;  of  course  I  do."  "  I  wonder,  now,  if  you  ever  ask  the  Lord  Jesua 
about  this  marble  playing? "  "  Yes,  sir ;  I  do,"  answered  Ernest,  heartily.  "  And 
what  do  you  ask  Him ? "  "I  ask  Him  to  let  me  hit."  "  Ernest,  do  you  ever  aek 
Him  to  let  another  boy  hit  ?  "  "No,  sir;  of  course  I  don't."  ""^Tiynot?"  "Why, 
I  want  to  get  all  the  marbles  I  can."  "  It  seems  as  if  the  other  boys  might  like  to 
win  sometimes,"  said  Mr.  Burch,  thoughtfully.  "  Ernest,  are  you  trying  to  show 
God  to  the  boys?"  "  Yes,  Mr,  Burch  ;  I  am,"  very  earnestly,  "  Do  you  ever  talk 
to  them  about  God?"  "Yes,  sir,  I  do;  I'd  like  to  have  the  boys  know  Him." 
"  Well,  do  they  seem  to  want  to  love  Him  much  ?"  "  No,  Mr.  Burch ;  I  think  the 
boys  don't  care  much  about  God."  "  Well,  Ernest,  I  don't  know  that  I  wonder 
much  at  it.  The  God  that  they  see  is  your  God.  He  lets  you  have  all  that  you 
want,  but  does  not  tell  you  to  ask  Him  to  give  them  anything  I  You  are  not  show- 
ing them  the  God  who  laid  down  His  life."  "What  do  yon  mean  by  that,  Mr. 
Buroh  7  "    "  Giving  up  the  thing  that  we  want  is  the  very  heart  of  Christ's  religion. 


CHAP.  X.]  8T.  MATTHEW,  191 

Christ  laid  down  His  life  for  us,  and  we  are  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  others.  If  wa 
lose  our  life — that  is,  our  will,  our  way,  our  pleasure,  our  advantage — for  Christ's 
sake,  we  shall  find  the  real  life,  which  He  only  can  give.  Try  it,  Ernest ;  lose  your 
life  among  the  boys,  and  see  if  they  won't  think  better  of  your  God." 

Ver.  41.  He  that  receivetli  a  prophet.  The  reception  of  a  prophet : — I.  What,  m 
THE  Bible  meaning  of  the  tebm,  is  a  prophet?  1.  There  is  first  what  may 
properly  be  called  the  "  seer,"  men  with  burning  eye  to  take  in  visions  of  the  un- 
Been.  2.  Then  the  word  prophet  merges  into  our  word  preacher.  3.  Bat  there  are 
two  conditions  without  which  no  man  has  a  right  to  this  name ;  a  godly  Ufe,  a 
special  message  from  God.  II.  The  tede  spibit  in  which  a  prophet  should  bs 
lutCEiVED.  1.  The  true  exercise  of  our  receptive  faculties  is  an  important  element 
of  our  responsibility.  2.  Let  us  receive  without  prejudice.  3.  Let  us  receive  with 
humility.  4.  That  such  a  reception  will  bring  us  a  "prophet's  reward."  (J.  Brierlcy, 
B.A.)  Goodness  essential  to  a  true  Prophet : — In  other  walks  of  hfe  a  man  may 
attain  high  distinction  without  this  condition.  He  may  be  a  successful  lawyer,  and, 
as  some  modern  examples  have  shown,  obtain  the  chief  prizes  of  his  profession 
without  possessing  moral  character  that  will  bear  inspection.  A  man  may  obtain 
fortune  and  fame  as  an  artist,  and  be  all  the  while,  hke  Turner,  addicted  to  the 
lowest  pleasures.  In  fact,  a  recent  French  writer  has  given  us  the  exquisitely  French 
doctrine  that  immorality  is  a  great  auxihary  to  art.  A  man  may  be  a  success  on  the 
Stock  Exchange,  and  have  in  him  no  scintilla  of  spiritual  principle.  All  this  is 
possible,  but  a  man  who  in  any  age  takes  the  name  and  function  of  prophet  of  God, 
proclaimer  of  His  truth  and  message,  and  who  at  the  same  time  keeps  not  step 
in  his  life  to  the  subUme  music  of  heaven's  highest  law,  is  a  self-confessed  mon- 
strosity. (Ibid.)  The  true  prophet  has  spiritiMl  knowledge  at  first  hand: — Like 
a  man  who  has  been  teaching  geography  in  a  school.  His  time  has  been  occupied 
with  maps,  atlases,  globes,  and  text-books  of  geography.  He  knows  all  the  moun- 
tains in  Europe  by  name,  and  the  length  of  the  principal  rivers.  His  head  is  full 
of  this,  and  he  has  tried  to  fill  the  heads  of  his  pupils  with  this,  and  to  him 
and  to  them  it  has  been  a  business  unspeakably  dry.  By-and-by  he  gets  a 
vacation,  and  somebody  fills  his  purse  for  him,  and  says,  "  Now  go  off  somewhere 
and  enjoy  yourself."  He  goes  to  Switzerland.  He  sees  Mont  Blanc  and  the  Ehine,  and 
the  Lake  of  Geneva.  It  is  not  a  bit  hke  the  geography  book.  These  fresh  breezes 
that  blow,  the  deep  blue  of  the  glorious  lake,  the  glint  up  yonder  of  the  everlasting 
snows,  whisper  no  hint  of  page  sixteen  in  that  odious  text-book  with  its  endless 
names  and  figures.  This  is  the  difference  between  knowledge  at  second  hand  and  at 
first  hand.  (Ihid.)  The  responsible  use  of  our  receptioe  faculties : — Physiologists 
tell  us  we  have  two  sets  of  nerves,  the  afferent  and  the  efferent ;  the  one  bringing  to 
us  impre-sions  fr'im  without,  the  other  acting  on  the  muscles  and  carrjing  to  the 
outside  world  the  tides  of  force  that  are  within.  Life  is  just  this  contrast,  giving 
and  receiving,  and  the  one  process  needs  as  much  watching  as  the  other.  It  is  not 
enough  to  look  after  the  activities  of  the  soul.  The  call  may  be  for  courtesy,  sym- 
pathy, and  unless  these  are  forthcoming,  in  spite  of  activities,  the  man  is  a  failure 
over  half  his  nature.  (Ibid.)  When  God's  rains  are  descending,  and  His  gracious 
breezes  blowing  fiom  off  the  everlasting  hills,  keep  the  soul  open.  It  is  a  grand 
opportunity  on  the  receptive  side.  (Ibid.)  The  principle  of  future  recompenses  : — 
1.  By  OUT  works  shall  be  decided  the  degree  of  our  future  reward.  2.  The  reward 
affixed  to  an  action  may  be  obtained  though  the  action  itself  has  not  been  per- 
formed. He  who  receives  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  is  to  obtain  the 
recompense  as  though  he  were  himself  a  prophet.  There  must  be  division  of  labour  ; 
all  working  to  the  same  end  receive  same  reward.  3.  If  our  works  are  susceptible 
of  reward,  it  seems  necessaiily  to  follow  that  there  will  be  differences  in  reward,  so 
that  the  future  portion  of  the  righteous  will  be  far  from  uniform.  What  the  "  pro- 
phet "  receives  is  not  what  the  "  righteous  man  "  receives.  4.  That  no  good  work 
is  BO  inconsiderable  as  to  be  excluded  from  recompense.  "  Cup  of  cold  water  given 
in  the  name  of  a  disciple."  But  if  the  "cup  of  cold  water"  is  not  to  lose  its 
reward,  it  must  be  proffered  when  he  who  gives  it  has  nothing  better  to  give. 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Difference  of  office  does  not  preclude  sameness  of  recom- 
pense : — For  instance,  what  wholly  different  spheres  of  duty  are  assigned  to  the 
clergy  and  the  laity  1  And  we  are  told  that  he  who  labours  with  great  earnestness 
in  the  work  of  a  clergyman  has  a  reward  of  peculiar  splendour  within  reach,  inas- 
muoh  as  "  they  who  turn  many  to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and 
ev8K  "    Sat  it  is  evident  from  our  text  that  the  same  reward  is  attainable  by  otheii 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

who  have  never  been  called  to  the  clergyman's  work.  They  who  have  not  been 
"  prophets  "  may  "  receive  a  prophet's  reward  ;  "  and  if  an  individual  have  upheld 
a  clergyman  in  his  arduous  and  most  responsible  calling,  strengthening  him  by  such 
assistances  as  the  occasion  demands,  sustaining  him  when  assailed,  cheering  him 
when  disheartened,  and  all  out  of  love  for  his  office,  and  desire  for  his  success,  so 
that  he  receives  the  pastor  in  the  name  of  a  pastor,  we  may  say  of  such  an  indi- 
vidual  that  in  God's  sight  he  takes  part  in  the  clergyman's  labours.  (Ibid.) 
Sympathy  with  a  character  involves  likeness  to  that  character: — The  power  of  sym- 
pathizing with  any  character  is  the  partial  po-^session  of  that  character  for  ourselves. 
A  man  who  is  capable  of  having  his  soul  bowed  by  the  stormy  thunder  of  Beethovan, 
or  lifted  to  heaven  by  the  etherial  melody  of  Mendelsshon,  is  a  musician,  though  he 
never  composed  a  bar.  The  man  who  recognizes  and  feels  the  grandeur  of  the 
organ  mutic  of  "  Paradise  Lost  "  has  some  fibre  of  a  poet  in  him,  though  be  be  but 
a  "mute  inglorious  Milton."  {Dr.  Maclaren.)  Sympathy,  not  action,  the  con- 
dition of  reward: — The  old  knight  that  clapped  Luther  on  the  back  when  he  went 
int''  the  Diet  of  Worms,  and  said  to  him,  "  Well  done,  Uttle  monk !  "  shared  in 
Luther's  victory  and  in  Luther's  crown.  He  that  helps  a  prophet  because  he  is  a 
prophet,  has  got  the  making  of  a  prophet  in  himself.  {Ibid.)  Holding  the  ropes : — 
"  I  am  going  down  into  the  pit.  you  hold  the  ropes,"  said  Carey,  the  pioneer  mis- 
DiOiiaijr,  They  that  held  the  ropes,  and  the  daring  miner  that  swings  away  down  in 
the  blackness,  are  one  in  the  work,  may  be  one  in  the  motive,  and,  il  they  are,  shall 
be  one  in  the  reward.  So,  brethren,  though  no  coal  of  fire  may  be  laid  upon  your 
lips,  if  you  sympathize  with  the  workers  that  are  trying  to  serve  God,  and  do  what  yoa 
can  to  help  them,  and  identify  yourself  with  them,  and  so  hold  the  ropes,  my  text 
will  be  true  about  you.—  "  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet 
shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward."  They  who  by  reason  of  circumstancetf,  by  defi* 
ciency  of  power,  or  by  the  weight  of  other  tasks  and  duties,  can  only  give  silent 
sympathy,  and  prayer,  and  help,  are  one  with  the  men  whom  they  help.  {Ibid.) 
Participation  in  service  : — As  there  is  a  way  of  partaking  of  other  men's  sins,  bo 
in  other  men's  holy  services.    {Gumall.) 

Ver.  42.  A  cup  of  cold  water. — TJie  cup  of  cold  water: — The  doings  of  this  life 
are  had  in  remembrance :  that  no  humble  action  in  its  relation  to  high  principles 
is  lost;  but  is  retained  in  a  future  judgment.  I.  The  duty  of  acting  from  Chbis- 
TiAN  MOirvES.  1.  Our  Saviour  points  out  this  by  three  examples.  2.  The  duty 
derives  its  importance  from  God's  omnipresence  and  omniscience.  The  cup  of  cold 
water  comes  under  the  Divine  notice.  U.  Tub  influence  of  our  actions  upon  thb 
UESTiNiES  OF  THE  FUTUKE.  1.  The  Mstory  of  nations  and  individuals  proves  how 
the  past  acts  upon  the  future.  2.  The  promise  of  reward  by  Christ  shows  how  every 
simple  act  done  with  reference  to  Himself  is  made  to  react  upon  ourselves  in  a  way 
we  should  not  anticipate  apart  from  revelation.  3.  Things  done  out  of  Christ, 
having  no  connection  with  His  love,  will  perish.  {W.  D.  Horwond.)  Giving 
to  the  needy  giving  to  Christ: — St.  Martin,  before  he  was  baptized  into  the 
faith  of  Christ,  and  while  still  a  soldier,  showed  a  rare  instance  of  love  and 
charity.  In  the  depth  of  winter,  a  beggar,  clothed  in  rags,  asked  an  alms  of 
him  for  the  love  of  God.  Silver  and  gold  he  had  none.  His  soldier's  cloak 
was  all  he  had  to  give.  He  drew  his  sword,  cut  it  in  half,  gave  one  portion 
to  the  poor  man,  and  was  content  himself  with  the  other.  And  of  him  it  may 
be  truly  said,  "He  had  his  reward."  That  night,  in  a  vision,  he  beheld  our 
blessed  Lord  upon  His  throne,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  standing  on  His  right 
band  and  His  left.  And  as  Martin  looked  more  steadfastly  on  the  Son  of  God,  h« 
saw  Him  to  be  arrayed  in  his  own  half-cloak ;  and  he  heard  Him  say,  "  This  hath 
Martin,  nnbaptized,  given  to  Me."  Zeal  for  theyoung  rewarded: — I.  The  objects 
OF  compassionate  beoard  AI.LUDED  TO.  1.  Ill  their  inherent  depravity  and  their 
solemn  I'.usiiny  as  intended  for  a  state  of  nnending  being.  2.  In  their  natural  con- 
dition of  helplessness  and  weakness  amid  the  circumstances  of  peril  to  which  they 
are  exposed  in  their  progress  through  the  world.  3.  In  their  influence  for  good  or 
evil  upon  the  world,  and  the  final  account  they  shall  give  at  the  bar  of  God.  XL 
The  blessedness  of  those  who,  under  the  influence  of  Christian  motivbs,  bhau 
MAKE  thb  touno  THE  OBJECTS  OF  THEiB  DEVOTED  CARE.  1.  They  shall  have  their 
avnaxd  lii  ths  lovsly  STid  pppmiiriate  fruits  with  which  the  objects  of  their  compaa- 
Bionate  regard  shall  be  adorned.  2.  In  the  beneficial  influence  they  shall  tbni 
originate  and  perpetuate.  3.  In  the  approbation  of  their  Saviour  and  tbeir  God. 
(fi.  Madgin.)        A  good  passport : — Some  few  years  ago,  three  small  children — a 


•HAP.  X.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  IJJ 

boy  and  two  girls,  aged  respectively  ten,  seven,  and  four — arrived  in  St.  Lonis, 
having  travelled  thither  aU  the  way  from  Kulin  in  Germany,  withoat  any  escort  or 
protection  beyond  a  New  Testament  and  their  own  innocence  and  helplessness. 
Their  parents,  who  had  emigrated  from  the  Fatherland  and  settled  in  Missouri,  had 
left  them  in  charge  of  an  aunt,  to  whom,  in  due  time,  they  forwarded  a  sum  of 
money  sufficient  to  pny  the  passage  of  the  little  ones  to  their  new  home  across  the 
Atlantic.    As  the  children  could  not  speak  a  word  of  any  language  but  German,  it 
is  doubtful  whether  they  would  ever  have  reached  their  destination  at  all,  had  not 
their  aunt,  with  a  woman's  ready  wit,  provided  them  with  a  passport,  addressed, 
not  so  much  to  any  earthly  authority,  as  to  Christian  mankind  generally.    Befor« 
taking  her  leave  of  the  children,  the  aunt  gave  the  elder  girl  a  New  Testament, 
instructing  her  to  show  it  to  every  person  who  might  accost  her  during  the  voyage, 
and  especially  to  call  their  attention  to  the  first  leaf  of  the  book.     Upon  that  leaf 
the  wise  and  good  woman  had  written  the  names  of  the  three  children,  and  this 
simple  statement :  "  Their  father  and  mother  in  America  are  anxiously  awaiting 
their  arrival  at  Sedalia,  Missouri."     This  was  followed  by  the  irresistible  appeal — 
their  guide,  safeguard,  aud  interpreter  throughout  a  journey  over  sea  and  land  of 
more  than  4,000  miles — "  Verily  I  say  .  .  .  unto  Me."    Many  were  the  little  acts 
of  kindness  shown  to  the  little  travellers,  many  the  hands  held  out  to  smooth  their 
journey,  by  those  who  read  that  appeal ;  and  at  length  they  reached  their  parents 
in  perfect  health  and  safety.       Christ's  appreciation  of  little  services  : — 1.  Because 
they  often  have  great  results.    A  cup  of  cold  water  is  mentioned  here;  we  can 
hardly  mention  a  service   which  one  would  more  naturally  think  of    as  a  little 
service,  than  the  giving  of  a  cup  of  cold  water;  and  yet  it  may  be  great  in  its  results. 
It  may  allay  the  f«ver,  and  drive  away  the  coming  madness  of  the  man  who  is  con- 
sumed by  thirst — there  may  be  hfe  in  a  cup  of  cold  water.     The  fainting  traveller 
in  the  desert,  where  the  greedy  sun  has  licked  all  the  water  up,  would  die  but  for 
the  cup  of  cold  water  which  a  provident  pilgrim  brings  to  him.     Many  a  castaway 
on  the  ocean,  diifting  on  his  raft — many  a  wounded  soldier,  writhing  among  tJie 
heaps  of  the  smitten  on  the  battle-field — has  spent  his  last  breath  in  crying  for  a 
eap  of  cold  water ;  and  a  cup  of  water  given  at  a  critical  moment  would  have  saved 
life.    2.  When  they  are  the  best  a  man  can  render.    3.  When  they  are  truly  ren- 
dered to  Him.     The  giving  of  the  cup  of  cold  water,  you  observe,  acquired  its 
character  of  moral  worth  from  its  being  given  '*  in  the  name  of  a  disciple  " — given 
for  Christ's  sake.     It  is  possible  to  work  in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  not 
serve  Christ  at  all.     A  soldier  may  go  out  in  his  country's  wars,  and  make  for 
himself,  by  his  courage  and  success,  an  imperishable  name,  aud  yet  never  really 
Berve  his  country  or  his  king,  but  only  himself;  his  one  impulse  throughout  may 
be  not  biyalty,  not  patriotism,  but  the  desire  of  fame,  the  desire  of  power,  a  motive 
which  never  takes  the  man  out  of  himself.     (A.  Hannay.)        SligJit  services  for 
Christ : — 1.  Slight  services  are  often  all  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  render.     W^at 
can  I  do  for  Christ  ?    2.  Slight  services  are  sufficient  to  show  love  for  the  Saviour. 
3.  Slight  services,  after  all,  may  be  invaluable   services — trivial — "  cup  of   cold 
water."    4.  Slight  services  shall  be  richly  requited — "He  shall  in  no  wise  losa 
his  reward."     (/.  Guge  Rigg,  B.A.)        A  small  act  the  embodiment  of  self-saeri' 
fUe: — In   Bonar   and  MacCheyue's  narrative   of   their  mission   to   the  Jews  in 
Palestine  (Edinburgh,   1839),   an  incident  occurs,  illustrative  of    this    passage. 
"During  our   ramble"    (near   Gaza),    "...  a  kind   Arab   came   forward  from 
his  teut  a&  we  passed,  offering  us  the  refreshment  of  a  drink  of  water,  saying, 
•  Jesherhetu  moie  ? ' — '  Will  you  drink  water  ? ' "    The  promise  of  our  Lord  seema 
to  refer  to  cases  like  this,  where  the  individual,  unasked,  seeks  out  objects  on 
whom  to  show  kindness.     "The  least  desire  to  bless  shall  not  lose  its  reward.     We 
all  know  how  precious  a  gift  a  cup  of  cold  water  may  be,  aud  what  self-denial  it  may 
involve,  from  the  well-known  story  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney  and  the  wounded  soldier 
on  the  battle-field.     Sidney,  mortally  wounded  on  the  field  of  Zutpben,  was  about 
to  drink  a  glass  of  water  which  some  one  had  humanely  brought  him  to  assuage 
his  agonizing  thirst.    Just,  however,  as  he  was  about  to  press  it  to  his  hps,  he  saw 
A  soldier,  in  like  plight  with  himself,  looking  wistfully  at  it.     Unable  to  resist  the 
pleading  eyes  of  his  fellow-sufferer,  Sidney  handed  the  glass  to  him,  exclaiming, 
"  Thy  necessity  is  greater  than  mine."     It  is  well-known  that  in  Western  Australia 
there  is  a  great  want  of  water,  the  rivers  in  that  part  of  the  island-continent  being 
few.     Mrs.  Millett,  in  her  "  Life  in  an  Australian  Parsonage,"  describes  the  feeling 
of  distress,  approaching  to  despair,  experienced  by  a  mother  and  her  child  who  had 
missed  their  way  in  a  remote  part  of  the  colony,  and  who  had  the  dreary  proapeeti 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  i<3HA».  n. 

ae  night  came  on,  of  being  many  hours  before  they  could  hope  to  assuage  their 
thirst ;  and  their  astonishment  and  delight,  when,  iu  that  remote  region,  they  saw, 
suddenly  emerging  from  the  trees,  a  woman  and  a  girl  each  carrying  a  bucket. 
♦'  Perhaps,"  says  Mrs.  Millett,  "  my  friend  mentally  compared  the  incident  to  that 
of  an  angel's  visit,  when  the  strangers  showed  her  a  spring  at  no  great  distance, 
whither  they  were  already  on  their  way  to  fetch  water,  having  already  walked  two 
miles  from  their  own  home."  We  ourselves  remember  with  pleasure  a  hot  summer 
evening  many  years  ago,  when,  tired  with  a  long  walk  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Heidelberg,  we  asked  the  mistress  of  a  picturepque  German  cottage  for  a  glass  of 
water.  Eeadily  was  it  brought,  and  the  peasant-woman,  on  our  thanking  her, 
replied  in  a  tone  of  true  courtesy,  "Masser  haben  wir  genug." — "  We  have  sutlicient 
water."  But,  as  Jeremy  Taylor  says,  he  will  have  no  reward,  who  gives  only 
watei,  when  bis  neighbour  needs  wine  or  a  cordial,  and  he  could  give  it. 


CHAPTEE  XL 

Verb.  1-5.    Art  Thou  He  that  should  come  7 — John*8  inquiry  :-—l,  Thk  nrQuntt 

MADE  BY  THE  Baptist.  It  was  suggested  by  the  incredulous  state  of  his  disciples. 
(1)  Because  if  Jesu«  was  Messiah  He  had  not  exerte.l  His  power  for  the  deliverance 
of  John  from  prison  ;  (2)  Because  they  observed  that  our  Saviour  had  as  yet  made  no 
public  claim  to  the  title ;  and  (3)  Because  the  manner  of  our  Saviour's  life  and 
conversation  had  less  appearance  of  sanctitv  than  the  life  of  their  master.  II.  Thk 
REPLY  MADE  BY  THE  Savioub.  1.  As  to  the  manner  of  it.  It  is  not  direct  and 
positive,  but  enables  them  to  answer  their  question  themselves.  2.  As  to  the 
matter  of  it.  Three  things  deserve  to  be  weighed  by  us.  (a)  The  remarkable 
gradation  and  rise  there  is  in  the  particulars  there  mentioned ;  (6)  The  apposite- 
ness  of  it  in  relation  to  the  inquirers ;  (c)  The  general  force  and  evidence  of  the 
arg'iment  contained  in  it.  (Francis  Atterhury.)  Marks  of  convincing  miracles  : — 
I.  They  must  be  above  the  known  powers  of  all  natural  causes.  II.  They  must  be 
done  publicly  and  in  the  face  of  the  world,  that  there  may  be  no  room  to  suspect  arti 
fice  and  collusion.  III.  The  doctrines  which  they  are  brought  to  vouch  must  be  every 
way  worthy  of  God.  IV.  They  should  carry  marks  of  good-will  and  beneficence  to 
men.  V.  It  is  the  more  convincing  if  such  miracles  were  foretold,  and  VI.  If  there 
be  no  appearances  of  self-interest  and  design  in  the  worker  of  such  miracles, 
(Ibid.)  John's  message  to  Jesus : — It  will  appear  odd  that  John  should  entertain 
any  doubt,  or  require  any  satisfaction  about  this  matter.  .  .  .  John  sent  this 
message,  not  from  any  doubt  which  he  himself  entertained  of  the  matter,  but  in 
order  that  the  doubts  which  his  disciples  had  conceived  about  it  might  receive  an 
answer  and  satisfaction  from  the  fountain  head.  From  our  Lord's  answer  wf  are 
entitled  to  infer  that — I.  The  faith  which  He  required  was  a  rational  absent  and 
faith  founded  upon  proof  and  evidence.  These  were  given  in  His  miracles.  IL 
Our  Lord's  miracles  distinguished  Him  from  John.  IH.  Our  Lord  distinctly  put 
the  truth  of  His  pretensions  upon  the  evidence  of  His  miracles.  IV.  Our  Lord 
fixes  the  guilt  of  the  unbelieving  Jews  upon  this  article,  that  they  rejected  miraculoua 
proofs  which  ought  to  have  convinced  them.  (IF.  Paley.)  Proving  Jesus  to  be 
the  Messiag : — I.  The  evidence  which  odb  Saviodb  gives  of  His  being  the  teub 
Messiah,  and  to  prove  this  three  things  were  necessary  : — 1.  To  show  that  Ho  was 
Bent  by  God,  and  had  a  peculiar  commission  from  Him,  by  the  miracles  which  He 
wrought.  2.  This  \vill  more  clearly  appear  by  the  correspondency  of  the  thinga 
here  mentioned  with  what  was  foretold  by  the  prophets  concerning  the  Messias. 
(1)  It  was  foretold  of  the  Messias  that  He  should  work  miraculous  oureg 
(Isa.  XXX.  4-6) ;  (2)  That  He  should  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor  (Isa.  Ixi.  1) ; 
(3)  That  the  world  should  be  offended  at  Him  (Isa.  viii.  14).     II.  An  intimation  in 

THE  TEXT  THAT  NOTWITHSTANDING  ALL  THE  EVIDENCE  ChBIST  GATE  OF  HiMSELF  YET  KANT 

WOULD  BE  OFFENDED  AT  Hni,  1.  Consider  how  t)ie  poor  came  to  be  more  disposed 
to  receive  the  gospel  than  others.  They  Lad  no  earthly  interest  to  engage  them  to 
reject  the  Saviour.  They  enjoy  little  of  the  gooil  things  of  this  life,  and  are  willing 
to  entertain  good  newa  of  happiness  in  anotlier.  2.  What  those  prejudices  art 
which  the  world  had  against  Christ.     That  He  wrought  miracles  by  diabolical 


OHAP.  n.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  199 

skill ;  that  He  kept  company  with  einners ;  that  He  profaned  the  Sabbath.  {J. 
Tillotson,  D.D.)  The  Mesxiah : — I.  The  prophets  declared  that  the  Saviour  should 
be  Himself  the  Everlasting  God  (Mic.  v.  2).  II.  The  family  of  the  Messiah  waa 
foretold  (Isa.  xi.  1).  IH.  The  prophets  foretold  the  time  at  whicn  the  Saviour  should 
be  born.  IV.  The  place  of  the  Saviour's  birth  was  foretold-  V.  The  character  of 
the  Messiah  was  the  subject  of  prophecy.  VI.  The  offices  the  Messiah  was  to 
sustain  for  His  people  were  foretold  by  the  prophets.  VII.  The  prophets  plainly 
foretold  the  manner  of  Christ's  death,  resuiTection,  and  exaltation.  Application  : — 
1.  To  those  who  treat  with  unholy  mirth  this  sacred  season.  2.  There  may  be  some 
whose  faith  in  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  is  assaulted  by  Satan,  and  perplexed  by 
cruel  doubts.  3.  There  are  those  who  have  been  effectually  taught  by  the  Spirit 
to  believe  in  Him  who  carae  in  the  flesh.  *'  No  man  can  say  that  Jetus  is  the 
Christ  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."      {E,   Blencowe,  M.A.)  Third  Sunday   in 

Advent : — I.  The  word  of  this  Lobd  stands  firm.  Forty  centuries  had  passed 
since  the  promise  of  the  seed  of  the  woman  had  been  given.  II.  The  work  of  the 
Lord  goes  on.  Men  may  not  understand  it ;  His  own  servants  may  be  perplexed 
about  it.  But  there  is  the  secure  ongoing  of  the  eternal  plan.  III.  The  con- 
bumjiation  COMETH — all  that  pertains  to  Messianic  work  He  will  pei-form.  God  has 
no  cause  for  haste.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  I.  John's  doubt.  The  subject  of  the 
doubt — the  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  II.  John's  way  of  AcriNO  under  the  doubt. 
1.  What  he  did  not  do.  He  did  not  boast  of  His  douot.  He  was  not  content  to 
remain  in  this  state  of  doubt  withoat  making  an  effort  to  rise  out  of  it.  ILL 
Christ's  answer  to  John's  doubt.  John's  question  is,  iui  substance,  the  question 
of  to-day.  But  the  answer  of  Jesus  is  distinct,  calm,  dignified.  (Vr.  Ritchie.) 
Doubting: — I.  That  there  is  no  sin  in  dotjbtino.  Some  duuots  are  siaful,  when 
born  of  irrational  prejudices,  or  bred  of  an  unregulated  life.  But  doubt,  of  its  own 
nature,  cannot  be  siulul.  Must  be  hesitation  till  evidence  be  suiiicient.  II.  But 
FAITH  IS  BETTER  THAN  DOUBT.  We  are  never  encouraged  in  Scripture  in  culti- 
vating an  inner  habit  of  intellectual  or  moral  scepticism.  Doubt  is  only  a  means 
to  faith.  UI.  There  may  exist  honest  doubt,  notwithstanding  diligent  efforts 
HADE  TO  REMOVE  IT.  1.  In  any  attempt  to  subdue  scepticism,  regard  should  be 
had  to  the  proximate  cause  of  it,  or  to  the  real  cause  of  it.  Much  perplexity  has 
a  physical  cause.  The  gosDcl  for  the  body :  rest,  change,  ocean,  may  remove  this. 
Doubt  has  intellectual  cause ;  not  to  be  forced  down  by  acts  of  wiU,  but  by  prayer 
for  more  light.  There  are  doubts  wiiich  have  a  moral  origin.  Let  conscience 
speak  and  remove  them.  2.  That  nearly  all  doubts  concerning  Christ  or  Christian 
truth,  ought  to  be  brought  in  some  way  before  Christ  Himself,  and  given  as  it  were 
into  His  own  hand  for  solution.  Christ's  reply  to  the  Baptist  was  clear,  prompt, 
convincing.  It  is  an  argumentative  reply  ;  fresh  evidence  is  presented.  Cliriwt's 
work  is  always  open  to  examination,  and  testifies  to  His  Messiahship;  if  it  does 
not  then  do  not  believe.  {A.  lialeigh,  D.D.)  Douht,  a  meuHS  to  faith : — What 
would  be  thought  of  a  chemist  who  should  conduct  an  expeiiment,  day  after  day, 
making  a  number  of  httle  variations  in  his  method,  but  always  withholding  the 
deciding  element  from  the  cnicible,  or  else  persistently  refusing  to  look  at  the 
result?  Or,  what  would  be  thought  of  a  merchant,  always  reckoning  up  his 
figmes,  but  never  writing  down  the  final  sums?  Or,  what  of  a  captain  who 
should  sail  his  ship  in  a  circle?  Or,  of  a  traveller  alwa:v3  on  the  road,  never 
reaching  home  or  inn?  {Ihid.)  Conflicts  with  unbelief. — Martin  Luther,  of 
a  kindred  spirit  with  the  Baptist,  and  with  a  like  task  to  perform,  had  many  days 
of  despondency,  and  passed  through  many  conflicts  of  unbelief.  He  writes :  "  One 
may  overcome  the  temptations  of  the  flesh,  but  how  hard  it  is  to  struggle  against 
the  tempuJons  of  blasphemy  and  despair."  Again:  "Having  all  but  lost  my 
Christ,  I  was  beaten  by  the  waves  and  tempests  of  despair  and  blasphemy." 
Bunyan,  who,  with  his  wonderful  imagination,  could  body  forth  the  things  unseen 
and  spiritual,  as  if  he  could  see  them  with  his  eyes,  hear  them  with  his  ears, 
and  touch  them  with  his  hands,  had  many  conflicts  with  unbeUef.  "  Of  all  tempta* 
tioDS  I  ever  met  with  in  my  life,"  he  says,  **  to  question  the  being  of  God  and  the 
truth  of  His  gospel  is  the  worst,  and  worst  to  be  borne.  When  this  temptation 
comes  it  takes  my  girdle  from  me,  and  removes  the  foundation  from  under  me. 
Though  God  has  visited  my  soul  with  never  so  blessed  a  discovery  of  Himself, 
yet  afterwards  I  have  been  in  my  spirit  so  filled  with  darkness,  that  I  could 
not  so  much  as  once  conceive  what  that  God  and  that  comfort  were  with 
which  I  had  been  refreshed."  Natv.ral  melancholy  obstiitcts  the  sense  of  Divitu 
contort: — ^As  it  is  in  clear  water,   when  it  is  still  and   transparent,  the  son 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  n 

shines  to  tbe  very  bottom ;  but,  if  you  stir  the  murl,  presently  it  grows  so  thick 
that  no  light  can  pierce  into  it.  So  it  is  with  the  children  of  God  :  though  their 
apprehensions  of  God's  love  be  as  clear  and  transparent,  sometimes,  as  the  very 
air  that  the  angels  and  glorified  saints  breathe  in  heaven,  j'et  if  once  the  muddy 
humour  of  melancholy  stirs  they  become  dark,  bo  that  no  ray  of  comfort  can  break 
into  the  deserted  soul.  {Buhop  Hophins.)  Morbid  self-suspicioTia : — Colton 
declares  that  i»  moments  of  despondency  Shakespeare  thought  himself  no  poet ;  and 
Raphael  doubted  his  right  to  be  called  a  painter.  We  caU  such  self-suspiioions 
morbid,  and  ascribe  them  to  a  hypochondriacal  fit;  in  what  other  way  can  we 
speak  of  those  doubts  as  to  their  saintship,  which  occasionally  afflict  the  most 
eminently  holy  of  the  Lord's  people  !  Truth  not  afraid  of  the  lifiht : — Here  is 
One  evidently,  who  is  not  afraid  of  the  light.  He  will  not  seek  the  homage  of 
superstition.  Depend  on  it,  Christ  is  glad  of  the  science  of  to-day,  and  its  in- 
vestigations, when  carried  on  in  the  spirit  of  reverence  and  earnestness.  He  is 
glad  for  the  broadening  light,  and  for  every  new  coign  of  vantage  whence  we  can 
look  at  Him.  Shall  we,  then,  be  afraid  of  the  light?  When  we  take  a  rose,  a 
lily  out  of  the  garden,  we  put  it  in  the  clearest  light  that  all  its  beauty  may  be 
seen.  We  are  not  afraid  of  the  light  for  it.  We  say,  "  Get  the  microscope,  and 
let  its  lenses  concentrate  tbe  rays  upon  these  flowers  of  God,  and  they  will  glorify 
Him  all  the  more."  Shall  it  not  be  so  with  this  Rose  of  Sharon,  this  Lily  of  the 
Valley  I  At^k  your  question  1  Push  your  inquiry  I  Who  is  afraid  of  it  f  Not 
Christ.    Not  we.     {J.  Brierley,  B.A.) 

Ver.  5.  And  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them.  —  The  right  of  the 

poor : — I.  Let  us  state  the  sentimknt  of  the  text.  We  understand  it  to  intend 
the  poor  in  condition,  and  not  the  poor  in  spirit.  1.  The  gospel  is  not  preached  to 
the  poor  in  order  to  mix  itself  with  the  questions  of  civil  distinctions.  2.  It  is  not 
that  the  gospel  regards  social  distinctions  as  chiefly  importantl  3.  It  is  not  that 
the  gospel  takes  the  same  view  of  these  respective  classifications  which  we  are 
accustomed  to  entertain,  4.  It  is  not  that  the  gospel  is  merely  adapted  to  the  humble 
spheres  and  employments  of  life.  5.  It  is  not  that  the  gospel  is  unworthy  the 
attention  of  the  most  educated  minds.  6.  This  announcement  is  not  only  decla- 
rative but  predictive.  II.  Why  is  the  gospel  especially  preached  to  the  poor  f 
1.  To  demonstrate  the  Divine  independence.  2.  To  pxplain  the  apparent  inequalities 
of  Providence.  If  the  poor  are  denied  worldly  wealth;  they  can  have  durable  riches. 
3.  To  establish  the  necessity  of  a  Divine  revelation.  The  poor  show  the  perplexity  of 
other  systems ;  Christianity  commenced  where  they  failed.  4.  To  exhibit  the  trua 
importance  of  man.  5.  To  relieve  the  hf  aviest  severity  of  present  trouble.  The 
gospel  is  "  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God."  6.  To  unfold  the  true  genius  of  the 
Christian  faith.     7.  To  intimate  the  spirituality  of  Cbristian  blessings  and  rewards. 

8.  To  place  before  us  tbe  value  of  predispositions  in  the  reception  of  Christianity. 

9.  To  bind  the  institutions  of  the  gospel  with  the  perpetuity  of  an  inevitable  human 
condition — "  The  poor  ye  have  alwtxys  with  you."    III.  The  demonstration  op  thb 

truth   of   CHRISTIANITY,    ARISING   OUT   OF  THIS    FACT,    REMAINS    TO    BK     ESTABLISHED. 

1.  It  was  the  accomplishment  of  prophecy.  2.  It  distinguished  it  from  all  other 
systems  of  jjhilosophy  and  rehgion.  3.  It  took  a  survey  of  human  nature  profound 
as  it  was  new.  4.  It  reflects  most  amiably  on  the  character  of  the  Christian  Founder. 
5.  Its  Divine  efQcacy  is  proved  to  be  complete.  6.  The  truth  of  Christianity  bonows 
new  evidence  from  its  operations  on  the  poor,  when  we  remember  the  nature  of  the 
principles  which  it  has  inculcated.  7.  In  this  progress  of  the  gospel  we  mnst  seek 
an  adequate  cause.  (R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  goxpel  of  the  poor  : — We  shall 
more  clearly  see  how  it  is  that  Christ's  gospel  is  for  the  poor,  if  we  contrast  it  with 
some  of  the  many  human  schemes  which  we  are  assured  are  an  excellent  substitute 
3or  the  gospel  of  Cbrist.  1.  There  is  that  parody  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  which  I 
will  call  the  gospel  of  philanthropy.  This  gospel  says  educate  the  poor,  refine 
their  tastes,  open  your  museums  on  the  Sunday.  These  things  have  softening  and 
humanising  influence,  so  long  as  they  are  not  made  substitutes  for  religion.  But 
there  is  a  refined  sensuousness  as  well  as  a  brutal.    These  things  will  not  save  man. 

2.  There  is  the  gospel  of  science.  This  gospel  says  to  the  poor  man,  "  Your  con- 
dition is  the  result  of  inevitable  la  s.  It  is  the  rule  of  nature  that  in  the  struggle 
for  existence  the  weakest  shall  go  the  wall.  If  therefore  you  are  weak  you  must 
submit  to  the  common  lot."  Thi  gospel  gives  no  comfort.  3.  There  is  the  gospel 
of  socialism.  This  says  "All  men  have  equal  rights.  The  rich  are  your  oppressors  ; 
your  poverty  is  the  result  of  cruel  laws  made  by  the  rich  for  their  benefit."    Wreck 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  101 

these  and  you  will  soon  correct  the  ineriuality.  This  is  a  gospel  of  hate.  But  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Clirist  is  the  gospel  of  power,  for  it  is  the  gospel  of  good  tidings ; 
of  Kim  who  was  poor.  And  what  makes  this  gospel  so  strong  and  attractive  is 
that  it  ia  a  gospel  of  sympathy.  It  is  also  a  gospel  of  hope,  because  it  is  the  gosoel 
of  the  resurrection.  It  is  a  gospel  of  brotherhood.  (Dean  Perowne,  D.D.) 
Poverty  and  the  gospel: — Christ's  gospel  was  one  of  mercy  to  the  poor.  His  ccn- 
duct  fortified  His  words.  His  earUest  life  was  of  poverty.  His  miracles  were  not 
philosophical  enigmas  ;  but  of  mercy  to  helpless  suffowrs.  Thus  Christ  represented 
the  best  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  genius  tf  the  Jewish  Scriptures  is  that 
of  mercy  to  the  poor ;  the  prophets  denounced  avarice.  This  view  of  the  gospel 
also  fits  in  with  the  order  of  the  unfolding  of  human  life  and  human  society.  It 
takes  sides  with  the  poor,  and  so  the  universal  tendency  of  Providence  and  ol 
history,  slowly  unfolded,  is,  nevertheless,  on  the  whole,  going  from  low  to  high, 
from  worse  to  better,  and  from  good  toward  the  perfect.  "When  we  consider,  we 
see  that  man  begins  as  a  helpless  thing,  a  baby  zero  without  a  figure  before  it ; 
and  every  step  in  life  adds  a  figure  to  it  and  gives  it  more  and  more  worth.  On  ths 
whole,  the  law  of  unfolding  throughout  the  world  is  from  lower  to  higher,  and 
though,  when  applied  to  the  population  of  the  globe,  it  is  almost  inconceivable ; 
Btill,  with  many  back-sets  and  reactions,  the  tendency  of  the  universe  is  thus  from 
lower  to  higher.  Why  ?  Let  any  man  consider  whether  there  is  not  of  necessity 
a  benevolent  intelligence  somewhere,  that  is  drawing  up  from  the  crude  toward  the 
ripe,  from  the  rough  toward  the  smooth,  from  bad  to  good,  and  from  good  through 
better  toward  best ;  and  the  tendency  upward  runs  like  a  golden  thread  through 
the  history  of  the  whole  world,  both  in  the  unfolding  of  human  life  and  in  the 
enfolding  of  the  race  itself.  Thus  the  tend-ftcy  of  nature  is  in  accordance  with  the 
tendency  of  the  gospel  as  declared  by  Jesus  Christ — namely,  that  it  is  a  ministry  of 
mercy  to  the  needy.  The  causes  of  poverty  are  worthy  consideration.  1.  Climate 
and  soil  have  much  to  do  with  it.  Men  whose  winters  last  nine  months,  as  in 
extreme  north,  cannot  be  rich.  Some  live  on  borders  of  deseits.  2.  Bad  govern- 
ment is  a  public  source  of  poverty.  Property  is  insecure.  3.  Ignorance  or  unde- 
velopedness  of  mind  is  a  great  cause  of  poverty.  All  property  is  matter  that  haa 
been  shaped  to  uses  by  intelligent  skill.  It  is  the  husbandman  who  thinks,  fore- 
sees, and  calls  on  natural  laws  to  serve  Him  whose  farm  brings  forth  one  hundred 
fold.  4.  The  appetites  and  passions  of  men  are  the  causes  of  poverty.  The  men 
of  animalism  are  always  at  the  bottom  of  society.  All  these  causes  indicate 
that  the  poor  need  moral  and  intellectual .  culture.  To  preach  the  gospel  to 
the  poor  is  to  awaken  the  mind  of  the  poor.  It  is  a  gospel  of  prosperity.  Its 
primary  result  is  to  develop  the  man  himself ;  to  give  him  such  qualities  that  he 
will  not  need  relief.  The  gospel  changed  from  a  spirit  of  humanity  into  a  philo- 
Bcphical  system  of  doctrine,  is  perverted.  Churches  organized  upon  elective 
affinities  are  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  Art  and  intellectual  communion 
right ;  but  must  not  abandon  hiunanity.  The  church  needs  poor  men  ;  it  needs 
familiarity  with  universal  human  nature.  {U.  W.  Beeclier.)  Tendency  of  the 
gospel  to  '*  level  up  " ; — So,  make  the  common  people  grow,  and  there  is  nobody  tali 
enough  to  be  much  higher.  When  you  cross  the  continent  on  the  Union  Pacific 
Railway  and  reach  the  Bocky  Mountains,  you  do  not  kuow  it.  You  have  been 
running  up  at  a  rate  that  seemed  as  if  you  were  in  a  valley  almost.  It  simply  was 
because  the  grade  was  so  easy  on  this  side  that  when  you  got  up  to  the  top  of  the 
mountains  they  do  not  seem  any  higher  than  the  plains  below,  and  it  is  rising  bo 
graduahy  that  first  made  them  seem  so  low.  But  when  you  begin  to  go  on  the 
other  side,  and  plunge  down  the  gorges  and  canons,  the  mountains  seem  very  high 
from  those  low  points.  The  general  tendency  of  Christian  democratic  institutions 
is  to  raise  the  average  of  mankind,  and  as  the  average  goes  up  it  becomes  harder 
and  harder  for  single  men  to  stand  as  much  above  the  level  of  their  fellow-men  aa 
they  did  formerly.  (Ibid.)  Preaching  for  the  Poor: — 1.  That  the  gospel  must 
be  preached  where  the  poor  can  come  and  hear  it.  2.  It  must  be  preached  attrac- 
tively before  the  poor  will  come  to  hear  it.  3.  It  must  be  preached  simply. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  climax  ofwonden: — 1.  That  the  tendency  of  the  gospel 
ia  to  raise  society.  2.  That  the  gospel  dignifies  man  independently  of  his  oatward 
circumstances.  3  The  great  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  4.  The  freeness  of  the 
gospel.  6.  The  inherent  power  of  the  gospel.  (1)  The  gospel  is  the  only  system 
adapted  to  man.  (2)  It  is  the  most  favom-able  system  to  the  working  class.  ^3) 
That  it  is  by  the  intluenc«  of  the  gospel  alone  that  the  world  can  be  reformed.  \i\ 
That  those  only  who  beli<  7e  the  gospel  can  enjoy  its  blessings.     (H.  E.  Thomat!^ 


208  mE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [cha*.  si. 

The  gospel  preached  to  the  poor  : — The  law.  I.  Its  excellency.  Tliis  provisioQ 
of  the  gospel  for  the  poor  was  a  new  thing  ;  it  was  a  charity  unknown  b^r-fore.  Th« 
excellency  of  its  effects.  What  exaltation  of  hope  and  character  it  suhstitutes  foi 
cheerless  poverty.  It  cultivates  the  moral  wiklerness.  U.  The  obligation  it  lays 
DPON  D8.  III.  The  means  of  fulfilling  IX.  {N.  Paterson.)  Tue  gospel  preached 
to  the  poor  : — I.  The  salvation  op  God  as  brought  before  ds  in  tue  text — "the 
gospel."  II.  The  mode  OF  ITS  announcement — "preached."  1.  Cifiuiy.  2.  Fully. 
3.  Affectionately.  4.  Faithfully.  5.  As  the  Word  of  God.  III.  The  objects 
WBicn  ABE  especially  brought  before  ub  IN  THE  TEXT — "  the  poor."  The  gospel 
knows  no  partiality.  The  poor  iu  spirit  also  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them. 
{H.Alle7i,M.A.)  The  gospel  especially  addressed  to  the  poor: — 1.  Because  it  is 
peculiarly  adapted  to  their  capacities.  2.  Also  to  their  means.  It  is  not  a  costly 
purchase.  3.  It  is  suited  to  their  opportunities.  It  is  not  limited  to  time  or 
place,  hut  is  a  thing  of  the  heart,  and  can  be  profe.'^sed  consistently  with  daily  toil. 
Thfc  go;ipel  is  glad  tidings  to  the  poor.  1.  It  elevates  in  rank.  2.  It  promotes  the 
terrestrial  happiness.  3.  It  Ughtg  up  ihe  hope  of  immortahty.  {II.  Stowell,  M.A.) 
The  gospel  kindles  noble  principles  within  the  heart  of  the  poor : — Let  me  here  state 
a  simple  fact  relative  to  Sunday  School  instruction  hy  way  of  illustration.  The 
earUebt  Sunday  School  which  was  instituted,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  collect, 
was  in  a  valley  in  Gloucestei shire,  by  a  maaufacturer,  who,  though  not  a  man  of 
piety  himself,  was  moved  by  the  state  of  ignorance  of  the  little  ones  released  on  the 
day  of  rest  from  their  labours  in  the  factory,  and  from  all  restraint ;  he  built  a 
school,  and  employed  a  holy  old  man  to  bring  them  into  this  fold,  where  they  were 
fostered  in  simplicity  and  security.  Years  rolled  on,  and  that  rich  manufacturer 
was  reduced  by  vicissitudes  in  trade  to  great  distress ;  and  as  he  was  walking  in 
the  streets  in  the  midst  of  his  poverty,  he  was  accosted  by  a  man  in  the  garb  of  a 
soldier,  who  said,  "How  glad  am  I  to  see  you."  The  manufacturer  rephed,  "I 
know  you  not."  The  man  rejoined,  "Ahl  but  I  know  you,  sir;  it  was  in  your 
school  that  I  was  taught  to  read  the  Word  of  God,  which  has  been  my  comfort  in 
all  my  wanderings."  "  It  cheers  me,,"  said  the  man  of  sorrows,  *'  changed  as  you 
see  me;  I  was  then  rich,  but  am  now  poor."  "Say  you  so?"  exclaimed  the 
6t>ldier,  "  I  have  just  received  a  pension ;  you  cannot  work  for  your  bread,  but  I 
can  work  fi-r  mine,  and  that  pension  shall  be  youre."  He  pressed  upon  him  his 
little  all,  for  which  he  had  toiled  and  bled  in  his  country's  defence.  "  Never," 
said  the  afflicted  man,  when  relating  this  incident,  "  did  I  before  comprehend  the 
meaning  of  that  prumiBe,  '  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the  waters,  and  it  shall  be  found 
after  many  days.'"  Oh,  what  a  sublime  description — or  rather,  what  a  sublime 
action  I  It  is  worth  ten  thousand  sentiments.  Tbere  was  the  magnificent  charac- 
ter and  majesty  of  soul,  which  nothing  but  Christian  principle  can  give,  and  com- 
pared with  which,  all  the  deeds  of  ordinary  philanthropy  are  but  the  glow-worm'i 
light  to  the  splendour  of  the  mid-day.  That  poor  man  had  no  learning  bat  what 
he  derived  from  the  gospel ;  but  see  how  it  elevated  his  soul.  {Ibid.)  Ths 
gospel  for  the  poor: — It  is  the  high-born  chiefly  that  approach  the  perbon  of  the 
sovereign,  enjoy  the  honours  of  the  palace,  and  fill  the  chief  oiiices  of  the  state. 
Royal  favours  seldom  descend  so  low  as  humble  life.  The  grace  of  our  King,  how- 
ever, is  like  those  blessed  dews  that,  while  the  mountain  tops  remain  dry,  lie  thick 
in  the  valleys ;  and,  leaving  the  proud  and  stately  trees  to  stand  without  a  gem, 
hang  the  lowly  bush  with  diamonds,  and  sow  the  sward  broadcast  with  orient 
pearl.  This  is  the  kingdom  for  the  mean,  and  the  meek,  and  the  poor,  and  the 
humble  1     (Dr.  Guthrie.) 

Yer.  6.  And  blessed  Is   be,  wLJsoever  Bball   not  be   ofiTended   In  K9.—Tht 
prejudices  again'it  Christianity  considered: — I.  Those  prejudices  and  objections 

WHICH     THE    WORLD     HAD     AGAINST   THE    SaVIOUB  AND   HiS    RELIGION   AT   THEIB   riRSl 

APPEARiNCE  ;  also  to  inquire  into  those  which  men  at  this  day  insist  upon ;  and  to 
show  the  unreasonableness  of  them.  1.  That  Christianity  was  a  great  innovation, 
and  contrary  to  the  received  institutions  of  the  world.  2.  They  objected  against 
the  plainness  and  simplicity  of  the  doctrine.  3.  That  it  wanted  demonstration. 
4.  That  the  low  and  suffering  condition  of  our  Saviom*  was  unsuitable  to  one  that 
pretended  to  be  the  Son  of  God.     II.  To  consider  the  prejudices  and  objeotions 

WHICH   MEN   AT   THIS  DAY    INSIST   UPON    AGAINST   OUR    SaVIOUR   AND    HiS    RELIGION.      1, 

Some  that  relate  to  the  incarnation  of  our  Saviour.  2.  To  the  time  of  His  appear- 
ance. Why  did  He  not  come  sooner  ?  3.  That  we  have  not  now  suCicient  evidenc* 
of  the  truth  of  Christianity.     4.  That  the  terms  of  it  seem  veiy  hard,  and  to  laj 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW-  801 

too  great  restraints  upon  human  nature.  6.  That  it  is  apt  to  despoil  men,  ard  to 
break  the  vigour  and  courage  of  their  minds.  6.  The  divisions  and  factions  that 
are  among  Christians.  7.  The  wicked  lives  of  the  greatest  part  of  the  professors  ot 
Christianity.     III.  How  happy  a  thing  it  is   to  escape  the  common  pkejudices 

MEN   ABE   APT    TO    ENTEBTAIN   AGAINST   EELIGION — "  BleSSed   Is    he,"    &G.       This   will 

appear  if  we  consider — 1.  That  prejudice  does  many  times  sway  and  bias  men 
against  the  plainest  truths.  2.  Prejudice  will  bias  men  in  matters  of  the  greatest 
concernment,  in  things  that  concern  the  honom*  of  God  and  the  good  of  others  and 
our  own  welfare.  3.  The  consequences  of  men's  prejudices  in  these  things  prove 
many  times  fatal  and  destructive.  4.  There  are  few  in  comparison  who  have  the 
happiness  to  escape  and  overcome  the  common  prejudices  which  men  are  apt  to 
entertain  against  religion.  (J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  Taking  offence  at  the  gcsp'l : — 
What  are  the  offekces  which  abe  generally  taken  at  the  gospel  of  Christ  ? 
1.  The  poverty  and  meanness  in  which  our  Saviour  appeared  was  the  earliest  objec- 
tion to  the  gospel.  This  prejudice  arises  from  a  false  conception  of  the  power  and 
majesty  of  God,  as  if  the  success  of  His  purposes  depended  upon  the  visible  fitness 
of  the  instruments  He  made  choice  of ;  or  as  if  the  majesty  of  God  wants  the  little 
supports  of  outward  pomp  as  that  of  man  does.  But  would  the  advantages  with 
respect  to  men  have  been  greater  had  Christ  appeared  in  greater  splendour  f  The 
majesty  of  God  must  be  veiled  to  be  seen  by  the  human  eve.  But  did  not  Christ 
give  sight  to  the  blind,  and  triumph  over  death  ?  Do  princes  and  greatest  men 
perform  such  works?  Do  these  not  manifest  Divine  power  ?  2.  The  next  offence 
is  that  men  do  not  find  the  wisdom  they  seek  after  in  the  gospel.  (1)  But  this 
objection  must  rise  to  our  creation,  with  God  for  not  making  us  wiser  than  we  are. 
(2)  This  objection  does  not  affect  the  practice  of  religion.  (3)  That  the  gospel  has 
given  us  the  greatest  evidence  for  the  certainty  of  those  things  that  can  be  desired. 
3.  The  last  offence  is  that  the  gospel  contains  mysterious  truths.  (1)  This  objec- 
tion does  not  reach  the  gospel  use  of  the  word,  nor  can  affect  the  mysteries  con- 
tained in  the  gospel.  (2)  That  the  use  of  the  word,  which  is  liable  to  this  objection, 
does  not  in  any  way  belong  to  the  gospel ;  nor  are  there  any  such  mysteries  in  the 
gospel  as  may  justify  the  complaint  made  against  them.  (T.  Sherlock,  D.D.) 
Ojffended  with  Christ : — I.  There   abb   bomb   who   abe   bo  offended  in  Christ 

THAT   they  never   TRUST  HiM   AT   ALL,  OR  ACCEPT   Hlll   AS   THEIR  SaVIOUB.       1.    Some 

in  His  own  day  were  offended  with  Him  because  of  the  humbleness  of  His  appear- 
ance. They  said,  "He  is  the  son  of  a  carpenter."  2.  There  are  others  who  reject 
Him  because  of  the  fewness  of  His  followers.  3.  Some  are  offended  with  Christ 
because  of  the  grandeur  of  His  claims.  He  claims  to  be  God.  4.  Some  are 
offended  with  our  Lord  because  of  ELis  atonement.  5.  Some  are  offended  because 
of  the  graciousness  of  the  gospel.  They  prefer  works.  6.  Some  are  offended 
because  of  the  holiness  of  His  precepts.     They  like  liberty  to  sin.     II.  There  abb 

BOMB    WHO   JOIN   THE    ChUBCH   OF   JeSUS   CkRIST   WHO   AFTER     A    TIME   ARE   OFFENDED. 

1.  Because  the  novelty  wears  off.  8.  Because  they  thought  that  they  were  always 
going  to  be  happy.  3,  Because  they  have  met  an  opposition  they  did  not  expect 
from  their  enemies.  4.  Because  they  began  to  find  that  religion  entailed  more  self- 
denial  than  they  had  reckoned  upon.  6.  Because  of  the  hard  speeches  of  those 
who  ought  to  have  encouraged  them.     6.    Because  of  the  ill  conduct  of  professors. 

7.  Through  trials  of  providence.  III.  There  are  some  who  abe  not  offended 
IK  Christ,  and  they  are  declared  to  be  blessed.  1.  Apart  from  anything  else 
it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  have  grace  enough  given  you  to  hold  fast  to  Christ  under  all 
circumstances.     2.  Then  you  shall  find  a  blessedness  growing  out  of  your  fidelity, 

8.  But  what  blesseduess  awaits  you.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  I.  Who  are  tbm 
persons  that  are  offended  at  Christ  f  1.  Those  who  discredit  the  authenticity 
of  His  Word.  2.  Who  deny  the  Divinity  of  His  Person.  3.  Who  reject  the  efficacy 
of  His  atonement.  4.  Who  despise  the  influences  of  His  Spirit.  5.  Who  backsUde 
from  the  profession  of  His  name.  H.  The  things  at  which  they  are  offended. 
1.  The  meanness  of  His  birth.  2.  The  sufferings  of  His  Ufe.  3.  The  simphcity  of 
His  doctrines.  4.  The  poverty  of  His  followers.  6.  The  ignominy  of  His  death. 
III.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  are  not  offended  at  Christ.  1.  Divine 
peace  (Psa.  cxix.).  2.  Divine  comforts  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  16).  3,  Divine  care  (1  Peter 
V.  7).  4.  Divine  honours  (1  Sam.  ii.  30).  5.  Eternal  reward.  6.  To  be  offended 
at  Christ  displays  the  greatest  ignorance.  {The  Pulpit.)  The  offence  of  Christ: 
— I.  With  regard  to  those  things  which  bendeb  the  Redeemeb  an  offence  to 
THE  world.  1.  The  mysterious  constitution  of  His  nature.  2.  The  humbling 
tendency  of  the  doctrines.    3.  The  exclusive  character  of  His  religion.    IL  Taa 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cBkt.  xt, 

BLESSEDNESS   OF  THOSE    WHO   ABB    NOT   OFFENDED   IN   THE    SaVIOUB.        HoW    is    it    that 

some  embrace  the  Saviour,  and  others  are  offended  at  Him  ?     The  reception  of  Hin^ 
is  the  result  of    Divine  illumination.    III.  The  best  means   of   attaining  this 
BLESSEDNESS.     1.  Eamest   Prayer.     2.  Seek    God    in    His  Word.      3.  A    holy 
life.     {E.   Thompson,  M.A.)        Offences  against  Christianity  no  just  grounds  for 
infidelity: — 1.  The  objections  grounded  on  the  nature  of  the  religion,  and  what 
it  has  effected.     2.  On  the  controversies  about  it.     3.  On  the  conduct  of  its  pro- 
fossora.     (S.  Jenner,  B.A.)        OJfended  in  Christ: — The  fact  that  our  Lord  directed 
His  reply  to  John  himself,  for  his  personal  satisfaction.     John  knew  that  Jesus  was 
Messiah,  but  he  did  not  know  that  His  kingdom  was  to  be  a  spiritual,  not  a  temporal 
one.     Two  objections  were  taken  against  Christ  of  old.    Jews  pretended  that  Hia 
condition  of  life  was  too  low  and  mean  for  what  their  prophets  had  taught  them  to 
expect ;  and  the  Grentiles  objected  to  His  doctrine,  as  not  displaying  enough  of  what 
they  called  wisdom.     He  should  have  come  as  a  philosopher,  or  as  a  temporal  king. 
But  He  did  come,  unassisted  by  human  power,  or  dignity,  or  wisdom,  and  thus  He 
was — I.  Enabled  to  be  the  pattern  of  all  virtue.     II.  The  spread  of  His  kingdom 
in  so  short  a  time,  the  more  fully  displays  tLe  hand  of  God.     III.  His  miracles 
acquire  a  greater  degree  of  evidence,  and — IV.  What  He  taught  is  now  not  liable  to 
be  charged  with  those  suspicions,  which  royalty  and  conquest  would  justly  have 
raised.     {Zachary  Pearce.)        Offences  taken  at  Christianity: — I.  It  is  not  to  be 
expected  that  a  religion,  though  truly  Divine,  should  be  entirely  exempt  from  every- 
thing of  difiSculty,  or  liable  to  no  manner  of  objection.     II.  Not  a  few  of  the 
offences  taken  at  religion,  at  that  of  Jesus  in  particular,  may,  they  do  in  fact,  arise 
entirely  from  men  themselves,  rather  than  from  any  real  occasion  that  religion  gives 
for  them.     III.  Many  of  the  particular  occasions  of  offence  taken  at  the  Saviour 
had  been  themselves  actually  predicted.    IV.  No  objections  brought  against  Christi- 
anity should  be  considered  alone  ;  they,  and  the  evidence  it  produces  in  its  favour, 
should  be  considered  together.     The  chief  objections  are — (1)  The  needlessness  of 
any  supernatural  revelation ;  (2)  the  want  of  universality  in  Christianity ;  (3)  the 
weakness  of  the  evidence  produced  in  its  favour ;  (4)  the  difficulties  found  in  some 
of  the  pecuUar  and  sublime  doctrines  of  the  gospel ;  (6)  the  disagreements  among 
those  who  profess  the  gospel;  (6)  the  stress  which  Christianity  lays  upon  faith; 
(7)  the  difficulties  of   its  precepts ;  (8)  the  inconsistencies  of  professors.     (John 
Hodge.)        Message  of  Christ  to  one  bfginning  to  be  offended :— John,  in  prison, 
hears  of  the  great  progress  of  the  kingdom  he  has  heralded,  and  cannot  understand 
why  he  is  left  unaided,  seemingly  unpitied,  to  perish.     Not  for  want  of  power, 
Burely  ;  the  hand  that  healed  the  sick  could  open  the  prison.    If  for  want  of  will, 
can  this  be  the  real  King  ?    Why  does  the  axe  not  smite  the  overshadowing  tree  of 
wickedness ;  why  does  the  fan  not  winnow  the  evil  from  the  good  ?     So  be  sends 
his  message  of  remonstrance  and  indignation.      To  this  Christ  gives  a  twofold 
answer.    He  bids  John's  disciples  tell  their  master  of  His  works  aud  of  His  word, 
of  His  miracles  and  of  His  teaching.     I.  Mieacles,  i.e.,  not  merely  things  to  wonder 
at,  but  signs  that  the  supernatural  kingdom  of  righteousness  wrought  by  a  power,  a 
will,  a  voice  outside  of  and  acting  on  nature ;  telling  us  that  this  order  of  nature 
may  yet  be  completely  changed  for  a  higher  and  better,  in  which  it  shall  be  as 
unnatural  for  man  to  suffer,  sorrow,  and  die,  as  it  is  now  natural.    But  the  exercise 
ot  this  power  was  limited,     Onlv  some  of  the  sick  were  healed  and  dead  raised.     To 
assure  us  that  eventually  all  shall  be,  we  need,  besides  the  evidence  of  Christ's 
works,  the  declaration  of  His — II.  Word — "  to  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached."  "Why 
is  this  significant?    Because  poverty  is  only  another  word  for  human  imperfection 
and  weakness.     The  life  of  humanity  on  earth  is  a  life  of  struggle  with  nature.    In 
proportion  as  man  subdues  the  earth,  progreua,  civilization,  and  wealth  increase. 
But  all  are  not  equally  fitted  for  this  struggle;  hence,  while  the  strong  frame,  keen 
intellect,  resolute  will,  conquer  circumstances,  the  weak  suffer  and  hunger.    But  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  there  is  a  gospel  for  the  poor.     God  has  another  world,  in 
wliich  to  redress  the  inequalities  of  this,  where  the  poor  shall  hunger  and  thirst  no 
more,  and  where  God  shall  wipe  away  the  tears  from  all  eyes.     This  gospel  for  the 
poor  is  no  myth  or  mirage  begotten  of  the  fevered  thirst  of  man's  soul.  Deeprooted  in 
historic  fact  lie  the  reasons  of  this  promise.    The  city  of  God  that  is  to  come  down 
from  heaven  has  had  its  foundation-stone  laid  already  upon  earth.   The  gospel  for  the 
poor  is  the  gospel  of  the  resurrection.     He  who  preaches  it,  stands  beside  an  open 
grave.     Moreover,  the  glory  to  come  is  linked  with  present  suffering  as  its  result 
and  fruit.     The  law  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  requires  that  the  sin  which  hinders 
oar  happiness  should  be  burnt  out  by  sorrow,  and  that  we  should  bear  the  chasten' 


OHA».  XI.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  808 

ing  cross  in  this  life.  While  the  rich  man  is  told  that  if  he  would  walk  heavenward 
he  must  be  ready  to  part  with  riches  and  become  poor  at  Christ's  bidding,  the  poor 
man  is  comforted  with  the  knowledge  that  weariness,  sorrow,  toil,  suffering,  and 
disappointment,  if  taken  up  as  a  cross,  if  lifted  as  a  burden  the  Saviour  baa 
appointed,  will  bear  rich  fruit  in  heaven.  Thus,  out  of  suffering  comes  joy ;  out 
of  sorrow,  eternal  peace ;  and  so  the  trials  of  the  poor  man  in  this  world  are  made 
bis  spiritual  wealth  in  the  world  to  come.  {Bishop  W.  C.  Magee.)  Offended  by 
faithful  preaching : — Mr.  Dodd,  having  preached  against  the  profanation  of  tht 
Sabbath,  which  much  prevailed  in  his  parish,  and  especially  among  the  mora 
wealthy  inhabitants,  the  servant  of  a  nobleman,  who  was  one  of  them,  came  to  him 
Bud  said,  "  Sir,  you  have  offended  my  lord  to-day."  Mr.  Dodd  replied,  "  I  should 
not  have  offended  your  lord,  except  he  had  been  conscious  to  himself  that  he  had 
first  offended  my  Lord  ;  and  if  your  lord  will  offend  my  Lord,  let  him  be  offended." 
The  ready  way  to  blessedness : — I.  What  it  is  to  be  offended  in  Chbist.  1.  It 
supposes  some  offer  and  revelation  made  to  us,  that  grace  is  brought  home  to  as 
and  salvation  offered  to  us.  2.  It  implicth  such  an  offence  that  either  they  are 
kept  off  from  Christ,  or  else  drawn  away  from  Him.  IL  Upon  what  occasions  men 
WERE  OFFENDED  IN  Chbist.  1,  They  Were  displeased  with  His  Person.  2.  They 
were  offended  at  His  doctrine.  3.  The  great  stumbling-block  of  all  was  His 
Bufferings.  III.  Was  it  not  proper  to  that  age  only?  There  is  danger, still : — 
1.  Because,  though  the  name  of  Christ  be  had  in  honour,  yet  the  stricter  profession 
of  godliness  is  under  reproach,  2.  It  may  happen  that  the  stricter  sort  of  Christians 
are  the  poorer,and  so  may  be  despised  of  men.  3.  Though  men  be  not  distasted  against 
Christianity  as  a  whole,  yet  in  part,  at  some  of  its  ways.  4.  There  is  no  man  but 
if  he  run  up  his  refusal  of  Christ  to  its  proper  principle  he  will  find  it  to  be  some 
dislike,  either  from  the  inward  constitution  of  his  own  mind,  or  the  external  state 
of  religion  in  the  world.  What  is  hkely  to  offend  since  Christ's  exaltation  into 
heaven  ?  1.  The  many  calamities  which  attend  the  profession  of  religion.  2.  They 
may  take  offence  at  Christ's  doctrine,  at  the  purity,  self-denial,  the  simplicity,  the 
mysteriouaness  of  it.  IV.  The  kinds  of  this  sin  of  being  offended  in  Christ. 
1.  There  is  an  offence  with  contempt,  and  an  offence  with  discouragement.  2.  There 
is  an  offence  of  ignorance,  and  an  offence  of  malice  and  opposition.  3.  There  is  a 
total,  and  there  is  a  partial,  offence.  V.  How  la  it  true  that  those  that  escape 
THIS  SIN  ARE  in  THE  READY  WAY  TO  SALVATION  ?  1.  He  that  Is  uot  offended  but  evan- 
gelized, hath  the  power  and  virtue  of  the  gospel  stamped  upon  his  heart.  2.  The 
esteem  produceth  uniform  obedience.  3.  We  are  better  fortified  against  tempta- 
tions to  apostasy — errors,  scandals,  and  persecutions.  VI.  Make  use  of  this 
CAUTION.  "Take  heed  of  being  offended  in  Christ.  1.  Who  are  in  danger  of  it.  2. 
The  heinousness  of  it.  (1)  It  is  unreasonable.  (2)  Natural.  (3)  Dangerous.  8. 
What  shall  we  do  to  avoid  it  ?  (1)  Get  a  elear  understanding ;  (2)  a  mortified  heart ; 
(3)  a  fervent  love.     (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-9.  What  went  ye  out  Into  the  wIldemeBS  to  see  ? — The  attraetiveneu 

of  Jyhn  the  Baptist : — What  is  it  in  human  character  that  exerts  the  most  powerful 
influence  over  the  hearts  of  men  ?  1.  Is  it  what  is  generally  called  amiability  t  la 
it  "  a  reed  shaken  by  the  wind  ? "  a  character  that  bends  at  the  first  expression  of 
adverse  opinion  7  Is  this  the  character  that  wins  the  human  heart  f  That  which 
really  draws  us  to  itself  is  the  man  who  is  strong  enough  to  resist  with  tenderness. 
3.  Are  we,  then,  generally  attracted  by  the  attributes  of  high  station  ?  "  Clothed  in 
Bcft  raiment."  Few  people  are  insensible  to  the  attraction  of  high  station ;  it  has 
often  the  charm  of  old  associations  and  achievements.  But  does  it  draw  our 
hearts  ?  His  life  may  contradict  the  high  ideal  his  position  would  lead  us  to  expect ; 
and  these  decorations  are  outside  the  man.  3.  Is  it  mental  power  which  most 
powerfully  affect  us  f  Many  a  man  bows  down  to  intellect  who  would  not  to  wealth. 
Intellect  is  attractive,  but  its  attraction  is  not  universal ;  it  is  not  powerful ;  there 
•re  large  regions  of  heart  in  our  nature  where  it  does  not  touch.  Intellect  may 
forfeit  its  power  by  being  divorced  from  goodness — "  More  than  a  prophet. "  4, 
The  feeling  which  is  always  inspired  by  a  great  religious  soul  of  whose  consistency 
we  are  well  assured,  but  which  we  only  half  understand.  Such  a  character  lives 
before  na  evidently  in  constant  communion  with  God  while  ahiouding  from  the 
public  eye'much  which  our  cmiosity  would  fain  explore.  Without  analyzing  their 
feehngs,  the  multitude  felt  that  in  coming  near  to  the  Baptist  they  were  like  men 
who  stood  at  the  base  of  a  mountain  which  buries  its  summit  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven.    John  wtus  not  discredited  by  his  imprisonment ;  he  was  a  prophet  still ; 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  a. 

BO  our  Lord  would  have  them  understand.  (Canon  Liddon.)  ConceptioTU  of 
religion : — I.  Thebk  akb  those  whose  idea  or  eeligion  is  a  weak,  tacillatinq,  ob 
VAOUB  PRINCIPLE.  It  has  no  strong  hold  in  their  minds  or  hearts.  To  how  many 
is  religion  hardly  more  than  a  mere  curiosity,  or  a  transcient  excitement,  liks  wind 
blowing  among  reeds.  But  these  words  are  meant  to  describe  the  preconceptions 
of  the  multitude  respecting  John.  For,  after  all,  it  may  bo  said  of  the  mass  of 
men  that  their  feeUng  in  regard  to  religion  is  not  one  of  curiosity  ;  there  is  a  deep 
sense  of  something  in  the  thing  itself,  and  not  in  the  mere  manner  of  presenting 
it ;  but  it  is  not  held  to  be  a  strong  principle,  fitted  for  maturity,  or,  if  they 
do  not  conceive  it  to  be  vacillating  and  weak,  they  hold  it  fitfully,  or  else  it 
is  merely  in  a  traditional  way  tliat  men  hold  religion  ;  or  perhaps  religion  ig 
held  by  them  because  it  is  respectable.  II.  That  theke  is  a  class  to  whom  beli> 
GioN  18  MEKELT  AN  AFFArB  OF  SENTIMENT.  They  are  represented  by  those  people  wha 
expected  to  see  the  Baptist  clothed  in  soft  raiment.  There  are  those  to  whom  reli- 
gion is  a  matter  of  sesthetic  beauty.  In  another  view,  religion  is  to  some  a  matter 
of  soft  raiment,  from  the  idea  that  it  is  merely  a  matter  of  comfort  and  consola- 
tion. Others  do  not  like  a  religion  that  has  anything  to  do  with  agitation  or  reform. 
There  are  some  who  do  not  like  to  hear  hard,  sharp  epithets  from  the  preacher. 
III.  There  abb  those  who  regard  religion  in  its  bdpernatdraii  chabacteb. 
They  look  for  nothing  less  remarkable  or  worthy  than  a  prophet.  They  view  reli- 
gion solely  in  its  connection  with  miracles.  The  supernatural  is  not  the  exclusive 
element  in  religion  ;  religion  touches  our  common  daily  life.  What  is  religion  to 
you  ?  (E.  H.  Chapin.)  The  only  real  moral  power  injluendng  the  world  i* 
courage  in  acting  up  to  our  convictions : — Those  who  have  not  this  are  reeds.  They 
may  be  classified  thus : — 1.  The  irresolute ;  the  soul  which  never  can  be  got  to  take 
a  decided  line.  But  it  puts  off  this  necessary  reformation  ;  and  so,  although  it  has 
got  a  full  flowery  head  of  good  intentions,  they  all  blow  away  in  the  wind.  2.  The 
backsliding ;  sincere  in  its  weak,  watery  way,  desiring  to  do  what  is  right,  but 
never  able  to  stand  alone — always  falling  for  want  of  a  prop.  3.  The  frivolous  ; 
unable  to  form  a  serious  purpose,  or  take  a  grave  view  of  its  responsibihties.  The 
frivolous  mind  is  a  mind  outside  the  person  ;  there  is  only  emptiness  within,  and 
the  mind  is  occupied  only  with  externals.  It  is  a  more  mischievous  reed  than  the 
preceding;  the  winds  that  blow  it  about  are  fashion,  folly,  pleasure.  4.  The 
timorous ;  a  weak  little  rush,  harmless,  not  noxious.  It  will  not  undertake  a  duty, 
lest  it  should  not  have  strength  to  carry  it  on.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  A  reed 
is — 1.  A  light  man,  inconsistent,  tossed  to  and  fro ;  at  one  time,  impelled  by  the 
words  of  flatterers,  he  asserts  something ;  again,  being  driven  by  detractors,  he 
denies  it,  as  a  reed  is  blown  in  different  directions  by  different  winds.  2.  A  man 
devoid  of  truth,  virtue,  and  consistency — without  stamina.  3.  One  who  has  no 
fruit  of  good  works  to  show.  4.  He  who  is  delighted  with,  and  feeds  upon,  the 
fluctuating  pleasures  of  the  world.  For  a  reed  is  dry,  yet  it  grows  beside  the 
waters.  {Lapide.)  The  ends  of  the  Sacrament : — Based  on  the  expression,  "  What 
went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  "  Wlien  we  are  going  to  an  ordinance,  we  should  consider  our 
aim,  and  what  we  are  going  about.  In  every  action  we  should  reflect  upon  the  princi- 
ples and  ends,  the  reasons  that  move  us  to  any  duty.  The  ends  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
are — I.  To  ke  a  badge  of  profession.  Profession  is  a  great  matter  for  two  reasons. 
1.  Cases  may  happen  in  which  profession  is  like  to  cost  us  dear.  2.  We  are  botrnd 
to  a  profession,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed.  He  is  not  a  professor  whose  life  is 
not  a  hymn  to  God.  What  are  the  excellences  of  the  Christian  profession  7  Sure 
principles  of  trust,  or  commerce,  between  us  and  God,  for  mercies  of  daily  provi- 
dence, pardon,  and  life,  excellent  rewards,  and  holy  precepts  of  purity  and  charity 
Now  if  we  transgress  any  of  these,  we  dishonour  our  profession.  II.  To  be  a  seav 
OF  THE  COVENANT.  On  our  part  an  obhgation  to  obedience ;  God  bindeth  Himself 
to  be  our  God,  and  we  bind  ourselves  to  be  His  people.    III.  To  be  a  pledge  oi 

HEAVEN.  IV.  To  be  a  sign,  means,  AND  PLEDGE  OF  OCTB  COMMUNION  WITH  ChRIST. 
V.  To  BE  A  MEANS  OF  OCR  SPIRITUAL  GROWTH   AND  NOURISHMENT.      VI.   To  BE   A  MEMO- 

BIAL  or  Christ's  death.  VII.  To  be  a  pledge  of  His  coming.  If  these  be  the  ends 
of  the  sacrament,  you  see  what  need  there  is  of  preparation.  (Thomat  Manton.) 
Uow  may  toe  give  Christ  a  satisfying  account  why  we  attend  upon  the  ministry  oj 
the  Word  t — I.  Those  that  attend  upon  the  uinistby  of  the  Word  bboulo  pro- 
roBK  unto  themselves  some  end  why  they  do  it.  1.  Some  propose  no  end  at  all. 
t.  Some  propose  ends  downright  sinful.  3.  Some  propose  ends  frivolous  and 
trifling.  II.  Those  that  propose  a  uood  end  must  call  themselves  to  a  strict 
ACCOUNT  HOW  THAT  SSD  IS  OBTAINED  OB  LOST.    1.  He  iQust  give  such  an  account  as  a 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  207 

Bcholar  to  his  teacher,  of  what  he  learns.  2.  As  a  steward  to  his  master.  3.  Aa 
a  debtor  to  his  creditor  (Matt,  xviii.  23,  24).  4.  As  a  malefactor  to  a  judge  (Matt 
xii.  86,  37).  III.  The  stbict  account  wr  take  of  ourselves  must  be  frequent. 
Inferences:  1. It  is  not  the  bareheiring  of  the  best  preachers  that  will  save  you.  2. 
Eemovo  those  hindrances  which  prevent  any  soul  business.  3.  Call  yourself  to  account 
before  and  after  hearing  the  Word  of  God.  4.  Christ  asks  thee  here  in  this  world,  that 
thou  mayest  stand  at  the  last  day,  when  there  will  be  no  time  to  rectify.  5.  If  you  do  not 
give  Christ  an  answer  which  He  will  accept,  it  is  vain  to  expect  relief  from  any  other.  {S. 
Anvesley,  D.D.)  Christ  praising  the  Baptist :  The  time  to  praise  : — Due  praise  is  to 
be  given  to  the  good  parts  and  practices  of  others  ;  but  rather  behind  their  backs  than 
before  their  faces,  lest  we  be  suspected  of  flattery,  than  which  nothing  is  more  odious . 
Aristobulus,  the  historian,  wrote  a  flattering  book  of  the  brave  acts  of  Alexander  the 
Great,  and  presented  it  to  him.  He  read  it,  and  then  cast  it  into  the  river,  telhng 
the  author  that  he  deserved  to  be  treated  as  his  book  was.  {John  Trapp.)  Men 
see  what  they  go  out  to  see  : — A  geologist  and  a  botanist  take  a  walk  together.  They 
go  over  the  same  country,  but  the  geologist  sees  the  lie  of  the  strata,  the  botanist 
Bees  the  wild  flower  under  the  hedge.  So  it  is  in  the  world  of  the  moral  and  the 
Bpiiitual.  What  we  are  spiritually  all  goes  into  our  vision.  (J.  Brierley,  B.A.) 
The  reed  of  the  Jordan : — Mr.  Macgregor,  known  as  Eob  Boy,  gives  the  following 
precise  description  of  this  reed.  *'  There  is  first  a  lateral  trunk  lying  on  the  water 
and  half  submerged.  This  is  sometimes  as  thick  as  a  man's  body,  and  from  its 
lower  side  hang  innumerable  string-like  roots,  from  three  to  five  feet  long,  and  of  a 
deep  purple  colour.  On  the  upper  surface  of  the  trunks  the  stems  grow  alternately 
in  oblique  rows ;  their  thickness  at  the  junction  ia  often  four  inches,  and  their 
height  fifteen  feet,  gracefully  tapering  until  at  the  top  ia  a  little  round  knob,  with 
long,  thin,  brown,  wire-like  hairs,  eighteen  inches  long,  which  riae,  and  then, 
recurving,  hang  about  it  in  a  thyrsus-shaped  head." 

Ver.  10.— Which  shall  prepare  Thy  way  before  The*. — Preparatiom  for  Chri$Ca 
coming  : — God  does  not  seem,  as  a  rule,  to  allow  any  great  truth  or  blessing  to  burst 
upon  the  world  without  some  sort  of  preparation.  In  this  case  two  series  of  pre- 
parations :  (1)  Prophecy,  educating  religious  souls  among  the  Jews  to  look  out  for  a 
Messiah ;  and  (2)  St.  John  Baptist,  to  point  Him  out  when  He  had  come.  John's 
business  was,  first  of  all,  to  gain  the  ear  of  his  countrj-men,  and  then  to  say,  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  and  afterwards  to  announce  Jesus  as  "the  Lamb  of 
God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  Thus  John  was,  in  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  hke  those  gifted  men  in  the  world  of  thought,  or  in  the  world  of  practical  life, 
who  are  always  ahead  of  the  mass  of  people  around  them  ;  they  have  the  inspira- 
tion  not  of  supernatural  grace,  but  of  natural  genius,  which  is  itself  a  gift  of  God, 
though  of  a  different  order  of  value  and  power.  They  are  hke  lofty  mountains 
whose  summit  the  sun  has  already  ht  up,  while  he  has  not  yet  poured  his  beams 
npon  the  plain  beneath.  They  are  alone  on  their  watch-tower ;  and,  if  they  say 
what  they  think,  it  is  only  to  be  smiled  down  as  enthusiasts.  Two  requisites  for 
work  like  that  of  John  Baptist :  I.  Couraqb  to  tear  the  mask  from  evils  and 
abuses,  and  this  implies  (1)  a  firm,  definite  conviction  that  certain  things  are  abso- 
lutely true,  worth  working  for,  suffering  for,  and  (if  need  be)  dying  for ;  and  (2)  In- 
dependence, i.e.,  detachment  from  those  motives  of  subservience  which,  at  critical 
times,  stay  the  hand  and  silence  the  tongue  of  ordinary  men.  II.  Disintebestbd- 
HES8.  A  man  may  be  brave,  and  yet  he  may  be  selfish  ;  he  may  work  and  endure, 
yet  only  for  himself.  John  Baptist  had  to  resist  this  temptation.  Some  of  his 
disciples  would  have  liked  him  to  become  the  founder  of  a  new  rehgious  school. 
But  he  himself  never  yielded  to  the  temptation  to  make  selfish  capital,  in  the  way 
of  influence  or  consideration,  out  of  his  popular  power.  He  ever  regarded  it  as  his 
highest  work  and  glory  to  bury  his  own  miserable  self  beneath  the  surpassing  great- 
ness of  his  commission  from  Heaven.  (Canon  Liddon.)  John  at  forerunner  of 
Jesus.  I.  'Tis  written  in  the  prophets  that  such  a  messenger  should  go  before  and 
prepare  the  way  of  the  Messias.  II.  St.  John  was  the  person,  or  he  of  whom  this 
was  written.  III.  In  what  manner  did  he  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  f  1,  Not 
with  any  worldly  pomp  or  splendour,  2.  Not  by  calling  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  to  meet  their  Lord  in  state  and  magnificence.  3.  It  was  by  preaching  repen- 
tance, and  taming  men  from  their  sins.     {Matthew  Hole.) 

Yer.  11.  There  hath  not  arisen  a  £n:eater  than  John  the  Baptist.  —  The  least 
tm  the  kingdom  of  heaven : — Is  it  co  trary  to  any  true  theory  of  John's  prophetical 


S08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

mission  that  he  should  be  for  once  seized  with  a  spasm  of  doubt  ?  Great  men  are 
not  at  their  greatest  at  all  times.  The  heavenly  treasure  is  in  earthen  vessels. 
There  are  two  sufficient  reasons  for  his  doubt : — 1.  Things  were  turning  out  some- 
what differently  from  his  own  programme.  He  was  falling  into  the  mistake  we 
often  make  of  fancying  ourselves  architects  in  God's  world,  whereas  we  are  only 
day  labourers,  2.  John's  message  came  from  the  inside  of  a  prison.  A  man  ol 
his  temperament,  flung  back  from  great  activities  to  mope  by  himself,  was  almost 
sure  to  get  a  little  strained  in  his  views  of  things.  For  such  men  the  difficulty  ia 
not  to  do  hard  things,  but  to  be  kept  back  from  doing  them.  Note,  now,  the  way 
in  which  Christ  deals  with  this  message.  How  is  the  doubter  received  T  No  word 
of  anger  or  remonstrance.  1.  He  gives  the  messengers  clear  proof  of  His  Messiah- 
ship,  and  then,  when  their  back  is  turned,  He  speaks  to  the  multitude  of  John  in 
terms  of  commendation.  2.  Observe  what  Christ  says  concerning  John — "  What 
went  ye  out  for  to  see."  Men  go  out  to  see  what  there  is  to  see  :  what  we  bring  to 
a  thing  conditions  what  we  shall  bring  away  from  it.  *'  Notwithstanding,  he  that 
is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."  We  are  all  of  us  higher  up 
than  John.  We  are  so  by  virtue  of  belonging  to  a  dispensation  beyond  his.  The 
baptism  of  Pentecost  lifted  the  world  to  a  higher  stage,  and  we  are  on  that  higher 
stage.  It  is  a  glorious  thought  that,  under  God,  the  human  race  is  continually 
advancing.  3.  Take  two  particulars  as  regards  our  dispensation : — 1.  We  have  the 
advantage  of  John  in  the  testimony  we  bear,  from  the  facts  we  deal  with,  as  com> 
pared  with  those  of  which  he  spake.  He  sketched  the  Christ  in  outline ;  we  have 
the  picture  filled  up.  2.  The  advantage  of  the  worker  in  the  Christian  Church 
over  the  Baptist  is  seen  in  the  kind  of  effort  to  which  he  puts  his  hand.  John's 
work  was  to  bring  men  to  repentance  ;  this  its  hmit.  But  in  the  Christian  Church 
this  work  is  to  be  carried  on  through  all  the  process  of  sanctification,  till  it  Ufts 
the  soul  to  the  topmost  heights  of  hoUness.  The  element  of  the  remarkable  and 
extraordinary  is  not  always  the  measure  of  real  value.  John's  career  was  extra- 
ordinary. We  do  a  work  thousands  have  done  before.  Team  not  to  be  eccentric, 
but  deep  and  real.  (J.  Brierley,  B.A.)  The  infinite  possibility  of  manhood:— 
Each  generation  is  on  higher  ground  than  the  last.  Fathers,  respect  your  children, 
they  are  older  than  you.  Do  people  speak  of  me  as  some  forty  years  of  age,  more 
or  less?  Nonsense.  1  am  6,000  years  old.,  at  least,  I  have  in  me  the  sum  of  the 
lives  and  consciousness  of  all  who  preceded  me,  and  something  new  added  besides. 
We  are  trees  which,  through  the  root,  drink  up  the  virtue  of  the  soil  around  them^ 
soil  made  up  of  the  buried  generations  of  trees — and  bring  forth  also  something 
new  in  their  own  fruit  and  flower.  In  the  light  of  this,  what  business  have  we  to 
be  always  looking  to  the  past,  as  if  there  were  nothing  of  goodness  or  value  in  the 
world  but  what  is  hundreds  and  thousands  of  years  old  ?  You  get  people  who,  in 
rehgion,  are  nothing  if  not  antiquarian.  If  Quakers,  they  think  there  were  never 
such  days  as  those  of  George  Fox  ;  if  Methodists,  there  will  never  be  the  like  again 
of  John  Wesley  and  his  fellows ;  if  Churchmen,  they  grope  about  fcoiongst  the 
fathers,  and  hold  that  wisdom  and  worth  died  with  them.  This  is  a  wrong  mood 
of  mind.  We  want  to  take  in  all  our  predecessors  can  teach  us ;  but,  oh,  il  we 
have  faith  in  the  living  God  we  shall  have  belief  in  the  boundless  possibihties  also 
of  the  present  and  of  tlie  future.  Man  is  going  on.  He  is  pushed  up  from  behind. 
He  is  drawn  up  from  above.  Yes  1  John  is  mighty  in  his  generation.  But  those 
who  come  after  are  higher  than  he.  Onward,  upward !  Oh,  that  we  may  not 
hinder  the  progress  in  ourselves,  but  spread  every  sail,  stretch  every  stitch  of  canvas 
to  the  breeze  that  bears  us  along  to  the  celestial  country  I  {Ibid.)  Greater  tlian 
the  Baptist. — I.  The  heaninq  of  the  text.  The  first  clause  is  simple  enough; 
it  states  that  John  Baptist  was  greater  than  all  who  preceded  him.  The  second 
elause  is  the  difficulty — "least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he." 
What  is  intended  by  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  " — the  kingdom  of  glory,  or  of  grace, 
or  both?  It  is  of  course  true  that  the  least  in  heaven  is  greater  and  more  privi- 
leged than  John.  It  is  better  to  be  with  Christ  than  on  earth.  But  the  kingdom 
of  glory  is  not  meant  here.  The  term  is  almost  universally  used  with  reference  to 
the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  the  kingdom  of  God, 
Cometh  not  with  observation."  This  refers  to  earth ;  the  heavenly  kingdom  will 
eome  with  splendour.  The  gospel  dispensation  is  intended.  Who  are  the  least  1 
Not  the  apostles,  but  the  saint.  II.  The  reason.  In  what  sense  John  was  greater 
than  all  who  preceded  him.  1.  One  might  take  the  personal  character  of  John, 
and  his  superiority  will  be  seen.  His  zeal  was  great.  He  was  the  mespenger 
before  oar  Lord.    This  establishes  the  great  superiority  of  John.     No  prophel 


CUAP.  xi.j  ST.  MATTHEW.  209 

actually  prepared  the  way  of  the  Saviour,  Eeal  greatness  is  approximation  to  God. 
The  man  who  knows  God  best  is  greatest.  Who  was  ever  brought  into  such  near 
connection  with  God  as  John  ?  He  was  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom.  The  dispen- 
sation of  John  was  peculiar  ;  he  stood  between  the  law  and  the  gospel.  How  is  it 
that  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  John  ?  Observe  the  expres- 
sion "  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  John  was  not  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
It  all  turns  upon  this.  Our  Lord  draws  the  contrast.  John  was  the  greatest  of  aU 
who  went  before  him ;  but  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  greater  than 
he — not  in  heaven,  but  on  earth.  The  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  the  sense  here  in- 
tended, commenced  with  the  day  of  Pentecos^t ;  it  is  essentially  connected  both 
with  the  in-dwelling  and  out-pouring  ol  the  Holy  Ghost.  John  said,  "  He  shall 
baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  1.  The  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
participator  of  all  that  the  God  of  heaven  can  bestow.  Nothing  more  can  be  given 
him.  2.  The  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  member  of  the  bride's.  3.  The 
least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  The  least  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  has  the  spirit  of  adoption — the  spirit  of  a  son.  5.  The  leas« 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  brought  into  relationship  with  each  of  the  Persons  in 
the  Trinity,  in  a  sense  which  John  was  not.  6.  The  least  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  may  therefore  become  the  greatest.  Let  as  realize  the  greatness  of  the 
gospel  dispensation.     {Capcl  Molyneux,  B.A.) 

Ver.  12.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence. — Eamestnest  in  religion: 

— 1.  Earnestness  is  a  distinguishing  mark  of  race-elevation.  2.  Earnestness  is 
characteristic  of  great  epochs.  3.  Earnestness  is  a  criterion  of  individual  cha- 
racter, men  weight  according  to  earnestness ;  it  is  more  than  ability.  4.  Of  all 
places  for  earnestness,  rehgion  is  the  most  important  and  natural.  Reasons  for 
earnestness  in  religion : — I.  It  is  demanded  by  the  natcbe  of  beligion  itself. 
It  is  an  earnest  thing,  demands  our  best  power  (1)  as  a  scheme  of  worship ;  (2)  as  a 
series  of  works  ;  (3)  as  a  system  of  duty  ;  (4)  as  a  revelation  of  future  rewards  and 
punishments.  II.  Earnestness  in  beligion  is  demanded  by  earnestness  in  thb 
God  whom  religion  reveals.  No  epicurean  deity,  careless  of  men.  1.  God's 
earnestness  visible  in  nature.  It  is  a  whirl  of  terrible  forces.  2.  It  is  visible  in 
things  permitted  and  accomplished  in  Providence.  3.  Earnestness  visible  in  God's 
self -revelation.  God  comes  nearer  to  man  at  every  step  up  to  incarnation.  4.  The 
language  of  scripture  as  revealing  earnestness  in  God.  It  contains  tender  pleading, 
strong  remonstrance.  The  only  thing  that  can  answer  God  is  earnestness  in  us. 
III.  Earnestness  is  demanded  by  the  difeiculties  in  being  eelioious.  1.  These 
are  real — "  Many  are  called  ;  few  chosen."  The  promises  are  "  to  him  that  over- 
cometh."   2.  They  are  not  difficulties  in  religion  itself.    Abundant  grace  is  supplied, 

3.  They  are  in  us.  (1)  Our  unbelief.  (2)  Love  of  the  world.  (3)  Spiritual  indo- 
lence. 4.  These  are  complicated  by  our  surroundings.  5.  And  there  is  no  accom- 
modation of  conditions.  Religion  no  respecter  of  persons.  IV.  Earnestness  in 
religion  is  demanded  by  oue  actual  dangers  and  needs.  1.  Religion  is  a  scheme 
of  pardon  as  well  as  a  system  of  truth.  Our  exposure  is  imminent.  2.  Here  is  the 
supreme  reason  for  earnestness  in  seeking  the  kingdom  of  heaven.      It  is  your  life. 

V.  Now  CONTRAST  THE  EARNESTNESS  SO  EVIDENTLY  DEMANDED  BY  OTJB  SITUATION  AND 
THE    LIGHTNESS   WITH  WHICH  SOME  TREAT   THE  WHOLE    MATTER.       1.    Contentment  with 

Blight  grounds  for  unbehef.  2.  Then  see  the  lightness  with  which  some  turn  away 
to  busmess.   3.  Lack  of  earnestness  shown  in  deferred  prayers  and  broken  promises. 

4.  The  feeble  beginnings  speedily  abandoned.  Application  : — 1.  Remember  the 
i-eligious  earnestne^'S  to  which  Christ  exhorts  is  no  fanatical  excitement.  2.  Re- 
member how  soon  difficulties  melt  away  before  earnestness.  3.  Examine  the  reasons 
why  indifference  replaces  earnestness.  4.  Earnestness  is  demanded  by  your  con- 
duct in  anything  else  which  you  believe  will  be  to  your  advantage.  5.  Appeal  for 
immediate  decision.  These,  the  best  things  for  earnestness;  will  please  God; 
come  to  them  as  they  come  to  you.  {S.  F.  Scovel.)  The  kingdom  of  heaven  taken 
by  violence : — I.  From  the  fact  that  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  lost  the  kino- 
DOM  with  everything  IN  THEIR  FAVOUR,  whilst  the  "  violent  "  won  it  with  every- 
thing against  them,  we  gather  that  every  natural  advantage  may  be  forfeited  by 
non-improvement,  and  that  its  want  may  be  compensated  by  strenuousnesa  of 
exertion.  II.  He  who  would  be  saved  must  be  saved  by  violence,  and,  never- 
theless, he  can  be  saved  only  by  grace.  Many  charge  the  doctrine  of  justifi- 
cation by  faith  with  a  tendency  to  under  ine  exertion.  But  there  is  more  effort 
necessary  to  be  saved  by  grace  than  by  works.     Man's  strongest  inclinations  are 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xX, 

on  the  side  of  meriting  heaven  by  works ;  hence  the  need  of  violence  to  resist 
this.  And  the  violence  done  to  nature  by  the  act  of  believing,  faith,  as  work- 
ing by  love,  will  keep  men  in  perpetual  activity.  A  life  of  faith  is  a  life  of  self- 
denial.  It  is  not  easy,  though  God's  grace  will  prevent  it  being  too  difficult.  IIL 
With  this  proof  that  they  who  would  be  saved  must  use  violence  there  is  given  a 

DEMONSTRATION    THAT,    NEVERTHELESS,    THEY    CAN    BE     SAVED    ONLY    BY    GRACE.        The 

faith  which  prompts  and  enables  the  violence  is  no  human  principle,  but  is  of  celes- 
tial gift.  Faith,  and  all  its  results,  must  be  attributed  to  grace.  \H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  Christian  inust  use  force : — If  the  wrestler  must  use  force  when  the  athletic  arm 
is  raised  against  him,  then  must  we,  for  we  wi'estle  with  principalities  and  powers. 
If  the  warrior  must  use  force  when  the  army  cometh  against  him,  then  must  we  use 
force,  for  there  are  squafirons  between  us  and  everlasting  rest.  If  the  captive  must 
use  force  when  he  would  wrench  off  his  chains,  then  must  we  use  force,  for  the 
fetters  of  an  evil  nature  bind  us  to  the  earth.  If  the  traveller  must  use  force  when 
there  are  mountains  to  be  scaled,  then  must  we  use  force,  for  a  rugged  land  is  before 
us,  and  the  rocks  and  the  torrents  block  up  our  path.  Or  if  the  suppliant  use  force 
— the  force  of  earnest  entreaty,  unwearied  sohcitation,  burning  tears,  and  passionate 
cries,  when  he  would  gain  a  favour  from  a  great  one  of  the  earth ;  then  must  we 
use  force  ;  we  must  "  pray  always  and  not  faint ;  "  we  must  besiege  the  mercy-seat, 
seeing  that  all  we  need  must  come  from  God  ;  and  earnest  supplication  is  the  con- 
ditiou  on  which  God  bestows.  (Ibid.)  The  kingdom  of  heaven  taken  by  force: 
— I.  The  NAT0RE  OF  THE  FORCE  HERE  SPOKEN  OF.  1.  A  resolution  of  mind  to  re- 
ceive the  doctrine  and  precepts  of  strict  holiness  and  virtue,  though  contrary  to 
the  ordinary  bias  of  men's  appetites  and  inclinations.  2.  The  quitting  favourite 
notions  and  prejudices,  upon  sufficient  evidence,  and  with  mature,  serious,  and 
diligent  consideration.  3.  Quitting  some  present  worldly  advantages  for  the  sake 
of  the  gospel,  and  maldng  a  profession  of  the  truths  of  religion,  against  much  oppo- 
sition, and  notwithstanding  dilEoulties  and  discouragements.  II.  There  is  also  in- 
tended A  REFERENCE  TO  THE  wiLLrao  FORWARDNESS  and  Tcsolute  zcal  of  many  in 
embracing  the  principles  of  true  religion,  who,  to  outward  appearance,  were  the 
most  unlikely  of  any  to  have  a  share  in  the  blessings  and  privileges  of  the  gospel : 
such  as  men  of  mean  rank  and  low  education,  men  of  tmreputable  character,  and 
Gentiles.      {Nathanacl  Lardner.)  Taking  the  kingdom  by  violence: — I.  Thb 

KECEssiTT  FOB  THESE  STRONG  EXERTIONS  ariscs  from  the  immense  diliQcidties  in  the 
■way : — 1.  The  world,  as  comprehending  both  objects  of  attention  and  objects  of 
attachment.  2.  The  devil  and  his  angels.  3.  The  flesh  with  all  its  passions  and 
lusts.  4.  The  diffi'Mjlty  of  dissolving  long-connected  associations,  of  breaking  up 
long-established  habits,  and  of  issuing  forth  into  new  courses  of  action.  II.  Teb 
NATURE  OF  THE  VIOLENCE  INTENDED.  1.  It  must  be  accompanied  with  supreme 
desire,  and  with  corresponding  earnestness  and  diligence.  2.  It  must  be  accom- 
panied with  true  repent^^noe.  3.  It  must  be  marked  with  submission.  4.  Yoa 
must  offer  the  prayer  of  the  destitute.  Apply:  1.  To  those  who  are  opposed  to 
any  great  earnestness  or  any  uncommon  movement  in  religion.  2.  To  awakened 
einneis.  3,  Where  will  the  prayerless  sinner  appear?  (E.  GriJin,D.D.)  Religious 
earnestness : — I.  The  characteristic  earnestness  of  the  gospel  dispensatiok. 
1.  These  are  the  provisions  of  the  gospel,  complete  and  full.  2.  Its  early  history. 
8.  Its  work  and  mission.  4.  Its  finality.  II.  Its  effects  among  men  ;  theib 
treatment  of  it.  1.  Many  enter  the  kingdom  violently.  (1)  Violence  exhibited 
in  their  repentance.  (2)  In  their  efforts  to  believe  and  acquire  holiness.  (3)  In  the 
difficulties  they  are  called  to  overcome.  2.  Enemies.  (Anon.)  A  visitation  of 
strong  religious  desire: — Not  one  or  other  among  us,  but  probably  every  man  who 
hears  me,  eithsr  has  already  had,  or  will  have,  at  some  time  of  his  hfe,  a  strong 
desire  to  obey  God.  One  man  is  checked  or  is  favoured  in  this  respect  in  one  way, 
another  in  another.  We  cannot  avoid  seeing  that  some  men  have,  almost  by 
nature,  religious  feelings  which  are  not  given  in  equal  measure  to  others.  Bat  still 
it  is  with  respect  to  religion  as  it  is  with  regard  to  our  own  prosperity  in  life.  It  is 
said  there  is  no  man  who  has  not  once  or  twice  in  life  a  lucky  chance,  and  it  depends 
on  the  skill  with  which  he  uses  it  whether  he  turns  out  a  prosperous  man  or  not. 
8o  it  is  with  our  religious  character.  However  unfavourable  his  position,  however 
strongly  a  oharaeter  may  have  taken  a  cold  or  irreligious  tone,  still  there  is  scarcely 
a  man  who  is  not  now  and  then  awakened  by  some  of  what  we  call  the  accidents  of 
life,  but  w'uich  are  in  reality  calls  fiom  God,  and  who  does  not  often  see  Him  and 
His  will  distinctly — as  it  was  said  of  Balaam,  "having  his  eyes  open."  But  did 
£alaam,  when  his  eyes  were  open,  obey  ?    Did  he  to  whom,  more  than  to  God's  own 


CHAP.  xi.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  »1| 

Bervants,  it  was  given  to  know  God's  will,  follow  it  ?    No  !  He  was  contented  to  know 
about  God,  and  made  his  knowledge  of  Kim  a  substitute  for  the  obedience  he  ought 
to  have  rendered.    So  it  is  with  us  all,  if  we  forget  that  the  wish  to  press — nay,  the 
very  pressing  itself  into  God's  kiEgdom,  is  but  the  first  step  towards  winning  it.     It 
may  be  a  great  step ;  it  may  change  the  direction  of  a  man's  whole  life ;  it  may 
realize  the  proverb,  that  "  well  begun  is  half  done ;  "  while  it  may  also  be  the  mere 
turning  away  for  a  few  weeks,  or  even  days,  from  vice.     God's  kin;:;dom  can  be 
really  won  by  nothing  but  steady,  manly  perseverance  ;  it  is  a  matter  which  demands 
a  lifelong  energy  of  prayer  and  watching,  lest  at  any  time  we  let  it  slip.    {Dean  Lake.) 
The  mcsl  religious,  the  most  energetic  : — Whosoever  shall  do  most  violence  to  Christ 
shall  be  accounted  most  religious  by  Him.     We  desire  to  take  His  kingdom,  His 
riches,  and  His  life.     And  He  is  so  rich  and  so  liberal  that  He  does  not  resist.    He 
does  not  deny,  and  after  He  has  given  all.  He  still  possesses  all.     We  attack  Him, 
not  with  swords,  nor  staves,  nor  stones ;  but  with  meelmess,  good  works,  chastity. 
These  are  the  weapons  of  our  faith,  by  which  we  strive  in  the  contest.     But,  in 
order  that  we  may  be  able  to  make  use  of  these  arms  in  doing  violence,  let  us  first 
use  a  certain  violence  to  our  own  bodies,  let  us  carry  by  storm  the  vices  of  our 
members,  that  we  may  obtain  the  rewards  of  valour.    For,  to  seize  the  Saviour's 
kingdom,  we  must  first  reign  in  ourselves.     {St.  Ambrose.)         A  struggle  to  reach 
heaven  ; — In  the  life  of  Perpetua  and  her  fellow-martyrs,  we  read  that  in  a  dream 
she  beheld  a  golden  ladder  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven,  which  was  hedged  in  and 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  knives  and  sharp  swords.     By  this  ladder  they  had  to 
climb  up  to  heaven.    At  its  foot  lay  a  horrible  dragon,  who  sought  to  hinder  the 
climbers.     She  saw,  moreover,  one  of  her  companions,  Satyrus  by  name,  bravely 
mounting  the  ladder,  and  invitiug  his  corapanious  to  follow  him.    When  she  had 
related  her  vision,  they  all  understood  that  they  were  to  suffer  martyrdom.    And  so 
it  happened.     Thus  let  each  believer  consider  that  with  his  utmost  energy  he  must 
struggle  up  to  heaven,  by  means  of  a  ladder  hedged  about  with  knives.    Heaven 
taken  by  storm : — The  claim  for  admission  into  the  covenant  had  hitherto,  from 
Abraham  to  John  the  Baptist,  been  a  national  one  ;  it  now  became  a  solely  moral 
one.     1.  We  lay  down  as  our  first  principle  that  indomitable  earnestness  is  the  soul 
of  our  religion  and  the  key  to  all  progress.      2.  Let  no  man  suppose  that  this  will 
clash  with  the  doctrines  of  Divine  grace.     3.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  there  are  two 
ways  of  taking  the  khigdom,  a  weak  way  and  a  violent  way.    Faith  may  be  merely 
of  an  educational  kind,  or  strong  and  personal ;  tlie  inner  life  of  man  may  go  on 
easily  from  day  to  day,  or  it  may  contend  with  evil  infiuenees ;  prayer  may  consist 
in  empty  cries.     4.  The  promise  of  success  is  to  the  violent.     (1)  Not  because  God 
is  unwilling,  but  because  it  is  His  way  to  exercise  grace  that  He  may  increase  it. 
(J.  Vauphiin,  M.A.)        Fighting  a  way  into  the  kingdom : — The  Interpreter  took  the 
pilgrim  again  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  into  a  pleasant  place,  where  was  built  a  stately 
palace,  beautiful  to  behold  ;  at  the  sight  of  which  Christian  was  greatly  delighted. 
He  saw  also  upon  the  top  thereof  certain  persons  walking,  who  were  clothed  all  in 
gold.     Then  said  Christian,  " May  we  go  in  thither?"     Tlaen  the  Inter^jreter  took 
him,  and  led  him  up  toward  the  door  of  the  palace  ;  and  behold,  at  the  door  stood 
a  great  company  of  men,  as  desirous  to  go  in,  but  durst  not.     There  also  sat  a  man  at 
a  Uttle  distance  from  the  door,  at  a  table-side,  with  a  book  and  his  ink-born  before 
him,  to  take  the  name  of  him  that  should  enter  therein ;  he  saw  also  that  in  the 
doorway  stood  many  men  in  armour  to  keep  it,  being  resolved  to  do  to  the  men 
that  would  enter  what  hurt  and  mischief  they  could.     Now  was  Christian  somewhat 
in  amaze.     At  last,  when  every  man  started  back  for  fear  of  the  armed  men,  Chris- 
tian saw  a  man  of  a  very  stout  countenance,  come  up  to  the  man  that  sat  there  to 
write,  saying,  "  Set  down  my  name,  sir  ;  "  the  which  when  he  had  done,  he  saw  the 
man  draw  his  sword,  and  put  a  helmet  upon  his  head,  and  rash  toward  the  door 
apon  the  armed  men,  who  laid  upon  him  with  deadly  force ;  but  the  man,  not  at 
aU  discouraged,  fell  to  cutting  and  hacking  most  fiercely.    So  that,  after  he  had 
received  and  given  many  wounds  to  those  that  attempted  to  keep  him  o«ut,  he  cut 
his  way  through  them  all,  and  pressed  forward  into  the  palace  ;  at  which  there  was 
a  pleasant  voice  heard  from  those  that  were  within,  even  of  thost  that  walked  upon 
the  top  of  the  palace,  saying, 

"  Come  in,  Oome  in, 
EtenuJ  glory  thou  shalt  win.' 

Bo  he  went  In,  and  waa  clothed  with  such  garments  as  they.    {John  Bumjan.) 
Frictical  religion  requires  energy  : — When  we  look  at  towns  on  a  map  we  think 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

the  way  to  tliem  easy,  as  if  our  foot  were  as  nimble  as  our  thoughts  ;  but  we  ar« 
Boon  discouraged  and  tired,  when 'we  meet  with  dangerous  and  craggy  passages,  and 
come  to  learn  the  difference  between  glancing  at  the  way  and  serious  endea- 
vours to  traverse  it.  So  in  matters  of  religion,  he  that  endeavours  to 
bring  Christ  and  his  soul  together,  before  he  hath  done,  will  be  forced  to  sit  down 
and  cry,  Lard,  help  me  1  (T.  Manton.)  Earnest  prayer: — Prayer  pulls  the 
rope  below  and  the  great  bell  rings  above  in  the  ears  of  God.  Some  scarcely  stii 
the  bell,  for  they  pray  so  languidly ;  others  give  but  an  occasional  pluck  at  the 
rope ;  but  he  who  wins  with  heaven  is  the  man  who  grasps  the  rope  boldly  and 
pulls  continuously,  with  all  his  might.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Need  inspires  energy  : — 
After  Sir  Colin  Campbell's  silent  retreat  from  Lucknow  in  the  last  Indian  war. 
Captain  Waterman  was  left  behiniL  He  had  gone  to  his  bed  in  a  retired  comer  of 
the  brigade  mess-house,  and  having  overslept  himself  was  forgotten.  At  two  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  to  his  great  horror,  he  found  all  was  deserted  and  silent,  and  that 
he  was  alone  in  an  open  entrenchment  with  15,000  furious  barbarians  just  outside. 
Frightened,  he  took  to  his  heels  and  ran  himself  nearly  out  of  breath,  till  he  over- 
took the  retiring  rear-guard,  mad  with  excitement,  and  breathless  with  fatigue. 
But  was  not  his  earnestness  reasonable,  seeing  that  he  realized  his  danger  f  And 
if  unconverted  sinners  reahzed  their  danger,  would  they  not  be  desperately  in 
earnest?    [A.  Tucker.) 

Ver.  15.  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  Mm  hear. — Hearing  the  word  • — I.  Take 

heed  that  ye  hear.  1.  This  imphes  willingness  to  hear ;  it  pre-eupposes  a  mind 
exempt  from  prejudice.  2.  It  implies  devout  earnestness  to  hear.  II.  Take  heed 
HOW  ye  hear.  1.  This  means  that  we  should  seek  to  understand  the  gospel.  2. 
That  we  should  endeavour  to  experience  the  gospel.  3.  That  we  should  reduce 
what  we  learn  to  practice.  III.  Take  head  what  ye  hear.  1.  You  should  desire  to 
hear  the  Word  of  God.  2.  The  pure  Word  of  God.  3.  The  plain  Word  of  God.  4. 
The  sure  Word  of  God.  5.  The  living  Word  of  God.  (J.  C.Jones.)  Capacity 
involves  responsibility : — What  a  man  can  do,  that  he  ought  to  do.  If  he  can  hear, 
let  him  hear ;  yes,  and  if  he  can  see,  let  him  see  ;  if  he  can  serve,  let  him  serve  ;  if 
he  can  pray,  let  him  pray.  Men  can  hear  much  that  they  do  not  hear.  An  average 
ear,  we  are  told,  is  able  to  recognize  about  a  thousand  musical  tones.  Speaking 
roughly,  the  human  ear  is  so  constructed  that  all  tones,  from  that  which  is  caused 
by  fifty  vibrations  in  a  second  to  that  which  is  caused  by  five  thousand  vibrationg 
in  a  second,  can  be  distinctly  received  and  discriminated.  How  much  we  lose,  for 
example,  in  walking  through  a  wood,  if  we  are  ignorant  of  the  notes  of  the  varioug 
birds  we  hear  around  us  ;  how  much  the  fcceue  gains  in  interest  and  charm  when  we 
have  learned  to  recognize  them,  and  can  call  up  a  picture  of  the  birds  in  their  several 
haunts.  Nay,  how  many  more  distinct  tones  we  hear  in  the  sweet  general  babble 
of  the  woods,  if  we  are  able  to  recognize  the  several  notes  of  which  it  is  composed 
(Carpus,  in  ''Expositor.")  Our  Lord's  keenness  of  hearing: — Remember  what 
lovely  and  pathetic  parables  our  Lord  was  for  ever  hearing,  as  well  as  speaking, 
when  He  dwelt  among  us.  For  Him  the  whole  realm  of  Nature  was  instinct  with 
spiritual  significance,  and  all  the  relations,  occupations,  and  events  of  human  Ufe. 
For  Him  they  had  voices,  and  voices  that  disclosed  their  inmost  secret.  The  birda 
of  the  air  spoke  to  Him,  and  the  lilies  of  the  field,  and  the  sower  going  forth  to  sow, 
and  the  housewife  sweeping  her  floor  or  making  her  bread,  and  the  very  children  aa 
they  played  and  wrangled  in  the  market-place.  What  a  world  that  was  through 
which  H<;  moved  ;  with  what  sweet  and  delicate  voices  it  greeted  Him  ;  what  tender 
and  lovely  stories  they  were  always  telling  Him  ;  what  spiritual  messages  and  con- 
solations and  encouragements  and  hopes  they  were  for  ever  bringing  Him.  (Carput, 
in  "  Expositor")  Hearing  fulfilled  in  doing  : — When  JuUus  Mascaron  preached 
before  the  French  Court,  some  envious  persons  would  have  made  a  crime  of  the 
freedom  with  which  he  announced  the  truths  of  Christianity  to  King  Louis  XIV. 
His  Majesty  very  spiritedly  rebuked  them,  saying,  "  He  has  done  his  duty ;  it 
remains  for  us  to  do  ours."  (Percy.)  The  word  planted  in  the  heart: — There  is 
a  story  of  two  men,  who,  walking  together,  found  a  young  tree  laden  with  fruit. 
They  both  gathered,  and  satisfied  themselves  for  the  present ;  but  one  of  them  took 
all  the  remaining  fruit  and  carried  it  away  with  him  ;  the  other  took  the  tret>,  anu 
planted  it  in  his  own  ground,  where  it  prospered  and  brought  forth  fruit  every  year ; 
•o  that  though  the  former  had  more  at  present,  yet  this  had  some  when  he  had 
none.  Tbey  who  hear  the  Word,  and  have  large  memories  and  notliing  else,  may 
ciiiry  away  most  of  the  Word  at  i)rcsent ;  yet  he  that  can  perhaps  but  remtimbci 


CHAP.  XI. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  SIS 

little,  who  carries  away  the  tree,  plants  the  Word  in  his  heart,  and  obeys  it  in  his  life, 
shall  have  fruit  when  the  other  has  none. 

Ver.  16.  But  whereunto  shall  I  liken  this  generation  7    It  Is  like  unto  children 

sitting  in  the  markets. — Excuses  of  sinners : — The  Great  Teacher  on  the  watch  that 
He  might  spiritualize  what  passed  before  Him;  He  was  probably  standing  in  a 
Jewish  market-place  when  He  uttered  these  words.  The  Jews  used  the  pipe  at 
marriages  and  funerals.  This  instrument  of  music,  therefore,  like  our  church  bells, 
served  alike  for  the  jorful  and  mournful  occasion,  I.  The  application  of  thb 
PASSAGE  TO  THE  Jews.  There  was  a  marked  difference  between  the  ministry  of  the 
Baptist  and  that  of  our  Lord ;  John  presented  piety  under  the  form  of  austerity ; 
Jesus,  on  the  contrary,  mingled  freely  with  the  people.  Thus  was  brought  to  bear 
npon  the  Jews  a  great  variety  of  moral  assault.  Both  were  unheeded.  The  Baptist 
had  been  too  repulsive,  and  now  the  Eedeemer  was  too  conciliating.  If  they  had 
melancholy  music,  they  wanted  Uvely,  and  if  they  had  Uvely  they  wanted  melan- 
choly. They  were  Uke  sullen  children  resisting  all  efforts  to  interest  them.  11.  The 
APPLICATION  OF  THE  PASSAGE  TO  0UBSELVE3.  God's  dealings  with  sinners  are  still 
mixed.  In  the  preaching  of  the  Word  there  is  variety  of  assault : — Boanerges  and 
Barnabas  are  sent.  If  the  preacher  is  vehement,  then  you  say  that  frightening 
men  is  not  the  right  way  of  deaUng  with  them ;  if  he  is  pathetic,  you  say  there  ought 
not  to  be  an  attempt  to  master  the  feelings  without  carrying  the  judgment.  The 
occurreyvces  of  daily  life  are  so  many  endeavours  on  the  part  of  the  Almighty  to  win 
men  from  unrighteousness.  Both  prosperity  and  adversity;  men  resist  the  combina- 
tion. (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Caprice  and  inconsistency  : — Our  Lord  clearly  charges 
npon  those  to  whom  He  personally  preached,  that  they  were  childish  in  their  treat- 
ment of  religion.  I.  How  inconsistent  and  capkiciocb  abe  many  of  the  objections 
TO  CHBisTiANiTY.  They  assume  contradictory  forms.  Look  at  some  of  these  objeo 
tions.  1.  "  A  Divine  revelation,"  say  such  men,  "  ought  to  exhibit  a  Divine  power." 
Is  it  reasonable  to  say  that  Christianity  has  no  power  because  its  work  has  not 
been  completely  finished  in  eighteen  centuries  ?  Then  he  does  not  beUeve  in  any 
superhuman  power  which  rises  above  the  laws  of  nature.  The  very  man  who  said 
the  gospel  wanted  power  I  2.  You  find  the  same  principle  in  regard  to  the  way  in 
which  such  men  treat  the  evidence  on  which  Christianity  is  based.  Men  do  well  to 
look  to  foundations.  They  object  to  evidence  of  rehgion  in  books,  and  cry  for  some- 
thing to  affect  the  moral  nature ;  but  if  you  point  him  to  characters  changed  by 
religion  he  says  that  he  "  does  not  believe  in  a  religion  that  depends  for  proof  ou 
inward  experiences."  3.  But  nowhere  is  this  determination  not  to  be  pleased  so 
apparent  as  in  their  judgment  of  the  personal  character  and  conduct  of  Christians. 
Fidelity  to  truth  may  not  please  men,  but,  by  God's  blessing,  it  will  save  them. 

II.    ChBISTIANITY  ADIVnTS  OF  VABIETY  IN  INDIVIDOAL  CHABACTKB  AND  WOBK.      1.  Variety 

in  experience,  2.  In  doctrine,  too,  Christianity  admits  of  variety.  3.  In  Christian 
work  the  religion  of  Jesus  admits  of  great  variety  of  individual  peculiarity.  {Bishop 
Cheney.)  Varied  ministries  in  vain  : — Have  you  never  attempted  the  culture  of 
certain  plants  which  "  refuse  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  charmer,  charm  he  never  so 
wisely"  ?  Trust  to  the  showers  to  f-urnish  them  sufficient  moisture,  and  suddenly 
you  find  their  leaves  are  drooping  as  if  a  drought  had  cursed  the  soil.  Try  to  refresh 
them  with  water,  and  you  find  the  roots  softening  with  decay,  and  the  leaves  in- 
crusting  themselves  in  mildew.  Put  them  out  in  the  open  border,  where  nature 
manifests  her  kindest  care,  and  the  sun  scorches  them  Uke  the  breath  of  a  furnace. 
Bemove  them  where  a  friendly  shrub  offers  its  shade,  and  forthwith  they  spindle  up 
with  a  pale  and  ghastly  growth,  at  once  worthless  and  unhealthy.  Fit  types  of  many  of 
the  objections  with  wliich  the  faith  of  the  Saviour  has  been  met  from  the  beginning  1 
(11)14.)  Varied  workers : — And  above  all,  in  Christian  work  the  religion  of  Jesus 
admits  of  great  variety  of  individual  peculiarity.  Eising  before  the  dawn  you  saw 
the  morning  star  cUmb  slowly  up  the  purple  ladder  of  the  eastern  sky.  It  had  its 
work  to  do.  God  gave  it  that  work.  But  no  one  expects  it  to  hght  the  world  and  turn 
darkness  into  day.  That  the  rising  sun  must  do.  Even  so  widely  different  was  the 
work  of  John  the  Baptist  and  Jesus  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Both  were  to  work  the 
works  of  Him  who  sent  them — but  in  ways  utterly  unlike.  (Ibid.)  Man  naturally 
$eeks  variety  : — In  the  great  print-works  of  the  land  are  men  whose  only  duty  is  to 
make  new  patterns  to  be  impressed  upon  the  white  surface  of  the  snowy  cotton.  The 
countless  combinations  of  colours  which  the  ksdeidoscope  presents  are  reproduced 
in  an  infinite  variety  of  designs.  The  men  whose  vast  wealth  is  invested  in  looms 
and  spindlss  comprehend  human  nature,  and  they  know  that  it  demands  variety. 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU  THAT  OR.  [chap.  «, 

Just  in  proportion  as  tyranny  has  established  its  supremacy,  it  has  tried  to  redac« 
all  the  race  to  a  single  pattern.  The  idea  of  beauty  which  has  filled  the  mind  ol 
def^pots  has  always  been  that  of  the  Dutch  gardeners,  who  clipped  and  pruned  trees 
that  nature  would  have  made  lovely  in  luxiariant  growth  till  each  one  was  precisely 
like  every  other.  How  different  when  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  to  establish  His 
supremacy.  Two  men  could  hardly  have  been  more  widely  different  than  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  and  John  the  Baptist.  {Ihid.)  Critics  hard  to  please  : — If  a  Christian 
be  reserved  in  his  habits  and  a  lover  of  retirement,  they  describe  him  as  narrow 
and  ungcnial.  If  he  be  frank  and  accessible,  they  shake  their  heads  over  his  world- 
liness  and  inordinate  love  of  society.  He  is  never  quite  right  in  their  eyes.  He  is  too 
strict  or  too  yielding ;  too  gloomy  or  too  happy ;  too  cautious  or  too  bold ;  too 
shrewd  or  too  simple.  Let  not  such  judgments  of  men  disconcert  or  discourage 
any  who  with  an  honest  heart  enueavour  to  be  true  to  Christ.  (D.  Fraser,  D.D.) 
Transition  periods : — There  are  three  great  periods  in  religion.  1.  The  period  of 
law  ;  in  which  the  motives  are  hope  and  fear — hope  of  reward  and  fear  of  punish- 
ment. 2.  The  period  of  the  gospel ;  in  which  the  motive  is  simply  the  love  of  what 
is  good  without  regard  to  personal  results.  3.  The  transition  period,  which  is  that 
of  John  the  Baptist ;  when  there  is  the  light  of  the  gospel,  and  yet  the  terror  of 
the  law  behind  it ;  in  which  men,  though  they  love  God  a  little,  are  still  afraid  of 
Him.  The  impnssibility  of  pleasing  the  enlightened  conscience  and  the  carnal 

viind : — When  a  man's  conscience  is  pulling  one  way,  and  his  heart  is  pulling  him 
another  w^ay,  nothing  pleases  him.  If  you  ask  him  to  do  his  duty,  and  tell  him 
what  he  ought  to  be,  his  conscience  assents,  but  he  does  not  hke  it.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  you  make  excuses  for  him,  and  tell  him  he  is  all  right,  then  his  feelinga 
are  soothed,  but  his  conscience  remonstrates,  because  he  knows  you  are  wrong  ia 
saying  so.  Selfishness  is  thus  always  ill  at  ease,  and  has  no  inward  unity  so  long 
as  there  is  any  conscience  left.  Fault  not  in  the  gospel,  but  in  the  evil  heart ; — 
The  trouble  is  in  the  men  themselves,  and  not  in  the  institutions  that  sun'ound 
them.  They  are  like  sick  children.  Whate?er  the  nurse  may  bring,  whether  it  be 
of  food,  or  of  drink,  or  of  some  object  of  amusement,  the  child  pushes  it  pettishly 
away.  Nothing  suits  the  child.  It  is  not  because  the  picture  is  not  beautiful ;  it 
is  not  because  the  drink  is  not  cooling  and  palatable  ;  it  is  not  because  the  food  is 
not  good ;  it  is  because  the  uritable  nerve  is  such  that  nothing  seems  good,  no 
matter  how  good  it  may  be,  and  notiiing  seems  desirable,  no  matter  how  attractive 
it  may  be.  And  there  are  hundreds  of  men  in  every  community  who  refuse  to  bow 
down  the  pride  of  their  nature,  and  who  refuse  to  accept  the  service  of  Christ, 
because  of  the  heart  that  they  carry  in  them,  although  the  reasons  which  they 
allege  are  reasons  of  exterior  religion,     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Yet.  19.  The  Son  of  man  came  eating. — Christ  and  common  life: — I.  "We  have 
here  a  strong  proof  of  the  humanity  of  Christ.  *'  The  Son  of  man."  His  one- 
nes£  with  men  ;  not  exempt  from  the  necessities  of  our  nature  ;  He  was  subject  to 
the  laws  under  which  we  live.  No  manna  fell  from  heaven  for  Him.  II.  Christ  ate 
and  drank  with  mkn.  Not  only  as  others,  but  with  others.  He  was  no  recluse, 
Jesus  represents  the  new  order,  which  is  a  life  of  liberty,  because  a  life  of  love.  Be- 
ligion  must  hn  able  to  endure  the  strain  of  life.  III.  Here  Christ  sanctifiee  thb 
COMMON  DUTIES  OF  EVEBY  DAY.  Nothing  is  SO  ccmmon  as  eating  and  drinking ;  it  ia 
commonplace.  The  temptation  is  to  make  the  hours  for  meals  mere  feeding  times, 
or  to  become  an  epicure.  Christ's  example  guards  against  this.  He  taught  the 
dignity  of  our  bodies.  He  who  recognizes  the  body  as  God's  gift  will  never  dis- 
honour Its  appetites.  The  daily  meals  may  be  family  sacraments  cheered  by  Chris- 
tian  intercourse.  Christ  came  to  fit  men  for  this  world  as  well  as  for  the  next.  (IF. 
S.  Jerome.)  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children  : — I.  The  different  courses  of 
LIFE  wherein  John  and  Jesus  appeared.  1.  That  God  sendeth  forth  Ilis  servants 
with  divers  dispositions.  2.  That  men  are  qualified  according  to  the  dispent  ation 
wherein  God  useth  them,  John,  a  preacher  of  repentance,  was  austere;  Christ,  as 
A  giver  of  pardon,  mild.  3.  That  men  are  apt  to  complain.  1.  Except  against  what 
is  done  by  God,  and  whatsoever  methods  are  used  to  reduce  them  to  a  sense  of  par- 
don. The  censures  of  the  two  things  disliked  in  Christ  were  not  just.  1.  His  diet. 
All  our  food  should  be  sanctified.  2.  His  company.  II.  The  reasons  why  Hh 
chose  this  sort  or  life.  1.  Because  He  would  not  place  religion  in  outward 
austerities  and  observances.  2.  Christ  would  live  a  strict,  but  sociable  and  charitable 
life;  and  did  not  observe  the  laws  of  proud  pliarisaical  separation,  but  spent  His 
time  in  doing  good.     3.  Christ  came  to  set  us  an  example,  and  would  take  tip  that 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  21» 

course  of  life  most  imitable  by  all  sorts  of  persons.  4.  It  was  fit  His  form  of  life 
should  suit  with  the  nature  of  the  kingdom.  5.  Because  Chiist  would  not  gratify 
human  wisdom,  as  He  would  not  gratify  sense,  by  choosing  a  pompous  life,  bo  He 
would  not  gratify  wisdom  by  choosing  an  austere  life.  6.  To  show  us  the  trua 
nature  of  mortification,  which  consists  not  in  abstinence  and  retreat  from  tempta- 
tions, but  in  a  spirit  fortified  against  them.  III.  The  observances  which  we  mat 
BUILD  THEKEON.  1.  We  may  observe  the  humanity,  goodness,  and  kindness  of  that 
rehgion  which  we  profess,  both  with  respect  to  ourselves  and  others.  2.  That  ex- 
ternal holinets  which  consisteth  in  an  outside  strictness  without  love  usually  puffeth 
np  men.  3.  That  a  free  life,  guided  by  a  holy  wisdom,  is  the  most  sanctified  life, 
(T.  Manton.)  A  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners. — A  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners: — I.  Otje  Lobd  proved  Himself  in  His  own  time  to  be  the  Friend  o» 
BiNNEBa.  1.  lie  came  among  them.  2.  He  sought  their  good  by  His  ministry.  3. 
He  showed  His  patience  toward  them  by  the  contradiction  He  endured  from  them. 
II.  What  Christ  is  doing  now  for  sinners.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  I.  Christ  a 
FRIEND.  In  a  friend  we  anticipate  finding  sincere  attachment,  affectionate  concern 
to  promote  our  welfare,  freedom  in  fellowship  and  communication,  unflinching 
fidelity.  II.  The  duty  we  owe  to  Him.  Friendliness,  gratitude,  fellowship,  in- 
tegrity,  constancy.  III.  The  advantages  besultino  from  the  performance  o» 
IT.  The  friendship  of  Christ  affords  rich  consolation,  exhaustless  supphes,  requi- 
site instruction,  eternal  inheritance.  Address  the  enemies  of  Christ,  the  undecided, 
and  His  friends.  (Ed.  Treffy.)  But  wisdom  Is  justified  of  her  children. — Wit^dom 
justified  of  her  children : — I.  How  wisdom  becomes  justified  to  her  children. 
Notice  those  respects  in  which  the  scheme  of  Christianity  is  considered  foolishness 
by  the  world.  1.  A  strong  natural  dislike  of  Christianity  is  founded  on  the  mean- 
ness of  the  Saviour's  life  and  the  ignominy  of  His  death.  The  Christian's  great 
struggle  is  with  earthly  attachments,  and  he  acknowledges  with  thankfulness  the 
wisdom  of  any  arrangement  whose  direct  tendency  is  to  help  him  in  the  struggle. 
2.  They  often  allege  the  disproportion  of  the  means  to  the  end.  Keason  cannot  decide 
how  much  the  pardon  of  a  sin  must  cost.  The  converted  man  sees  the  heinousnesa 
of  sin.  He  sees  that  only  an  infinite  sacrifice  could  put  it  away.  3.  It  is  regarded 
as  unsuited  to  the  ends  which  it  proposes  to  effect,  and  no  heavier  charge  could  be 
brought  against  its  wisdom.  The  idea  of  substitution  is  said  to  encourage  men  in  sin ; 
but  where  can  we  find  higher  morality  and  truer  friendship  than  amongst  men  who 
are  tru.-ting  in  Christ  ?  IL  Wisdom  is  justified  through  her  children  to  others. 
This  wisdom  is  so  manifest  in  the  effects  of  Christianity  on  the  lives  of  its  disciples, 
that  enemies  are  inexcusable  in  charging  it  with  foohshness.  The  children  of  God 
must  vindicate  the  wisdom  of  religion.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Wisdom  justified  in 
her  children: — I.  What  is  the  wisdom  to  which  reference  is  here  made. 
Some  suppose  our  Lord  to  have  meant  Himself ;  in  Proverbs  it  is  declared  that  by 
"  Wisdom  "  God  created  the  heavens.  The  term  wisdom  is  also  applied  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  true  God.    "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  that  is  wisdom."     II.  To  show  how  it 

HAS  BEEN  IN  ALL  AGES  EXPOSED  TO  THE  INDIFFERENCE,  CONTEMPT,  OR  THE  MISAPPRE- 
HENSION OF  MANKIND.    1.  Deny  her  doctrines.    2.  Forget  her  commands.     III.  How 

IT    HAS    BEEN    NEVERTHELESS   JUSTIFIED    IN    ITS    CHILDREN.         1.    lu    the    life    Of    eVeVJ 

saint  who  has  arrived  in  heaven.  "  A  cloud  of  witnesses  "  prove  wisdom  is  justi- 
fied of  her  children.  2.  Wisdom  is  justified  in  all  the  social  relationships  of  life.  Is 
he  a  husband?  wisdom  will  have  given  him  a  new  affection.  (T.  Jackson,  M.A.) 
The  world's  estimate  of  religion  : — I.  Evangelical  rehgion  is  characterized  as  wisdom. 
As  it  rightly  applies  the  sublimest  knowledge  ;  as  it  diligently  studies  the  most  ap- 
proved rule;  as  it  zealously  prosecutes  the  most  endming  interest.  II.  Evangelical 
rehgicn  has  been  charged  with  folly.  Its  principles,  its  feelings,  its  practices, 
have  been  accounted  foolishness.  III.  Evangelical  religion  is  jtsTiriED  by  thb 
experience  of  its  possessors.  They  receive  her  doctrines,  avow  her  service,  obey 
her  precepts.  (Studies.)  Wisdom  justified  : — I.  What  is  the  wisdom  of  God  is 
IHB  WAT  of  salvation  PRESENTED  BY  THE  GOSPEL?  The  end  of  the  means.  II 
That  this  wisdom  is  despised  and  contradicted  by  the  carnal  world.      III. 

How  AND    WHY   IT   MUST   BE   JUSTIFIED   BY   THE    SINCERE   PROFESSORS   OF   THE    OOBPEZi. 

1.  It  must  be  approved  and  received  by  themselves.  2.  It  must  be  professed  and 
owned  when  it  is  in  contempt  in  the  world.  3.  This  profession  must  be  honoured 
and  recommended  to  others  by  a  holy  conversation.  Why  ?  1.  Because  of  the 
charge  that  is  put  upon  us  to  testify  for  God,  and  justify  His  ways.  2.  Wisdom 
deserveth  to  be  justified  by  us.  3.  Those  who  condemn  wisdom  by  t.aeir  tongues, 
justify  it  in  some  measure  by  their  consciences.    4.  If  we  do  not  justify  rehgion,  we 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 

justify  the  -world.  5.  Christ  will  one  day  justify  all  His  sincere  followers.  6.  Be- 
cause of  the  necessity  of  justifying  wisdom  in  the  times  we  live  in.     (T.  Manton.] 

Ver.  20-24.  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazln  I  woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  I    The  damna- 
tion under  the  gospel  more  intolerable  than  that  of  Sodom : — I.  There  shail  be  a 

DAT  OF  JUDGMENT.  11.  In  THE  DAT  OF  JUDGMENT  SOME  SINNERS  SHALL  FARE  WoRgB 
THAN  OTHERS.  III.  In  THE  DAT  OF  JUDGMENT  THERE  WILL  BE  A  DISTRIBUTION  0» 
sinners'  PUNISHMENTS  ACCORDING  TO  THE  EXACT  RULES  OF  JUSTICE.  IV.  In  THB 
DAT    OF    JUDGMENT     IT     WILL     BE     MORE     TOLERABLE     FOR     SoDOM     THAN     CaPERNAUM. 

These  two  cities  may  be  considered  under  a  threefold  distinction.  1.  Nominal.  2. 
Local.     3.  Moral.     V.   That  the  worst  of  the  heathen  who  never  had  Christ 

PREACHED  TO  THEM  SHALL  FARE  BETTER  IN  THE  DAT  OF  JUDGMENT,  THAN  THOSB 

THAT  CONTINUE  IMPENITENT  UNDER  THE  GOSPEL.  Why  ?  1.  Because  impcnitency 
under  the  gospel  hath  more  of  sin  in  it,  than  any  sin  of  the  heathen.  It  is  without 
excuse.  Cannot  plead  ignorance.  2.  Impeuitency  under  the  gospel  is  a  resisting  the 
loudest  calls  of  God  to  repentance.  The  heathen  called  to  repentance  by  natural 
conscience,  creation;  now  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Higher  motives  are  laid  before 
einiiers.  3.  There  is  the  highest  contempt  of  God  in  it  (1)  of  His  authority :  (2) 
of  His  goodness  ;  (3)  of  His  threatenings.  4,  This  impenitency  is  a  disappointing 
of  God  in  His  end.  5.  This  impeuitency  hath  much  folly  in  it,  as  well  as  sin.  6. 
Impenitency  under  the  gospel  shows  greater  wilfulness  in  sin.  7.  Impenitency 
under  the  gospel  is  attended  with  the  greatest  resistance  of  the  Spirit.  Wherein 
the  greater  intolerableness  will  consist  ?  1.  Such  will  suffer  greater  torments  from 
their  own  consciences.  2.  More  than  others  from  the  devil  and  his  angels.  3. 
Christ  Himself  will  appear  in  greater  severity  against  such.  4.  Witnesses  will  rise 
np  against  these  more  than  other  sinners.  Application.  1.  We  may  hence  learn 
what  to  judge  of  the  heathen  who  have  not  heard  of  Christ.  2.  The  greatest 
favour  and  privilege  to  a  people,  may  be  the  occasion  of  the  greatest  evil.  3.  How 
ineffectual  the  best  outward  means  are  of  themselves  to  bring  a  people  to  repen- 
tance. 4.  What  little  reason  men  have  to  boast  of  their  knowledge  of  gospel 
privileges,  when  these  may  turn  to  their  surer  condemnation.  5.  To  awaken  us  who 
have  gospel  favours  above  most  people  under  heaven.  (M.  Barker,  M.A.)  I.  Does 
God  grant  to  all  mankind  a  sufficiency  of  means  of  repentance.     II.    Is  rr 

ANT  contradiction  TO  HiS  GRANTING  A  SUFFICIENCT  TO  ALL,  THAT  IN  THE  HIGH 
EXERCISE    OF    HIS    SOVEREIGNTY   He    GRANTS    TO     SOME     SPECIAL    ASSISTANCE. He    gaVe 

time  to  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida  what  He  granted  not  to  Tyre  and  Sidon.  When  I 
read  that  Tyre  and  Sidon  would  have  repented  with  the  same  means  of  grace  that 
were  given  to  Chorazin,  I  naturally  inquire  whether  the  means  actually  afforded 
to  Tyre  were  sufficient.  Then  I  ask  if  Tyre  only  wanted  additional  means,  how 
could  it  consist  with  the  justice  of  God's  dealings  to  have  refused  those  means? 
Lay  it  down  as  an  axiom  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  do  right.  We  forget 
that  Chorazin  and  Tyre  were  under  different  dispensations,  one  under  light  of  the 
gospel,  the  other  in  darkness  of  heathenism ;  one  would  be  judged  by  the  standard 
of  revelation,  the  other  not.  And  what  is  there  incredible  in  the  supposition  that 
the  means  afforded  to  Tyre,  in  order  to  obedience,  were  as  ample  as  those  given  to 
Chorazin  for  raising  her  to  the  loftier  elevation  which  the  gospel  demanded  ?■  Meant 
must  he  judged  in  connection  with  this  end,  and  in  this  connection  could  their  diffe- 
rence or  equalitrj  he  decided.  If  one  man  be  required  to  lift  one  thousand  tons,  and 
another  only  one,  it  is  obvious  the  arm  of  either  must  receive  strength  before  it 
could  accompHsh  the  task.  But  they  do  not  need  the  same  strength.  Tyre  had  ai 
much  help  as  Chorazin  in  view  of  her  duties ;  less  is  required  of  the  heathen. 
There  are  mystiries  about  the  doctrine  of  election.  But  why  does  not  God  give  to  each 
of  us  grnce  as  His  omniscdence  sees  will  be  effectual?  But  has  not  God  given  us  enough 
to  render  our  condemnation  just  ?  We  have  sufficient  for  our  salvation.  Means 
must  be  kept  within  certain  limits.  Means  which  exceeded  them  not  in  Chorazin, 
would  not  in  the  case  of  Tvre.  The  means  consistent  with  responsibility  in  Chora- 
zin might  have  destroyed  it  in  Tyre,  (//.  Melvill,  M.A.)  The  danger  of  impeni- 
tence where  the  goi^pel  is  preached  : — I.  I  observe  from  this  discourt^e  of  our  Saviour, 

THAT   MIR.4CLE8   ARE    OF   GREAT    FORCE    AND    EFFICACT   TO    BRING    MEN    TO     REPENTENCB. 

II.  That  God  is  not  obliged  to  work  miracles  for  the  conversion  of  sinners. 

III.  That  the  extkrnal  means  of  repentance  which  God  affords  to  men,  do 
BDPPi'SK  AN  INWARD  GRACE  OF  GoD  ACCOMPANYING  THEM,  suflSciently  enabling  men 
to  repent,  until  by  obstinate  neglect  and  resistance  we  provoke  God  to  witlidiAw  it 
from  the  means,  or  else  to  withdraw  Imth  tlie  errace  and  tlie  means  from  us.     IV. 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  317 

That  an  irresistible  degree  of  grace  is  not  necessary  to  repentance,  nor  commonly 
afforded  to  those  who  do  repent.  V.  That  the  sins  and  impenitence  of  men  receive 
their  aggravation,  and  consequently  shall  have  their  punishment  proportionable  to 
the  opportunities  and  means  of  repentance  which  those  persons  enjoyed  and  neg- 
lected. VI.  That  the  case  of  those  who  abe  iiipenitent  undek  the  gospel  ii 
or  ALL  OTHEKS  THE  MOST  DANGEROUS,  and  their  damnation  shall  be  the  most  severe 
{J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  The  sentence  of  Chorazin : — We  can  conceive  some  inhabi- 
tant of  these  Jewish  towns  demanding  with  astonishment  how  the  heathen  could 
be  preferred  in  their  stead.  The  Almighty  Judge,  in  apportioning  rewards  and 
punishments  regards  not  the  actual  amount  of  profligacy  and  virtue,  but  also  the 
means  of  improvement  enjoyed.  He  could  see  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  debased  as  they 
were,  a  disposition  not  indillerent  to  those  proofs  of  Divine  revelation  which  to 
Bethsaida  and  Chorazin  were  exhibited  in  vain.  He  judges  according  to  that 
hidden  temper,  not  by  the  acts  done.  He  judges  of  a  degree  of  faith  never  actually 
called  into  existence.  I.  The  first  conclusion  to  be  drawn  relates  to  the  future  con- 
dition  of  those  millions  of  men,  wbo  depart  this  life  in  ignorance  of  a  Saviour's 
name.  II.  The  probability  of  our  being  mistaken  in  our  views  of  the  future  judg- 
ment.  III.  Warning  against  drawing  hasty  conclusions  from  anything  which  we  can 
interpret  as  a  manifest  interference  of  Divine  Providence  for  the  punishment  of  sin. 
IV.  Such  is  the  sentence  against  ourselves  if  we  know  these  things  and  do  them  not. 
(G.  Girdlestone,  M.A.)  The  woe  of  Capernaum : — While  Christ  was  unmoved  at 
the  foreseen  decay  of  Ca))ernaum,  He  wept  at  the  thought  of  the  desolation  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  a  sign  of  His  perfect  manhood  that  He  should  thus  have  most  sympathy  with 
those  who  were  His  countrymen.  I.  What  is  implied  by  the  denunciation  or 
Capernaum  as  exalted  unto  heaven.  The  Bible  finds  man  in  a  garden,  it  leavei 
him  in  a  city  ;  intimating  that  the  highest  kind  of  life  is  social.  We  are  not  to  re- 
gard the  accumulation  of  men  into  great  communities  as  an  unmixed  evil.  It  may 
be  a  source  of  temptation  ;  it  is  also  the  means  of  drawing  out  some  of  the  holiest 
charities  of  the  soul,  some  of  the  noblest  endowments  of  the  mind.  It  is  this  self- 
exaltation  which  is  the  snare  of  every  man  who  is  one  of  a  great  community. 
The  concourse  of  men  has  a  tendency  to  put  God  at  a  distance.  Hence  arises  an 
independent  spirit.  If  we  would  lead  a  life  safe  from  the  casting  down  of  shame 
and  care,  we  must  keep  before  us  the  thought  of  an  ever-present,  personal  God. 
Distraction  of  mind  makes  men  wretched.  This  is  produced  by  absence  of  religious 
obedience.  Men  are  worn  out  with  the  eternal  strife  to  reconcile  impossibilities. 
In  putting  our  life  under  God,  lies  its  own  safe  exaltation.  II.  But  it  is  not  only 
the  being  independent  of  God  which  our  Lord  charges  upon  Capernaum ;  He  speaks 
of  it  as  being  in  an  especial  degree  insensible  to  His  own  wonder-working 
powEB.  Here  Chiist  appears  to  lay  bare  another  fault  to  which  large  and  flourishing 
communities  are  peculiarly  hable,  viz.,  insensibility  to  distinct  religious  impressions. 
This  shows  itself  by  the  small  proportion  of  people  who  attend  public  service  or 
partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Not  difficult  to  see  the  reason  why  this  should  be  the 
besetting  sin  of  those  who  hve  in  large  cities.  1.  The  personal  insignificance  of  each 
individual  in  this  place  is  a  snare.  One  man  is  nothing  in  the  mighty  throng.  2. 
There  is  never  wanting  in  a  vast  population  the  support  of  others .  3.  In  living 
amongst  large  numbers,  we  become  acutely  suspicious  of  being  deceived  and  misled. 
We  learn  to  distrust  our  best  feelings.  Not  more  mighty  works  were  done  in  Caper- 
naum than  in  our  own  streets  if  we  have  hearts  to  receive  them.  All  that  savours 
of  the  supernatural  in  religion,  finds  men  apathetic.  For  a  little  while  we  catch  a 
glimpse  of  what  is,  we  know  what  it  is  to  beUeve ;  and  then  the  cold  black  flood  of 
worldliness  and  unconcern  rolls  back  and  the  solemn  union  grows  indistinct  and 
fades  away.  The  spirit  of  insensibility  possesses  us  again.  Then  awaits  that  man 
B  fall  more  disastrous  than  ever  overtook  any  earthly  city — not  the  casting  down  of 
walls,  but  the  undermining  of  every  high  resolve,  the  decay  of  every  unselfish  prin- 
ciple, the  ruin  of  every  goodly  hope.  (J.  E.  Woodford,  M.A.)  Tlie  sin  and 
dancer  of  abusing  religious  privileges: — It  is  a  sin  of  the  deepest  dye.  1.  A  great 
contempt  and  affront  are  cast  upon  God.  2.  It  shows  a  man's  determined  hardness 
of  heart.  3.  Let  us  consider  the  privileges  we  enjo.7  in  this  favoured  land. 
{E.  Cooper.)  Judgment  on  Capernaum  : — I.  Capernaum  was  exalted  to  heaven 
because  of  Christ's  preaching  and  performing  so  many  miracles  there.  1.  Here  He 
performed  most  of  His  miracles.  2.  Here  Jesus  preached.  3.  Here  Jesus  prayed. 
4.  Here  the  Holy  Spirit  descended,  for  conversion  of  souls.  So  Scotland  has  been 
exalted  to  heaven,  (1)  By  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  (2)  By  the  pouring  out  of 
the  Spirit,     II.   Capernaum   bepented   not.    1.  Some  would  not  go  to  hear.     2. 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {cua.  xx. 

Borne  went  for  awhile.  3.  Some  followed  Him  all  the  time,  but  did  not  repenb 
III.  Capernaum  was  brought  jjown  to  hell.  1.  According  to  justice.  2.  Ao> 
cording  to  truth.     3.  In  the  nature  of  things.    (McCheyne.) 

Ver.  25.   Because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent.— 

Why  God  reveals  to  babes  : — The  babe  is  the  representative  of  the  receptive  spirit— 
trusting,  open  to  impression,  free  from  prejudice.  Wisdom — like  wealth  and 
power — is  an  obstruction,  not  in  itself,  but  in  the  temper  and  frame  of  mind  it  is 
apt  to  produce.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is,  in  this  preference  of  the  child-spirit, 
no  encouragement  of  spiritual  pride,  as  if  ignorance  and  mental  indolence  were 
things  of  dignity  and  worth  in  themselves.  The  prime  requisites  in  the  child-spirit 
are  unconsciousness  and  humility.  The  grounds  for  God's  dealing  thus  are  as  fol- 
lows:— I.    To    EEVEAL  TO     BABES   HABM0NIZE8   WITH   God's   CHAKACTEB  AS   A   FaTHEB, 

AND  ILLUSTRATES  IT.  " Babe  "  is  Counterpart  to  "  Father."  Afather'sheart  ie  not 
attracted  to  the  brilliance  or  power  in  his  family,  but  to  the  want.  The  child  who 
knows  his  father  will  have  a  knowledge  of  things  beyond  the  reach  of  research. 

II.     To    BEVEAL     TO     BABES     GLORIFIES    GoD  AS   LoRD   OF    HEAVEN   AND   EABTH.       The 

higher  and  mightier  you  conceive  God  to  be,  the  more  necessary  it  is  to  know  that 
he  is  lowly,  and  to  have  abundant  proof  of  it.  But  oh  1  how  near  God  comes  ; 
how  dear  He  is  to  us  by  His  frequent  close  relationship  to  the  poor  and  lowly. 
We  are  drawn  to  the  mighty  God  who  is  drawn  to  the  babes.     III.  God  thus 

MANIFESTS     THE    SUPREMACY    OF    THE      KOEAL     ELEMENT.         The    UndeJ  Standing    hag 

but  a  narrow  horizon  ;  the  spirit  embraces  eternity  and  God.  Intellect  is  the  fibre 
of  the  plant,  the  moral  and  spiritual  are  the  sap  that  turns  everything  into  flower 
and  fruit.  Knowledge  and  ingenuity  are  as  nothing  without  righteousness.  What 
inventiveness  or  brilUancy  could  ever  supply  the  place  of  honesty,  faithfulness, 
goodwill  in  the  homes  of  men  ?  IV.  God  thus  shows  His  desire  to  reveal  as 
MUCH  AS  possible,  AND  TO  AS  MANY  A3  POSSIBLE.  Had  He  revealed  specially  to 
intellect,  to  the  wise  and  understanding,  what  a  little  circle,  what  a  select  coterie  it 
would  have  been  I  The  great  mass  of  mankind  are  burdened  with  labour,  and  can. 
not  develop  greatly  their  intellectual  nature.  But  by  revealing  to  babes,  God  gives 
hope  to  universal  humanity.  While  few  can  be  wise  and  learned,  all  may  become 
babes.  It  is  vmn  himself  that  God  wants,  not  his  accomplishmente,  his  energies,  his 
distinctions.  (</.  Leckie,  D.D.)  The  great  paradox : — Ignorant  men  have  argued 
from  these  words  that  sound  knowledge  is  incompatible  with  the  child-like  spirit. 
It  is  possible  to  forget  in  tbe  wisdom  of  this  world  Him  whom  the  world  by  wisdom 
never  knew.  Our  Lord  uttered  these  words  when  He  permitted  His  disciples  to 
hsten  to  His  communings  with  the  Father.  We  know  more  of  each  other  when  we 
pray  than  when  we  teach,  I.  The  apparent  paradox  involved  in  these  words. 
"  Thou  hast  hid,"  &c.  All  revelation  is  to  some  extent  a  concealment.  The  veil 
is  drawn  aside,  but  never  taken  away.  When  an  infinite  God  reveals  Himself  to 
man,  by  necessity  of  our  nature  He  hides  far  more  than  He  manifests.  The  special 
revelation  which  God  has  made  to  some  individuals,  is  the  very  process  by  which  he 
has  concealed  Himself  from  others  ;  for  there  are  two  conditions  of  Divine  revela- 
tion by  which  God  brings  his  truth  to  bear  upon  the  human  heart.  1.  The  external 
circumf-tance  and  event.  There  can  be  no  special  revelation  to  any  man  without  a 
willin!.>ness  on  God's  part  to  confer  upon  some  events  or  some  teacher  His  own 
authoriziition,  and  a  wiUingness  on  man's  part  to  receive  the  revelation  as  such. 
Therefore  the  revelation  made  to  some  is  necessarily  a  concealment  from  others. 
2.  The  mental  pre-requi sites,  subjective  state  or  moral  condiliou  capable  of  receiving 
a  Divine  revelation.  All  conditions  of  understanding  and  emotion  are  not  equally 
receptive ;  hence  it  is  concealed  from  those  who  have  not  right  moral  conditions. 
It  becomes  of  great  importance  to  know  what  is  the  disposition  which  most  of  all 
fits  us  for  the  reception  of  the  Divine  message  ?  The  highest  revelations  of  God  are 
made  to  the  moral  nature,  other  knowledge  is  illuniiued  by  the  higher  spiritual 
wisdom.  The  humble  heart  knows  more  than  the  massive  intellect.  It  may  be 
mortifying,  but  it  is  patent.  IL  The  Redeemer's  judgment,  and  gratitude  con- 
cebnino  it.  1.  He  attributes  this  arrangement  to  the  universal  Lord — "  0  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth."  The  apparent  paradox  is  a  Divine  arrangement,  not  an  nnfor 
tunate  accident.  There  is  not  more  conformity  between  the  eye  and  light, 
between  the  ear  and  sound,  than  between  the  child-like  soul  and  God's  revelation 
of  heavenly  things.  "  The  fear  oi  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom."  He  has 
determined  with  royal  independence,  through  what  organs,  to  wliat  condition,  H^ 
will  reveal  Himeelf.     2.  The  Savio:^  acquiesces  in  this  arrangement,  not  simply  a< 


CHAP.  SI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  219 

an  act  of  universal  sovereignty,  but  as  most  merciful  and  good ;  ae  the  Father'a 
good  pleasure.  It  was  a  fatherly  way  and  method.  3.  Christ  does  more  than  throw 
the  responsibility  on  God  ;  He  thanks  God  that  it  is  so.  He  rejoiced  because  He  felt 
the  amplitude  of  this  provision.  This  principle  of  discrimination  was  the  widest 
and  noblest  that  can  be  conceived.  Had  it  been  to  intellect  only  a  lew  could  have 
recf;ived  the  revelation  ;  moral  conditions  are  possible  to  all.  Christ  rejoiced  in  this 
mode  because  it  satisfied  the  yearnings  of  His  own  heart,  for  He  proceeds  to  say  to 
the  weary  "Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  <fec.  To  man  distracted  by  the  wisdom 
of  the  world  He  thus  appeals.  (H.  B.  Reynolds,  B.A.)  The  vroud  and  the  loicly  :— 
I.  The  inherent  peopeiety  of  this  aebanqement.  1.  There  were  great  moral 
dibqualifications  in  the  wise  and  prudent.  (1)  They  were  co yetous.  (2)  They  were 
proud.  (3)  They  were  prejudiced.  2.  There  were  great  preparatory  qualifications 
in  the  babes.  (1)  They  were  humble.  (2)  They  were  tractable,  (3)  They  were 
conscious  of  their  needs.  In  what  frame  of  mind  do  yoa  seek  gospel  blessings? 
n. — See  the  seasons  or  this  aeeangement  in  eelation  to  the  ministey  of  Cheist. 
1.  His  position  was  one  of  self-humiliation,  and  therefore  it  was  unsuitable  that  the 
rich  and  mighty  should  be  among  His  followers.  2.  His  work  was  peculiarly  a  work 
of  God,  therefore  He  avoided  the  appearance  of  using  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  or 
any  of  its  carnal  agencies.  3.  He  came  for  the  sake  of  all  classes,  and  it  was  needful, 
in  order  to  elevate  all,  that  He  should  begin  at  the  lowest.  {The  Congregational 
Pulpit.)  "  Even  so.  Father  "  : — I.  The  Saviour  would  have  us  attain  to  an  kn- 
ughtened  apprehension  of  the  chaeacteb  of  God.  II.  Christ  would  have  us 
carefully  observe  the  disceiminating  chaeactee  of  God's  grace.  HI.  The  Saviodb 
WOULD  have  His  people's  hearts  in  perfect  ageeeiient  with  the  rule  and  action 
OF  God.  IV.  Peactical  use  of  the  text.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  kingdom  of 
God  hid  from  the  wise  and  revealed  unto  babes.  I.  The  chabactees  named  in  the 
text  from  whom  certain  truths  are  hidden.  1.  "The  wise"  seem  to  be  those  who 
are  seeking  to  become  acquainted  with  Divine  tnith  by  the  exercise  of  their  natural 
faculties.  2.  The  "  prudent  "  man  is  one  who  always  shapes  his  course  in  the  path 
•whish  is  most  consistent  with  his  worldly  interests.  3.  "The  babe"  is  the  direct 
opposite  of  those  we  have  described,  and  yet  one  to  whom  the  Lord  graciously  con- 
descends to  reveal  these  things  which  He  hides  irom  them.  Thefeatme  of  the  babe 
is  (1)  helplessness,  (2)  ignorance.  But  we  need  not  limit  the  "  babe  "  to  the  age  of 
infancy.  (3)  Great  teachability.  11.  What  are  these  things  that  God  hides 
FROM  ONE  chaeacteb  AND  MAKES  KNOWN  TO  THE  OTHER?  1.  The  Workings  of  godly 
fears  in  the  soul  is  a  branch  of  Divine  truth  which  the  Lord  hides  from  the  wise  and 
prudent  and  reveals  unto  babes.  2.  God  hides  from  the  wise  and  prudent  a 
spiritual  acquaintance  with  His  law.  8.  The  operations  and  exercises  of  a  living 
faith  in  a  tender  conscience  are  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent.  4.  God  hides 
from  them  the  exercis^e  of  a  living  hope.  5.  The  breathing  forth  of  spiritual  affec- 
tions he  hides.  6.  He  hides  aU  the  savour,  and  unction,  and  sweetness,  and  power 
of  truth.  (•/.  C  Philput.)  Revelation  a  concealment : — The  belt  of  light  thrown 
over  some  divisions  of  the  great  sphere  of  knowledge  leaves  the  rest  in  apparently 
deeper  shade.  All  language  by  expressing  some  thoughts  conceals  many  others. 
Much  is  repressed  by  every  effort  that  we  maka  towards  expression.  If  we  try  to 
unbosom  our  hearts  to  each  other,  we  hide  M  much  as  we  reveal.  We  wrap  our- 
selves round  in  mystery  when  we  are  most  communicative.  All  art  is  concerned  as 
much  in  hiding  what  ought  to  be  concealed  as  in  making  known  what  is  meant  to  be 
expressed.  (iZ.  R.  Reynolds,  B.A.)  Revelation  addressed  to  the  heart  of  man: — 
It  should  not  surprise  us  when  men  of  acute  and  powerful  understandings  more  or 
less  reject  the  gospel,  for  this  reason,  that  the  Christian  revelation  addresses  itself  to 
our  hearts,  to  our  love  of  truth  and  goodness,  our  fear  of  sinnmg,  and  our  desire  to 
gain  God's  favour ;  and  quickness,  sagacity,  depth  of  thought,  strength  of  mind, 
power  of  comprehension,  perception  of  the  beautiful,  power  of  language,  and  the  like, 
though  they  are  excellent  gifts,  are  clearly  quite  of  a  different  kind  from  these  excel- 
lences— a  man  may  have  the  one  without  having  the  other.  This,  then,  is  the  plair 
reason  why  able,  or,  again,  why  learned  men  are  so  defective  Christians,  because 
there  is  no  necessary  conneciion  between  faith  and  ability ;  because  faith  is  one 
thing  and  ability  is  another  ;  because  ability  of  mind  is  a  gift,  and  faith  is  a  grace. 
"Who  would  ever  argue  that  a  man  could,  like  Samson,  conquer  lions,  or  throw  down 
the  gates  of  a  city,  because  he  was  able,  or  accomplished,  or  experienced  in  the 
business  of  life?  Who  would  ever  argue  that  a  man  could  see  because  he  could  hear, 
or  run  with  the  swift  because  he  had  "  the  tongue  of  the  learned  "  ?  These  gift* 
are  di\Serent  in  kind.     In  like  manner,  powers  of  mind  and  religious  principles  and 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

feelings  are  distinct  gifts ;  and  as  all  the  highest  spiritual  excellence,  humility, 
firmness,  patience,  would  never  enable  a  man  to  read  an  unknown  tongue,  or  to 
enter  into  the  depths  of  science,  so  all  the  most  brilliant  mental  endowments,  wit, 
or  imagination,  or  penetration,  or  depth,  will  never  of  themselves  make  us  wise  in 
religion.  And  as  we  should  fairly  and  justly  deride  the  savage  w^ho  wished  to  decide 
questions  of  science  or  literature  by  the  sword,  so  may  we  justly  look  with  amaze* 
ment  on  the  error  of  those  who  think  that  they  can  master  the  high  mysteries  of 
spiritual  truth,  and  find  their  way  to  God,  by  what  is  commonly  called  reason,  i.«., 
by  the  random  and  blind  efforts  of  mere  mental  acuteness,  and  mere  experience  of 
the  world,  (F.  W.Newman.)  Hidden  for  want  of  sight : — Unconverted  men  of  ten 
Bay,  "  If  these  things  are  so,  if  they  are  so  clear  and  great,  why  cannot  we  see 
them?"  And  there  is  no  answer  to  be  given  but  this,  "Ye  are  blind,"  "But 
we  want  to  see  them.  If  they  are  real,  they  are  our  concern  as  well  as  yours.  Oh, 
that  some  preaclier  would  come  who  had  power  to  make  us  see  them  1  "  Poor  souls, 
there  is  no  such  preacher,  and  you  need  not  wait  for  him.  Let  him  gather  God'g 
light  as  he  will,  he  can  but  ponr  it  on  blind  eyes.  A  birruing  glass  will  condense 
Buiibeama  into  a  focus  of  brightness;  and  if  a  blind  eye  be  put  there,  not  a 
whit  will  it  see,  though  it  be  consumed.  Light  is  the  remedy  for  darkness,  not 
blindness.  Neither  will  strong  powers  of  understanding  on  your  part  serve.  The 
great  Earl  of  Chatham  once  went  with  a  pious  friend  to  hear  Mr.  Cecil.  The  ser- 
mon was  on  the  Spirit's  agency  in  the  hearts  of  believers.  As  they  were  coming 
from  church,  the  mighty  statesman  confessed  that  he  could  not  understand  it 
all,  and  asked  his  friend  if  he  supposed  that  any  one  in  the  house  could.  •'  Why 
yes,"  said  he,  "  there  were  many  plain  unlettered  women,  and  some  children 
there,  who  understood  every  word  of  it,  and  heard  it  with  joy."  (Hoge.)  The 
Mysteries  of  the  goypel  hid  from  many.  I.  What  may  be  intended  by  thksh 
THINGS?  1.  In  general,  the  things  pertaining  to  salvation .  2.  More  particularly, 
those  doctrines  which  are  in  an  especial  sense  peculiar  to  the  gospel,  seem  here  to 
be  intended,  such  as  (a)  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  {b)  distinguishing  grace,  (c)  the 
new  birth,  {d)  the  nature  of  the  life  of  faith.  II.  Where,  and  in  what  sense, 
AKE  these  things  HID  ?  1.  They  are  hid  in  Christ  (Col,  ii.  3) ;  therefore  (a)  you 
can  attain  to  no  saving  truth,  but  in  and  by  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  (b) 
Whatever  seeming  knowledge  you  have,  if  it  does  not  endear  Him  to  you  it  is 
nothing  worth.  2.  They  are  hid  in  God's  Word,  (a)  They  are  contained  there. 
(6)  Yet  though  contained  there,  they  are  not  plain  to  every  eye.  They  are  not 
hid  in  the  sense  that  seekers  shall  not  find,  but  that  those  who  seek  to  cavil  shall 
meet  with  something  to  confirm  their  prejudices.  Application  :  Do  not  entertain 
hard  and  perplexing  thoughts  about  the  counsels  of  God,  either  respecting  others 
or  yourselves.  (John  Newton.)  Concealment  and  Revelation  : — I.  Divine  things 
CONCEALED.  Not  through  any  deficiency  of  revelation,  nor  by  arbitrary  will.  II. 
Divine  things  revealed.  The  revelation  of  Divine  reaUties  is  made  to  prepared 
Bouls.  Elicits  thrtnkfulness.  III.  The  unwilling  alone  soffeb  privation  and 
LOSS.  God  will  not  force  Hia  truth  and  mercy  upon  man.  {M.  Braithwaite.) 
Saintliness  better  than  learning  : — There  died  five-and-twenty  years  ago  in  France 
a  village  priest,  the  Cure  of  Ars,  a  small  hamlet  about  thirty  miles  north  of  Lyons. 
He  was  so  devoid  of  worldly  learning  that  he  was  long  unable  to  obtain  orders, 
until  some  bishop  had  the  wisdom  to  perceive  that  saintliness  was  a  better  claim 
to  orders  than  technical  learning.  In  that  village  this  priest  ministered  for  many 
jears,  preaching,  lecturing,  hearing  confessions  all  day  long.  Sceptics  came  from 
Paris;  and  the  bursts  of  his  spiritual  fire  burnt  deep  into  their  consoienoeB. 
During  the  last  year  of  his  life  no  less  than  80,000  persons  flocked  to  his  church  to 
listen  to  his  religious  advice.  Such  as  he  was,  a  standing  argument  for  Christianity,  a 
standing  evidence  of  its  being  a  living  influence,  such  may  every  one  of  us  be;  for 
it  was  not  knowledge  but  holiness  that  constituted  his  power.  The  secret  of  his 
strength  was  bis  weakness.  His  power  was  not  his  own.  His  soul  lay  at  the  foot 
of  the  Cross,  his  body  at  the  foot  of  the  altar ;  he  was  made  a  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  was  an  epistle  known  and  read  of  all  men.  (Canon  Adam  S.  B'arrar.) 
T}u  thingt  of  revelation  cannot  be  seen  unless  shoivn: — Let  me  suppose  a  person  to 
have  a  curious  cabinet,  which  is  opened  at  his  pleasure,  and  not  exposed  to  com- 
mon view.  He  invites  all  to  come  to  see  it,  and  offers  to  show  it  to  any  one  who 
asks  him.  It  is  hid,  because  he  keeps  the  key  ;  but  none  can  compLiiu,  because 
he  is  ready  to  open  it  whenever  he  is  desired.  Some,  perhaps,  disdain  the  offer,  and 
BJty,  "  Why  is  it  locked  at  all?  "  Some  think  it  not  worth  seeing,  or  amuse  them- 
selvea  with  guessing  at  the  contents.     But  those  who  are  simply  desirous  foi 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  t21 

themselves,  leave  others  disputing,  go  according  to  appointment,  and  are  gratifiod. 
These  have  reason  to  be  thankful  for  the  favour,  aud  the  others  have  no  just 
cause  to  find  fault.  Thus  the  riches  of  Divine  grace  may  be  compared  to  a  richly- 
furnished  cabinet,  to  which  Christ  is  the  door.  The  Word  of  God  is  likewise  a 
cabinet,  generally  locked  up,  but  the  key  of  prayer  will  open  it.  The  Lord  invites 
all,  but  keeps  the  dispensation  in  His  own  hand.  They  cannot  see  these  things, 
except  He  shows  them ;  but  then  He  refuses  none  that  sincerely  ask  Him.  The 
wise  men  of  the  world  can  go  no  further  than  the  outside  of  this  cabinet ;  they 
may  amuse  themselves  and  surprise  others  with  their  ingenious  guesses  at  what  is 
within ;  but  a  child  that  has  seen  it  opened  can  give  us  more  satisfaction,  without 
Btudying  or  guessing  at  all.  If  men  will  presume  to  aim  at  the  knowledge  of  God, 
without  the  i^nowledge  of  Christ,  who  is  the  Way,  and  the  Door ;  if  they  have  such 
a  high  opinion  of  their  own  wisdom  and  penetration  as  to  suppose  they  can  under- 
stand the  Scriptures  without  the  assistance  of  Hi?  Spirit ;  or  if  their  worldly  wisdom 
teaches  them  that  these  things  are  not  worth  their  inquiry,  what  wonder  is  it  that 
they  should  continue  to  be  hid  from  their  eyes  ?  They  will  one  day  be  eifipped  of 
all  their  false  pleas,  and  condemned  out  of  their  own  mouths.     (Newton.) 

Ver.  2G,  Even  so,  Father :  for  so  It  seemetli  good  In  Thy  sight — Submission  to 
ovr  Father's  will : — In  order  to  cherish  such  feelings  in  the  heart — 1.  Take  fatherly 
views  of  the  character  of  God — "  Even  so.  Father."  2.  Eemember  that  nothing 
could  have  happened  to  you,  unless  it  had  been  first  good  to  you  in  God's  eight 
that  it  should  be — "  It  seemeth  good  in  Thy  sight."  3.  The  unfoldings  of  eternity 
will  solve  the  problems  of  this  world,  and  justify  Ood  iu  His  moral  government. 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Yer.  27.  All  things  are  delivered  unto  Me  of  My  Father. — All  things  delivered 
unto  Christ: — I.  The  rutoRTANT  declaration  here  made.  1.  All  nations  of  the 
earth  are  delivered  to  Him.  2.  All  power  in  heaven  and  earth  is  given  to  Him.  3. 
All  hearts  are  His.  4.  The  gifts  and  graces  of  th>^  Spirit  are  His.  6.  Principalities 
and  powers  are  His.  II.  The  ground  on  which  this  declaration  was  made. 
His  mediatorial  character — •'  Wherefore  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,"  «fec.  III.  To 
make  a  practical  application  of  the  subject.  We  may  think  that  if  all  things 
are  given  to  Christ,  He  does  not  need  our  puny  efforts.  1.  That  the  command  of 
God  on  this  point  is  imperative  and  binding  upon  every  one  who  professes  to  know 
His  name.  2.  God  works  in  and  by  the  use  of  means.  3.  A  principle  of  gratitude 
will  constrain  the  real  Christian  to  engage,  and  that  heartily,  in  this  glorious  work. 
4.  The  Christian  will  not  only  be  influenced  by  love  to  his  Saviour,  but  also  by  a 
deep  and  tender  compassion  to  the  souls  of  his  fellow  creatures.  5.  A  dreadful 
curse  is  denounced  against  those  who  refuse  to  lend  a  helping  hand  to  the  cause  of 
God.  6.  There  is  encouragement  to  active  exertion  in  that  Christ  has  promised  a 
reward  to  every  effort  made  to  promote  His  glory.  {W.  Folland,  M.A.)  A 
striking  declaration : — I.  Of  otjr  Lord's  personal  and  mediatorial  dignitt.  Hia 
personal  dignity — the  Son  of  God.  All  the  fulness  of  the  Godliead  dwelt  in  Him. 
His  mediatorial  dignity  as  the  Son  of  Man.  All  things  are  delivered  unto  Him. 
II,  Of  the  standing  method  of  the  Divine  dispensations.  It  is  indispensable 
to  the  safety  and  happiness  of  man  that  he  should  become  acquainted  with  God. 
God,  abstractedly  considered,  is  absolutely  unintelligible  and  unapproachable  to 
guilty  man,  except  through  a  Mediator.  Learn  :  the  need  of  Divine  teaching  ;  the 
importance  of  humility ;  the  encouragement  to  the  humble  seeker.  {J.  Hirst.) 
Christ  officially  delegated: — In  times  of  distress,  every  man  is  at  liberty  to  do  his 
best  for  the  public  welfare ;  but  the  officer  commissioned  by  his  sovereign  is  armed 
\\itha  supreme  right  to  give  counsel  or  to  exercise  command.  Away  there  in  Bengal, 
if  there  are  any  dying  of  famine,  and  I  have  rice,  I  may  distribute  it  of  my  own  will 
at  my  own  charge.  But  the  commissioner  of  the  district  has  a  special  warranty 
which  I  do  not  possess ;  he  has  a  function  to  discharge ;  it  is  his  business,  his 
vocation ;  he  is  authorized  by  the  government,  and  responsible  to  tbe  government 
to  do  it.  So  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  not  only  a  deep  compassion  of  heart  for  the 
necessities  of  men,  but  he  has  God's  authority  to  support  Him.  The  Father 
delivered  all  things  into  His  hands,  and  appointed  Him  to  be  a  Saviour.  (<7.  B . 
Spurgeon.)  I.  The  inconceivable  dignity  of  His  Person — "  No  man  knoweth  the 
Son  but  the  Father."  1.  Nor  the  wisest  man  in  a  state  of  nature.  2.  Neither  do 
His  own  people  know  Him  in  the  sense  of  the  text.  How  little  is  plain  because 
their  love  is  so  faint.     3.  The  glorified  «aints  and  holy  angels,  who  behold  as  much 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chak    xi. 

of  His  glory  as  creature  can  bear,  do  not  know  Him  as  He  is.  A  vesspl  cast  Into 
the  sea  can  but  receive  according  to  its  capacity.  4.  This  proves  Hi?;  Dvinity.  II. 
His  authority.    III.  His  orrioa — "  The  Sou  will  reveal  Him."    {BUhof  Newton.) 

Yet.  28.  Come  tmto  Me  all  ye  tMt  labour  and  are  heavy  laden. — The  burdmed 
directed  to  Christ: — I.  The  persons  whom  our  Lord  uere  addresses.  1.  Aa 
burdened  with  convictions  of  sin  and  the  keen  remorse  of  a  wounded  conscience. 
2.  Th:it  sinners  und>  r  these  circumstances  labour  to  be  released  from  their  burden. 
(1)  They  resolve  in  their  own  strength  to  forsake  their  sins.  (2)  There  are  others 
who  are  ignorant  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  go  about  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness.  (3)  In  looldng  to  thn  mercy  of  God  irrespective  of  Christ's  pro- 
pitiatory sacrifice.  II.  Our  Lord's  tender  solicitude  for  the  happiness  of  such. 
1.  The  invitation  is  condescending.  2.  It  is  extensive  and  unconditioual.  III.  Thh 
promise  annexed.  1.  Kest  in  your  conscience  from  the  dread  of  Divine  wrath.  2. 
Best  in  the  will  from  its  former  corrupt  propensities.  3.  Heavenly  rest  for  the 
people  of  God.     {R.  May.)  Best  in  Christ  for  the  heavy-laden: — I.  What  ix  is. 

"Kest,"  not  rest  in  sin,  not  rest  from  trouble.     It  is  rest  from  sin — its  guilt, 
misery,  power.     It  is  rest  in  trouble.     II.  Of  whom  la  this  blessing  to  be  ob- 
tained.    The  conscious  greatness  these  few  simple  words  indicate.     Have  you  ever 
tried  lo  comfort  a  troubled  heart  ?    Bev  ond  your  power.    It  is  the  prerogative  of  Him 
who  made  the  soul  to  give  it  rest.     There  is  more  power  in  Him  to  comfort  than  in 
the  world  to  disquiet.      HI.  Who  mat  obtain  this  best  from  Hzm — "All  that 
labour."     These  words  express  the  inward  condition  of  man.     We  do  indeed  toil. 
Some  weary  themselves  to  work  iniquity.     The  world  has  worn  some  of  you  out. 
The  burden  of  affliction  ;  guilt — our  corruptions.     IV.  How  they  who  desire  mat 
OBTAIN  it — "  Come."     1.  Literally,  when  He  was  on  earth.     2.  Faith  in  operation. 
Hagar  went  to  the  well  and  drank,  and  was  saved.     Those  who  have  found  rest  in 
Chiist,  remember  where  you  found  it.     See  on  what  easy  terms  we  may  find  rest. 
Some  know  they  are  sinners,  but  are  not  weary  of  sin.     {G.  Bradley.)        Rest  for 
the  weary  : — 1.  The  promise  is  faithful.     2.  It  is  a  precious  promise.     3.  It  is  an 
appropriate  promise.     4.  It  is  one  of  present  accomplishment.     (D.  Rees.)        The 
way  of  coming  to  Christ : — 1.  The  most  obvious  is  Christ  historically  taught.    2. 
Men  seek  to  come  to  Him  speculatively.  Who  can  find  out  a  being  by  a  pure  process 
of  tiiought  ?    3.  There  are  those  who  seek  Christ  by  a  sentimental  and  humani- 
tarian method.    This  will  not  fire  zeal.     How  then  are  men  to  come  to  Christ? 
Through  a  series  of  moral,  practical  endeavours  to  live  the  life  which  He  has  pre- 
Ecribed  for  us.     {H.  W.  Beecher.)        Christ's  word  to  the  weary  : — There  are  three 
sorts  of  trouble.     1.  There  is  head-trouble — to  do  what  is  right.      2.  There  ie 
heart-trouble.     The  interior  grief.     3.  There  is  soul-trouble.    Christ  gives  rest  from 
these.     {W.  G.  Barrett.)        A  ftjiecial  invitation: — 1.  It  is  personal — "Come  unto 
nic."     God  directs  to  Christ,  not  to  His  members.      2.  It  is  present — "  Come  " 
now,  do  not  wait.     3.  So  sweet  an  invitation  demands  a  spontaneous  acceptance. 
8.  He  puts  the  matter  very  exclusively.    Do  nothing  else  but  come  to  Him.     Argu- 
ments which  the  Saviour  used : — 1.  Because  He  is  the  appointed  mediator — "  Ail 
things  are  delivered  unto  rae  of  My  Father."    2.  Moreover  the  Father  has  given 
all  things  into  His  hands  in  the  sense  of  government.     3.  Christ  is  a  well-furnished 
mediator — "  All  things  are  delivered  unto  Me."     He  has  all  the  sinner  wants.    4. 
Come  to  Christ  because  He  is  an  inconceivably  great  mediator.     No  man  knows 
His  fulness  but  the  Father.     5.  Because  He  is  an  infiuitely  wise  Saviour.    He 
understands  both  persons  on  whose  behalf  He  mediates.     6.  He  is  an  indispensable 
mediator — "Neither  knoweth  any    man  the   Father   save    the  Son."      {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        Invitation  based  on  saving  power : — In  a  previous  verse  our  Lord 
Lad  said,  "  All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  by  My  Father :  meaning  that  all  power 
is  given  nntoHim  for  the  instructing,  ruling,  and  saving  of  mankind  ;  from  whence 
He  infers  those  comfortable  words  m  the  text.      I.  A  gracious  invitation  made  by 
our  Saviour.    II.  The  persons  invited.     III.  A  promise  of  ease  and  benefit.    IV. 
The  way  and  manner  of  coming  to  Christ.     V.  A  farther  encouragement  hereunto, 
from  an  inward  sense  and  feeling  of  the  promised  rest.    VI.  A  good  reason  to  back 
and  enforce  it — ••  My  yoke  is  easy."  {Matthew  Hole.)     Wayn  of  coming  to  Chriit: — 
Coming  to  Christ  and  believing,  are  in  Scripture  used  to  signify  one  and  the  same 
thing.     I.  The  first  step  in  coming  to  Christ  is  by  baptism.     II.  The  next  step  •« 
by  prayer.     III.  A  farther  step  is  by  repentance  and  confession  of  sin.    IV.  We 
are  said  to  come  to  God  by  hearing  His  Word,  and  receiving  instruction  from  Him. 
Y.  Also  by  receiving  His  Holy  Supper:  and — VL  By  putting  our  whole  trust  and 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  823 

affiance  in  Him,  relying  upon  Him  for  salvation,  and  placing  all  our  hopes  and 
confidence  in  His  merits  and  satisfaction.  (Ibid.)  Coming  to  Christ: — This 
implies  thiee  things.  I.  Absence  :  for  what  need  is  there  of  oar  coming  to  Christ 
unless  we  are  previously  at  a  distance  from  Him  ?  Such  is  the  condition  of  every 
man.  Naturally,  all  are  without  Christ  as  to  saving  influence ;  a?  to  a  proper  know- 
ledge of  Him,  love  to  Him,  conlideoce  in  Him,  and  union  and  communion  with 
Him.  II.  AccEBSiBiiENESs.  We  come  to  Him  ;  we  can  find  and  approach  Him. 
Not  to  His  bodily  presence.  As  man  He  is  absent ;  as  God  He  is  still  present.  He 
eaid  to  His  apostles,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  jou  always  ;  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world." 
III.  Application.  For  this  coming  to  Him  is  to  deal  with  Him  concerning  the 
affairs  of  the  soul  of  eternity.  {IV.  Jay.)  Christ's  rest: — I.  A  neoativk  de- 
BCBiPTioN.  (1)  Eest,  not  lethargy.  A  condition  in  wliich  the  powers  of  the  soul 
are  quickened,  rendered  aiive  to  its  capacities,  duties,  and  privileges.  (2)  Rest, 
not  ina'tivity.  Eelease  from  weariness  rather  than  from  labour.  (3)  Ilest,  not 
confiuemeut.  Not  isolation  or  routine.  (4)  Best,  not  leisure.  Not  a  brief  season 
of  relaxation,  .but  a  lasting  state  of  peace  and  strength.  IL  A  positive  description. 
,  (1)  E«8t,  that  is,  peace.  Conscience  is  at  ease.  The  mind  is  satisfied.  The  heart 
is  filled  with  love.  (2)  Eest,  that  is,  fearlessness.  Not  only  is  there  present 
satisfaction,  but  assured  confidence  in  the  future.  (3)  Rest,  that  is,  fortitude. 
The  burden  may  not  be  removed,  but  Christ  gives  us  such  a  temper  that  wa 
are  as  happy  with  our  burden  as  though  we  were  without  it.  (4)  Rest,  that  is, 
eecurity.  He  shields  us  from  every  adverse  power.  He  gives  us  ground  for  our 
confidence.  (Stems  and  Twigs.)  Christ  relieving  us  of  natural  burdens: — 1. 
Spiritual  burdens.  2.  Mental  burdens.  3.  Providential  burdens,  4.  Physical 
burdens.  (Bishop  Simpson.)  Christianity  lightens  physical  burdens  : — Go  to-day 
into  heathen  countries,  into  Mohammedan  lands,  and  what  do  yon  find  T  The 
village  on  the  hill  top,  the  old  walls,  the  spring  down  near  the  foot  of  the  hill,  the 
water  carried  by  hand,  the  pitcher,  the  goat  skin — just  as  it  was  in  ancient  times. 
The  burden  is  borne  by  men  upon  their  backs.  Go  to  China,  and  travel  from  place 
to  place.  It  is  difficult,  and  oftentimes  the  traveller  must  be  carried  by  men,  and,  if 
not  by  men,  by  a  rude  cart.  W  hen  I  was  in  Palestine,  a  year  ago,  there  was  only  one 
wheeled  vehicle  in  the  whole  territory,  and  that  had  been  brought  there  by  the 
Russian  Embassy.  Burdens  were  borne  on  the  back,  and  in  the  simplest  way.  Torn 
to  Chri.stian  lands,  and  what  are  they?  See  what  you  call  civilization — that  is, 
Christianity  affecting  the  minds  and  occupations  of  men — how  it  works  I  How  is 
this  city  of  a  million  and  a  quarter  supplied  with  water  ?  A  great  engine  pumpa 
it  up  from  the  river ;  iron  pipes  carry  it  to  every  house.  You  turn  the  tap  and 
have  it  in  almost  every  room.  There  is  no  broken  back  or  burdened  frame  carrying 
from  some  spring  this  water.  Go  into  coantries  partly  civilized,  and  you  find  a  few 
public  pumps  or  wells,  and  the  multitudes  go  there.  It  is  a  mere  physical  thing, 
you  say.  Yes  ;  but  it  is  God  working  in  the  subjugation  of  nature  to  man's  com- 
fort. Moreover,  you  turn  these  taps  m  your  room  without  thinking  of  it ;  and  yet 
you  have  here  a  proof  that  God  is  taking  care  of  the  labonr-bmdened,  and  ought  to 
remember  how  Christ  has  said,  ••  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Go  out  into  the  fields.  What  was  the  old  way? 
Men,  bowed  down  in  the  heat  of  an  August  sun,  took  the  sickle  in  hand,  and  tried 
to  reap  the  harvest.  Now  the  reaping-machine,  drawn  by  horses,  moves  into  the 
field,  throws  out  its  bound-up  sbeaves  without  human  toil :  and  the  harvest  is 
gathered  without  man  being  bowed  down  to  the  earth.  What  is  itf  **Come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  g^ve  you  rest."  Go  into  tha 
house:  long  ago,  needlewomen,  from  early  mom  until  night,  and  late  into  the 
night,  stitched  carefully,  slowly,  regularly,  on  their  endless  task.  Now  look  at  the 
sewing-machine,  and  see  the  amount  of  work  that  can  be  done  without,  compara- 
tively speaking,  human  toil.  Turn  your  eyes  over  to  this  light,  and  whence  comea 
it,  and  how  t  Look  at  the  little  lamp  of  old,  with  its  lard  and  wick,  then  the  tallow 
candle;  and  now,  wandering  through  all  these  pipes,  comes  this  air  or  gas  to  be 
lighted,  and  what  a  change  in  human  labour  1  From  the  darkness,  from  the  atmo- 
■phere  around  us,  men  are  gathering  this  electric  fluid,  and  throwing  light  over  the 
darkest  of  streets  and  alleys  of  your  city,  and  thus  enabling  thousands  of  men  to 
work  as  by  daylight  in  your  manufactories.  What  a  change  in  human  labour  I 
There  must  still  be  labour,  but  it  is  not  to  be  of  that  toilsome  character  that  it  once 
was.  (Bishop  Simpson.)  It  is  not  a  local  coming  to  Christ,  which  is  now  im- 
possible, but  a  movement  of  heart  and  mind  to  Him.  I.  The  class  of  persons  that 
our  Saviour  was  supposed  to  have  in  view.    1.  Such  as  were  laden  with  the  burden  ol 


22i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

ceremonial  obedience.  The  observances  of  Christianity  were  few  and  simple,  neither 
occupying  much  time,  nor  incurring  much  expense.  They  recommended  themselve* 
by  their  significance  and  force.  2.  Such  as  are  oppressed  and  burdened  with  a  sense 
of  guilt.  '6.  Such  as  are  endeavouring  to  erect  an  edifice  of  righteousness  out  of  their 
own  performances.  4.  Those  who  are  overwhelmed  with  worldly  calamities — the 
\ictims  of  worldly  sorrow.  5.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  a  restless,  uncertain 
pursuit  after  felicity  in  the  present  state.  6.  Those  who  axe  heavy  laden  by  specu- 
lative pursuits  in  matters  of  rehgion.  {Robert  Hall,  M.A.)  A  word  in  season  to  the 
weary : — Causes  of  weariness.  1.  Wounded  affections.  2.  The  disappointment  of  our 
desires.  3.  Vacancy  of  mind  and  the  sence  of  monotony.  4.  The  load  of  a  guilty 
conscience  is  fatiguing.  6.  The  burden  of  earnest  thought  and  noble  endeavour. 
{E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Desire  outruns  faculty  and  causef  weariness  : — The  result 
would  be  something  monstrous  if  their  energies  and  abilities  grew  as  fast  as  their 
Bjpirations  or  their  ambitions.  As  the  eye  carries  the  mind  in  the  flash  of  a 
moment  over  a  space  of  country  wliich  it  would  require  hours  to  traverse  in  the 
body,  so  the  hot  speed  of  human  Desire  outruns  our  slow  and  pausing  faculties. 
And  this  a  great  cause  of  fatigue ;  we  cannot  keep  up  with  ourselves  ;  one  part  of 
our  nature  lags  behind  another.  Or,  no  sooner  is  the  goal  which  we  had  thought 
a  fixed  one  reached,  than  another  starts  up  in  the  new  distance,  and  Desire  is  still 
goading  us  on,  refusing  us  rest.  (Ibid.)  Rest  not  found  in  mere  ceremonial 
observances: — JBoth  the  Wesleys,  and  "Whitefield  also,  fell  for  a  time  into  the 
same  mistake.  In  their  endeavours  to  obtain  peace  of  conscience,  in  addition 
to  attending  every  ordmary  service  of  the  church,  they  received  the  sacrament 
every  Sunday,  fasted  every  Wednesday  and  Friday,  retired  regularly  every 
morning  and  evening  for  meditation  and  prayer;  they  wore  the  coarsest  gar- 
ments, partook  of  the  coarsest  fare,  visited  the  sick,  taught  the  ignorant,  minis- 
tered to  the  wants  of  the  needy ;  and,  that  he  might  have  more  to  give  away, 
John  Wesley  even  for  a  time  went  barefoot.  And  yet,  with  all  this,  they  did  not 
obtain  the  peace  for  which  their  souls  craved.  {R.  A,  Bertram.)  The  reality  of 
rest: — "Come,"  saith  Christ,  "and  I  will  give  you  rest."  I  will  not  show  you 
rest,  nor  barely  tell  you  of  rest,  but  I  will  give  you  rest.  I  am  faithfulness  itself, 
and  cannot  lie,  I  will  give  you  rest.  I  that  have  the  greatest  power  to  give  it,  the 
greatest  will  to  give  it,  the  greatest  right  to  give  it,  come,  laden  sinners,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest.  Eest  is  the  most  desirable  good,  the  most  suitable  good,  and  to  yon 
the  greatest  good.  Come,  saith  Christ — that  is,  believe  in  Me,  and  I  will  give  yon 
rest ;  I  will  give  you  peace  with  God,  and  peace  with  conscience :  I  will  turn  your 
storm  into  an  everlasting  calm  ;  I  will  give  you  such  rest,  that  the  world  can  neither 
give  to  you  nor  take  from  you.  (Thomas  Brooks.)  Rest  only  in  God : — Lord, 
Thou  madest  us  for  Thyself,  and  we  can  find  no  rest  till  we  find  rest  in  Thee  t 
(Augustine.)  The  weary  welcome  to  rest : — A  poor  English  girl,  in  Miss  Leigh's 
home  in  Paris,  ill  in  body  and  hopeless  in  spirit,  was  greatly  affected  by  hearing 
some  children  singing,  "  I  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  say."  When  they  came  to  the 
words,  "weary,  and  worn,  and  sad,"  she  moaned,  "  That's  me  I  That's  me  1  What 
did  He  do?  Fill  it  up,  fill  it  up  !  "  She  never  rested  until  she  had  heard  the  whole 
of  the  hymn  which  tells  how  Jesus  gives  rest  to  such.  By-and-by  she  asked,  "  la 
that  true?"  On  being  answered,  "Yes,"  she  asked,  "Have  you  come  to  Jesus? 
Has  He  given  you  rest  ?  "  "  He  has."  Kaising  herself,  she  asked,  "  Do  you  mind 
my  coming  very  close  to  you  ?  Mav  be  it  would  be  easier  to  go  to  Jesus  with  one 
who  has  been  before  than  to  go  to  Him  alone."  So  saying,  she  nestled  her  head  on 
the  shoulder  of  her  who  watched,  and  clutching  her  as  one  in  the  agony  of  death, 
she  murmured,  "Now,  try  and  take  me  with  you  to  Jesus."  (I'he  Sunday  at 
Home.)  Rest  for  all: — There  are  many  heads  resting  on  Christ's  bosom,  but 
there's  room  for  yours  there.  (Samuel  Rutherford.)  Rest  not  inaction : — It  is 
not  the  lake  locked  in  ice  that  suggests  repose,  but  the  river  moving  on  calmly  and 
rapidly,  in  silent  majesty  and  strength.  It  is  not  the  cattle  lying  in  the  sun,  but 
the  eagle  cleaving  the  air  with  fixed  pinions,  that  gives  you  the  idea  of  repose  with 
strength  and  motion.  In  creation,  tbe  rest  of  God  is  exhibited  as  a  sense  of  power 
which  nothing  wearies.  When  chaos  burst  into  harmony,  so  to  speak,  God  had 
rest,  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  Rest  in  trouble : — I  say  that  men  want  rest  from  their 
troubles,  and  that  the  only  worthy  rest  is  rest  in  our  trouble.  We  have  our  first 
real  impression  of  what  toil  is,  when  we  begin,  as  an  apprentice,  to  learn  some 
trade.  Our  first  real  impression  of  toil  brings  the  first  real  desire  for  rest.  But  all 
the  rest  the  young  man  thinks  of  is  the  rest  of  laying  down  his  tools,  and  leaving 
'the  workshop  or  the  warehouse  to  spend  the  evening  in  manly  sports.    He  has  qo 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  225 

thought  yet  of  that  higher  rest,  which  will  come,  by-and-by,  out  of  skill  and 
facility  in  the  use  of  tools.  (R.  Ttick,  B.A.)  Resting  on  the  Bible  : — In  Newport 
church,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  lies  buried  the  Princess  Elizabeth  (daughter  of 
Charles  the  First).  A  marble  monument,  erected  by  our  Queen  Victoria,  records 
in  a  touching  way  the  manner  of  her  death.  She  languished  in  Carisbrook  Castle 
during  the  wars  of  the  Commonwealth — a  prisoner,  alone,  and  separated  from  all 
the  companions  of  her  youth,  till  death  set  her  free.  She  was  found  dead  one  day, 
with  her  head  leaning  on  her  Bible,  and  the  Bible  open  at  the  words,  ••  Come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  The  monu- 
ment in  Newport  church  records  this  fact.  It  consists  of  a  femfde  figure  reclining 
her  head  on  a  marble  book,  with  our  text  engraven  on  the  book.  Think,  my 
brethren,  what  a  sermon  in  stone  that  monument  preaches.  Think  what  a  stand- 
ing memorial  it  affords  of  the  utter  inabihty  of  rank  and  high  birth  to  confer 
certain  happiness.  Think  what  a  testimony  it  bears  to  the  lesson  before  you  this 
day — the  mighty  lesson  that  there  is  no  true  rest  for  any  one  excepting  in  Christy 
Happy  will  it  be  for  your  soul  if  that  lesson  is  never  forgotten. 

Ver.  29.  Talie  My  yoke  upon  you  and  learn  of  Me. — Tfie  teJiool  of  Chritt : — 

I.  There  must  be   docility,  obedience,  willingness  to  learn    of    that    Teacher. 

II.  The  school  is  in  the  recesses  of  the  soul — it  is  everywhere.  III.  Branches 
of  instruction.  1.  Humility.  2.  Patience.  3.  Fortitude.  5.  Love.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Christ  an  effective  Teacher:—!.  Christ's  riTNEsa  to  be  man's  Teacher. 
1.  He  understands  man's  nature.  2.  He  understands  all  those  things  which 
man  has  need  to  know.  3.  He  understands  perfectly  the  art  of  imparting  know- 
ledge. II.  The  METHODS  by  which  He  teaches  man.  1.  By  His  words,  works,  cha- 
racter, as  made  known  in  the  Bible.  2.  By  the  truths  Ho  now  imparts  to 
the  human  heart  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  The  effect  of  Christ's  teachings— 
"Eest."  1.  This  instruction  leads  to  the  pardon  of  Hin.  2.  To  the  assurance  that 
we  are  reconciled  to  God.  3.  To  the  removal  of  all  fear  of  evd.  Observe — 1.  The 
evidence  that  we  are  leaining  of  Christ  is  that  we  are  becoming  like  Him.  2.  All 
should  submit  to  be  taught  by  Christ.  {American  Homiletic  Review.) 
Unspoken  teaching  : — We  are  taught,  and  we  tea.oh,  by  something  about  us  that 
never  goes  into  language  at  all.  (Bishop  Huntingdon.)  The  advantages  oj 
humility: — I.  Whence  we  abb  directed  to  leabn  it.  We  are  to  learn  it  from 
Christ,  because  it  is  a  grace  so  peculiarly  Christian,  that  no  other  institution  will 
furnish  us  with  it.  All  ancient  schemes  of  morality  are  chargeable  with  this 
defect.  They  are  advanced  rather  as  arguments  for  men  of  learning  to  dispute 
than  as  directions  of  life  to  be  reduced  to  practice ;  humility  left  out  of  them. 
And  though  some  have  declaimed  with  great  zeal  on  the  contempt  of  glory,  yet 
we  find  these  men  to  have  declined  the  applause  with  greater  vanity  than  others 
pursued  it.  The  Jews  were  rendered  proud  by  their  privileges.  Christianity 
first  taught  the  true  doctrine  of  humility ;  Christ  its  pattern.  His  circumstances, 
disciples,  are  all  of  lowly  character.  II.  Eecommend  from  the  encouragement 
nere  given,  that  it  will  bking  best  to  our  souls.  Tranquillity  of  mind  is  the  spring 
of  our  present  felicity ;  without  it  all  acquisitions  are  insipid.  When  we  remeraber 
the  miseries  which  arise  from  resentment  of  real  or  fancied  injuries,  humility 
recommends  itself  to  us  as  a  support  and  protection.  The  humble  will  keep, 
without  inconsistency,  within  the  bounds  of  justice  and  sobriety,  neither  impatient 
in  prospect  nor  fretted  in  the  event.  Before  honour  is  humility.  Humility  softens 
the  terrors  of  death.  If  we  are  His  disciples,  let  the  humility  of  the  Master 
correct  the  pride  of  His  servants.  How  much  our  own  happiness  depends  on  thia 
disposition.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  Our  Saviour's  humility : — L  Humility 
towards  God  the  Father  was  exhibited  in  several  ways.  In  not  exceeding 
the  bounds  of  His  commission  ;  in  obedience  and  forbearance ;  He  did  not  employ 
His  illuminating  Spirit  in  the  task  of  refuting  error.  Humble  in  the  mani- 
festation of  His  power.  How  has  His  humility  been  imitated  by  us?  True 
we  have  no  supernatural  gifts  to  exert  with  humility  ;  but  those  we  have  do  we  so 
use  ?  IL  Humihty  is  exhibited  in  His  intercourse  with  mankind.  Look  at  the 
choice  He  made  of  disciples.  He  told  the  centurion  he  would  go  to  his  house. 
Let  us  not  suppose  that  His  humility  was  allied  to  weakness  or  timidity.  It  was 
a  humility  manfully  arrayed  against  vice  and  pride.  It  did  not  stoop  nor  waver. 
It  did  not  flatter.  It  was  associated  with  courage.  We  need  this  humility,  just  esti- 
mate of  self ;  only  to  respect  what  is  true  and '  good,  not  mere  outward  show. 
IF.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)     The  meek  and  la   ly  One  .-—I.  The  fibst  qcalixt  which 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  SZ. 

Jesos  ctiAiMS.  1.  Meek  as  opposed  to  ferocity  of  spirit  manifested  by  the  zealota 
and  bigots.  2.  There  is  a  sternness  whioh  cannot  be  condemned.  3.  It  is  meek 
in  heart.  II.  Lowliness  of  heabt,  1.  He  is  willing  to  receive  the  poorest 
sinner.  2.  This  lowliness  leads  Him  to  receive  the  most  ignorant.  {C.  H.  Spurgeo7u) 

1.  It  is  something  for  the  Christian  to  bnjoy — "Rest."  1.  Best  from  legal 
servitude.  2.  From  wrathful  apprehensions.  3.  From  carnal  pursuits.  4.  From 
earthly  anxiety.  6.  From  terrific  forebodings.  II.  Something  to  beab — 
"  Yoke."  I.  Subjection  to  the  mind  of  Christ  (Phil.  ii.  6).  2.  Resignation  to  the 
will  of  Christ.      Why  called  a  yoke  f     1,  Because  it  opposes  our  corrupt  nature. 

2.  Because  it  opposes  the  maxims  of  the  world.  8.  Because  it  is  repugnant  to  the 
schemes  of  men.  HI.  Something  which  the  Christian  is  to  be  taoght — "  Learn 
of  Me."  1.  Meekness.  2.  Humility.  Christ  teaches :  1.  By  His  Spirit. 
2.  By  His  Word.  3.  By  His  example.  {The  Pulpit.)  The  three  exchanges  ;— 
I.  The  exchange  of  tokeb.  II.  The  exchange  of  bubdens.  III.  The  exchange 
of  TEACHING.  (H.  BonuT.)  The  yoke  of  Christ ; — Our  Lord  speaks  of  His 
service  as  a  yoke  or  burden,  because  it  is  so  esteen??d  by  all  who  know  Him  not. 

I.  What  is  meant  by  the  yoke  of  Christ  t  It  includes — (1)  the  yoke  of  Hia 
profession ;    (2)  The  yoke  of  His  precepts;    (3)  The  yoke  of  His  dispensations. 

II.  The  appointed  means  by  which  sinners  are  <)nabled  to  bear  this  threefold 
yoke — •'  Learn  of  Me."  1.  Are  you  terrified  with  the  difficulties  attending  your 
profession?  Learn  of  Jesus  (Heb.  xii.  3).  2.  Do  you  find  it  hard  to  walk 
stedfastly  in  His  precepts  ?  Learn  of  Jesus  (Rom.  xv.  3).  3.  Are  you  tempted 
to  repine  at  the  dispensations  of  Divine  Providence?  Take  Jesus  for  your 
pattern  (John  xviii.  11).  III.  The  happy  effect  of  bearing  this  yoke.  Best 
to  the  roul.  This  affords  the  best  and  most  unshaken  evidence  that  He  has  begun 
a  good  work  of  grace  in  our  hearts.  (John  Newton.)  The  double  yoke : — If  the 
yoke  for  oxen  is  meant,  it  was  a  yoke  for  two ;  it  passed  across  the  shouldera 
of  two  animals,  and  they  bore  the  yoke  together,  and  so  the  yoke  was  easier 
and  lighter  for  each.  Jesus  is  bearing  a  yoke.  His  is  a  yoke  for  two.  He  would 
have  us  take  the  vacant  place  beside  Him,  and  share  with  Him.  I.  Chbist'b  toke. 
1.  His  Father's  will.  2.  The  work  given  Him  to  do.  3.  All  involved  in  His 
Sonship.  4.  Seeking  and  saving  the  lost.  6.  Redemption  of  the  world  from  sin. 
6.  Winning  the  world's  heart  for  God.  II.  Christ's  yoke  shabed  by  os. 
Illustrate  how  Paul  shared  it.  We  may  share  in  (1)  the  active  work ;  (2)  the 
spirit  of  the  work ;  (3)  the  joy  and  reward  of  the  work.  Conclusion  : — There 
is  no  forced  bearing  of  yokes  with  Christ,  we  must  choose  to  come  under  it  with 
Christ.  (R.  Tuck.)  Best  in  submission: — The  text  suggests  a  figure.  Two 
oxen  are  yoked  together  at  the  plough.  But  they  toil  unwillingly.  They  fret  and 
chtife  themselves.  They  strive  to  force  themselves  free  of  the  galling  yoke.  They 
are  weary,  oppressed  with  their  slavery.  Would  it  not  be  rest  for  those  oxen 
if  they  would  cheerfully  submit ;  simply  accept  the  toil  before  them ;  encourage 
their  spirit  quietly  and  bravely  to  suffer,  and  bear,  and  do ;  fret  no  more  at  the 
yoke,  but  take  it,  bear  it,  and  in  bearing  it  discover  how  light  and  easy  and 
restful  the  very  yoke  can  become?  {R.  Tuck.)  Humility  : — The  great  business 
of  man  is  the  regulation  of  his  spirit.  Rest  is  only  found  in  ourselves  in  a  meek 
and  lowly  disposition  of  heart.  I.  Much  of  trouble  comes  from  diBpositiona 
opposite  to  humility.  II.  HumiUty  is  the  best  security  against  heart-aches. 
III.  Christian  humility  is  opposed  to  that  spiritual  pride  which  is  the  worst 
of  all  prides.  {Sterne.)  Man's  unrest: — There  are  three  causes  in  men 
producing  unrest  :  I.  Suspicion  of  God.  II.  Inward  discord.  IIL  Dis- 
satisfaction with  outward  circumstances.  For  all  these  meekness  is  the  cure. 
{F.  W.  RobertKon.)  The  yoke  lined : — The  yoke  of  Christ  will  be  more  easy 
than  we  think  of,  especially  when  it  is  lined  with  grace.  {T.  Manton.)  We  weU 
remember  an  old  man  who  carried  pails  with  a  yoke,  and  as  he  was  infirm,  and 
tender  about  the  shoulders,  his  yoke  was  padded,  and  covered  with  white  flannel 
where  it  touched  him.  But  what  a  lining  is  "  love  "  1  A  cross  of  iron,  lined  with 
love,  would  never  gall  the  neck,  much  less  will  Christ's  wooden  cross.  Lined 
with  Chrifit's  love  to  us  1  Covered  with  our  love  to  Him  I  Truly  the  yoke  is  easy, 
and  the  burden  is  light.  Whenever  the  shoulder  becomes  sore  let  us  look  to  the 
lining.  Keep  the  hning  right,  and  the  yoke  will  be  no  more  a  burden  to  us  than 
wings  are  to  a  bird,  or  her  wedding-ring  is  to  a  bride.  O  love  divine,  line  my  whole 
life,  my  cares,  my  griefs,  my  pains  ;  and  what  more  can  I  ask  ?  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Hard  beginnings: — Some  beginners  are  discouraged  in  their  first  attempti 
At  a  godly  life,  and  so  give  over  through  despondency.     They  should  remember 


CHAP.  XI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  22? 

that  the  bullock  is  most  unruly  at  the  first  yoking,  and  that  the  fire  at  first 
kindling  casts  forth  most  smoke.  (T.  Manton.)  Imitating  Christ  the  highest 
art : — In  the  great  galleries  of  art  that  are  the  glory  of  Loudon,  Paris,  Munich, 
Dresden,  and  Borne  you  may  see  the  artists  of  the  future.  Young  men  toil  there 
day  after  day,  patiently  copying  the  masterpieces  of  the  painters  who  are  world- 
renowned,  learning  thus  to  become  painters  themselves.  Every  line,  every  colour, 
every  gradation  of  light  and  shade  they  put  forth  their  utmost  skill  to  imitate. 
They  are  not  content  that  their  picture  should  be  something  like  the  original ; 
their  ambition  is  to  make  their  copy  so  exact  that  none  but  an  experienced  eye 
shall  be  able  to  tell  which  is  the  original  and  which  is  the  copy.  To-day, 
my  friend,  place  yourself  before  the  Lord  Jesos;  look  on  His  chanicter, 
eo  majeatio  in  its  righteousness,  so  tender  and  attractive  in  its  love,  and  resolve 
to  become  like  Him.  Let  not  your  ambition  be  lower  than  that  with  which 
the  young  artist  sita  down  before  some  masterpiece  of  Raphael  or  Rubens,  nor  tha 
patience  with  which  you  strive  to  aocomphsh  it  less.    (22.  A.  Bertram.) 

Ver.  30.  For  My  yoke  Is  easy  and  My  burden  is  light. — Christ's  yoke  and  burden : 

Some  of  the  particuii/uis  in  which  Christ  is  reputed  to  impose  a  heavt  tokb 
AND  BURDEN.  I  know  of  no  obligation  ihat  rests  upon  me  ua  a  Christian  which 
does  not  equally  rest  upon  me  as  a  man.  1.  The  burden  of  duty.  Purity,  justice, 
love,  industry,  are  enjoined  upon  me  as  a  man.  This  burden  Christ  makes  light 
and  easy.  (1)  By  giving  us  clear  knowledge  of  the  right  in  His  plain  precepts.  (2) 
By  the  irresistible  motives  to  duty  which  He  suppUes  in  the  love  of  the  Father.  2. 
The  yoke  of  penitence,  tbe  burden  of  self-reproach.  This  burden  we  bring  with  ua 
into  the  school  of  Christ ;  nor  can  we  get  rid  of  it  by  remaining  from  Christ.  It 
has  rested  far  more  heavily  under  Pagan  than  Christian  auspices.  But  through 
Christ  penitence  is  the  way  to  peace.  Its  tears  are  the  dew-drops  of  the  soul's 
resurrection  morning.  Forgiveness  is  its  counterpart.  3.  The  burden  of  self- 
denial.  This  not  merely  a  Christian  duty,  but  a  universal  necessity.  Through 
Christ  it  is  made  such  as  we  can  caiTy  with  joy  and  gratitude.  4.  The  unavoidable 
burden  of  earthly  suffering  least  of  all  to  be  ascribed  to  Christ.  {A.  P.  Peabody, 
D.D.)  Christ's  yoke  easy  : — Important  that  those  to  whom  the  ministry  of  tha 
gospel  is  entrusted  should  state  with  clearness  the  real  nature  of  religion,  neither 
too  easy  or  too  difficult.  I.  Christians  are  under  the  yoke.  Not  their  own 
masters  ;  please  not  themselves.  What  is  the  yoke  ?  Obedience  to  His  command- 
ments. 11.  It  is  an  EASY  yoke.  1.  In  comparison  with  the  yoke  of  Satan.  2. 
In  comparison  with  the  yoke  which  self-righteousness  imposes  on  mankind.  8.  As 
it  is  made  easy  in  itself  to  those  who  wear  it,  Christ  renders  obedience  pleasant  to 
His  followers.  (E.  Cooper.)  Christ's  burden  a  light  burden: — I.  In  what  it 
consists,  1.  In  the  daily  conflict  which  the  Christian  maintains  with  the  sin  that 
dwelleth  in  bun.  2.  In  the  hostile  treatment  which  the  Christian  experiences  from 
the  world.  3.  In  the  chastening  which  the  Christian  receives  from  his  heavenly 
Master.  II.  It  is  light.  1.  It  is  light  compared  with  the  buiden  of  the  unpardoned 
sin  in  another  world.  2.  It  is  light  compared  with  the  burden  of  unpardoned  sin 
in  this  world.  3.  It  is  made  light  in  itself  to  those  who  bear  it ;  strength  is  given 
to  beat  it.  (Ibid.)  Hard  to  nature,  easy  to  grace: — Is  Christ's  yoke  not  easy 
then  ?  Is  there  not  force  and  meaning  in  His  own  words  ?  Yes,  most  assuredly ; 
but  it  is  easy  only  to  them  who,  having  heard  Hia  voice,  have  come  unto  Him  al 
His  cidl,  and  who  have  thus  received  the  will,  the  grace,  the  strength  to  take  it 
upon  them,  and  to  bear  it.  A  thing  is  easy  to  be  done  just  in  proportion  to  the 
power  of  doing  it.  It  is  easy  for  a  man  to  hft  a  weight  which  a  child  could  not 
move  from  the  ground.  It  is  easy  for  the  bird  to  soar  into  the  atmosphere,  and  for 
the  fish  to  make  its  way  through  the  waters;  their  natures  are  suited  to  their 
respective  elements;  but  it  were  impossible  for  man  to  do  either.  So,  in  the 
spiritual  world,  what  becomes  easy  to  a  believing  and  renewed  soul  is  impossible 
to  a  sirmer  in  his  carnal  state.     What  is  impossible  to  nature,  is  easy  to  grace. 

{J.  Mac/arlane.)  The  nature  and  excellence  of  the  Saviour's  discipline: I.  Thai 
Jhbibt  has  His  yoke.  His  discipline,  and  that  we  ark  never  to  foroet  thai 
IT  IS  BO  SUBSTANTIALLY  AND  REALLY.  These  8X6,  in  the  first  place,  conditions  ol 
discipleship.  1.  One  condition  is  the  entire  submission  of  the  judgment  of  tha 
disciples  to  the  Great  Teacher.  2.  If  any  man  will  be  My  disciple,  so  says  our 
Lord,  let  him  deny  himself.  3.  Taking  up  the  cross.  But  the  discipline  of  Christ 
has  its  restraints  as  well  as  its  conditions.  1.  Christ  lays  restraint  upon  oux 
Bociety,     2.  Upon  the  affections  and  tempers  of  the  soul.    3.  Upon  the  word*.    4 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnxs.  so. 

Upon  the  whole  conduct.  Then  there  is  service,  too,  in  the  discipline  of  Jesui 
Christ.  1.  Service  of  devotion.  2.  Charity  and  zeal.  II.  That  His  yoke  ib  east 
AND  THAT  EVEN  His  BURDEN  IS  LIGHT.  Eest  Can  be  found  in  no  other  way  of  life. 
Easy  (1)  Because  the  discipline  of  Christ  is  confined  to  the  truth  and  reality  o£ 
things ;  (2)  Because  it  brings  with  it  a  sense  of  the  approbation  of  the  great  God 
Himself ;  (3)  Because  it  is  part  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  to  plant  in  the  soul 
principles  corresponding  with  everything  which  God  requires  of  us,  it  is  a  regene- 
rating  system ;  (4)  Because  it  is  a  discipline  which  has  always  a  respect  to  the 
heavenly  state,  and  whilst  it  is  the  only  road  to  heaven,  it  is  the  infallible  prepara- 
tion for  it.  {R.  Watson.)  Chrint's  yoke  ea^y  to  the  subjects  of  His  kingdom  : — 1. 
Because  having  come  to  Christ  they  have  received  the  willing  mind  to  bear  it.  2. 
Because  there  is  a  pure  satisfaction  imparted  to  their  mind  even  in  the  very  exer- 
cise of  self-denial  and  self-abasement  which  He  enjoins.  3.  Because  His  Presence 
is  promised  to  be  with  His  servants  to  make  it  easy  and  light.  4.  This  yoke  ever 
becomes  easier  and  this  burden  lighter  as  the  Christian  continues  to  bear  it.  6. 
That  it  is  easy  in  comparison  with  that  which  must  otherwise  be  borne.  {J.  Mae- 
farlane.)  Religion  easy  : — 1.  Because  of  the  means  of  instruction  which  are 
afforded  us,  to  teach  us  how  to  commence  it.  2.  Because  of  the  principles  on  which 
the  Christian  acts  ;  not  from  compulsion,  but  from  filial  affection.  3.  Because  of 
the  helps  which  a  Christian  derives  while  maintaining  the  discipUne  of  that  Ufe.  4. 
Because  of  the  enjoyments  that  stand  connected  with  the  Christian's  course.  5. 
Because  of  the  prospect  before  him  in  heaven.  (E.  E.  Jenkins.)  Christ's  service 
easy  : — Christ's  service  is  easy  to  a  spiritual  mind.  I.  It  is  easy,  as  it  is  a  bationaIi 
service :  consonant  to  right  reason,  though  contradictory  to  depraved  nature.  II. 
Easy,  as  it  is  a  spiritual  service  :  delightful  to  a  spiritual  mind.  III.  Easy,  as  it 
is  an  ASSISTED  service  ;  considering  that  we  work  not  in  our  own  strength,  but  in 
God's.  IV.  Easy,  when  once  it  is  an  accustomed  service ;  though  hard  to  begin- 
ners, it  is  easy  to  professors  ;  the  farther  we  walk  the  sweeter  is  our  way.  V.  Easy, 
as  it  ie  the  most  gainful  service ;  having  the  assurances  of  an  eternal  weight  of  glory 
as  the  reward  of  our  obedience.  (Burkitt.)  God  kjiows  our  burden  : — A  httle  boy 
was  helping  his  father  to  unpack  some  boxes  of  dry  goods.  His  father  took  the 
pieces  of  goods  from  the  box  and  put  them  on  the  outstretched  arms  of  the  boy. 
•'Don't  you  think  you  have  load  enough?  "  said  some  one  passing  by.  "  Father 
knows  best.  He  knows  how  much  I  ought  to  carry,"  replied  the  boy.  How  much 
trust  and  confidence  it  shows  us.  He  knew  that  his  father,  who  loved  him,  would 
not  give  him  more  than  he  could  carry.  And  so  it  is  with  our  Heavenly  Father. 
Sometimes  we  think  He  is  putting  more  on  us  than  we  can  carry,  and  we  become 
fretful.  Sometimes  He  adds  sorrow  to  sorrow  untU  we  think  we  cannot  bear  the 
load,  but  He  knows  best,  and  will  not  give  as  more  than  we  can  bear,  for  He  is  a 
kind  and  loving  Father. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 

Vers.  1-6.  Behold  Thy  disciples  do  that  which  Is  not  lawful  to  do  vpon  th* 
Sabbath  day. — 1.  It  is  no  new  thing  to  see  men  who  are  otherwise  learned,  and  are 
In  account  for  their  hoUness  in  the  church,  to  be  adversaries  unto  Christ,  and 
His  disciples.  2.  Christ's  disciples  readily  shall  be  misconstrued,  do  what  they 
please ;  their  plucking  ears  of  corn  for  their  hunger  doth  not  escape  censure. 
3.  Hypocrites  do  urge  ceremonies  and  external  observations  more  than  the  greater 
things  of  the  law.  4.  When  the  mind  of  the  Lawgiver  and  the  intent  of  the  com- 
mandment is  not  contravened,  the  precept  is  not  broken,  this  is  the  ground  of 
Christ's  defence.  5.  Not  reading  nor  considering  the  Scriptures,  whereby  the 
meaning  of  the  law  may  be  understood,  is  the  cause  of  error  in  duties.  6.  Whatso- 
ever bodily  work  is  necessary  for  providing  of  the  service  and  worship  of  God  upon 
the  Sabbath  is  not  a  breaking  of  the  Sabbath  ;  for  the  priests  did  bodily  work  in 
the  temple  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  were  blameless.  7.  As  the  body  is  above  the 
figure,  or  shadow,  so  is  Christ  greater  than  the  temple.  {David  Dikson.)  The 
observance  of  the  Sabbath  : — Christ  came  not  to  abolish  the  Sabbath,  but  to  explain 
and  enforce  it,  as  He  did  the  rest  of  the  law.  Its  observance  was  nowhere  positively 
enjoined  by  Him,  because  Christianity  was  to  be  practicable  to  all  nations,  and  i| 
goes  to  them  stripped  of  its  precise  and  various  circumstances.     '*  I  was  in  the 


CHAP,  xn.]  SI.  MATTHEW.  829 

Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,"  seems  to  be  the  soul  of  the  Christian  Sabbath.  In  thia 
view  of  the  day,  a  thousand  frivolous  questions  concerning  its  observance  would  b* 
answered.  We  are  going  to  spend  a  Sabbath  in  eternity.  The  Chrfstian  will 
acquire  as  much  of  the  Sabbath-spirit  as  he  can.  And,  in  proportion  to  a  man's 
real  piety  in  every  age  of  the  Church,  he  will  be  found  to  have  been  a  diligent 
observer  of  the  Sabbath  day.  (Cecil's  Remains.)  The  Sabbath  a  day  for  doing 
good : — The  performance  of  so  many  miracles  on  the  Sabbath  day  seems  to  intimata 
its  being  the  most  "  acceptable  time  "  for  our  doing  good  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of 
men,  after  the  pattern  of  Christ's  example,  as  we  have  opportunity.  And  it  is  this, 
perhaps,  that  may  especially  expose  us  to  the  unkind  remarks  of  those  who  make 
tho  Lord's  day  a  day  of  mere  Pharisaic  formalities,  or  one  of  idle  and  selfish  indul- 
gence, by  doing  their  own  way,  by  finding  their  own  pleasure,  and  by  speaking  their 
own  words.  (J.  Ford.)  Rabbinical  Sabbath  scruples: — The  Rabbi  Kolonimoa 
was  innocently  accused  of  having  murdered  a  boy.  It  appears  that  he  knew  the 
assassin,  and  to  prevent  himself  being  torn  to  pieces,  he  wrote  the  name  of  the 
culprit  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and  laid  it  upon  the  lips  of  the  corpse.  By  this  means  the 
rabbi  saved  his  own  life,  and  the  real  murderer  was  exposed.  But,  alas  1  Kolonimos 
had  written  that  name  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  penance. 
Not  content  with  this  long  atonement  for  his  sin,  the  rabbi  gave  orders  that  for  one 
bundled  years  after  his  death,  every  one  who  passed  by  should  fling  a  stone  at  his 
tomb,  because  every  one  who  profaned  the  Sabbath  ought  to  be  stoned. 

Yer.  6.  That  in  this  place  Is  One  greater  than  the  temple. — Christ  greater 
than  the   Chv-rch: — I.  Look   at   the    things    essential    in   the  stboctdbe   of 

THE     CHOBCH,    ANE     SHOW     WHAT     ChKIST    18     IN     BELATION    TO    THESE.       The     things 

essential  in  the  structure  of  the  church  are  the  plan,  the  foundation,  and 
the  materials.  1.  Let  us  understand  what  Christ  is  in  relation  to  the 
plan.  The  plan  of  the  Christian  Church  is  that  of  a  temple.  Everything 
we  see  suggests  that  God  seeks  manifestation.  The  temple  was  complete  in 
Christ ;  the  union  of  the  Divine  and  human,  the  indwelling  of  the  Divine  Spirit, 
the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  perfection,  the  operation  of  the  Divine  mercy — 
all  were  in  Him.  The  Ufe-plan  of  the  Saviour  developed  by  Christian  life  and 
fellowship.  2.  The  foundation.  The  foundation  means  the  reason  which  both 
churches  and  souls  give  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  the 
foundation.  3.  The  materials  of  which  it  is  composed.  In  respect  of  the  house 
of  God  this  is  a  great  mystery;  composed  of  divers  elements,  Christ  fits  every 
individual  member  into  his  appropriate  place.  II.  The  pcbposes  of  the  church, 
WHAT  Christ  is  in  relation  to  these.  1.  Up-building,  or  culture.  2.  Outbuilding, 
or  conquest.  3.  Worship,  or  adoration.  Christ  eveiything  to  the  church  in  the 
process  of  culture.  He  liberates,  elevates,  and  purifies.  As  to  conquest  the  Church 
is  Christ's  messenger.  As  to  worship  it  is  "  a  holy  priesthood."  (A.  McLeod,  D.D.) 
Christ  greater  than  the  temple.  The  Church  is  nothing  without  its  head.  Whatever 
it  is.  He  has  created  it.  Whatever  it  does,  He  is  its  life  I  It  is  righteous,  but  it  is 
with  His  righteousness.  It  is  royal,  its  royalty  comes  from  Him.  It  is  a  priest- 
hood. He  conferred  the  priesthood.  Its  love,  its  power,  its  faith,  its  hope,  everything 
it  is,  everything  it  expects  to  do,  find  their  explanation  and  root  in  it?  relation  to 
Him.  (Ibid.)  One  greater  than  the  temple : — I.  Odb  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
qbeateb  THAN  THE  TEMPLE,  1.  Hg  is  SO  manifestly  because  He  is  God.  He  who 
dwells  in  the  house  is  greater  than  the  house  in  which  He  dwells,  so  that  as  God 
Jesus  is  greater  than  the  temple.  The  Divine  must  be  greater  than  any  human 
workmanship  ;  the  self-existent  must  excel  the  noblest  created  thing,  f  he  temple 
was  many  years  in  building,  and  came  to  an  end.  Christ  is  from  everlasting  ta> 
everlasting.  Hence  our  Lord's  authority  was  greater  than  that  of  the  temple. 
S.  He  is  greater  than  the  temple,  for  He  is  a  more  glorious  enshrinement  of  Deity. 
"  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  The  manifestation  of 
the  Godhead  in  Christ  is  approachable.  3.  Our  Lord  is  a  fuller  manifestation  of 
the  truth  than  the  temple  was.  The  temple  was  full  of  instruction ;  but  all  in 
type.  Christ  says,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  4.  Because 
He  is  a  more  abiding  evidence  of  Divine  favour.  6.  Because  He  is  a  more  sure 
place  of  consolation.  6.  Because  He  is  a  more  glorious  centre  of  worship.  IL 
Jesus  ought  to  be  begarded  as  greater  than  the  temple.  1.  We  ought  to  think 
of  Him  with  greater  joy  than  even  the  Jews  did  of  the  greater  and  beautiful  bouse. 
2.  We  ought  to  consider  Him  with  greater  wonder  than  that  with  which  men  sur- 
veyed the  temple.    3.  He  ought  to  bo  visited  with  greater  fre^ueuoy.    4.  He  ought 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  to, 

to  be  reverenced  -with  greater  solemnity.  5.  He  ought  to  be  honoured  with  higher 
Bervice.  6.  He  ought  to  be  sought  with  more  vehement  desire.  III.  PracticaIi 
EEFLECTio^s.  1.  How  carefully  should  the  laws  of  Jesus  Christ  be  observed.  2.  How 
much  more  ought  we  to  value  Christ  than  auy  outward  ordinance.  3.  How  much 
more  important  that  you  should  go  to  Christ  than  that  you  should  go  to  any  place 
which  you  suppose  to  be  the  house  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  I.  The  scperiob- 
ITT  OF  Christ  to  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  His  superiority  in  those  respects 
which  distinguish  that  temple  above  all  others.  1.  It  was  built  under  the  iiiimedlate 
and  special  direction  of  God.  2.  It  was  furnished  with  everything  that  was  requisite 
to  the  purpose  of  its  erection  as  it  regards  both  God  and  man.  3.  It  was  adorned 
with  a  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  4.  It  was  frequented  by  all  the 
tribes  of  Israel  as  the  place  set  apart  for  their  religious  worship.     II.  Inferences, 

1.  His  lordship  over  the  conscience.    Every  human  authority  must  yield  to  His. 

2.  His  power  to  bestow  aU  spiritual  blessing — peace,  strength,  glory.  (1)  How 
signal  are  our  privileges  I    (2)  How  solemn  is  our  responsibihty  I     (Various.) 

Yet.  7.  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice. — Mercy,  not  sacrifice: — ^When  St 
Spyridion  was  about  eighty  years  old,  it  happened  that  a  traveller  came  to  visit  liim 
at  one  of  those  periods  of  the  year  when  it  was  his  custom  to  fast  on  alternate  days. 
Seeing  that  the  stranger  was  very  tired,  Spyridion  told  his  daughter  to  wash  hia 
feet,  and  set  meat  before  him.  She  replied,  that  as  it  was  fast-time,  there  waa 
neither  bread  nor  meat  ready.  On  which  Spyridion,  having  prayed  and  asked  for- 
giveness, desired  her  to  cook  some  salt  pork  there  chanced  to  be  in  the  house. 
When  it  was  prepared,  he  sat  down  at  table  with  the  stranger,  partook  of  the  meat, 
and  told  him  to  follow  his  example.  But  the  stranger  declined,  saying  he  was  a 
Christian,  and  ought  not  to  eat  meat  during  the  great  fast.  Spyridion  answered, 
"  It  is  for  that  very  reason  you  ought  not  to  refuse  to  partake  of  the  food  ;  unto  the 
pure  all  things  are  pure."  The  earthly  subservient  to  the  heavenly: — Kabbi  Tan- 
chum  was  once  asked  if  it  were  lawful  to  extinguish  a  candle  on  the  Sabbath,  when 
it  inconvenienced  a  sick  man.  Said  he,  "A  candle  is  an  earthly  light,  man's  soul 
a  heavenly  light."  Is  it  not  better  to  extinguish  an  earthly  than  a  heavenly 
light  7  (Talmud.)  Obedience  has  not  merely  to  do  with  the  easy  part  of  religion : — 
They  pick  and  choose  out  the  easiest  part  in  reUgion,  and  lay  out  all  their  zeal  there, 
but  let  other  things  go :  in  some  duties  that  are  of  easy  digestion,  and  nourish  their 
disease  rather  than  cure  their  soul,  none  so  zealous  as  they,  none  so  partial  as  they. 
Now,  a  partial  zeal  for  small  things,  with  a  plain  neglect  of  the  rest,  is  direct 
Pharisaism  ;  all  for  sacrifice,  nothing  for  mercy.  Therefore  every  one  of  us  should 
take  heed  of  halving  and  dividing  with  God  :  if  we  make  conscience  of  piety,  let  us 
also  make  conscience  of  justice ;  if  of  justice,  let  us  also  make  conscience  of  mercy. 
It  is  harder  to  renounce  one  sin  wherein  we  delight,  than  a  greater  which  we  do  not 
equally  affect.  A  man  is  wedded  to  some  special  lusts,  and  is  loth  to  hear  of  a 
divorce  from  them.  We  have  our  tender  and  sore  places  in  the  conscience,  which 
we  are  loth  should  be  touched.  But  if  we  be  sincere  with  God  we  will  keep  ourselves 
from  all,  even  from  our  own  iniquity  (Psa.  xviii.  23).  (T.  MantoTi.)  Morals  before 
rituals,    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  10.  And  behold  there  was  a  man  which  had  his  hand  withered. — The 
withered  hand: — I,  The  person  to  whom  the  command  in  our  text  is  addressed. 

I.  To  a  man  who  was  hopelessly  incapable  of  obeying.  The  hand  had  lost  the 
moisture  of  life,  Christ's  power  is  displayed  on  our  inability,  2.  To  one  who  waa 
perfectly  willing,  II.  The  Person  who  gave  the  command.  "  He  said."  HI.  Thb 
COMMAND  itself.  The  stretcbiug  forth  of  the  hand  was — 1.  An  act  of  faith.  2.  An 
act  of  decision.  The  Pharisees  around  him.  IV.  This  man's  obediencb.  1.  Ha 
did  not  do  something  else  in  preference  to  what  Jesus  commanded.  2.  He  did  not 
raise  any  questions.  3.  He  was  told  to  stretch  out  his  hand,  and  he  did  bo.  V. 
The  result  of  this  btretchino  out  of  the  man's  hand  in  obedience  to  th» 
COMMAND.  1.  The  healing  was  manifest.  2.  It  was  immediate.  3.  It  was  per- 
manent.     (C.   H.    Spiirgeon.)  The  withered  hand: — I.    A  common  calamity. 

II.  The  man  could  do  nothing.  III.  He  knew  he  could  do  nothing.  IV.  He  is 
A  TTPE  OF  those  WHOSE  USEFULNESS  IS  SPOILED  Bv  SOME  DEFECT — the  orotchety,  ill- 
tempered,  hasty,  niggardly  man.  V.  The  causes  of  this  withered  hand.  1, 
Disuse.  2.  Multipli<-d  anxieties  and  cares,  3.  Contact  with  poisonous  matters — 
questionable  company  or  pleasures.  VI,  The  cube.  The  sei-vices  of  the  synagogue 
not  enough.    The  solemn  ritual,  the  round  of  confession  and  sacrifice,  of  singing 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  231 

and  the  word,  each  of  these  was  a  help  to  the  healing  power,  but  nothing  more- 
hands  that  pointed  and  lifted  the  sufferer  nearer  to  the  great  Eestorer.  At  last, 
before  the  man  there  stands  the  living  Christ,  as  He  stands  before  all  who  seek 
Him,  Then  swiftly  comes  the  being  made  whole.  That  living  Presence  sought ; 
that  great  Love  appealed  to ;  that  mighty  Power  trusted ;  His  word  waited  for, 
believed,  obeyed.  Thus  may  every  withered  hand  be  stretched  forth  perfectly  whole. 
{Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  The  use  of  vieans : — It  is  one  of  the  sophisms  of  every  age 
to  urge  the  Spirit's  efficacy,  as  a  plea  for  the  neglect  of  means.  It  is  folly  and 
prenumption  to  think  that,  because  power  is  with  God  and  from  God,  efforts  rficuld 
not  be  in  ourselves.     {Dr.  Mantan.) 

Ver.  13.  How  much  then  Is  a  man  better  than  a  sheep  t — The  dignity  inherent 
in  man's  nature : — This  is  not  a  question,  but  an  exclamation,  and  it  is  so 
punctuated  in  the  Kevised  Version.  Exclamation  rare  with  our  Lord  ;  He  can  say 
great  things  without  becoming  perturbed.  "  How  much,  then,  is  a  man  better  than 
a  sheep  1  "  1.  Our  reading  of  this  exclamation  is  not  appreciative  till  we  realize 
that  in  it  the  Son  of  Man  was  not  propounding  a  theory,  but  uncovering  an  experi- 
ence. He  is  hinting  here  at  what  He  knew.  "  He  knew  what  was  in  man  " — was 
conscious  of  Himself ;  we  are  not.  I  do  not  know  what  we  should  say  if  we  could 
understand  all  that  it  means  to  be  a  man.  Almost  every  one  has  times  when  he 
stands  in  awe  of  himself.  Christ  utters  no  word  that  cheapens  man.  He  exhorts 
to  humility,  but  humility  is  a  symptom  of  dignity.  Conceit  one  thing  ;  sense  of 
worth  another.  2.  Even  sin,  too,  has  about  it  something  that  in  this  matter  is 
pleasantly  suggestive.  It  is  better  to  be  a  man  that  sins  than  a  sheep  that  cannot, 
A  man's  moral  corruption  is  index  of  the  native  moral  grandeur.  It  is  important 
that  men  sheuld  be  saved,  because  there  is  so  much  for  them  to  be  saved  to  as  well 
as  from.  3.  There  is  in  man,  also,  a  cer'ain  power  to  transcend  limitations  that 
gives  him  just  a  flavour  of  infinitude.  The  spirit  chafes  under  restraints ;  has  a 
sense  continually  of  something  outside  that  it  has  not  yet  gotten  to ;  makes  for 
itself  a  larger  and  larger  world ;  stretches  itself  back  in  memory,  and  forward  in 
surmise.  4.  It  is  rather  in  the  line  of  this  to  say  that  we  are  persuaded  how  great 
a  thing  it  is  to  be  a  man,  by  observing  the  ease  with  which  man  can  receive  a 
Divine  revelation.  Man  and  God  will  have  to  be  understood  as  standing  to  one 
another  within  intelligent  reach.  It  is  not  the  fact  that  there  can  be  a 
Divine  revelation  so  much  as  what  it  contains  that  convinces  us  of  the  dignity 
inherent  in  our  nature.  The  cross  proves  God's  esteem  for  the  sinner.  Man's 
worth  explains  redemption  ;  not  redemption  man's  worth.  (C.  H.  Parkhurst.) 
A  sense  of  self-worth  not  conceit : — The  two  take  cognizance  of  different  matters. 
My  conceit  occupies  itself  with  what  I  have  that  is  different  from  others ;  my  sense 
of  worth  occupies  itself  with  what  1  am  in  common  with  others.  Conceit  therefore 
separates  men,  while  just  sense  of  worth  only  draws  them  more  closely  together. 
Hence  where  there  is  the  largest  self-respect  there  will  be  always  the  largest  and 
gentlest  respect  for  other  people.  Once  in  a  while  we  are  a  surprise  to  ourselves  ; 
are  stirred  at  times  by  what  we  seem  to  get  upon  the  track  of  when  we  take  deep, 
quiet  counsel  with  our  own  hearts.  We  appear  to  be  upon  the  edge  of  something. 
Every  soul  has  what  it  calls  its  grand  moments.  A  sort  of  refraction  appears  for 
an  instant  to  throw  above  our  horizon  lights  that  are  not  yet  risen.  {Ibid.) 
Self-w&rth  aids  oiir  realization  of  God: — Men's  estimate  of  God  will  maintain  a 
certain  proportion  with  their  estimate  of  themselves.  Even  shadows  keep  a  certain 
ratio  with  the  objects  that  cast  them.  Christianity  gives  us  a  deepening  sense  of 
human  worth,  and  through  that  deepened  sense  of  human  worth  we  reach  a  higher 
sense  of  Ool's  worth,  and  theology  is  bound  to  expand  along  the  brightening  lines 
of  the  human  self-consciousness  ;  and  the  gospel  and  humanity  play  backward  and 
forward  upon  one  another,  like  the  sun  which  brightens  the  eye  so  that  it  can  see 
the  sun ;  like  the  stars  which  wake  up  the  eye  so  that  it  can  find  more  of  the  stars. 
{Ibid.)  Capacity  for  evil  indicative  of  worth : — A  man's  moral  corruption  is 
index  of  the  native  moral  grandeur  of  the  man ;  just  as  the  wealth  of  weeds  in  a 
field,  equally  with  the  wealth  of  wheat  in  the  same  field,  measures  the  potency  and 
richness  of  the  soil.  The  strength  of  the  spring  can  be  calculated  as  well  by  the 
distance  which  the  pendulum  swings  to  the  left  of  the  perpendicular,  as  by  the  dis- 
tance of  its  swing  to  the  right.  There  is  the  same  degree  of  sinfulness  in  a  sin  as 
there  is  of  personal  worth  in  the  man  that  commits  it.  Here,  too,  the  shadow  keeps 
a  ratio  with  the  object  that  casts  it ;  and  the  blackness  of  the  shadow  will  vary  with 
the  brightness  of  the  sunshine  that  gets  excluded.     {Ibid.)        Man  greater  than 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  m. 

matter  : — We  are  like  the  bird  in  the  cage  that  is  kept  inside  the  burs,  but  lives  in 
continuous  communication  with  the  air  and  light  without,  as  though  animated  stilj 
with  a  sense  of  freedom  that  has  been  forgotten.  The  Shinarites  built  into  the  air. 
The  giants  piled  Ossa  on  Pelion.  Everything  is  to  us  small  because  there  is  a 
larger ;  everything  partial  because  there  is  a  whole.  Assurance  continually  rum 
ahead  of  verification.  Everything  that  gets  in  our  way  is  felt  by  us  almost  as  an 
impropriety  and  an  indignity.  In  one  way  the  earth  is  larger  than  we,  in  others  it 
is  a  great  deal  smaller.  It  is  compelled  to  loan  itself  to  our  service.  Mind  mast'^ra 
matter.  We  tame  and  harness  the  forces  of  nature  and  put  them  to  our  work.  The 
sea  that  separates  the  continents  is  made  over  into  a  highway  to  connect  them.  We 
play  off  the  energies  of  nature  upon  each  other,  and  set  the  mountain  toixent  to 
boring  a  roadway  through  the  very  mountain  it  flows  oil  from.  We  rub  out  distance 
and  talk  through  the  air  to  Chicago,  and  tie  our  letters  to  the  lightning  and  post 
them  under  the  sea  to  London,  Constantinople,  and  Calcutta.  Pent  in  the  body  we 
are,  and  yet  domiciled  in  all  the  earth;  a  sort  of  adumbration  of  omnipresence.  In 
the  same  way  thought  gets  into  the  sky,  slips  around  upon  the  ocean  of  space  from 
star  to  star  as  easily  as  a  birch  canoe  among  the  islands  of  any  mundane  archi- 
pelago ;  finds  out  what  has  been  transpiring  in  the  heavens  for  a  million  years ; 
fixes  latitudes  and  longitudes  of  suns  a  thousand  years  away  as  the  light  flies; 
learns  their  secrets,  weighs  them,  measures  them,  exacts  from  them  their  biography 
and  their  kinships  ;  reads  in  the  star-beams  the  story  of  stellar  composition  ;  finda 
the  unity  that  pervades  the  whole ;  translates  the  phenomena  of  the  heavens  into 
terms  of  terrestrial  event ;  gets  at  the  language  in  which  all  the  worlds  unconsciously 
think,  the  lines  along  which  they  instinctively  act.  It  is  grander  to  think  a  world 
than  to  be  a  world.  To  be  able  to  conceive  of  a  universe  is  fraught  with  richer  sub- 
limity than  to  be  a  universe.  We  rejoice  in  the  great  created  world.  It  pleased  God 
■when  He  bad  made  it,  and  it  pleases  us  because  our  tastes  are  like  His.  W^e  can  dis- 
cover the  laws  which  work  in  it.  A  natural  law  is  a  Divine  thought.  In  detecting 
and  threading  those  laws  then  we  are  following  where  God's  mind  has  gone  on 
before.  Mind  can  construe  only  what  mind  constructs,  and  only  when  the  mind 
that  construes  matches  the  mind  that  constructs.  In  this  way  nature  is  a  mirror  that 
ehows  both  God's  face  and  our  own  ;  and  scientific  truth  is  only  religious  truth 
Becularly  conceived.  (Ibid.)  The  dignity  of  man  as  compared  with  the  animal : — 
1.  Man  is  better  than  the  animal.  1.  In  origin.  2.  In  endowments.  3.  In 
destiny.  II.  Practical  lessons.  1.  He  ought  to  live  better  than  an  animal.  2. 
He  is  better  worth  saving.  {American  Homiletic  Review.)  Better  than  a  sheep  : — 
I.  That  a  sheep  is  wokth  something,  and  is  vert  useful.  II.  How  much  are  you 
BETTER  THAN  A  SHEEP  ?  1.  You  cau  use  God's  Woid.  Every  child  can  read  the 
Bible.  2.  You  are  better  than  a  sheep,  because  you  are  to  be  praised  or  blamed  for 
what  you  do.    3.  Because  you  can  grow  better  than  you  are  now.     III.  Because  wb 

AEE    so   MUCH  better  THAN   SHEEP  JeSUS   ChRIST    CAME  TO    SEEK   AND  SAVE  US.       IV. 

Because  we  are  better  than  sheep  God  and  His  angels  are  glad  oveb  every 
ONB  THAT  REPENTS  OF  SIN.     (W.  Harris.) 

Vers.  14-21.  That  It  might  be  fulfUled  which  was  spoken  by  Esalas  the  prophet. 
.—Isaiah's  description  of  Christ: — I.  When  our  Lord  knew  that  the  Pharisees  were 
plotting  His  destruction,  it  is  said  that  "  He  withdrew  Himself  "  from  that 
PLACE.  He  did  not  avenge  their  malice.  He  allowed  it  space  to  dissipate.  Give  no 
place  to  anger.  He  continued  His  icorks  of  mercy  ichen  He  withdreic  from  the 
Pharisees. — "  Great  multitudes  followed  Him,"  &c.  By  His  practical  benevolence 
He  would  refute  their  falsehood,  not  to  be  overcome  of  evil,  but  to  overcome  evil 
with  good.  Our  Tiord  did  not  wixh  His  fame  spread  abroad.  An  absence  of  ambi- 
tion.    We  should  be  satisfied  with  approval  of  God.     II.  The  conduct  of  our  Lord 

ON  THIS  occasion  WAS  A  FULFH/MENT  OF  A  PREDICTION  BY  IsATAH.      1.  He  is  termed  the 

••  servant "  of  Jehovah.  2.  He  was  chosen  for  His  work.  3.  Beloved  by  the  Father. 
4.  He  will  put  His  Spirit  upon  Him.  6.  He  shall  not  strive.  6.  In  His  name  shall 
the  Gentiles  trust.  {B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  I.  The  personal  characteristics  of  thif 
"Servant  of  God."  II.  His  mission.  III.  The  manner  in  which  Hb  would 
accomplish  it.  IV.  The  guarantee  that  in  this  mission  Hb  would  succked. 
(M.  N.)  I.  The  person  here  referred  to.  II.  The  description  here  given  ot 
Him.  III.  The  commission  herb  given  Him.  Lessons  :  I.  If  Christ  needed  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  upon  Him,  how  much  more  do  we  ?  2.  If  Christ  does  not 
manifest  ostentation,  why  should  we?  3.  If  Christ,  who  is  all  purity,  could  be 
gentle  with  the  erring,  why  should  not  we?  {W.  M.  Taylor, D.D.)        L  His  Divin« 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  232 

appointment.  II.  His  special  enlowment.  III.  His  expansive  work.  {J.  Rawliruon.) 
I.  The  love  of  the  Fathek.  Tiie  mission  of  the  Son  had  its  origin  in  tlie  Father's 
pitying  love  for  us  (1  John  iv.  9,  10 ;  John  iii.  16).  II.  The  condescension  of  the 
Son.  Became  a  servant.  III.  The  co-opekation  or  the  Holy  Spibit.  1.  It  was 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  the  Son  was  qualified  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  work 
He  had  undertaken  (Johi  i.  16 ;  iii.  34).  2.  It  is  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  the  work 
of  Christ  is  now  carried  on  in  the  heaits  of  men  (John  xvi.  7,  8).  (C  Kemhle.'^ 
L  The  progress  of  Christianity  shall  continue  until  the  principles  of  Christ's  king- 
dom pervade  the  entire  globe.  II.  There  is  a  modern  tendency  to  speak  of  the 
failure  of  Christianity.  III.  In  what  direction  do  indications  around  us  point?  It 
is  thought  that  Christianity  attempts  too  much.  It  is  thought  that  the  agency  is 
wholly  inadequate  to  accomplish  the  work  proposed.  IV.  The  sure  future  of  Chris- 
tianity. (Bishop  Simp.^oti.)  Physical  forces  gentle : — The  forces  of  physical  nature 
around  ns  might  serve  to  teach  us  that  those  things  are  not  always  the  most 
precious  that  make  the  most  noise.  The  common  air  and  dew,  the  rain  of  heaven, 
the  light  that  falls  upon  us  day  by  day — influences  like  these  work  silently  and 
without  any  ostentation,  and  yet  no  one  will  doubt  that  they  are  far  more  precious 
to  us  than  the  noisy  forces  of  nature,  the  earthquake,  or  the  hurricane,  or  the  wild 
tornado.  What  comparison,  for  instance,  can  you  draw  between  the  lightning  and 
the  light?  The  lightning  may  attract  our  attention  more,  demanding  as  it  does 
that  attention  in  imperious  thunder  tones,  and  yet  who  will  venture  to  say  that 
there  is  any  comparison  between  the  daily  sunlight  so  beautiful  to  the  eye,  so 
essential  to  vegetation,  so  necessary  to  all  the  beautiful  variety  of  colour  in  the 
world,  and  that  noisy  and  occasional  flash,  which  may  indeed  purify  the  atmo- 
sphere for  a  moment,  but  which  can  do  but  little  more,  unless  it  is  sent  on  some 
irrand  of  destruction.  And  even  in  respect  to  power,  what  comparison  can  be 
ilrawn  between  the  earthquake,  the  most  powerful  perhaps  of  the  ostentatious  forces 
of  nature — the  earthquake  which  can  rend  a  continent,  or  swaUow  up  a  whole  city — 
what  comparison  can  be  drawn  between  that  and  the  great  silent  law  of  gravitation, 
toat  law  which  guides  the  flight  of  every  bird,  and  the  fall  of  every  pebble,  that  law 
which  leads  the  sea  in  its  ebb  and  flow,  which  holds  this  world  and  all  the  mighty 
«rbs  of  the  firmament  in  the  hollow  of  its  silent  but  mighty  hand  ?  [F.  Greeves.) 
Social  forces  gentle  : — And  so  it  is  in  S(  cial  life:  we  think  a  great  deal  of  the  matters 
that  astonish  and  dazzle  us;  of  the  outbreak  of  passionate  feeling  in  a  noble  cause, 
of  the  hearts  that  inflame  the  multitude,  of  the  deed  of  superhuman  daring  that 
makes  a  man  the  hero  of  an  hour,  of  some  noble  work  in  rescuing  life  from  flood 
or  fire — these  things  occupy  our  thoughts,  and  we  think  very  little  of  the  thousand 
names,  and  deeds,  and  looks  of  kindness,  by  which  God  is  honoured,  and  humanity 
is  blessed,  and  the  world  is  made  liker  heaven.  And  yet  who  will  veutuje  to  say 
that  the  aggregate  of  the  world's  happiness  is  as  much  promoted  by  that  public 
deed,  however  noble  and  illustrious,  as  by  the  silent  stay-at-home  virtues  of  multi- 
tudes cf  persons  whose  names  will  never  be  known  until  the  great  day  shall  declare 
them?    (Ihid.) 

» 

Ver.  20.  A  trulsed  reed  shall  He  not  break. — The  tenderness  oj  Christ : — 1.  The 
originality  of  Christ.  It  is  easy  to  smile  on  the  strong  and  pror.perous ;  Christ's 
smiles  were  for  the  weak.  2.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  root  of  His  tenderness.  This 
brought  Him  from  the  land  of  glory ;  He  came  to  save  man.  3.  How  practical 
Christ's  teaching.  4.  But  in  dealing  with  bruised  reed  and  dim  wick,  tenderness 
must  be  wise  not  to  break  the  reed  and  quench  the  wick.  No  unwise  precipitancy. 
6.  His  work  is  not  merely  negative.  He  will  do  more  than  not  break ;  He  will 
strengthen.  His  work  is  perfect.  (C.  T.  Coster.)  Cojnpassion  of  Christ  to  weak 
believers : — I.  Some  chabacteristics  op  weak  eelievers.  1.  The  metaphor  of  a 
"  bruised  reed  "  conveys  the  idea  of  (1)  a  state  of  weakness.  He  is  weak  in  know- 
ledge, love,  faith,  joy,  zeal,  prayer.  He  laments  his  weakness.  (2)  A  state  of  oppres- 
sion. He  feels  himself  crushed  under  a  sense  of  guilt.  2.  The  metaphor  of 
"  smoking  flax "  conveys  the  idea  of  grace,  true  and  sincere,  but  languishing  and 
jnst  expiring.  Describe  the  reality  of  religion  in  a  low  degree.  1,  The  Christian 
feels  an  uneasiness,  emptiness,  anxiety  within.  2.  He  is  very  jealous  of  tha 
sincerity  of  his  religion.  3.  He  retains  direction  and  tendency  toward  Christ. 
Even  the  smoking  flax  sends  up  some  exhalations  of  love  towards  heaven.  II.  Thb 
CASE  AND  COMPASSION  OF  Jesfs  Christ  FOR  WEAK  BELIEVERS.  1.  The  declarations 
and  assurances  of  Jesus.  2.  His  people  in  every  age  have  found  these  promises 
good.    Hear  David,  "  This  poor  man  cried."  &c.    3.  Go  to  the  cross  an  I  thgce  learn 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

this  love  and  compassion.  {President  Bavies.)  The  Redeemer's  gentleness: — 
Consider  this  narrative: — I.  As  an  exhibition  of  the  personal  character  and 
DISPOSITION  OF  Jesus.  1.  He  did  not  abandon  His  work  in  disi;ust.  2.  He  did  not 
flag  in  it,  but  still  healed  all  that  came  to  Him.  3.  He  did  not  rail  at  His  enemies, 
defy  or  denounce  them  to  the  people.  4.  He  quietly  retired  before  the  storm.  5. 
He  avoideil  giving  further  offence.  II.  View  it  in  relation  to  His  work  and 
KINGDOM  I  Isa.  xlii.  1).  III.  ^ee  the  disposition  of  Jesus  towards  us  individuai  ly. 
1.  Are  we  persecutors,  He  lets  His  meekness  conquer  hostility.  2.  Are  we  weak 
in  fftith,  He  helps  to  victory.     3.  Are  we  in  affliction,  He  acts  a  kind  part.    Learn 

1.  To  love  and  trust  Him.  2.  To  imitate  His  spirit  and  conduct  in  timea  of  perse- 
cution. (Congregational  Pulpit.)  Bruised  reed  and  smoking  Jlax : — Christ  has 
nothing  in  common  with  demagogues,  or  world  conquerors.  The  characteristics  oi 
His  operations : — I.  Qoietneks.  Rivulets  noisy ;  deep,  full  rivers,  stiU.  StDlness 
the  condition  of  growth.  II.  Tenderness.  Tenderness  does  not  imply  lack  of 
force.  Delicacy  of  touch  in  strong-natured  men.  Tenderness  is  not  to  be  associated 
with  moral  indifference.  In  Him,  associated  with  intense  antagonism  to  moral  evil. 
III.  Victorious  on-goino.  No  pause  in  the  progress.  IV.  So  Christ  is  the  great 
Creator  of  hope  in  the  hearts  of  sin-cursed  men  —  "In  His  name  shall  the 
Gentiles  trust,"  &c.  (Preacher's  Monthly.)  Sweet  comfort  for  feeble  saints: — L 
A  VIEW  op  mortal  frailtt.     1.  The  encouragement  in  our  text  applies  to  weak  ones. 

2.  To  worthless  thinjis.  A  student  cannot  read  by  a  smoking  flax.  3.  To  offensive 
things.  4.  These  may  yet  be  of  some  service.  II.  The  Divine  compassion.  III. 
There  is  certain  victory — "  Till  He  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory."  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  tenderness  of  God: — I.  The  tenderness  of  God  as  shown  at 
certain  periods  and  seasons  of  our  lives.  II.  If  the  bruised  reed  may  represent 
our  broken  hopes,  it  may  also  represent  odr  broken  resolutions.  III.  That  Christ 
does  not  and  will  not  apply  the  least  force  OB  violence  to  propagate  His  ItKVr 
oB  religion.  God  understands  the  structure  of  our  minds  and  never  offers  violence 
to  their  free  exercise.  (W.  H.  U.  Murray.)  Weakness  prevalent: — Have  you 
ever  thought  how  many  weak  things  there  are  in  the  world  ?  Look  at  the  natural 
kingdom.  How  few  are  the  oaks,  and  how  many  are  the  rushes  1  There  is  a  rose, 
with  a  stem  so  fragile  as  to  almost  break  under  the  burden  of  its  own  blushing  and 
fragrant  bloom.  Yet  God  is  God  of  the  reed  and  the  rose.  (Ibid.)  Tenderness 
better  than  terror-: — Why,  you  might  as  well  try  to  frighten  a  flower  into  lifting  its 
face  toward  the  aun  as  to  frighten  a  soul  into  lifting  itself  toward  Godl  The 
attraction  of  light  and  love  from  above,  and  not  the  propulsion  of  fear  from  beneath, 
is  what  accomplishes  the  beautiful  result.  There  is  no  need  of  any  such  rude  and 
tyrannous  force,  such  violent  benevolence.  (Ibid.)  Tenderness  toward  the  irreso- 
lute : — Because  you  have  broken  one  resolution,  never  imagine  that  He  will  not 
assist  you  to  keep  another,  made  with  greater  wisdom,  and  a  more  determined  pur- 
pose. The  temples  of  God,  so  far  as  we  represent  them,  are  all  constructed  oat  of 
ruins.  He  builds  from  the  fragments  of  an  ancient  overthrow.  Be  persuaded  of 
this,  that  nothing  good  in  you  ever  escapes  the  notice  of  God,  He  is  not,  as  some 
seem  to  picture  Him,  a  heartless  overseer,  standing  over  you  whip  in  hand,  and 
watching  for  a  chance  to  get  in  a  blow.  His  observation  is  like  a  gardener's. 
There  is  not  a  bud  of  promise  that  can  open  in  your  soul,  there  is  not  an  odour 
that  can  be  added  to  the  fragrance  of  your  lives,  that  He  does  not  detect  it  and 
rejoice  in  it.  Whatever  beautifies  you  glorifies  Him.  He  delights  in  year  de- 
velopment, and  smiles  on  your  every  effort  in  that  direction.  (Ibid.)  Tenderness 
toward  the  outcast : — I  met  a  man  the  other  day  who  had  lived  like  the  prodigal ; 
wasted  the  substance  of  body  and  brain  in  riotous  living.  A  magnificent  wreck  he 
was.  A  man  who  stood  as  1  have  seen  a  tree  stand  after  a  fire  had  swept  through 
the  forest — blasted  and  charred  to  the  very  core,  all  the  life  and  vigour  burnt  out 
of  it;  yet  keeping  its  magnificent  girth  and  symmetry  of  proportion,  even  to  the 
topmost  bough.  So  that  man  stood.  I  took  him  kindly  by  the  hand,  and  said, 
"  Friend,  tliere  is  hope  in  your  future  yet."  He  drew  himself  slowly  up  until  he 
stood  at  his  straightest,  looked  me  steadily  in  the  eye,  and  said,  "Do  you  mean 
to  say,  Mr.  Murray,  that  if  I  went  to-night  to  God,  He  would  pardon  such  a  wretch 
as  I  ?  "  See  how  he  misunderstood  God  !  See  how  we  all  misunderstand  Him  I 
Pardon !  Is  there  any  one  He  will  not  pardon  ?  Is  there  a  noisome  marsh  or 
stagnant  pool  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  so  dark,  so  reeking  with  rottenneea 
and  mire,  that  the  sun  scorns  to  shine  on  it  ?  And  is  there  a  man  so  low,  so  heayy 
with  corruption,  so  coarse  and  brutal,  that  God's  love  does  not  seek  him  out  T  How 
U  the  world  to  be  redeemed  if  you  put  a  limit  to  God's  love  ?   How  is  the  great  laasa 


CHAP.  xn,J  ST.  MATTHEW.  233 

of  humanity  to  be  washed  and  lifted,  if  the  thoughts  of  God  are  like  our  thoughts, 
and  His  ways  like  our  ways  ?  It  is  because  He  does  not  love  as  we  do,  because  Ha 
does  not  feel  as  we  do,  because  He  does  not  act  as  we  do,  that  I  have  any  hope  for 
my  race — that  I  have  any  hope  for  myself.  (Ibid,)  Encouragement  for  new 
converts: — I.  The  new  convert  typified  by  the  bbuised  beed.  A  reed  one  of  the 
frailest  things  in  nature,  a  fit  image  of  a  person  whose  mind  is  newly  turned  to  a 
knowledge  of  Divine  truth ;  a  bruised  teed,  they  go  in  sorrow.  God  gentle  to  such, 
n.  The  smoking  flax  shall  Hs  mot  quench.  Before,  it  was  portrayed  by  brokennesa 
of  heart ;  here,  by  weakness  of  faith.  Of  all  things  in  the  world  flax  is  the  most 
combustible.  The  smallest  spark  will  kindle  it  into  a  blaze.  The  faith  little,  but 
real.  The  flax  was  smoking.  A  painted  fire  would  have  occasioned  no  smoke ;  however 
small  therefore  the  fire,  it  was  certainly  a  real  fire.  (H.  Blwit.)  The  gentleness 
of  Christ : — I.  Examples  of  Christ's  gentleness  recorded  in  Scripture.  1.  In  His 
dealing  with  His  disciples  (Luke  ix.  55 ;  John  xiv.  9 ;  Mark  ix.  33, 3-i ;  John  xx.  27; 
xxi.  15-17).  2.  And  so  in  hke  manner  to  all  the  people  (Matt.  xi.  28-30;  Luke  vii. 
86-48;  John  viii  3-11).  II.  Some  gbeat  tetjths  taught  us  by  Chbist's  gentle- 
ness. 1.  It  implies  that  when  there  is  so  much  as  a  spark  of  life  in  the  conscience, 
there  is  possibility  of  entire  conversion  to  God.  2.  The  only  sure  way  of  fostering 
the  beginnings  of  repentance  is  to  receive  them  with  gentleness  and  compassion.  How 
great  a  consolation  there  is  in  this  Divine  tenderness  of  Christ,  {n.  E.  Manning.) 
God's  care  specific : — I.  Our  entire  dependence  upon  God.  We  are  not  trees  able 
to  resist,  but  reeds.  II.  The  text  seems  to  imply  that  God  sometimes  bruises  us. 
Life  is  a  discipline.  (G.  H.  Hepicorth,  D.D.)  God's  method  with  the  weak  and 
weary : — I.  The  special  tbeatjxent,  negatively  stated.  1.  Considerate,  not 
arbitrary.  2.  Sparing.  3.  Merciful.  4.  Conciliating — He  does  not  reject  and 
despise.  II.  The  works  ik  the  ministby  of  Chkist  that  fulfils  the  pbomisb. 
1.  The  redemptive  works.  (1)  The  incarnation.  (2)  Atonement.  2.  Co-operative 
works.  (1)  Means  of  grace.  (2)  Disciphne.  (3)  Example.  (4)  Guidance.  (5) 
Support.  (W.  E.  M.  Linfield,  D.D.)  An  improving  discipline: — As  the  flax  ia 
broken  in  the  hackle  spun  by  hard,  patient  labour  into  thread,  woven  with  care  and 
skill  into  the  woof,  and  by  exposure  to  light  and  darkness,  dew  and  sunshine,  heat 
and  cold,  is  bleached  and  fulled  into  shining  linen,  so  shall  the  glorious  appearance 
of  the  redeemed  come  out  of  the  great  tribulation  of  life,  and  from  the  fulling  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  (Ibid.)  An  emblem  of  the  useless  : — A  reed  is,  at  the 
best,  but  a  very  ignoble  growth  in  the  vegetable  world ;  it  has  no  flowers  for  the 
band  of  taste ;  it  has  no  fruits  for  the  lap  of  toil ;  it  has  no  timber  for  archi- 
tecture ;  it  can  form  no  weapon  for  war ;  it  may  render  a  very  poor  and  uncertain 
support  if  you  cut  it  into  a  slender  staff,  or  it  may  perhaps  solace  a  weary  hoar 
with  very  questionable  music  if  you  shape  it  into  a  shepherd's  pipe;  but  at  the  best 
a  reed  is  one  of  the  least  precious  thingb  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.  (F.  Greeves.) 
Weak  grace  may  be  victorious : — I.  The  object.  1.  A  bruised  reed — such  as  are 
convinced  of  their  own  weakness,  vanity,  and  emptiness.  2.  The  smoking  flax  of 
the  wick  of  a  candle,  wherein  there  is  not  only  no  profit,  but  some  trouble  and 
noisomeness.  II.  The  act — "  He  shall  not  break  .  .  .  not  quench."  IIL  Th« 
CONTINUANCE  OF  IT — "Till  He  SGud  forth  judgment  unto  victory."  Doctrine: 
True ;  though  weak,  grace  shall  be  preserved,  and  in  the  end  prove  victorioas.  1. 
The  love  of  God  is  engaged  in  its  preservation.  2.  The  power  of  God.  3.  The 
holiness  of  God.  4.  The  wisdom  of  God.  6.  The  glory  of  God.  Further,  Christ 
is  engaged  in  this  work,  as  (1)  A  purchaser  of  His  people ;  (2)  An  actual  proprietor 
and  possessor  by  way  of  (a)  donation  from  His  Father ;  (b)  conquest  of  every 
gracious  person  ;  (c)  mutual  consent  and  agreement ;  (d)  appointment  to  take  care 
of  every  believer.  Christ's  charge  was  (a)  to  redeem  them ;  {b)  to  be  their  governor; 
(e)  to  receive  them ;  (d)  to  perfect  them.  {S.  Charnock.)  Bruised  reed : — Jerome 
takes  it  for  a  musical  instrument  made  of  a  reed  which  shepherds  used  to  have, 
which,  when  bruised,  is  flung  away  by  the  musician,  as  disdaining  to  spend  hia 
breath  upon  such  a  vile  instrument  that  emits  no  pleasant  sound.  (Ibid.)  Smoking 
flax : — Though  He  walk  in  the  way  where  bruised  reeds  lie.  He  will  step  over  them, 
and  not  break  them  more ;  He  will  not  tread  upon  a  hitle  smoking  flax  that  lies 
languishing  upon  the  ground,  and  so  put  it  out  with  His  foot,  though  it  hurts  the 
eyes  with  its  smoke,  and  offends  the  nostrils  with  its  stench.  {Maldonatus.) 
Security  in  abundant  grace : — The  sun  is  not  able  to  dry  up  a  drop  of  sea-water 
that  hes  in  the  midst  of  the  sand,  which  the  sea  every  minute  rolls  upon  and  pre- 
serves ;  neither  can  the  flesh  the  least  grace,  while  the  fulness  of  Christ  flows  oat 
apon  it  to  supply  it.     (S.  Cliarnock.)        Speo-'al  care  of  the  weak  ones : — As  the 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xil. 

sickly,  faint  child,  hardly  able  to  go,  and  not  the  strong  one,  is  the  object  of  the 
father's  pity,  the  weaker  thy  faith,  which  lies  mixed  with  a  world  of  strong  cor- 
ruptions,  the  more  will  Christ  be  affected  with  thy  case,  and  pity  that  grace  of  Hia 
own  which  suffers  under  them.  {Ibid.)  Safety  in  being  like  Christ : — Well, 
then,  will  Christ  suffer  one  to  perish  who  hath  the  same  nature,  spirit,  and  mind 
which  He  Himself  hath  ?  Will  He  endure  that  His  own  picture,  limned  by  the  art 
of  His  Spirit,  with  the  colours  of  His  own  blood,  in  so  near  a  resemblance  to  Him, 
that  He  hath  not  His  image  again  in  anything  in  the  world  besides  it ;  and  this 
drawn  for  His  own  glory,  that  He  might  be  a  head  among  many  brethren  ;  will  He 
suffer  80  excellent  a  piece  as  this  to  be  torn  in  pieces,  in  contempt  of  Him,  either 
by  flesh  or  devils  ?  (Ibid.)  Grace  never  blown  quite  out : — Grace  can  never  be 
BO  blown  out,  but  there  will  be  some  smoke,  some  spark,  whereby  it  may  be 
rekindled.  The  smoking  snuff  of  Peter's  grace  was  lighted  again  by  a  sudden  look 
of  his  Master.  [Ibid.)  Surprise  at  safety  of  Divine  life  in  souU  : — To  see  a  rich 
jewel  in  a  child's  hand,  with  a  troop  of  thieves  about  him  snatching  at  it,  and  yet 
not  able  to  plunder,  would  raise  an  astonishment  both  in  the  actors  and  spectators, 
and  make  them  conclude  an  invisible  strength  that  protects  the  child,  and  defeats 
the  invaders.  (Ibid.)  Weak  grace,  weak  glory  : — Though  weak  grace  will  carry 
a  man  to  heaven,  it  will  be  just  as  a  small  and  weak  vessel  surprised  by  a  shattering 
storm,  which,  though  it  may  get  to  the  shore,  yet  with  excessive  hardships  and 
fears ;  such  will  sail  through  a  stormy  sea,  and  have  a  daily  contest  with  stormy 
doubts,  ready  to  overset  their  hopes ;  whereas  a  stout  ship,  well  rigged,  will  play 
with  the  waves  in  the  midst  of  a  tempest,  and  at  last  pass  through  all  difficulties, 
without  many  fears,  into  its  haven.  (Ibid.)  Weak  Christians : — Weak  Christiana 
are  like  glasses  which  are  hurt  with  the  least  violent  usage,  otherwise,  if  gently 
handled,  will  continue  a  long  time.  (Sibbes.)  Good  in  seeming  evils  : — Some 
things,  though  bad  in  themselves,  yet  discover  some  good,  as  smoke  discovers  some 
fire.  Breaking  out  in  the  body  shows  strength  of  nature.  Some  infirmities  dis- 
cover more  good  than  some  seeming  beautiful  actions.  Better  it  is  that  the  water 
should  run  something  muddily  than  not  at  all.  Job  had  more  grace  in  his  dis- 
tempers than  his  friends  in  their  seeming  wise  carriage.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  22,  29.    One  possessed  with  a  devil,  blind  and  dumb. — I.  What  kikd  ov 

POWER  Satan  still  exercises  generally  over  mankind.  II.  All  who  apply  to 
Jesus  shall  surely  obtain  deliverance.  III.  On  this  deliverance  an  experiencb 
OF  Christ's  mercy  will  excite  our  admiration  and  confirm  odb  faith.  (W.  P. 
Wait,  M.A.)  I.  A  miracle  of  singular  power  and  mercy.  II.  The  effect 
PRODUCED  BY  this  MIRACLE  ON  THE  MINDS  OF  THE  PEOPLE — "They  Were  amazcd," 
&c.  III.  The  IMPIOUS  calumnies  of  the  enemies  of  Christ.  This  charge  dis- 
played their  malignity.  There  are  two  principles  involved  in  our  Lord's  reply, 
1.  That  the  power  of  Christ  is  greater  than  that  of  all  the  powers  of  darkness.  2. 
That  the  manifestation  of  His  superior  power  estabUshes  His  claims  as  the  Author 
of  the  new  dispensation — "  Then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  you."    IV.  To 

AWAKE  SALUTARY  SELF-INSPECTION  THE  REDEEMER  UTTERED  THE  SOLEMN  ADMONITIOU 
RESPECTING  THE  DANGER  OF  NEUTRALITY  AND  INDECISION  IN  REFERENCE  TO  HiS  CLAIMS. 

1.  The  danger  of  an  undecided  state.  2.  Adore  the  gracious  power  of  Christ. 
3.  Rejoice  in  the  service  and  cause  of  Christ.  4.  Dread  the  thought  of  being  found 
amongst  the  enemies  of  Christ,  (J.  Fletcher.)  Christ  and  the  Pharisees  : — I. 
The  good  man's  relation  to  the  world  of  want.   1.  The  good  man  is  approachable. 

2.  He  is  sympathetic.  3.  He  is  unostentatious.  II.  The  Devil's  relation  to  good 
MEN.  How  did  these  Devil's  men  use  Christ?  1.  They  resorted  to  personal  abuse 
— "  This  fellow."  2.  They  ignored  the  value  of  the  greatest  blessings.  3.  They 
insulted  the  plainest  common-seuse.  4.  Tbey  attempted  to  trace  good  results  to  a 
bad  cause,  5.  They  falsified  the  deepest  and  truest  instincts  of  human  nature. 
(J.  Parker.) 

Ver.  30,  He  that  Is  not  with  Me  la  agrainst  Me. — Neutrality  in  religion  im- 
possible : — I.  The  character  described.  1.  Let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the 
openly  profane.  2.  There  are  others  not  habitually  profane.  3.  The  honest  and 
well-disposed.  4.  The  outwardly  religious.  II.  The  light  in  which  they  abb 
regarded  FY  Christ.  All  who  are  not  with  Christ  are  against  Him,  and  will  be 
chargeable — (1)  With  rejecting  His  salvation  ;  (2)  With  inducing  others  to  reject 
it ;  (3)  With  preventing  as  far  as  they  can  the  display  of  the  Saviour's  glory. 
Learn :  1.  How  inevitable  is  the  destruction  of  the  Saviour's  enemies.    2.  HoW 


CHAP.  XII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  237 

awfully  severe  will  be  their  destruction.  (S.  Steer.)  The  necessity  of  gathering 
with  Christ : — I.  Describe  the  man  who  is  with  Cheist.  Union  and  companion- 
ehip.  II.  The  proof  of  an  interest  in  Christ,  as  afforded  by  our  gaihertno 
with  Him.  {T.  Dale,  M.J.)  With  Christ,  or  against?  Gathering,  or  Scatter- 
ing t — The  principle  illust  ated  is  the  impossibility  of  a  state  of  neutrality  in  the 
service  of  Christ :  illustrations  are  fetched  first  from  the  battlefield — "  He  that  is  not 
with  Me,"  &c.  And,  secondly,  from  the  harvest-field — •'  He  that gathereth  not,"  *c. 
The  immediate  occasion  of  the  text  was  the  blasphemous  imputation  of  the  Phari- 
sees, that  Jesus  cast  out  devils  by  Beelzebub.  In  reply  our  Lord  appeals  to  reason  — 
*'  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself,"  &c.  He  also  appeals  to  the  acknowledged 
fact.  Thus  He  must  be  the  stronger.  I.  Make  a  personal  application  of  thh 
B3BJECT.  In  the  battlefield  of  life,  whose  side  have  you  chosen  ?  In  the  great 
harvest-field  of  the  world,  whose  interests  are  you  serving  f  1.  The  battlefield  is 
the  world.  We  are  soldiers.  Are  we  fighting  ?  Are  we  clad  in  armour  f  2.  The 
harvest-field.  Are  you  gathering  or  wasting?  II.  Make  a  national  application  of 
the  subject.  Has  England  gathered  with  Christ,  or  scattered?  {C.  R.  Alford, 
M.A.)    I.  That  those  who  are  not  with  Christ  in  discipleship  and  in  the  pbo- 

PESSIOH  OF  FAITH  ARE  AGAINST  ChBIST,  AS  THE  DISCIPLES  OF  ANOTHER  MASTER,  AND 
IN  THE  DISOBEDIENCE  OF  UNBELIEF.  II.  ThOSE  WHO  ARE  NOT  WITH  ChBIST  IN  THK 
PURPOSE  AND  DESIGN  OF  HiS  DEATH,  ARE  AGAINST  ChRIST  IN  DEFEATING  THE  PUR- 
POSE OF  His  DEATH.  (1)  The  first  purpose  was  to  make  an  atonement  for  our  sins ; 
(•2)  To  give  repentance  and  pardon  to  guilty  men  ;  (3)  To  make  meet  for  the  glory 
of  heaven.  We  can  be  with  Christ  by  enjoyment  and  participation.  We  are  against 
Christ  by  defeating  the  purpose  of  His  death.  (1)  By  rejecting  it  altogether  in  a 
spirit  of  infidelity ;  (2)  By  embracing  a  system  which  does  not  contain  any  of  its 
grand  principles;  (3)  By  careless  unconcern.  III.  Those  who  are  not  with 
Christ  in  the  affections  of  the  heart,  are  against  Him  in  its  enmities  and 
IN  ITS  indifference.  To  love  Christ  is  an  essential  of  Christianity ;  we  may  be 
against  Christ  by  enmity  or  inditference.  IV.  Those  who  are  not  with  Christ 
IN  gathering,  are  against  Him  in  scattering  abroad.  Neutrality  here  is  oppo- 
sition. (J.  Dixon.)  No  neutrality  in  religion: — In  those  days  when  there  was 
war  in  heaven,  and  Satan  and  his  angels  rebelled  against  the  Almighty,  one  circle 
of  angels  alone,  it  is  said,  remained  neutral.  They  would  not  join  the  arch-rebel, 
neither  would  they  range  themselves  among  the  hosts  of  their  Almighty  Sovereign. 
At  the  final  discomfiture  of  the  rebellious  angels,  that  circle  which  had  not  joined 
in  their  rebellion  could  not  justly  be  associated  with  them  in  their  punishment ; 
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  did  it  deserve  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  Those  angels, 
therefore,  were  consigned  to  the  earth,  and  boimd  irrevocably  to  its  fortunes.  These 
are  the  fairies.  They  enjoy  all  the  pleasures  and  all  the  happiness  which  their  new 
habitation  can  afford ;  but  it  is  on  a  lease,  as  it  were,  and  every  seven  years  theii 
lease  expires.  It  is  renewable  as  long  as  the  earth  lasts,  and  they  are  always  rein- 
stated in  their  privileges  on  paying  to  Satan  a  quit  rent  of  one  of  their  number.  Now 
this  is  an  allegory.  Whenever  we  have  been  neglectful  of  our  duty,  whenever  we 
have  refused  to  fight  the  battles  of  Him  whose  soldiers  we  have  vowed  ourselves,  we 
may  be  forgiven,  indeed,  and  reinstated  in  our  former  privileges ;  but  it  is  always 
at  the  expense  of  some  sacrifice  to  the  principle  of  evil,  whose  power  we  should  have 
resisted  from  the  first,  but  did  not.  iNewland.)  No  neutrality  in  religion  : — I. 
Who  are  allied  with  Christ?  1.  They  who  are  deUvered  from  the  power  of 
Satan.  2.  They  who  are  in  co-operation  with  Christ.  II.  All  not  thus  wtth  Christ 
ARE  OF  NECESSITY  AGAINST  HiM.  1.  That  man's  natural  state  is  one  of  antagonism 
to  God.  2.  That  it  is  a  necessity  of  man's  nature  to  influence  for  good  or  evil  all 
with  whom  He  may  associate.  3.  That  our  allegiance  is  Christ's  righteous  and 
inalienable  due.  {H.  C.  H.)  I.  The  human  heart  cannot  be  in  a  state  in  which 
neither  Christ  nor  the  world  has  the  supremacy.  Man  must  have  a  master  and  a 
God,  &c.  II.  Neither  Christ  nor  His  enemy  will  accept  of,  or  allow  of,  neutrality — 
serving  both  in  turn,  and  hence  warring  against  both  in  turn.  III.  Neutrality  is 
impossible,  inasmuch  as  Christ  holds  it  to  be  war  against  Himself.  Christ  requires 
the  whole  heart,  hfe,  &c.  IV.  Neutrality  is  seen  to  be  practical  hostility  to  the 
kingdom  of  Christ— enemies  of  Christ.  {J.  Stewart.)  No  "  via  media  "  in  moral* 
or  religion : — Christ's  words  contain  a  principle  and  an  appeal.  We  cannot  occupy 
8  neutral  position  in  relation  to  either  morals  or  religion  now  when  life  is  before  UB, 
or  by  and  by  when  the  issues  of  life  are  manifested.  I.  This  truth.  Border- 
countries  are  proverbially  bad  to  live  in.  The  two  clauses  of  the  text  may  be  r«ui 
(has  :  1.  He  that  is  not  in  heart  with  Me  is  against  Me.     No  externality  of  observ< 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Ichap.  xa 

anoe  will  sufSce  :  no  mere  association  will  suffice.  There  must  be  personal  heart- 
nnion  with  Christ.  2.  He  that  is  not  in  life-service  with  Me  is  against  Me.  Un- 
practical sentimentality  will  not  suffice.  Loudest  professiona  will  not  suffice. 
Christ's  words  appeal  searchingly  to  two  classes,  (a)  Those  who  excuse  wrong  life 
by  right  creed,  (&)  Those  who  excuse  wrong  creed  by  good  life.  IL  The  qualifi- 
cations OF  THIS  TBUTH.  Temporary  uncertainty  may  be  good,  or  at  least  may  be 
excused.  Such  as  comes  in  (a)  Mental  states  of  indecision  ;  (6)  Beginnings  of  reli- 
gions life;  (c)  Occasions  of  religious  doubt.  There  is  no  excuse  for  uncertainty  or 
indecision  in  relation  to  Christ.     We  ought  to  follow  Him  wholly,     (B.  Tuck.) 

Ver.  31.  All  maimer  of  sin  and  blasphemy. — Sin  against  the  Holy  Ohost : — 1.  Thii 
is  not  a  sin  which  one  can  commit  by  accident,  and  without  knowing  it.  This  is  an 
alleviation  to  many  who  are  in  great  distress.  They  fear  that  they  have  committed 
the  unpardonable  sin.  It  is  the  closing  of  a  long  series  of  wickednesses.  2.  No 
man  need  fear  that  he  has  committed  the  unpardonable  sin  who  is  deeply  alarmed 
and  anxious  about  it ;  for  the  very  nature  of  that  sin  is  moral  insensibility.  8. 
Ordinary  prrcrastination,  the  putting  aside  of  things  right  on  account  of  the 
superior  attraction  of  some  worldly  good — these  things  though  dangerous,  are  not 
the  sins  which  our  Saviour  marked.  Many  persons  are  grieving  the  Divine  Spirit, 
who  are  not  properly  to  be  called  blasphemers  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  Is  this 
perversion  frequent  ?  Men  are  not  Ukely  to  fall  into  it  suddenly.  This  moral  per- 
version may  be  the  result  of  physical  dissipation.  Constant  resistance  of  good 
impulses  may  lead  to  it.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Tampering  with  the  moral  sense 
destructive  of  it: — By  this  minute,  constant,  and  continued  tampering  with  big 
moral  sense,  he  at  last  comes  to  that  state  in  which  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God, 
when  it  shines  upon  him,  produces  no  more  effect  than  the  morning  sim,  shining 
upon  the  face  of  a  corpse  that  lies  in  the  east  window.  When  men  lie  dead  in  the 
house,  the  morning  bell  calls  them  not.  They  do  not  hear  the  children  on  the 
stairs.  Their  ears  are  deaf  to  the  sweet  sounds  of  birds  out  of  doors.  The  beauty 
dispersed  all  abroad,  their  eyes  do  not  behold.  And  I  see  men  whose  moral  sense 
is  so  dead  that  it  is  never  touched  by  all  the  mercies  of  God  above,  nor  by  all  the 
mercies  of  God  distributed  among  men  below.  (Ihid.)  Dissipated  men  not  alwayt 
destitute  of  moral  sensibility : — There  are  sometimes  very  bad  men  in  whom,  if  you 
could  only  steal  into  the  chapel  of  their  souls,  and  strike  the  bell  there,  you  could 
rouse  up  a  sensibility  which  would  surprise  their  friends  and  them.  But  it  is  shut. 
It  is  kept  locked  up.  Then  there  are  other  men  whose  dissipation  seems  to  make 
a  clean  sweep,  so  that  there  is  nothing  left  in  them.  It  destroys  the  imagination ; 
it  destroys  the  affections ;  it  destroys  the  whole  moral  sense.  Ton  may  sound  on 
every  nerve,  and  along  every  chord,  and  there  is  no  place  left  in  them  that  has  not 
been  destroyed  by  dissipation.  (Ibid.)  Moral  sensibility  man's  best  gift: — I  hear 
men  thank  God  that  He  gave  them  such  reason.  Eeason  is  a  stately  and  noble 
gift,  surely ;  but  conscience  is  better  than  reason.  I  hear  men  congratulating  theii 
fellows  that  God  gave  them  genius.  They  are  poets.  They  uie  orators.  They  are 
artists.  They  carve  the  stone.  They  depict  in  colours  the  various  forms  of  life. 
And  this,  surely,  is  a  munificent  gift  from  the  hand  of  God.  But  no  genius  is 
comparable  to  the  sense  of  that  which  is  right  and  wrong.  Genius  of  conscience  it 
the  best  genius  that  a  man  can  have.  (Ibid.)  Conscience  most  needed : — A  man 
may  cut  away  every  mast  on  his  ship,  and  yet  pursue  his  voyage.  A  man  may 
have  everything  on  deck  carried  overboard,  and  yet  make  some  headway.  A  man 
in  the  middle  of  the  ocean  can  afford  to  lose  everything  else  better  than  he  ean 
afford  to  lose  the  compass  in  the  binnacle.  When  that  is  gone  he  has  nothing  to 
steer  by.  That  little  instrument  is  his  best  friend.  It  is  his  guide.  And  that 
conscience  which  God  has  given  you  is  your  compass  and  guide.  You  can  afford  to 
lose  genius,  and  taste,  and  reason,  and  judgment  better  than  that.  Keep  that  as 
the  apple  of  your  eye.  Keep  it  clear,  and  strong,  and  discerning.  Be  in  love  with 
your  conscience  ;  and  let  your  conscience  be  in  love  with  God.  A  conscience  held 
in  love,  is  the  very  foundation  not  only  of  a  spiritual  manhood,  but  of  happiness  in 
an  earthly  manhood.    (Ibid.)        The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost : — I.  What  is  xaa 

DIFIEEENCE  BETWEEN  BPEAKINO  AGAINST  THE  SoN  OF  MaN  AND  SPEAKING  AGAINST  THH 

Holt  Ghost  ?  By  speaking  against  the  Son  of  Man  is  meant  here  all  those  re- 
preaches  which  they  cast  upon  our  Saviour's  person,  the  meanness  of  His  birth, 
without  reflecting  upon  that  Divine  power  which  He  testified  by  His  miracles.  By 
■peaking  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  meant  their  blaspheming  the  Divine  powef 
whereby  He  wrought  His  miracles.    II,  Whbbeiu  the  natubb  of  this  bin  on  bi.a»- 


CHAP,  xii.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  239 

PHEMT  AGAINST  THE  HoLT  Ghost  DOTH  CONSIST.  Some  have  siapposed  it  to  be  final 
impenitency,  because  that  is  unpardonable  ;  but  why  that,  it  is  hard  to  say.  Others 
place  the  sin  in  obstinate  opposition  to  the  truth  ;  but  it  is  hardly  imaginable  that 
a  man  will  oppose  the  truth  when  he  is  actually  convinced  that  it  is  truth.  The 
Pharisees  are  the  persons  guilty  of  this  sin.  The  ground  of  complaint  is  clesr 
(Mark  iii.  28,  29) :  they  charged  Christ  with  being  a  magician.  They  would  rather 
deny  the  reality  of  Christ's  miracles  than  own  Him  to  be  Messiah.     III.  In  what 

SENSE  18  IT  SAID  TO  BE  PECULIABLY  TJNPAKDONABLE  ?      IV.    HoW  IT  COMES  TO  PASS  THAT 

THIS  SIN  ABOVE  OTHERS  IS  INCAPABLE  OF  PABDON  ?  1.  Because  by  this  siu  men  resist 
their  last  remedy,  and  oppose  the  best  and  utmost  means  of  their  conviction.  Cau 
God  do  more  for  a  man's  conviction  than  work  miracles  before  his  eyes.  2.  Because 
this  sin  is  of  such  a  high  nature,  that  God  is  therefore  justly  provoked  to  withdraw 
His  grace  from  such  persons  ;  and  it  is  probable,  resolved  bo  to  do :  without  which 
grace  they  will  continue  impenitent.  V.  Make  this  discourse  usefdI/  to  oub- 
BELVEB.  1.  To  comfort  some  very  good  and  pious  persons  who  are  liable  to  despair, 
npon  an  apprehension  that  they  have  committed  this  great  sin.  I  cannot  see  how 
any  person  now  is  likely  to  be  in  those  circumstances  as  to  be  capable  of  committing 
it.  Total  apostasy  from  Christianity  comes  nearest  to  it  (Heb.  vi.  4-6).  2.  To  caution 
men  against  the  degrees  and  approaches  of  this  sin — profane  scoffing  at  religion.  Be 
ready  to  entertain  the  truth  of  God  whenever  it  is  fairly  propounded.  {J.  Tillotson.) 
Blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Glwst : — I.  The  sin  spoken  op  in  the  text  is  descbibed 
AS  blasphemy.  It  is  common  to  speak  of  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost ;  Jesus 
does  not  call  it  sin,  but  blasphemy.  Nor  are  they  the  same.  All  blasphemy  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  sin  ;  but  all  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  blasphemy.  This 
narrows  it  to  a  particular  sin.  What  are  we  to  miderstand  by  it  ?  When  abnsiye 
words  are  uttered  against  God  wilfully,  knowingly,  and  malignantly,  it  is  blasphemy. 
II.  That  this  blasphemy  is  described  as  a  sin  specially  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Why  this,  and  not  a  sin  against  the  Father  or  the  Son  ?  Not  because  He  is  more 
sacred  than  the  Father  or  the  Son.  The  Persons  of  the  Trinity  are  all  equal  in 
glory.  But  because  that  in  revilingly  opposing  the  gospel  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  specially  opposed.  It  is  the  Divine  Spirit  who  takes  of  the  things  of 
Christ,  and  through  the  Word  presents  them  to  the  mind.  It  is  a  defiance  of  His 
peculiar  prerogative.  III.  The  crowning  fact  connected  with  this  sin  is  its  un- 
PABDONABLENESS.  Why,  wheu  there  is  forgiveness  for  all  sin,  is  there  none  for  this  f 
What  sin  could  be  more  heinous  ?  It  cannot  be  because  of  any  inadequacy  in  Christ's 
atonement — "  His  blood  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,"  Nor  that  the  mercy  of  God 
cannot  reach  to  such  a  sin  ;  it  is  infinite.  Nor  that  the  gospel  is  unable  to  overcome 
such  obduracy.  The  truth  is  there  is  no  sin  in  itself  unpardonable.  This  would 
contradict  ver.  31.  The  reason  is  found  not  in  its  turpitude,  but  in  its  nature,  as  it 
discovers  a  heart  resolutely  opposed  to  the  Spirit  and  the  truth.  If  the  Spirit  be 
scorned,  it  follows,  pardon  is  impossible.  An  earthly  parent  cannot  forgive  a  child 
till  it  has  exhibited  sorrow  for  its  offence ;  and  as  sorrow  for  sin  is  unknown  to 
those  guilty  of  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  their  salvation  is  impossible. 
TV.  Mat  this  sin  be  still  committed  ?  I  think  it  may.  It  is  common  with  tbo8« 
who  hold  that  these  Pharisees  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin,  and  that  its 
commission  was  limited  to  their  time,  to  argue  as  if  Jesus  had  performed  this 
miracle  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  the  sin  consisted  in  ascribing  the 
power  by  which  it  was  performed  to  Satan.  Our  Lord  does  not  say  "  If  I  cast  out 
devils  by  the  Holy  Spirit,"  but  "  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  and  St.  Luke  has  it  "finger 
of  God  " — a  figure  significant  of  power.  Christ  uniformly  speaks  of  His  miracles 
as  if  the  power  that  performed  them  was  His  own,  or  that  of  His  Father — "  The 
works  which  I  do  in  My  Father's  name,"  &c.  The  power  of  working  miracles  was 
not  conferred  on  Christ ;  by  virtue  of  His  Divinity  He  required  no  such  endowment. 
It  is  important  to  keep  this  in  view,  in  order  to  see  that  there  is  no  ground  for  the 
allegation  that  He  wrought  the  miracle  before  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that, 
therefore,  these  Pharisees  were  guilty  of  blaspheming  Him.  The  fact  that  three  of 
•he  evangelists  quote  this  narrative  is  significant.  Observe,  that  our  Lord  specifies 
two  sins — speaking  against  the  Son  of  Man,  and  speaking  against  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Now,  on  looking  at  the  narrative,  i  appears  that  the  sin,  committed  in  the  present 
instance,  was  that  of  speaking  agai  st  the  Son  of  Man.  He  it  was  who  wrought  the 
miracle ;  and  He  wrought  it,  as  we  have  seen,  by  His  own  power ;  and  He  it  was 
against  whom  the  malice  of  the  Ph  risees  was  aimed.  Now,  had  they  been  actually 
goilty  of  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  Jesus  would  doubtless  have  said 
so.    Does  He  not,  however,  rather  intimate — by  the  antithesis  which  He  presents 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xh, 

between  blasphemy  against  the  Sou  of  Man  and  that  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
by  the  pardonablcness  of  the  one  and  the  unpardonableness  of  the  other — that  it 
was  blasphemy  against  Himself  of  which  they  had  been  guilty?  Why  speak  ol 
blasphemy  against  the  Son  of  Man  if  the  sin  which  they  had  committed  was  actu- 
ally blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  And  why  speak  of  the  pardonableness  of 
blasphemy  against  Himself,  if  they  had  committed  another  sin  which  was  unpar- 
donable ?  "Would  that  not  be  to  tantalize  ?  But  such  a  supposition  is  utterly  at 
variance  with  what  we  know  of  the  tenderness  of  the  Saviour's  character.  We  regard 
Jesus  as,  in  effect,  saying — "Dreadful  aa  it  is  to  speak  disparagingly  of  the  Son  of 
Man  in  this  the  day  of  His  humiliation,  when  His  true  character  is  veiled,  there  is 
a  day  coming,  when  the  evidence  of  My  Divine  commission  will  be  complete,  not 
only  through  the  muaculous  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  but  by  the  conversion  of 
thousands  to  the  gospel ;  and,  when  that  day  comes,  they  who  treat  the  work  ot 
the  Spirit  as  they  now  treat  Me,  shall,  even  in  this  life,  pass  from  the  sphere  of 
mercy  to  that  of  inevitable  doom."  One  fact  identifies  this  sajing  of  Christ  with 
the  outpouring  of  the  Spiiit,  beyond  all  dispute.  If  you  turn  to  Luke  xii.  10-12, 
you  will  read — "  And  whosoever  shall  speak  a  word  against  the  Son  of  Man,  it  shall 
be  forgiven  him  :  but  unto  him  that  blasphemeth  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  shall 
not  be  forgiven.  And  when  they  bring  you  unto  the  synagogues,  and  unto  magis- 
trates, and  powers,  take  ye  no  thought  how  or  what  thing  ye  shall  answer,  or  what 
yfc  shall  say  :  for  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  teach  you  in  the  same  hour  what  ye  ought 
to  say."  These  words  seem  to  have  been  spoken  on  a  different  occasion  from  the 
present.  From  the  first  verse,  we  learn  they  were  addressed  to  disciples ;  and  from 
this  fact  we  infer  that  the  sin  in  question  may  be  committed,  not  only  by  Christ's 
avowed  enemies,  but  by  those  who  confess  His  name.  Observe  then,  that  while,  in 
the  10th  verse.  He  repeats  in  substance  the  words  of  our  text,  in  the  11th  and  12th 
verses  He  predicts  what  actually  took  place  immediately  after  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit  had  begun  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  For,  when  Peter  and  Jonn  were 
brought  before  the  council,  it  is  stated  that,  on  Peter  rising  to  speak,  he  was  "  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  "  (Acts  iv.  1-8).  And  what  was  that  but  a  literal  fulfilment 
of  what  Christ  predicted  in  immediate  connection  with  the  text  as  given  by  Luke  ? 
•'  For  the  Holy  Ghost,"  he  said,  "  shall  teach  you,  in  the  same  hour,  what  ye  ought 
to  say," — conclusively  showing  that  it  was  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  which 
Christ  had  more  particularly  in  view  when  He  uttered  the  awful  words  of  our  text. 
S^  far,  then,  from  thinking,  as  some  have  done,  that  this  sin  consisted  in  ascribing 
the  miracles  of  Christ  to  Satanic  agency,  and  that  it  could  only  be  committed  during 
the  period  of  Christ's  earthly  ministiy,  I  rather  conclude,  on  these  grounds,  that  the 
Saviour  specially  pointed  to  that  future  which  is  our  present,  as  the  season  of  its 
commission.      V.   Before   concluding,  it  may  be  propeb  to  ask  if  wb  can  find, 

IN    OOB     CONDUCT     OB     IN     THAT     OF  OTHERS,    THE     IMAGE     OF     ANYTHING     LIKE     THIS 

BIN?  1.  There  are  the  Jews.  No  people  so  privileged;  none  have  so  sinned. 
2.  Another  form  in  which  this  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  now  presents  itself  is 
that  of  scornfully  resisting  conscientious  convictions.  3.  Perhaps  it  is  in  the  annals 
of  infidelity  we  must  seek  in  our  day  for  the  grossest  forms  of  this  sin.  How  diffe- 
rent all  this  from  the  spirit  of  those  who  dread  the  very  possibility  of  having 
committed  this  offence  1  (IF.  Reid,  D.D.)  The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
the  (lunger  of  rashly  applying  it  to  ourselves  or  others  : — I.  What  the  blasphemt 

AGAINST  THE  HoLY  GHOriT,  MENTIONED  BY  OCE  SaVIOUR,  IS.  II.  WhAT  IS  THE  TBDK 
SENSE  OF  OCR  SaVIODR'B  IECLARAIION   THAT   THIS   ONE    SIN    SHALL   NOT   BE    FORGIVEN? 

III.  Why  He  passed  such  a  severe  sentence  upon  this  one  sin.    IV.  What  sirs 

IX),  OB  DO  NOT,  At'PBOACH  TOWARDS  THAT  WHICH  IS   MENTIONED   IN   THE   TEXT  ?      1.    The 

case  of  unbelievers.  (1)  Unbehevers  ignorant  of  the  gospel,  or  its  proper  evidence, 
are  not  blameable  for  their  unbelief :  nor  surely  inexcusable,  though  they  should 
add  reproachful  words  to  it,  speaking  evil  of  things  they  know  not.  (2)  But  such 
unbelievers  who  through  contemptuous  negligence  refuse  to  consider  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  or  from  a  vain  opinion  of  the  sufficiency  of  their  own  reason,  reject  it, 
put  themselves  in  the  high  road  towards  the  sin  here  condemned.  (3)  If  they  have, 
since  they  came  to  a  full  use  of  reason,  deliberately  confessed  Christianity,  and  then 
forsaken  it  and  become  scoffers  at  it,  this  case  is  worse  than  if  they  had  never  believed. 
2.  The  case  of  believers.  Some  have  maintain  d  that  any  deliberate  sin  amounted 
to  it.  This  against  Scripture.  Sometimes  good  men  have  entertained  inevoreut 
thoughts ;  but  this  when  under  disturbance  of  mind,  and  had  not  command  of  their 
thoughts.  {T.  Seeker,  LL.D.)  Disease  fatal  because  the  remedy  is  rejected: — 
Suppose  the  providence  of  God  had  so  ordered  it,  that  all  diseases  should  be  curable 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  241 


bj  some  one  particular  course  of  medicine ;  still,  whoever  despised  and  ridiculed  that 
course,  instead  of  taking  it,  must  perish.  And  in  like  manner,  though  all  sins  would 
else  be  pardonable  through  the  grace  of  the  gospel :  whoever  scorns  the  utmost  effort* 
of  that  grace,  must  fail  of  it.  And  our  Saviour  foreseeing  that  these  persons  would, 
pronounces  their  doom.  Every  advantage,  that  any  others  ever  were  to  enjoy,  they  had 
enjoyed  to  the  full,  without  effect :  and  it  was  not  suitable  to  the  honour  of  God'a 
government,  or  the  holiness  of  His  nature,  to  stnve  with  such  by  still  more  extra- 
ordinary methods  ;  and  do  for  the  worst  of  men  what  he  had  not  done  for  the  rast. 
Their  condition,  therefore,  was  not  that  they  should  be  denied  pardon  though  they  did 
repent ;  but  it  was  foreknown  that  they  would  not  repent.  (Ibid.)  Things  we  never 
g  t  over: — There  are  sins  which  though  they  may  be  pardoned,  are  in  some  respects 
irrevocable:  1.  The  folly  of  a  misspent  youth.  2.  In  the  category  of  irrevocable  mis- 
takes I  put  all  parental  neglect.  3.  The  unkindness  done  to  the  departed.  4.  The  lost 
opportunities  of  getting  good.  5.  The  lost  opportunities  of  usefulness.  (Dr.  Talmnge.) 
The  unpardonable  sin : — I.  Let  us  endeavodb  to  kemove  some  mistakes  bespectinq 
THIS  SUBJECT.  Many  sins  supposed  to  be  of  the  nature  of  the  one  here  denounced 
have  been  remitted,  therefore  cannot  be  irremissible.  1.  Sins  against  great  light, 
conviction  and  knowledge.  2,  Sins  after  real  and  high  experience  of  the  Divine 
favour  are  also  improperly  supposed  to  be  of  this  character.  3.  The  sin  of  opposing 
the  trath  daringly  has  also  been  mistaken  for  the  dreaded  sin  under  consideration 
II,  Describe  the  peculiab  character  of  the  blasphemy  which  our  Lord  herb 
PRONOUNCES  iBREMissiBLE.  1.  It  appears  that  some  among  the  Pharisees  had  com- 
mitted the  sin;  they  applied  to  the  Holy  Spirit  the  diabolical  name.  2.  The 
Pharisees  heard  their  conduct  described  without  being  the  least  affected.  3.  Men 
may  approach  near  to  this  sin  now,  but  cannot  complete  it.  III.  Exhortation  and 
caution.  1.  The  reverence  due  from  all  of  us  to  the  Divine  Spirit.  2.  We  should  do 
aU  in  our  power  to  promote  that  religion  which  is  the  offspring  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
{J.  Leif child.)  1.  The  nature  of  the  sin  itself  is  such  as  to  preclude  the  possi- 
bility of  forgiveness.  2.  When  there  is  any  desire  for  salvation  yon  have  not 
committed  this  sin.  I.  All  men  have  sin  and  blasphemy  to  be  forgiven.  II. 
That  it  is  to  man  only  that  all  manner  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven.     III.  That  it 

8HALL  BE  FORGIVEN  TO  ALL  MEN    WHO    SEEK   FORGIVENESS    BY   THE    METHOD   WHICH    THK 

GOSPEL  HAS  ANNOUNCED.  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  The  unpardonable  sin: — AVe  might 
expect  that  the  best  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  would  have  some  corresponding  awful- 
uess  attaching  to  it.  We  have  in  the  Bible  four  separate  sins  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  laid  out  in  a  certain  order  and  progression — grieving,  resisting,  quenching—- 
these  have  been  forgiven.  But  there  is  a  fourth  stage  when  the  mind,  through  a 
long  course  of  sin,  proceeds  to  such  a  violent  disUke  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that 
infidel  thoughts  and  horrid  imaginations  come  into  the  mind.  They  become 
habitual.  This  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  he  in  any  particular  act  oi 
wcrd  ;  it  is  a  general  state  of  mind.  It  is  unpardonable,  because  the  mind  of  such 
a  man  cannot  make  one  move  towards  God.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  unpar- 
donable sin : — 1.  How  a  man  may  shut  against  himself  all  the  avenues  of  reconcili- 
ation. 2.  There  is  something  mysterious  in  the  process.  They  choose  not  to 
repent;  and  this  choice  has  been  made  so  often  and  so  perseveringly  that  the 
Spirit  has  let  them  alone.  3.  There  is  nothing  in  it  to  impair  the  freeness  of  the 
gospel,  or  the  universality  of  its  calls.  The  amplitude  of  Divine  forgiveness  : — ^A 
king  publishes  a  wide  and  unexpected  amnesty  to  the  people  of  a  rebellious  district 
in  his  empire,  upon  the  bare  act  of  each  presenting  himself,  within  a  limited  penod, 
before  an  authorized  agent,  and  professing  his  purposes  of  future  loyalty.  Does  it 
at  all  detract  from  the  clemency  of  this  deed  of  grace,  that  many  of  the  rebels  feel 
a  sti  on  t' reluctance  to  this  personal  exhibition  of  themselves,  and  that  the  reluc- 
tance strengthens  and  accumulates  upon  them  by  every  day  of  their  postponement ; 
and  that,  even  before  the  season  of  mercy  has  expired,  it  has  risen  to  such  a  degree 
of  aversion  on  their  parts  as  to  form  a  moral  barrier  in  the  way  of  their  prescribed 
return  that  is  altogether  impassable  ?  Will  you  say,  because  there  is  no  forgive^ 
ness  to  them,  there  is  any  want  of  amplitude  in  that  charter  of  forgiveness  which 
is  proclaimed  in  the  hearing  of  all ;  or  that  pardon  has  not  been  provided  for  every 
offence,  because  some  offenders  are  to  be  found  with  such  a  degree  of  perverseness 
and  of  obstinacy  in  their  bosom,  as  constrains  them  to  a  determined  refusal  of  all 
pardon?  The  blood  of  Christ  clean seth  from  all  sin;  and  there  is  not  a  haman 
creature  who,  let  him  repent  and  believe,  will  ever  find  the  crimson  inveteracy  of 
his  manifold  offences  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  its  purifying  and  its  peace-speaking 
power.     {Dr.  Chalmers.)        The  unpardonable  sin : — I.  What  is  this  sin  or  blaa 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

phemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost?  This  assertion  of  the  Pharisees  discloses  three 
odious  seutiments.  1.  A  deceitful  contradiction.  2.  An  unutterable  perversity  of 
heart.  3.  A  terrible  blasphemy.  II.  Why  is  this  sin,  and  this  sin  only,  unpardon- 
able either  in  this  world  or  in  the  next  ?  1.  Would  it  be  too  great,  too  odious,  to  find 
grace  before  God?  2.  Could  the  reason  of  this  exception  be  found  in  a  special 
decree  of  God,  who,  from  motives  unknown  to  us,  would  have  blotted  this  particular 
sin  from  the  list  of  those  He  is  disposed  to  pardon  ?  III.  Was  this  sin  peculiar  to 
the  times  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  are  we  still  liable  to  become  guilty  of  it  ?  Materially, 
no ;  virtually,  yes.     (The  Late  Grandpierre,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  Either  make  the  tree  g'ood  and  hla  ftult  good,  or  else  make  the 
tree  cerrupt. — Trees  of  righteoustiess : — There  are  two  kinds  of  religion  in  the 
world :  one  teaches  that  men  are  not  so  holy  as  they  should  be,  but  that  by  a  little 
attention  they  may  be  improved ;  the  other  that  men  are  only  evil,  and  must 
be  made  new  creatures.  The  one  mends,  the  other  makes.  Clirist  says.  Make 
the  tree  good.  I.  Although  the  tree  has  been  made  good  by  engrafting,  and  has 
consequently  begun  to  bear  good  fruit,  the  young  trees  that  spring  from  the  seed 
of  that  good  fruit,  when  it  is  sown  again,  take  after  the  original  bitter  root  of  the 
parent  tree,  and  not  after  the  sweetness  subsequently  imparted  to  it.  The  child 
of  a  Christian  man  is  not  by  birth  a  Christian.  II.  As  the  first  lesson  is  one 
of  warning  to  those  who  presume  upon  their  privileges,  the  second  a  one 
of  encouragement  to  those  who  have  had  in  youth  no  privileges  to  presume  upon. 
Although  a  young  tree  has  sprung  from  the  seed  of  an  evil  tree,  it  may  be  made 
good  by  engrafting  as  effectually  as  if  its  parent  had  been  the  best  in  the  garden. 
The  unprivileged  r.eed  not  despond.  III.  Although  an  evil  tree  ought  to  be  made  good 
by  engrafting  while  it  is  young,  it  may  be  made  good  by  engrafting  after  it  has  grown 
old.  Some  are  converted  in  youth  ;  some  have  mark  and  date  of  conversion  more 
distinct  than  others.  IV.  A  tree  that  has  been  made  good  does  not  again  become 
evil ;  but  latent  evil  in  its  roots  may,  if  it  be  not  watched,  spring  up  and  bear 
bad  fruit,  and  mingle  with  the  good,  and  to  a  great  extent  outgrow  and  choke 
the  good.  V.  Although  the  natural  head  of  the  tree,  either  in  youth  or  age,  is  oat 
off,  and  the  new,  good  branch  brought  near  to  touch  it,  unless  the  new  branch  take 
to  the  old  tree,  and  the  old  tree  at  its  wound  take  to  the  new  branch,  so  that  they 
become  one,  no  change  will  be  affected  in  the  old  tree.  The  wounds  of  conviction 
prepare  the  way  for  Clirist ;  but  if  the  wounded  do  not  in  the  end  close  with  Christ, 

his  wounds  will  not  make  him  safe  or  holy.     {W,  Arnot.)        The  grafting  mark  : 

[n  fruit-trees  fuUy  grown  you  may  sometimes  observe  a  ring  round  the  stem, 
midway  between  the  ground  and  the  branches,  resembling  somewhat  the  mark 
of  a  healed  wound  on  a  living  man.  This  indicates  the  place  where  the  natural 
stem  was  cut  off  and  a  new  branch  inserted.  You  perceive  at  a  glance  that  this 
tree  has  been  engrafted,  and  that  it  was  well  grown  ere  it  was  made  good.  In  the 
same  garden  another  tree  may  grow  which  exhibits  no  such  mark  ;  yet  the  owner 
does  not  value  it  less  on  that  account.  These  two  trees  are  equally  good  and  equally 
prolific.  They  differ  not  in  their  present  character,  but  in  the  period  of  life 
ftt  which  they  were  severally  renewed.  This  latter  tree  must  have  befin  engrafted 
when  it  was  very  young  :  the  cut  was  made  close  to  the  ground  when  the  stem  was 
very  slender ;  and  thus  the  mark  has  been  obliterated  by  the  subsequent  growth 
of  the  tree.  The  cicatrice  is  concealed  under  the  grass,  or  perhaps  under 
the  ground.  The  renewing  has  certainly  taken  place,  but  when  or  where  no  man 
can  tell.  The  date  of  its  new  birth  is  no  longer  legible.  Such  similarities 
and  such  differences  obtain  also  among  converted  men.  Some  who  were  bom  when 
they  were  old  bear  the  mark  of  their  regeneration  all  their  days.  When  the  old 
nature  was  matured  and  developed  before  the  change,  the  memory  of  the  fact 
is  more  distinctly  retained,  and  the  contrast  more  vividly  displayed.  It  was  thus 
in  the  experience  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  The  spiritual  man  did  not  in  his  case  obtain 
the  sway  while  the  natural  was  yet  young  and  tender  and  easily  moulded. 
Paul  was  a  man,  every  inch  of  him,  before  he  was  a  Christian.  ••  I  verily  thought 
with  myself  that  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesua 
of  Nazareth."  (Ibid.)  Two  kinds  of  frtiit: — One  clear  example  of  this 
tendency  I  knew  well  in  my  youth.  I  think  it  remains  to  this  day,  and  I  could 
point  to  the  spot.  A  grove  given  over,  by  the  time  I  knew  it,  for  the  purpose 
of  affording  shady  pleasure-walks,  had  originally  been  a  fruit-garden.  Some 
of  the  old  fruit-trees  had  been  left  standing  as  ornaments,  when  thr  owner 
no  longer    looked    for    a    profitable  return.      These  trees    were    left    growing 


CHAP,  xn.j  ST.  MATTHEW.  SIS 

for  the  sake  of  their  beauty  merely,  not  for  the  sake  of  their  fruit.  They  wer« 
allowed,  accordingly,  to  run  wild,  that  their  appearance  might  be  more  picturesque. 
An  aged  pear-tree  stood  there,  with  a  tall,  bare,  straight  stem  and  round  bushy 
head  like  an  Eastern  palm.  But  while  not  a  single  branch  grew  on  the  naked 
tiunk,  from  where  it  emerged  out  of  the  moss  to  where  its  head  began  to  spread 
at  three  times  the  height  of  a  man,  a  number  of  lively  vigorous  ?hoots  pprang 
from  its  roots,  or  rather  from  its  stem  where  it  touched  the  ground.  Thus  the  long 
bare  stem  had  a  bushy  head  of  branches  on  either  extremity.  These  lower  branches 
had  been  permitted  to  grow  freely  till  they  reached  maturity  on  their  own  account, 
and  bore  fruit  of  their  own  kind.  I  have  seen  fruit  growing  on  these  suckers, 
and  fruit  hanging  at  the  same  time  high  over  them  on  the  tree's  towering  head, 
with  a  large  portion  of  the  bare  stem  between.  I  have  compared  them,  and  found 
that  which  grew  from  the  old  root  hard  and  bitter,  while  that  which  grew  on  the 
head  that  had  been  made  new,  although  somewhat  deteriorated,  retained  still  the 
sweet  flavour  of  its  best  days.  Here  were  two  kinds  of  fruit  growing  at  the  same 
time  on  one  tree — evil  fruit  growing  on  the  original  root,  and  good  fruit  growing 
on  that  which  had  been  made  new.  If  the  tree  had  been  rightly  cultivated 
for  the  sake  of  its  fruit,  those  suckers  would  have  been  without  pity  torn  off  in  the 
bud  as  soon  as  they  showed  themselves,  and  never  have  been  permitted  to  open 
their  blossoms  or  bring  forth  their  fruit.  You  do  not  ordinarily  see  these 
out-growths  from  the  old  stock  growing  to  the  size  of  bearing,  on  fruit-trees. 
This,  however,  is  not  because  they  do  not  manifest  a  tendency  to  throw  out  these 
shoots,  but  because  the  shoots  are,  in  ordinary  cases,  wrenched  off  by  the 
husbandman  as  soon  as  they  appear.  (Ibid.)  Grafting  an  old  tree  : — You  may 
see  this  gloiy  of  grace  reflected  from  the  field  of  nature.  Perhaps  you  have  looked 
over  the  hedge  and  seen,  in  a  garden  by  the  wayside,  a  sight  that  attracted  your 
eye  and  excited  your  curiosity.  A  tree,  old,  thick,  and  rusty,  has  been  cut  off,  not 
by  the  ground,  but  about  the  height  of  a  man,  and  the  bare  stump  left  standing. 
On  a  closer  inspection  you  see  one  or  more  small  fresh  twigs  fastened  to  the  bark 
on  the  top  of  the  desolate  trunk.  They  are  buddiug  and  putting  out  green  leaves. 
It  is  a  tree  that  had  grown  old,  either  barren  or  bearing  bad  fruit.  Its  owner 
would  not  longer  permit  it  to  occupy  uselessly  the  precious  ground.  But  it  is  not 
necessary  that  he  should  cut  it  down  and  cast  it  away,  in  order  >o  make  room 
for  another  tree.  Even  this  tree,  grown  old  in  evil,  may  be  made  good. 
It  is  not  cut  down,  but  cut  off,  and  a  new  nature  engrafted  on  its  stem.  Even 
in  old  age  it  will  yet  be  fresh,  and  flourishing,  and  fruitful.  The  owner  of  the 
garden  counts  that  he  will  sooner  get  a  large  return  by  engrafting  the  old  tree 
than  by  rooting  it  out  and  planting  another.  The  tree  was  full  grown  and  in 
vigorous  health.  The  owner  will  utilize  all  these  powers  by  sending  the  sap 
through  a  new  and  better  head.  It  is  thus  that  our  Father,  the  husbandman, 
takes  full-grown  vigorous  natures,  charged  with  gifts  of  understanding,  and 
eloquence,  and  zeal,  that  have  been  hitherto  occupied  with  evil,  and  makes  them 
new  creatures  by  His  power.  Forthwith  they  are  fit  for  able-bodied  service  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  The  danger  of  delayed  grafting  : — Let  the  warning 
be  distinctly,  fully  given  on  the  other  side.  If  the  tree  is  permitted  to  grow 
np  and  grow  old  in  evil,  there  is  danger  lest,  by  storm  or  fire,  it  should 
be  destroyed,  and  so  never  be  made  good.  Bat  even  although  it  were  insured 
against  all  accidents,  there  is  no  reason  why  another,  and  yet  another  year  an  evil 
tre<3  Bhould  cumber  the  ground,  merely  to  put  off  the  time  of  its  change.    [Ibid.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  the  heart. — The  treaeuret 
of  a  good  and  evil  heart : — I.  Describe  the  good  tbeasdre  of  the  heart.  1.  A  good 
heart  contains  good  affections.  2.  Good  desires.  3.  Good  intentions,  4.  Good 
volitions.  5.  Good  passions.  II.  Describe  the  evil  tbeasokes  of  the  evil  heart. 
The  opposite  to  the  good  treasure.  lU.  That  men  are  good  ob  evil  accobdino  to 
IHB  good  oe  evil  TBEA80BE  OF  THE  hkabt.  1.  Every  man  forms  his  opinion  of 
himself  by  the  exercises  of  his  heart.  2.  It  is  a  dictate  of  common  sense  that 
nothing  can  properly  dominate  men  either  morally  good  or  evil,  but  that  in  which 
they  are  really  active.  3.  Scripture  confirms  this  consideration — "  As  a  man 
thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  he."  (1)  This  gives  us  a  great  idea  of  the  heart.  (2) 
Beligion  chiefly  coisists  in  good  affections.  (3)  The  propriety  of  God's  requiring 
sinners  to  change  tLeir  hearts.  [N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  I.  The  good  man.  Not  the 
natural  man ;  the  regenerate  man.  1.  He  has  the  life  of  God  in  his  soTil.  S.  The 
spirit  of  God  in  his  heart.    3.  The  peace  of  God  in  his  conscience.     4.  The  powet 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ceap.  xn. 

of  God  in  his  life.  II.  The  oood  treasube.  Good  because — 1.  Given  by  a  good 
God.  2.  With  a  good  design.  The  good  things  of  which  He  speaks  are  (1)  the 
Person  of  Cljrist ;  (2)  thd  work  of  Christ ;  (3)  the  fulness  of  Christ ;  (4)  the  opera- 
tion of  His  Spirit.  All  these  subjects  are  good,  pleasing,  and  profitable.  IH.  Thb 
EVIL  MAN.  He  is  without  the  hfe,  spirit,  love,  peace,  and  power  of  God.  He  is  evil 
because  he  possesses  an  evil  heart,  mixes  with  an  evil  world,  is  under  the  influence 
of  an  evil  devil.  IV.  The  evii,  treasure.  1.  Its  evil  nature.  2.  Its  evil  tendency. 
3.  Its  evil  effects.  Evil  thoughts,  words,  and  actions.  {S.  5  «m<u  i  )  T\«  heart 
a  reservoir  : — You  have  seen  the  great  reservoirs  provided  by  our  water  companies, 
in  which  the  water  that  is  to  supply  hundreds  of  streets  and  thousands  of  houses  is 
kept.  Now,  the  heart  is  just  the  reservoir  of  man ;  and  our  hfe  is  allowed  to  flow 
in  its  proper  season.  That  life  may  flow  through  different  pipes — the  mouth,  the 
hand,  the  eye ;  but  still  all  the  issues  of  hand,  of  eye,  of  lip,  derive  their  source 
from  the  great  fountain  and.central  reseiToir,  the  heart ;  and  hence  there  is  no  diffi- 
culty in  showing  the  great  necessity  that  exists  for  ke<-ping  this  reservoir — the 
lieart — in  a  proper  state  and  condition  ;  since  otherwise  that  which  flows  through 
the  pipes  must  be  tainted  and  corrupt.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  good  treasure  o) 
the  heart : — The  heart  of  many  a  poor,  neglected  Christian  is  as  if  we  opened  some 
rude  sea-chest,  brought  by  a  foreign  ship  from  distant  lands,  which  though  it  have 
so  rude  an  outside,  is  full  of  pearls,  and  gems,  and  diamonds.  A  sanctified  heart : 
— The  devil  knows  that  if  there  be  any  good  treasure,  it  is  in  our  hearts ;  and  ha 
would  gladly  have  the  key  of  these  cabinets,  that  he  might  rob  us  of  our  jewels.  A 
heart  which  is  sanctified  is  better  than  a  tongue  that  is  silvered.  He  that  gives 
only  the  skin  of  worship  to  God,  receives  only  the  shell  of  comfort  from  God.  It  is 
not  the  bare  touching  of  the  strings  that  makes  an  harmonious  tune.  A  spiritual 
man  may  pray  carnally,  but  a  carnal  man  cannot  pray  spiritually.  If  God's  mercies 
do  not  eat  out  the  heart  of  our  sins,  our  sins  will  soon  eat  out  the  heart  of  our  duties. 
A  work  that  is  heartless  is  a  work  that  is  fruitless.  God  cares  not  for  the  crazy 
cabinet,  but  for  the  precious  jewel,  (Archbishop  Seeker.)  Of  the  necessity  oj 
fettling  good  principles  in  the  heart: — I.  Of  the  high  importance  of  fixing  good 
principles  in  the  heart,  if  ever  we  would  hope  for  a  good  course  of  life  and  action. 
II.  That  the  course  of  life  and  action  will  discover  what  is  the  prevailing  principle 
of  the  heart,  ami  will  make  it  known  to  the  world.  III.  That  the  train  of  thought 
in  which  we  delight  will  betray  itself  in  speech,  as  well  as  in  our  general  course  of 
action  ;  so  that  it  will  be  known  by  the  tendency  of  our  conversation  in  this  respect, 
whether  we  are  good  or  evil.  IV.  That  it  is  of  high  importance  that  we  set  a  watch 
upon  our  tongues,  because  we  must  give  account,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  of  every- 
thing we  say,  as  well  as  everything  we  do.     (J.  Burroughs.) 

Ver.  36.  That  every  Idle  word. — Idle  words : — The  Pharisees  had  said,  "  This 
fellow  doth  not  cast  out  devils,  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  the  devils."  Christ 
meets  this  objection  in  two  ways.  I.  He  shows  its  unreasonableness.  It  is 
against  experience  that  any  power,  good  or  bad,  consciously  seeks  its  own  de- 
struction. The  powers  of  evil  and  of  good  are  distinct,  and  each  power  is  ready 
to  defend  itself.  II.  He  condemns  the  spirit  in  which  it  was  made,  and  brings 
out  the  serious  nature  of  the  sin  it  involved.  Why  did  Christ  warn  them  against 
this  dangerous  sin  ?  Not  because  of  any  act  unmistakably  wicked  and  cruel,  but 
because  they  called  evil  good,  and  good  evil,  confounding  the  two,  and  this  from 
dislike  to  the  truth  when  it  reflected  on  themselves.  I'here  lay  the  danger ;  and 
there  it  lies  still.  The  essence  of  sin  is  being  out  of  sympathy  with  goodness. 
{A.  Watson,  D.D.)  Evil  will  not  conspire  against  itself : — Just  as  it  C4n  be  shown 
in  nature  that  the  law  of  gravitation  in  a  drop  of  water  is  the  same  law  whltl  ti^da 
the  planets  in  their  courses  in  the  distant  heavens,  and  the  same  law  which  reigns 
through  the  whole  universe  of  matter ;  so  the  law  which  binds  goodness  tc  good- 
ness,  or  which  draws  evil  to  evil,  in  the  instinctive  feeling  that  they  are  in  them- 
selves one,  is  a  law  which  holds  good  in  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds.  The  powers 
of  evil — so  far  as  they  know  one  another — are  all  under  one  great  power,  and  they  will 
not  conspire  consciously  against  themselves.  (76 id. )  Idle  words : — They  are  words 
that  issue  out  of  a  condition  of  idleness.  1.  Tattling.  Tattling  dims  the  charity 
of  the  charitable  mind  as  a  spider  dims  the  light  of  a  window,  spinning  his  web 
over  it.  2.  Tale-bearing.  3.  "Slang"  conversation.  Slang  is  to  language  wb*t 
profanity  is  to  reverence.  4.  Boasting.  5.  Swearing.  (H.  W.  Beecher  )  Words 
that  dispel  gloom : — A  child  that  is  in  trouble  in  the  nurse's  arms  is  sung  to  ;  some 
little  song,  the  whole  of  which  does  not  give  a  single  solitary  particle  of  meaning ; 


CHAP.  XII. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  244 

but  the  movement  of  it,  and  the  various  associations  that  are  connected  with  it, 
charm  the  child  away  from  tears,  and  make  him  happier.  (Ibid.)  Conversation 
pleasurable  though  not  profound : — I  think  no  musical  instrument  in  the  world  ia 
like  the  utterance  of  speech  in  one  whose  voice  is  well  trained,  whose  mind  is  rich 
with  emotion,  and  who  is  accustomed  to  describe  in  graceful  and  appropriate 
language  one's  own  experience  in  life.  The  conversation  that  flows  in  the  quietude 
of  a  family,  like  the  tiukling  of  a  brook  under  the  shadow  of  green  trees;  the  con- 
versation that  flows  like  a  river  whose  hanks  are  efflorescent,  and  which  holds  its 
way  deep  and  tranquil — such  conversation  may  become  a  habit,  not  only  in  the 
sense  of  not  being  hurtful  but  in  the  sense  of  having  a  beauty  which  is  pleasurable. 

(Ibid.)        L  Idle  wokds 1.  By   idle  words  we  may  understand  such  words  as 

proceed  from  vanity  or  deceit,  which  comprt-bend  the  pretences  and  plausible 
sppeches  of  the  cunning,  and  the  empty  boastings  of  the  vain-glorious  man.  2. 
Idle  words  may  comprehend  the  reports  of  envy  and  mahce,  by  which  our  neighbour 
suffers  in  credit  or  reputation.  3.  Idle  words  may  imply  such  as  are  the  product 
of  a  loose  and  idle  mind,  such  as  represent  the  impure  conceptions  of  a  mind 
polluted  with  lust,  4.  By  idle  words  we  may  understand  useless  and  insignificant 
words  which  are  spent  to  no  great  end  or  purpose,  either  good  or  bad.  II.  The 
SCOPE  OS*  OUR  Saviotts's  AEorMENT  iu  this  place.  1.  He  descends  from  the  greater  to 
the  less  evils  of  speech  ;  from  blasphemy  to  the  other  evils  which  are  generated  in 
the  heart,  and  from  thence  derived  to  the  tongue — ♦'  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil 
thoughts,  murders,"  &c.  Not  only  these  but  idle  words  will  be  punished.  Jesting 
does  not  become  the  gospel.  III.  The  end  and  design  of  speech,  which  is  the  gift 
of  God  to  mankind.  If  we  use  our  speech  to  serve  any  purpose  contrary  to  the 
end  designed  by  God,  we  abuse  His  gift  and  must  answer  for  it.  1.  Speech  was 
given  for  the  communication  of  our  thoughts  to  each  other,  yet  all  our  thoughts 
are  not  to  be  brought  into  conversation.  2.  The  wants  and  necessities  of  nature 
call  for  our  help,  and  as  these  subjects  must  employ  great  part  of  our  thoughts,  so 
likewise  of  our  speech,  for  we  cannot  live  without  mutual  aid.  3.  Further,  God 
has  made  us  to  delight  in  each  other's  company,  hence  it  is  lawful  to  employ 
speech  for  improving  mutual  love  and  friendship.  Men  may  talk  of  many 
subjects  which  have  no  present  instruction,  yet  they  may  serve  this  end.  4. 
Consider  the  different  degrees  of  sense  and  understanding  that  men  are  endowed 
with.  The  tongue  cannot  speak  better  than  the  understanding  can  conceive. 
Must  not  despise  the  conversation  of  weaker  men.  (T.  Sherlock,  D.D.)  Idle 
Words : — Many  imagine  that  this  sin  is  too  insignificant  to  be  remembered  at  a 
moment  when  the  vast  things  of  eternity  shall  be  waiting  the  allotment  of  the  Judge. 
It  cannot  be  a  small  thing  to  disobey  God,  though  it  may  be  a  small  thing  in  which 
I  disobey  Him.  We  maintain  that  sins  of  the  tongue,  if  compared  with  other  sins, 
should  be  regarded  as  aggravated,  rather  than  trivial,  David  speaks  of  the  tongue 
as  of  the  best  member  which  he  had.  And  never  should  it  be  forgotten  that  language 
is  not  a  human  invention  ;  men  left  to  themselves  could  not  have  arranged  such  a 
system  for  communicating  their  thoughts  one  to  the  other.  There  was  silence  in 
creation  till  man  was  made  with  the  faculty  of  expressiug  what  he  felt,  and  creation 
thrilled  at  the  melody  of  speech.  1.  We  ought  to  consider  the  faculty  of  speech, 
how  eminent  its  power,  before  we  marvel  at  the  criminality  attached  to  its  abuse. 
Every  one  condemns  the  prostitution  of  reason,  because  it  is  a  high  attribute  ;  but 
what  is  language  but  reason  walking  abroad  ?  Can  it  be  a  Ught  thing  to  use  the 
tongue  against  God,  and  dishonouring  Him  through  that  whence  He  looked  for  His 
chief  glory?  2.  If  these  remarks  prove  the  "  idle  word"  so  criminal  that  of  itself 
it  might  justly  procure  the  condemnation  of  the  speaker,  they  will  also  prove  that 
our  conver'^ation  may  evidence  -whether  or  no  we  have  justifying  faith.  St.  James 
makes  the  power  of  the  tongue  equivalent  to  power  over  the  whole  man.  He  who 
U  master  of  his  chief  faculty  is  little  hkely  to  be  the  slave  of  an  inferior.  It  is  true 
.  hat  no  sin  is  more  easily  committed  than  one  of  the  tongue  ;  hence  the  non-com- 
mission of  it  is  a  high  attainment.  It  is  just  because  the  thing  may  be  so  easily 
done,  that  the  not  doing  it  marks  singular  power  and  vigilance.  But  this  is  evidence 
from  their  being  no  idle  words  ;  there  may  be  positive  as  well  as  negative  witness, 
the  witness  of  what  is  uttered  as  well  as  of  what  is  repressed.  If  it  be  true  that 
"  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh,"  we  may  confidently  reckon 
that  where  there  is  genuine  piety  it  will  give  tone  to  the  conversation.  "  With  the 
mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."  Hence  there  is  a  high  duty  to  be  per- 
formed by  the  tongue.  Therefore,  whilst  we  admit  that  faith  is  the  instrument  of 
justification,  we  can  understand  why  words,  which  are  the  confession  of  Christ  befor« 


246  j-tiE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


men,  should  be  given  as  securing  salvation.  They  are  but  faith  embodied.  It  waa 
to  a  particular  description  of  idle  words  that  our  Lord  had  respect — scoffing  words. 
What  helps  our  laughter  will  soon  lose  our  reverence.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
Language  too  good  to  be  abused: — Language  is  so  curious,  so  costly  a  gift,  so 
impregnate  with  Deity,  so  vast  in  empire,  that  to  misuse  it,  though  in  the  least 
particular,  may  be  likened  to  sacrilege,  the  profanation  of  an  august  and  infinite 
mystery.  (Ibid.)  Language  too  sacred  to  be  profaned: — It  is  grievous,  for 
example,  to  think  of  God  irreverently :  the  soul  should  be  His  sanctuary :  and  to 
profane  Him  there,  is  to  aggravate  the  contempt  by  offering  it  at  the  shrine  which 
He  reared  for  Himself.  But  it  is  yet  more  grievous  to  speak  of  Him  irreverently. 
This  is  worse  than  dishonouring  Him  at  the  secret  shrine:  this  is  taking  the 
material  of  His  costliest  temple — for  is  it  not  said,  that  He  ♦ '  inhabiteth  the  praises 
of  Israel  7"  as  though  words  were  the  columns,  the  walls,  the  domes,  which  combine 
for  the  noblest  dwelling-place  of  Deity — I  say,  then,  that  to  speak  irreverently  of 
God,  is  to  take  the  material  of  His  costliest  temple,  and  fashion  it  into  a  structure 
where  He  may  be  openly  contemned.  The  richness  of  the  material  enhances  the 
dishonour.  Give  me  the  stars  with  which  to  build,  give  me  the  treasures  of  immen- 
sity with  which  to  adorn,  and  the  temple  which  I  rear  to  an  idol  shall  be  so  much 
the  more  an  insult  to  the  one  living  God.  And  it  is  thus  with  speech.  Words  are 
as  the  stars  of  heaven,  fitted  to  illumine  the  yet  dark  places  of  creation.  Burning 
with  truth,  they  may  guide  the  wanderings,  and  be  as  messengers  for  the  depths  of 
eternity.  {Ibid.)  Language  a  heart  reflector : — Their  words  are  more  than  exhi- 
bitions of  the  workings  and  movements  of  the  intellect,  more  than  the  displayed 
rushings  and  soarings  of  the  imagination.  They  are  the  discoverings  of  a  heaven- 
born  principle,  a  principle  which  apprehends  truths  that  are  above  the  human  intel- 
lectj  and  glories  that  defy  the  human  imngination.  They  are  the  signs,  the  evidences, 
of  a  second  creation — the  order,  the  symmetry,  the  beauty,  the  stateliness,  of  a  new 
and  spiritual  world,  demonstrated,  unveiled,  laid  open,  incorporated.  If  they  be 
words  of  prayer,  they  are  the  ascendings  towards  heaven  of  renovated  affections  :  if 
of  praise,  they  are  the  vibrations  of  chords  which  a  Divine  hand  has  retuned  :  if  of 
reproof,  counsel,  exhortation,  they  are  but  the  soul,  once  "  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,"  appearing  as  an  armed  man  to  fight  the  battle  of  the  Lord.  Then  words  may 
justify,  as  incontrovertible  proofs  of  a  justifying  faith,  and  a  renewed  nature.  Actions 
furnish  no  better  criterion  :  and  when  the  great  white  throne  shall  be  set,  and  the 
earth  and  the  sea  shall  have  given  up  their  dead,  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  may 
alike  have  their  portions  determined  by  their  use  of  the  tongue :  speech,  forgotten 
speech,  may  be  heard  again,  piercing  as  the  tmmpet-peal,  by  which  the  graves  have 
been  rent ;  and  there  will  be  no  fear  of  erroneous  decision,  should  there  be  no  rule 
of  judgment  but  this,  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thoa 
shalt  be  condemned."  (Ibid.)  Our  words  to  justify,  or  condemn: — Consider 
some  of  the  ways  by  which  words  minister  to  our  condemnation.  I.  At  the  head 
of  the  list  we  must  put  pkofane  swearing.  H.  Another  way  in  which  we  expose 
ourselves  to  God's  displeasure  is  by  foolish  talking  (Ephes.  v.  4).  III.  Anothei 
example  of  the  improper  use  of  the  gift  of  speech  is  an  indulgence  in  the  petulani 
AND  COMPLAINING  LANGUAGE  which  SO  ofteu  de&troys  the  harmony  of  private  life. 
IV.  A  fourth  illustration  of  our  text  is  found  in  the  ease  of  misrepeesentation  and 
BLANDER.  V.  Angry  WORDS  may  endanger  ou^r  salvation.  (J.  H.  Norton.)  Innocent 
talk: — Happy  are  the  friends  of  those  whose  conversation  "  ministers  grace  to  the 
hearers."  It  may  not  always  be  grave  and  serious ;  it  may  even  dance  and  sparkle 
like  a  mountain  stream  in  the  cheerful  sunlight ;  but  it  is  always  innocent  and  pure. 
(Ibid.)  Speech  without  words  : — You  could  not  fasten  upon  any  word  or  sentence, 
and  say  that  it  was  calumny ;  for  in  order  to  constitute  slander  it  is  not  nacossary 
that  the  word  spoken  should  be  false — half  truths  are  often  more  calumnious  than 
whole  falsehoods.  It  is  not  even  necessary  that  a  word  should  be  distinctly  uttered  : 
a  dropped  lip,  an  arched  eyebrow,  a  shrugged  shoulder,  a  significant  look,  an  incredu- 
lous expression  of  countenance  ; — nay,  even  an  emphatic  silence,  may  do  the  work; 
and  when  the  light  and  trifling  thing  which  has  done  the  mischief  has  fluttered 
off,  the  venom  is  left  behind,  to  work  and  rankle,  to  inflame  hearts,  and  to  poison 
human  society  at  the  fountain  springs  of  life.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M. A.)  Slanderoru 
words : — There  is  a  machine  in  the  museum  at  Venice,  by  which  some  forgotten 
Italian  tyrant  used  to  shoot  poisoned  needles  at  the  objects  of  his  hatred.  How  much 
worse  was  he  than  the  unscrupulous  agent  of  slander  to  whom  the  great  Judge  of  aU 
is  heard  to  say :  "  By  thy  words  tbou  shalt  be  condemned "  ?  (J.  H.  Norton.) 
Cheerful  words  not  idle: — I  do  not  call  words  idle  simply  because  they  cannot  b« 


CHAr,  xn.J  ST.  MATTHETT.  247 

registered  and  measured  by  a  matter-of-fact  standard.  How  often  has  an  airy 
word  of  pleasantry  fallen  on  the  ear  and  pierced  the  shield  of  prejudice  or  passion  1 
How  often  has  the  cloud,  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand,  but  which  would  soon 
have  overspread  the  whole  sky,  been  dispersed  by  a  momentary  gleam  of  bright 
sunshine,  and  by  a  word  which  in  itself  was  only  fugitive,  and  hardly  to  b« 
remembered.  You  cannot  call  that  an  idle  word  which  is  the  outflow  of  simple 
cheerfulness,  if  it  dissipates  an  angry  thought.  (A.  Watson,  D.D.)  The  reflex 
influence  of  idle  words : — The  man  who  indulges  in  frivolous  and  idle  talk  damages 
his  own  mental  faculties  and  moral  sense.  In  such  speech  there  is  no  demand 
for  the  reflective  powers,  and  they  become  impotent ;  no  development  of  the  senti- 
ments of  truth,  benevolence,  and  religion,  the  very  stamina  of  our  moral  nature, 
and  they  become  more  and  more  inoperative  and  dead.  In  idle  talk  the  soul 
in  every  way  is  injured  ;  its  rich  soil,  capable  of  producing  trees  of  knowledge  and 
life,  is  wasted  in  flowery,  it  may  be,  but  still  noxious  weeds.  (Dr.  Thomas.) 
The  eternal  influence  of  idle  words : — Science  affirms  that  every  movement  in  the 
material  creation  propagates  an  influence  to  the  remotest  planet  in  the  universe. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  it  seems  morally  certain  that  every  word  spoken  on  the  ear  will 
have  an  influence  lasting  as  eternity.  The  words  we  address  to  men  are  written, 
not  on  parchment,  marble,  or  brass,  which  time  may  effiace,  but  on  the  inde- 
structible pages  of  the  soul.  Everything  written  on  the  imperishable  soul  is  im- 
perishable. AU  the  words  that  have  ever  been  addressed  to  you  by  men  long  since 
departed,  are  written  on  the  book  of  your  memory,  and  will  be  unsealed  at  the 
"Day  of  Judgment,"  and  spread  out  in  the  full  beams  of  eternal  knowledge. 
(Ibid.)  Words  without  interest : — The  meaning  may  best  be  gathered  from  the 
metaphor  whence  it  appears  to  be  taken — that  of  money,  not  employed,  but  lying 
dead  in  the  hands  of  the  possessor.  Our  words  are  as  precious  in  their  proper  use 
as  gold  and  silver  ;  but  they  become  * '  idle  "  words  when  they  yield  no  interest,  when 
they  bear  no  good  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  edification  or  comfort  of  our  neigh- 
bour, the  salvation  of  ourselves  and  of  those  who  hear  us.  (J.  Ford.)  Little 
agencies  destructive : — Idle  words  are  deemed  of  little  consequence.  There  are 
more  deaths  occasioned  by  unperceived  irregularities  of  diet,  than  by  open  and 
apparent  surfeits.  If  venial  sins  be  less  in  quality,  they  are  more  in  quantity, 
and  their  multitude  makes  them  equal  to  the  other's  magnitude.  The  aggregation 
of  atoms  made  at  first  the  world's  huge  mass;  and  the  aggregation  of  drops 
did  drown  it,  when  it  was  made.  (0.  Feltham.)  Accounts  for  eternity  : — 
An  infidel  once  remarked  jestingly  to  a  clergyman,  "  I  always  spend  the  Sunday 
in  settling  my  accounts."  "You  may  find,  sir,"  was  the  solemn  reply,  "that 
the  Day  of  Judgment  is  to  be  spent  in  exactly  the  same  manner  I  "  Con- 
versation with  grace  :—Oxii  conversation  need  not  always  be  o/ grace,  but  it 
should  be  with  grace.  {Matthew  Henry.)  Faith  and  works : — I.  The  con- 
nection BETWEEN  FAITH  ANI>  W0EK3  WHICH  CAUSES  THE  JP8TIFICATI0N  DERIVED  TBOU 
THE  FOEMEB,  OFTEN  TO  BE  SPOKEN   OF  AS  DEEIVED   FROM  THE  LATTER.       Tum  away  the 

mean  and  despicable  notion  of  a  faith,  which  doth  not  cordially  embrace  Christ, 
and  concentrate  all  the  affections  of  the  soul  in  Him  as  in  one  centre,  hke  as  a 
thousand  rivers  pour  forth  their  mighty  waters  into  the  bosom  of  the  ocean,  or  as 
the  scattered  rays  of  the  midday  sun,  gathered  by  the  optic  glass,  meet  in  one 
bright  focus.  Whenever  there  is  true  faith  in  Christ,  works  of  righteousness  and 
peace  are  the  inevitable  consequences  of  her  dominion.  Whenever  justification  is 
in  Scripture  ascribed  to  works,  it  is  not  for  their  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  that 
faith  whence  they  spring.    IL  How  the  paeticulab  fruit  to  which  oub  sext 

ALLUDES    IS    A    JUST    CRITERION    OF    OUB    FAITH,    AND    A    FITTING   STANDARD    FOB  THE 

AWABDS  OF  FINAL  TRIUMPH.  "For  by  thy  words,"  &o.  Such  is  the  law,  and  its 
justice  will  be  evinced  by  our  referring  to  the  fruit  of  the  lip  as  an  indication  of  the 
faith  of  the  heart.  God  may  be  denied  by  words  and  thoughts,  hence  both  may 
fairly  decide  the  great  assize.  From  the  tenor  of  a  man's  conversation  we  may 
estimate  his  conversion.  Various  methods  by  which  this  law  might  be  vindicated 
— words  of  prayer  and  praise.  Absence  of  these  leads  to  condemnation.  Faith 
speaks  through  these — "  If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect 
man."  (H.  Melvill,  M.A.)  Talking  of  religion  without  possessing  it: — I  believe 
a  man  may  speak  of  heaven  who  shall  never  behold  its  mansions,  just  as  he  may 
speak  of  India  who  will  never  sail  towards  its  distant  shores.  It  is  one  thing  to 
decide  that  a  man  has  justifying  faith  merely  because  his  tongue  may  give  utterance 
to  matters  connected  with  religion ;  and  it  is  another  to  declare  that  where  there  ia 
faith,  it  will  call  forth  religious  conversation,  and  excite  a  Divine  aspiration,  {Ibid.) 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  xn. 

Unconscious  influence : — I.  For  good  or  ill,  the  life  of  every  one  of  us  is  an  ince*. 
Bant  influence.  II.  Deduce  from  this  fact  some  important  lessons.  1.  Our  uncon- 
soions  influence  is  spontaneous,  and  has  no  premeditation  or  calculation  about  it. 
2.  Our  unconscious  influence  is  a  perpetual  emanation  from  ourselves.  3.  This  un- 
conscious influence  is  necessarilj  simple.  4.  Our  unconscious  influence  is  the  more 
powerful  because  it  excites  no  suspicion.  III.  In  what  sense  and  on  what  grounds 
are  we  accountable  for  this  kind  of  influence  ?  1.  It  is  conditioned  by  our  cha- 
racter. 2.  It  is  by  this  we  act  most  on  those  who  are  nearest  to  us.  3.  Our  in- 
direct influence  is  our  truest.  It  best  represents  us.  4.  By  these  unconscious 
exhibitions  of  character  the  world  is  constantly  judging  us.  Learn  (1)  The  im- 
portance of  each  act  in  our  life ;  (2)  The  necessity  of  conversion.  (Clement 
Bailliache.)  Idle  words: — I.  What  does  our  Lord  call  an  idle  word?  Some 
understand  unprofitable  words;  others  false,  reproachful,  hurtful  words;  and  this 
latter  meaning  may  be  preferred.  II.  How  can  men  be  justified  by  their  words,  if 
they  are  good  ;  and  condemned  by  them,  if  evil  ?  III.  The  reasonableness  of  justi- 
fying or  condemning  men  by  their  words.  One  reason  is,  that  a  great  deal  is  in  the 
power  of  the  tongue.  Another  is,  that  as  men's  words  are  so  are  their  hearts.  IV. 
Application  :  1.  No  one  may  hence  infer  that  he  may  be  saved  by  a  fair  profession 
of  religion  without  good  works.  2.  Here  is  a  mark  which  may  be  of  good  use  for 
determining  our  sincerity  or  insincerity.  3.  The  doctrine  oif  the  text  teaches  us  to 
be  careful  of  our  words.  4.  We  may  hence  discern  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  a 
most  excellent  person — "  Never  man  spake  like  Him."  {N.  Lardner.)  Chris- 
tianity judged  by  its  words  : — Think  of  the  streams  of  holy  speech  which  have  been 
flowing  through  the  world  for  ages,  and  of  the  life  which  they  have  conveyed  to  thirsty 
souls.  Think  of  these  streams  as  they  are  flowing  to-day  in  tens  of  thousands  of 
Christian  congregations,  aud  in  innumerable  Sabbath-schools.  Compare  their  influ- 
ence with  that  of  the  dark  utterances  of  heathenism,  and  the  distm-bing  teachings 
of  unbelief.  Think  of  the  countless  rills  of  Christian  speech  which  are  flowing 
to-day  from  the  lips  of  those  who  love  the  Saviour,  and  who  are  endeavouring  to 
make  Him  known  in  the  home,  in  the  sick-chamber,  in  the  prison-house,  and  in 
their  various  intercourse  with  those  around  them.  Compare  their  influence  with 
that  of  the  idle,  thoughtless,  impious,  profane  talk  of  the  milhons  who  are  Uving 
without  God ;  and  then  say  whether  Christianity  may  or  may  not  be  judged  by  its 
words  1     {Clement  Bailhache.) 

Ver.  38.  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from  Thee. — Religious  sign-seekers: — I. 
That  the  demand  fob  additional  advantages  geneeallt  comes  from  those  adreadt 
POSSESSED  OF  VERY  MANY.  It  was  the  scribcs  and  Pharisees  that  made  this  request, 
not  the  publicans.  II.  God  never  gives  additional  advantages  when  those 
POSSESSED  ABE  NOT  USED.  Christ  refused  this  demand  (1)  because  it  was  merely  an 
excuse  for  their  rejection  of  Him  ;  (2)  because  it  was  a  reflection  on  Him  ;  (3)  be- 
cause it  bore  no  proof  of  earnestness ;  (4)  because  God's  past  dealings  afforded  all 
the  proof  requisite.  lU.  Failtjbe  to  use  all  the  advantages  we  possess  can  only 
ISSUE  IN  condemnation.  The  Niuevites  would  condemn  the  Jews.  The  ministry  of 
Jonah  was  brief,  wrathful,  that  of  a  sinful  man.  Christ's  ministry  wa<j  longer, 
and  that  of  the  Holy  Son  of  God.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  would  condemn  them. 
1.  She  came  to  see  and  hear  out  of  curiosity.  2.  She  came  from  afar.  3.  She 
came  uninvited.  4.  She  came  on  a  mere  report.  (C.  Lankester,  B.A.)  The 
doctrine-1  of  religion  reasonahh-  to  he  believed  : — I.  That  the  doctrine  of  religion  la 
IN  itself  reasonable  to  be  believed,  and  suifieiently  evidenced  by  the  standing  and 
universal  signs  or  marks  of  truth.  The  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas  was  sufficient 
to  render  that  generation  of  the  Jews  inexcusable  in  their  unbelief.  Religion  is  in 
its  nature  a  trial  of  men's  hearts,  and,  therefore,  inconsistent  with  all  compulsive 
motives.  All  religion  consists  in  the  love  of  truth,  and  in  the  free  choice  and 
practice  of  right,  and  in  being  influenced  by  rational  and  moral  motives.  II.  Here 
is  a  description  given  of  wicked  wen,  in  one  part  of  their  character  that  they  are 
apt  continually  to  require  more  and  more  signs,  and  to  tempt  God  without  reason 
and  without  end.  Wicked  men  do  not  like  to  fight  against  God  openly;  and 
therefore  take  pains  to  impose  upon  themselves  some  slight  objection  against 
Him.  III.  There  are  just  and  good  reasons  why  God  sHorLD  not  gratify  the  un- 
reasonable expectations  of  prejudiced  and  corrupt  minds  —  '*  There  shall  no 
sign  be  given,"  Ac.     Men  must  obey  in  order  to  know.     (S.  Clarke,  D.D.) 

Ver.  41,  The  men  of  Nineveh  shall  rise  In  Judgment— r^«  greater  than  Jonas:—  • 


CHAP.  3cn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  249 

I.  To  SHOW  THAT  SUFFICIENT  CAUSE  IN  THB  DIFFERENT  CIRCUMSTANCES  0»  THB 
TWO,  WHY  THE  REPENTANT  NiNEVITES  SHOULD  BE  WITNESSES  AGAINST  THE  IMPENI- 
TENT Jews.  Now  what  account  are  we  to  give  of  tliis  repentance  of  the  Ninevitesf 
▲t  first  sight  it  seems  strange  that  so  vast  a  result  should  have  been  wrought  by 
the  preaching  of  a  solitary  and  unknown  individual.  Jonah  had  no  miraculous 
credentials  to  give;  but  he  had  himself  been  the  subject  of  miracle.  God  might  be 
said  to  have  raised  him  from  the  dead.  The  evidence  was  that  of  a  resurrection ; 
this  is  suflScient  to  produce  conviction.  1.  We  may  declare  that  far  more  evidence 
was  afforded  to  the  Jews  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  than  to  the  Ninevites  of  the 
resurrection  of  Jonah.  They  had  the  same  sign  with  greater  clearness.  The 
preaching  of  the  resurrection  by  the  apostles  exceeded  immeasurably  any  evidence 
granted  to  the  Ninevites  of  the  entombment  of  Jonah.  2.  Then  think  of  what  a 
contrast  there  was  between  Jonah,  void  of  all  power  of  proving  his  commission  by 
miracles,  and  our  Redeemer  displaj-ing  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  and  on  the 
coasts  of  Judea,  authority  over  diseases  and  death.  If  a  mere  report  of  the  miracle 
concerning  Jonah  overcame  the  Ninevites,  what  can  be  urged  in  defence  of  the  Jews, 
who  gave  no  heed  to  their  Teacher  though  they  beheld  Him  with  their  own  eyes 
exercising  miraculous  powers  ?  3,  How  different  were  the  messages  which  the  two 
prophets  delivered.      Jonah  brought  nothing  but    tribulation;    Christ  merciful 

Promises.  4.  Jonah  could  not  have  shown  any  sympathy  with  those  whose 
estructioa  he  was  commissioned  to  predict,  for  he  was  displeased  that  his  pre- 
diction was  not  accomplished.  But  how  different  the  deportment  of  Christ.  He 
had  to  predict  the  desolation  of  a  mighty  capital;  but  He  did  it  with  burning 
tears.  If  the  Ninevites  gave  heed  to  the  prophet  of  wrath,  how  much  more  should 
the  Jews  to  a  messenger  who  would  rejoice  if  repentance  should  turn  away  their 
woe.  II.  The  practical  lessons  which  the  reference  to  the  last  judgment 
MAY  have  been  INTENDED  TO  FURNISH.  One  man  Is,  OX  OHO  set  of  men  are,  sum- 
moned to  give  evidence  against  another  at  the  judgment  seat.  The  young  man  who 
died  in  his  prime,  the  victim  of  his  passions,  will  be  tried  as  the  sensuahst.  Who 
will  give  evidence?  A  father's  voice  will  testify',  "  I  warned  him."  The  child  will 
witness  against  the  negligent  parent.  The  faithful  pastor  will  witness  against  the 
nominal  Christian.  The  man  of  toil  and  poverty,  who  did  good,  will  witness 
against  the  wealthy  worldling.  The  heathen  may  witness  against  us.  (H.  Melvill, 
BJD.)  The  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonah:— 1.  Man  shunning  God's  presence.  2. 
God's  awful  wrath  in  consequence  of  man's  departure  from  Him.  _  3.  The  vain 
attempts  made  by  man  to  propitiate  an  offended  God.  4.  The  Divine  method  of 
propitiation  by  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  6.  The  triumph  of  Christ  over  death 
and  hell.  (E.  M.  Gonlhum,  B.C.L.)  Jerusalem  condemned  hy  Nineveh  : — Three 
particulars  in  which  the  Jews  were  favoured  above  the  Ninevites.  I.  Theib 
FORMER  ADVANTAGES  WERE  GREATER.  The  Nincvites  wcic  Idolaters ;  had  no  sacred 
history  to  rouse  them  to  reflection;  no  law-giver  like  Moses ;  no  judges  Uke  Samuel; 
no  kings  like  David ;  no  teachers  like  the  prophets ;  no  precious  promises  to  inspire 
them  with  hope.  II.  The  messenger  sent  to  them  was  more  encoubagino. 
Nineveh  was  only  threatened  with  destruction.  The  Jews  were  urged  to  reform. 
UI.  The  Preacher  who  now  addressed  them  was  more  worthy  op  regard. 
Jonah  was  a  man  ;  had  no  compassion  on  Nineveh ;  wrought  no  miracle ;  had  no 
power  to  forgive;  suffered  slightly;  his  example  unworthy  of  imitation.  Oar 
privileges  are  greater  than  the  Jews.  "  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  much 
will  be  required."  (F.  J.  A.)  Nineveh  and  her  testimony  : — I.  Nineveh  and  its 
BIN.  II.  Nineveh  and  its  repentance.  III.  Nineveh  and  its  testimony.  1. 
A  past  testimony.  It  speaks  to  us,  and  says,  Eepent.  2.  A  future  testimony.  Its 
inhabitants  shall  rise  against  us  in  the  day  of  judgment.  (H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 
Privilege  and  responsibility  : — I.  There  are  different  degrees  of  advantage,  involving 
different  amounts  of  responsibility.  II.  Reluctant  witness-bearing  will  be  heard  ia 
the  judgment  of  those  the  less  advantaged  in  condemnation  of  the  greater.  {W.  M. 
Punshon,  LL.D.)  Jonah  a  type  of  Christ  .-—I.  The  striking  signitication  of  his 
name.  Jonah  signifies  dove — a  striking  emblem  of  the  meek  and  gentle  Jesus.  II. 
As  a  proclaimer  of  God's  will  to  men.  III.  In  his  sufferings  and  deliverance. 
Jonah,  after  all,  very  imperfectly  typified  Christ.     (Dr.  Burns.) 

Ver.  42.  The  Queen  of  the  South  shall  rise  up  in  Judgment. — The  Queen  of  the 
South,  or  the  earnest  inquirer: — I  lET  us  commend  her  fob  heb  inquiring 
BPiRiT.  I.  She  was  a  queen.  2.  Her  roy^l  court  was  doubtless  already  stored 
with  wisdom.    3.  She  came  from  a  very  great  distance.    4.  She  was  a  foreigner  to 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  LLLViSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

■ H 

Solomon  and  had  a  religion  already.  5.  She  made  a  journey  which  cost  her  very 
much  expense.  6.  She  received  no  invitation.  7.  The  object  she  journeyed  after  was 
vastly  inferior  to  that  which  is  proposed  to  our  inquiry.  II.  How  she  condc£Ted 
TUE  iNQUiRr.  1.  In  person.  2.  She  went  first  of  all  to  Solomon.  3.  "She  told 
him  all  that  was  in  her  heart."  4.  She  proposed  to  !~'olomon  her  hard  questions. 
5.  She  listened  carefully  to  what  Solomon  told  her.  6.  She  saw  the  house  that  he 
had  built.  7.  She  observed  the  meat  on  his  table.  8.  She  looked  to  the  sitting  of 
the  servants.  III.  The  result  op  her  inquiry.  1.  A  confession  of  faith.  2. 
A  confession  of  her  unbelief — "  Howbeit  I  believed  not  the  words  until  I  came,"  Ac. 
3.  Her  anticipations  were  exceeded.  4.  She  blessed  Solomon's  God.  5.  She  gave 
to  Solomon  of  her  treasures.  6.  Solomon  made  her  a  present  of  his  royal  bounty. 
7.  She  went  home  to  her  nation.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christians  put  to  shame  by 
the  heathen. — Wilt  thou  not  be  sore  confoimded,  Christian,  when — bom,  as  thou  art, 
in  the  bosom  of  the  Church,  in  the  midst  of  so  many  oracles  of  Scriptures,  so  many 
examples  of  saints— thou  shalt  yet  see  many  heathens  outstripping  thee  in  good- 
ness ;  so  that,  excepting  only  thy  faith,  which  being  "  without  works  "  shall  only 
serve  to  increase  thy  shame,  instead  of  adding  to  thy  glory,  thou  shalt  find  thyseU 
placed  below  an  Aristides  in  justice,  below  a  Zeleucus  in  rectitude,  below  a  Palemon 
in  chastity,  below  an  Antigonus  in  meekness,  below  a  Socrates  in  patience,  below 
an  Epaminondas  in  disinterestedness ;  men  who  were  all  of  them  bom  in  the  deep 
gloom  of  heathenism,  never  favoured  (as  thou  hast  been)  with  any  knowledge  of 
life  eternal,  with  any  gospel,  with  a«iy  sacraments — men  who  had  never  seen  a 
God  dying  for  them,  as  thou  hast  seen.  (Segneri.)  I.  She  went,  notwithstanding 
the  distance  of  her  residence.  The  gospel  is  brought  to  our  door.  II.  She  went, 
notwithstanding  all  the  anxieties  of  her  public  station.  The  claims  of  business 
must  not  be  allowed  to  clash  with  the  claims  of  religion.  III.  She  went,  though 
uninvited.  We  have  been  invited — how  of  ten  I  IV.  She  went  to  hear  the  wisdom  of 
a  mortal,  at  best  fallible,  and  who,  after  all,  was  guilty  of  sad  and  criminal  defection. 
We  are  invited  to  hear  One  greater  than  Solomon.  Let  us  beware  lest  the  Queen  of 
the  South,  by  her  treatment  of  the  less,  become  a  swift  witness  against  us  on 
account  of  our  treatment  of  the  greater.  (Brooks.)  Christ  and  bolomon : — L 
The  comparison.  Solomon  a  type  of  Christ.  As  the  Son  of  David  ;  as  an  eminent 
favourite  of  God ;  as  to  the  extent,  prosperity,  peacefulness,  and  wisdom  of  His 
government ;  as  the  builder  of  the  temple ;  and  as  a  teacher  of  wisdom.  II.  Thb 
boperiokitt.  I.  Christ  was  a  Divine  as  well  as  a  human  character,  <fec.  2.  Christ 
was  the  antitype,  and  so  greater  than  the  type.  {Anon.)  Christ  greater  than 
Solomon: — I.  Solomon  was  a  great  querist,  but  Christ,  the  great  Evangehst,  answers 
the  queries  of  the  great  Ecclesiastes.  II.  Solomon's  teaching  is  mainly  negative, 
Jesus  was  as  mainly  positive.  III.  Solomon  s  speech  was  regal,  but  the  Saviour's 
was  Divine.  So  great  is  this  Prince  of  prophets  that  the  least  in  His  kingdom  la 
greater  than  Solomon.     (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  43,  45.    When  the  unclean  spirit  Is  gone  out  of  a  man. — Furnished, 

Wt  vacant : — The  central  lesson  of  this  text  is  this :  that  reformation  is  not 
necessarily  salvation — that,  indeed,  reformation  without  godliness  may  bring 
a  curse  rather  than  a  blessing.  And  it  is  not  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  only 
which  illustrates  this  principle.  Look  at  the  reaction  which,  in  our  own  country, 
followed  the  Puritan  Eeformation.  Again,  there  are  not  a  few  in  our  day  who 
have  lost  all  faith   in   the  gospel  of  Christ,   but  who  are  firm  belibvers   in 

THE   power  of    science  AND   MATERIAL    CIVILIZATION    TO    ELEVATE   AND    BLB89   MANKIND. 

Science  may  expel  the  devils  of  ignorance  and  superstition ;  it  may  "  sweep  " 
the  house,  and  "garnish"  it  with  information  on  a  thousand  subjects.  But 
can  it  supply  the  house  with  a  tenant  strong  enough  to  keep  out  the  "  seven 
worse  devils  "  when  they  come  ?  I  do  not  know  that  ignorance  is  more  dangerous 
than  intellectual  pride.  I  do  not  know  that  a  superstitious  idolatry  is  worse 
than  an  atheistic  materialism.  Nay,  it  may  perhaps  be  more  healthful  for  a 
man  to  worship  the  stars  than  to  worship  his  own  telescope.  It  is  surely  better 
to  "  feel  after  God "  in  the  darkness,  than  to  cease  caring  for  Him  in  the 
light.     Coming  nearer  home,  my  text  also  teaches  us  a  practical  lesson  as  to 

OUR   dealings  WITH    INDIVIDUALS    WHOM    WE   ABE    SEEKING    TO    HAVE    AND    BLESS.       As  a 

parent  you  endeavour  by  earnest  discipline  to  expel  from  your  child  the  demons  o£ 
disobedience,  untruthfulness,  self-will.  You  do  well  in  thus  sweeping  the  house ; 
l>ut  this  is  not  salvation.  One  deed  done  by  your  boy  through  the  love  of  God  or 
Christ  or  goodness,  is  worth  all  the  sweeping  and  garnishing  in  the  world ;  for  it 


ST.  MATTHEW.  251 


indicates  that  the  house  is  tenanted.  Take  another  case.  Here,  let  us  suppose,  is 
a  drunkard  whom  you  are  anxious  to  reform.  He  is  ruining  his  body,  breaking  his 
wife's  heart,  injuring  his  family.  You  succeed  in  reforming  him.  This  a  matter 
lor  lejoicing.  Yon  have  done  well  in  sweeping  the  house  from  one  vice  ;  but  that 
vice  had  its  root  in  ungodhness,  and  if  after  his  reformation  the  man  continues 
ungodly,  there  is  danger  of  that  ungodliness  breaking  out  in  worse  sins  than  ever. 
Finally,  the  text  has  a  solemn  application  to  the  state  op  our  own  souls.  The 
grand  question  is  :  Are  our  souls  inhabited  by  the  principles  of  godliness  ?  Is  the 
spirit  of  God  dwelling  within  us  ?  Let  us  choose  and  cherish  all  things  good.  {T.  G. 
Finlayson.)  "  To  lei,  furnished  "; — You  may  perhaps  have  seen  some  large  man 
sion  filled  with  substantial  and  elegant  furniture,  and  surrounded  with  a  beautifa 
and  well  kept  garden,  and  having  in  its  windows  a  placard  bearing  tha  words— 
"To  Let,  Fuknisked."  I  fear  there  is  many  a  man  in  modern  Christendom 
of  whom  such  a  house  is  only  too  fitting  an  emblem  1  He  may  have  been  well 
instructed  in  the  truths  of  Christianity ;  his  mind  may  be  richly  stored  with  the 
fiuits  of  modern  culture  ;  he  may  be  brilliant  and  accomphshed ;  his  acquirements 
may  be  substantial,  his  manners  gentlemanly,  his  tastes  refined,  his  conduct 
decorous :  but  the  well-furnished  rooms  are  all  vacant ;  they  are  not  tenanted  by 
the  spiritual  life  ;  they  are  sadly  too  open  to  the  incursions  of  evil ;  and  one  day, 
perhapa,  the  "  seven  devils "  may  come  and  abuse  to  their  own  purposes  all 
those  intellectual  and  sesthetic  treasures.  {Ibid.)  Reaction:  —  I  suppose 
there  never  was  a  time  in  the  history  of  England  which  equalled  in  licentious- 
ness and  profanity  the  period  ushered  in  by  the  Restoration.  And  doubtless 
the  chief  cause  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  endeavour  of  the  Puritans,  when 
they  were  in  power,  to  force  upon  the  nation  both  their  own  theology  and 
their  own  code  of  morals.  The  Puritans,  in  their  intense  eagerness  to  reform 
the  nation,  fell  into  the  great  mistake  of  supposing  that  they  could  make 
tha  people  orthodox  and  virtuous  by  Acts  of  Parliament.  At  least,  their  deeds 
were  in  accordance  with  some  such  theory.  The  Book  of  Common  Prayer  was 
forbidden,  under  penalty,  to  be  used  either  in  churches  or  in  private  houses. 
Punishments  were  threatened  against  such  as  should  find  fault  with  the  Calvinistio 
mode  of  worship.  Public  amusements  were  attacked.  Theatrical  representa- 
tions were  proscribed.  One  statute  ordered  that  all  the  maypoles  in  England 
should  be  cut  down.  The  Long  Parliament  gave  orders  that  Christmas  Day 
should  be  strictly  observed  as  a  fast — a  day  of  national  humiliation.  No  person 
was  to  be  "  admitted  into  the  public  service  until  the  House  of  Legislature  should 
be  satisfied  as  to  his  real  godliness."  Thus  the  Puritans  set  themselves  most 
vigorously  to  "  sweep  "  England  and  to  ••garnish"  it.  And  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  to  some  extent  they  succeeded.  The  counti-y  did  present  an  aspect  of  greater 
devoutuess  and  morality.  But  all  such  Acts  of  Parliament  could  not  communicate 
one  spark  of  religious  life  ;  they  could  "  sweep  "  away  much  visible  dust,  they  could 
"  garnish "  the  house  with  external  obsei-vances,  but  they  could  not  send  the 
indwelling  tenant.  And  so,  in  due  time,  to  the  untenanted  house  cama  the  •'  seven 
devils : " — first,  hypocrisy  and  all  manner  of  cant,  and  secret  debauchery,  even 
during  the  Protectorate  ;  and  then,  at  the  Eestoration,  an  unblushing  profanity  and 
licentiousness,  the  like  of  whieh  England  had  never  seen  before.  The  king  and  hie 
courtiers  set  the  example  of  profligacy.  The  statesmen  of  the  land  became  mere 
selfish  tiicksters.  Literature  draggled  itself  in  the  mire  of  pollution.  The  stage 
became  utterly  corrupt.  Conventicles  were  proscribed.  John  Bunyan  was  only 
one  of  many  who  were  sent  to  prison  for  preaching  the  gospel.  {Ibid.)  The 
return  of  the  dispossessed  spirit : — And  if  we  look  to  England  at  the  period 
c*  the  Eeformation,  we  find  that  men,  raised  up  by  God,  and  endowed  of 
Him  with  singular  boldness,  and  wisdom,  and  piety,  exorcised  the  unclean 
spirit  of  Eomish  superstition,  and  ejected  from  amongst  us  the  corruptions 
of  Popery.  It  was  a  sublime  moral  revolution,  and  never  did  the  human 
mind  struggle  free  from  a  more  oppressive  shackle,  never  was  there  thrown 
off  from  a  people  a  mightier  weight,  than  when  Reformers  had  won  the  hard* 
fought  battle,  and  Protestantism  was  enthroned  as  the  religion  of  these  realms. 
But  we  should  like  to  have  it  carefully  considered,  whether  there  has  been  no 
receiving  back  the  unclean  spirit.  The  human  mind,  long  enslaved,  was  intoxi- 
cated with  its  freedom,  and,  in  place  of  stopping  at  liberty,  went  on  to  lawless- 
ness. Hence  the  overspreading  of  the  land  with  a  thousand  sects  and  a  thousand 
systems;  as  though,  in  casting  out  the  one  spirit  of  ecclesiastical  tyranny, 
we  had  taken  in   the   seven    of  ecclesiastical  disunion.      And  over  and   abova 


252  TH jJ  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

this  melanclioly .  disruption  of  the  visible  Church,  Popery  itself  has  too  often 
found  a  home  in  our  Protestantism:  for  whenever  formaUty  has  insinuated 
itself  into  religion,  or  self-righteousness,  or  the  substitution  of  means  for  an 
end,  then  has  there  been  introduced  the  very  essence  of  Romanism :  the  ejected 
spirit  has  come  back,  the  same  in  nature,  though  less  repulsive  in  appearance. 
{H.   Melvill,  B.D.)  The  genius  of  moral  evil: — I.  Amazing  audacity — '^  My 

house."  II.  Unscuttpdlous  dishonestt.  1.  Not  a  particle  of  its  materials  belong 
to  him.  2.  Not  an  effort  in  its  workmanship  was  his.  III.  Intense  selfishness. 
Why  does  he  return  to  the  house,  for  injury.  IV.  Egbegious  folly.  Pcasession 
precarious.      (Dr.    Thomas.)         Transient  religious   impressions : — ^I.    The   ■with- 

DKAWAI    op  THE  EVIL  SPIRIT.       II.    HiS   RESTLESS    ANXIETY   TO    BETURN.        III.    ThB  EB- 

ENTRA>CE  HE  AT  LENGTH  EFFECTS.  1.  Of  the  State  in  which  he  found  it.  Empty.  Gar- 
nished but  not  furnished.  2.  The  possession  he  again  takes.  IV.  The  affecting 
coNSEQDKNCB  OF  HIS  REPOSSESSION,  1.  He  will  now  ruu  greater  lengths  in  impiety 
than  before.  2.  He  is  less  likely  than  ever  to  be  recovered  from  Satanic  dominion. 
8.  It  must  prove  the  occasion  of  more  severe  and  aggravated  suffering.  (11.  Bromley.) 
The  house  swept  and  garnished : — I.  A  miserable  condition  indicated.  It  is  that 
of  a  man  under  the  influence  of  an  evil  spirit.  1.  This  influence  is  powerful.  It 
is  inward,  controlling,  directing.  2.  It  is  detiling.  II.  An  agreeable  deliverancb 
EXPERIENCED.  Men  may  undergo  considerable  change  for  the  better,  without 
being  really  converted.  1.  In  the  Word  of  God  this  truth  is  frequently  set 
forth.  2.  It  is  confirmed  by  inmimerable  instances.  3.  This  subject  demands 
Berious  thought,  and  vigorous  self-examination.  III.  A  fearful  relapse 
DESCRIBED.  1.  When  the  evil  spirit  returned  he  found  the  house  unoccupied. 
2.  His  return  under  these  circumstances  was  easily  effected.  3.  The  conse- 
quences attending  this  re-possession  were  truly  awful.  (Expository  Outlines.) 
The  dangers  of  relapse : — Evil,  in  every  form  or  stage,  is  dangerous.  But  if  one 
comes  out  of  these  evils,  and  lapses  back  into  them,  the  dangers  are  increased. 
This  is  well  understood  in  disease.  When  the  fever  has  subsided,  and  pulse  and 
temperature  have  become  normal,  if  then,  through  some  indiscretion  or  exposure, 
the  disease  returns,  the  physicifin  looks  for  a  wider  variation  of  pulse  and  tempera- 
ture, and  greater  dauger.  The  fot.;es  of  nature  are  weakened ;  the  house  of  the 
body  was  swept  clean  of  all  those  gi'acious  energies  that  filled  it  full  of  Life  and 
health,  and  now  the  disease  runs  riot  through  all  its  undefended  chambers  and 
pa8^-ages.  So  one  may  dwell  in  a  marsh  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain — a  miserable 
existence,  it  may  be,  in  malarious  damps  and  under  fatal  shades ;  but  it  is  better 
to  stay  there  than  to  climb  the  mountain  and  heedlessly  slip  over  a  precipice.  Life 
may  be  maintained  below,  though  under  wretched  conditions ;  but  the  fall  may 
cripple  or  end  it.  So  one  may  Uve  a  contented  life  in  rude  poverty  ;  the  single  room 
of  the  hut,  water  from  the  spring,  the  wild  forest  around,  the  homespun  suit,  the 

Elain  diet,  the  unhelped  toil,  the  dull  and  narrow  routine — a  picture  for  pity,  per- 
aps,  and  not  representing  the  best  forms  of  hfe  ;  but  if  one  escapes  it,  and  comes 
into  finer  and  larger  ways  of  living,  and  then  is  driven  back  to  the  old  place  and 
ways,  the  lapse  breeds  a  discontent  and  misery  before  unknown.  To  venture  forth 
and  then  return  ;  to  rise  and  fall  back  ;  to  promise  and  not  fulfil ;  to  undertake 
and  not  do — this  is  the  tragedy  of  character.  I.  One  who  lapses  from  beugious 
earnestness  does  not  EASILY  REGAIN  IT ;  and  if  the  lapses  are  frequent  there  is  dan- 
ger of  losing  it  altogether.  The  Divine  flame  cannot  often  go  out  and  be  re- kindled. 
Once  out,  it  is  apt  to  stay  out.  The  religious  nature  cannot  be  tampered  with,  and 
retain  its  integrity.  It  is  largely  made  up  of  emotions  and  passions  that  lose  their 
quality,  and  turn  into  scourges,  if  treated  fitfully.  You  may  bend  a  bar  of  iron,  and 
Btraighten  it  again  ;  but  after  repeating  this  process  a  few  times  it  suddenly  parts  in 
your  hands,  and  only  fusing  fire  can  weld  it.  Take  a  finer  passion — love.  You  cannot 
give  and  take  back  love  without  ceasing  to  love ;  it  is,  by  its  nature,  a  continuous  tiling. 
Violate  its  nature  as  such,  and  it  becomes  a  name  and  a  disgust.  One  cannot  "fall  in 
love"  many  times,  and  have  a  heart  leit .  .  .  Fire  always  burns ;  water  seeks  its  level; 
the  crystal  keeps  its  angle  ;  light  extinguishes  darkness.  So  in  spiritual  matters ; 
we  cannot  trifle  with  these  great  passions  of  love  and  reverence,  devotion,  fidelity 
and  enthusiasm  without  destroying  them  ...  It  is  dangerous,  because  self-destruc- 
tive to  eay,  "  I  will  do  a  thing,"  and  then  not  do  it;  to  take  a  place  of  responsibility, 
and  shirk  its  duties  when  they  begin  to  press  hard  and  grow  monotonous.  If  w« 
trifle  with  truth  and  duty,  we  do  not  merely  lose  them ;  we  change  them  into 
avenging  spirits  that  return  to  us  with  consuming  power.  II.  One  who  takes  up  and 
lays  off  a  duty,  and  is  fitful  in  reUgious  habits  and  feelings,  obowb  sceptical  oi 


CHAP.  XII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  953 

THB  BEAiiiiT  OP  THESE  THINGS.  A  religions  life  gets  its  vindication  and  comes  to  a 
full  proof  of  its  reality,  only  as  it  is  continuous  and  lived  out  to  the  fuU.  One 
cannot  in  a  year  test  the  full  power  of  a  single  Chiistian  quality.  A  personal  vin- 
dication of  the  faith  is  a  life-work,  and  requires  all  its  years.  Thus  only  does  one 
come  to  know  in  whom  and  what  one  believes.  But  if  the  test  is  a  short  or  vacil- 
lating one ;  if  you  try  prayer,  worship,  self-denial,  meekness,  charity,  forgiveness, 
self-control,  devotion  for  a  while,  and  lapse  out  of  them,  you  doubt  their  reality. 
Why  should  you  not  ?  They  bore  you  no  fruit,  gave  you  no  proof.  But  alas  for  bim 
who  reaches  such  a  conclusion  by  such  a  process.  It  is  something  to  believe  in 
goodness,  though  we  may  not  be  good  ;  to  believe  that  honest  men  walk  the  streets, 
though  we  may  not  be  honest ;  that  the  light  which  shines  from  the  downcast  eye* 
of  modesty  is  not  a  false  li?-;ht,  though  it  may  have  died  out  in  our  own  ;  that  when 
men  speak  of  prayer  and  faith,  they  speak  of  realities  and  powers,  though  we  may 
be  strangers  to  them.  But  to  doubt  them,  to  disbelieve  their  existence — that  is  per- 
dition. Then  the  soul  begins  to  depart  from  all  things,  the  glory  of  humanity  fades 
out ;  inspiration  ceases  to  play  within  us  ;  nobility  is  gone  out  of  all  our  life.  Ill, 
The  reasons  fob  stedfastness.  Only  one  true  goal  of  human  effort — character. 
To  know  its  conditions  and  obey  them  is  the  sum  of  all  knowledge  and  duty.  Regu- 
larity, bending  the  powers  to  one  end,  doing  always  the  right  thine;  under  the  right 
motive — it  is  thus  that  character  takes  shape  and  becomes  a  reality.  A  habit  of 
religious  thought  may  be  formed  as  truly  as  a  trade  can  be  learned,  and  under  the 
same  law  of  repetition,  guided  by  will  and  sympathetic  purpose.  Lapse,  alternations, 
fluctuations,  now  earnest,  now  slothful,  now  up  and  doing,  and  now  doing  nothing, 
now  alive  with  religious  enthusiasm,  now  sunk  down  in  apathy — such  a  history  is 
the  defeat  and  the  denial  of  character.  There  is  still  hope  no  doubt,  for  one  who 
has  had  such  a  history ;  but  he  must  take  care  not  to  repeat  it.  Character  is  justly 
adjudged  by  its  faults  and  vices,  rather  than  from  its  virtues ;  just  as  it  is  the 
weakest  spot  in  the  iron  that  measures  the  strength  of  the  bar,  and  just  as  the  rope 
will  hold  only  the  weight  that  th.  frayed  and  chafed  strands  can  endure.  In 
character,  the  vice  blackens  the  vircue  ;  the  virtue  cannot  whiten  the  vice  .  .  .  And 
BO,  when  we  turn  to  the  Bi'ole,  we  find  all  the  promises  and  all  the  rewards  poared 
out  on  those  who  are  faithful  untu  the  end.  The  patience  of  the  saints  is  the  bur- 
den of  its  exhortation.  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  thou  shall  win  the  crown 
of  life.  And  in  keejiing  with  this,  the  picture  of  heavenly  perfection,  is  that  of 
constancy — serving  (iod  day  and  night  in  His  temple ;  and  so  they  reign  for  ever 
and  ever.  {T.  T.  Hunger.)  The  empty  life  : — As  wealth  increases,  as  we  multiply 
men-servants  and  maid-servants  in  our  houses,  as  Ufe  becomes  less  primitive  and 
more  artificial,  there  come  to  be  found  a  large  number  of  persons,  both  men  and 
women,  who  have  little  or  nothing  to  do,  unless  they  seek  or  make  an  occupation 
for  themselves.  It  is  out  of  such  a  condition  of  things  that  there  is  sure  to  arise, 
sooner  or  later,  every  imaginable  evil  that  can  afflict  society  or  ruin  the  individual 
soul.  Given  the  growth  of  wealth,  luxury  and  indolence,  and  straightway  you  have 
prepared  a  nest  in  which  a  whole  brood  of  vices  will  soon  and  swiftly  be  hatched. 
When  one  home  is  clouded  or  shattered  by  the  shame  of  some  wretched  intrigue, 
and  another  stung  and  wounded  by  the  cruelty  of  some  causeless  calumny,  and  a 
third  dishonoured  and  disbanded  perhaps  by  some  foolish  and  criminal  extravagance, 
have  we  ever  paused  to  consider  amid  what  idleness,  what  aimlessness,  amid  what 
vapid  seeking  for  a  fresh  excitement  in  the  dead  dull  level  of  an  unemployed  and 
uninterested  life,  these  manifold  forms  of  evil  were  conceived  and  initiated?  Ah  1 
if  we  could  trace  back  some  crime  or  baseness  to  its  incipient  beginning,  how  often 
should  we  find  it  true  that,  into  the  life,  "empty, swept  and  garnished,"  there  had 
entered,  just  because  it  was  so  empty,  its  hands  so  idle  and  tinemployed,  its  heart 
so  uninterested  and  indiflferent,  a  whole  legion  of  devils  to  drag  it  down  to  hell. 
(Bishop  H.  C.  Potter.)  The  entrance  of  evil : — It  is  not  here  said  that  the  evil  spirit 
breaks  open  the  door,  or  that  he  does  so  mach  as  draw  the  latch  ;  but  that  he  finds 
it  empty  and  open  already,  and  all  things  ready  for  his  entertainment ;  so  that,  if 
we  reach  not  out  our  hands  to  welcome  him  when  he  comes,  and  set  not  our  doors 
open  to  let  him  in  when  he  knocks,  his  temptations  can  never  do  ns  hurt ;  he  can 
but  entreat  us,  as  he  did  Christ ;  and,  if  we  fall,  the  fault  is  our  own  ;  we  cast  our- 
selves down  headlong  into  misery  and  sin,  {Bisliop  Cosin.)  The  heart  a  house  ;— 
So  the  malicious  heart  is  a  house  for  the  spirit  of  envy :  the  drunken  for  the  spirit 
of  ebriety :  the  proud  for  the  spirit  of  pride  ;  the  unchaste  for  the  spirit  of  unclean- 
ness :  usurer  for  the  spirit  of  covetousness.  {T.  Adams.)  Satanic  disquietude 
when   cast  out  of  man : — The   discontented  devil  cast  out  of  man   seeks  about 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  zms, 

for  a  new  lodidng  ;  and  finds  all  places  dry :  he  esteems  every  place,  but  in  man'a 
heart,  h-ksome  and  unpleasant,  as  a  dry,  barren,  and  heathy  wilderness.  Now, 
as  when  a  man  hath  long  lived  in  a  fertile  valley,  abounding  with  delightful  fruits, 
and  necessary  comforts,  the  grounds  standing  thick  with  corn,  and  a  pleasant  rivei 
running  along,  to  glad  his  heart  with  a  welcome  moisture  ;  it  cannot  be  other  than 
a  dispi.jctsing  change  to  be  banished  into  a  mountainous  desert,  where  the  scorching 
sun  bums  up  the  grass,  and  withers  the  fruit;  or  the  unhindered  force  of  the  wind 
finds  a  bleak  object  to  work  upon ;  where  the  veins  of  blood,  the  springs  of 
watf^r,  rise  not,  run  not,  to  modify  the  earth,  and  cherish  her  phnts.  Such  if 
Satan's  case  and  cause  of  pei-plexity.  The  wicked  heart  was  his  delighted  orchard, 
where  the  fruits  of  disobedience,  oaths,  lies,  blasphemies,  oppressions,  cozenages, 
contentions,  drunken,  proud,  covetous  actions  and  habits  made  him  fat.  The 
concealed  occvpniit . — The  devil  may  be  within  the  grate,  though  he  thrust  not 
out  his  apparent  horns,  or  say,  he  be  walked  abroad,  yet  he  returns  home  at  night : 
and  in  the  mean  time,  like  a  mistrustful  churl,  locks  the  door  af^er  him  ;  spares  up 
the  heart  with  security,  that  his  treasure  be  not  stolen.  Thus  as  a  snail,  he  pathors 
up  himself  into  his  shell  and  house  of  the  heart,  when  he  fears  discovery,  and  puts 
not  forth  his  horns.  Sometimes  he  plays  not  in  the  sun  actually,  but  burrows 
deep  in  the  affections.  The  fox  keeps  his  den  close,  when  he  knows  that  God's 
huntsmen  be  abroad  to  seek  him.  {T.  Adams.)  Satanic  relaxation  not  expulsion: — 
Nero  is  still  in  Eome,  though  he  remits  taxations,  and  forbears  massacres  for  a 
season.  (T.  Adams.)  The  apostate,  or  black  saint: — Man  compared  to  a 
fort,  and  the  devil  to  its  captain.  I.  The  unclean  spirit's  egress,  forsaking  the 
hold.  1-  His  uuroosting  :  (a)  the  person  going  out ;  (6)  the  manner ;  (c)  the 
measure,  of  his  going  out.  2.  His  unresting  :  which  is  seen  in  (a)  his  travel ;  (6) 
his  trial ;  (c)  his  trouble ;  (d)  the  event — "  finding  none."  II.  His  regress,  striving 
for  a  re-entry  into  that  which  he  lost.  1.  Inteatively  :  (a)  his  resolution;  (6)  his 
revolution  ;  (c)  the  description  of  the  seat ;  (d)  his  affection  to  the  same  place. 
2.  Inventively :  for  he  findeth  in  it,  (a)  Clearness ;  (6)  Cleanness  :  (c)  Trimness. 
IIL  His  INGRESS :  manifest  by — 1.  His  associates ;  (a)  their  number ;  (6)  their 
nature  ;  (c)  the  measure  of  their  malice.  2.  His  assault :  (a)  the  invasion  ;  (ft)  the 
inhabitation  ;  (r)  the  cohabitation,  (r.  Adams.)  Partial  Sweeping  : — For  like 
as  a  lazy  and  slothful  housewife  uses  to  sweep  a  little  of  the  loose  dust  and  filth  in 
the  open  and  middle  of  the  room,  and  lets  many  secret  comers  lie  foul  as  before, 
and  maybe  leaves  the  dirt  behind  the  door  out  of  the  public  view  of  people :  so 
the  false  and  counterfeit  Christian  reforms  his  life  in  the  sight  of  men  ;  or,  like  the 
Pharisees,  makes  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  but  their  hearts  are  still 
polluted,  and  as  vile  as  ever.  (B.  Keach.)  A  natural  improvement,  not  a  saving 
operation: — And  remarkable  is  the  phrase  of  our  Saviour,  "  garnished,"  which  we 
kiiow  is  commonly  a  curious  piece  of  art,  men  by  their  ingenuity  strive  to  imitate 
nature  ;  they  will  draw  the  face  of  a  man.  &c.,  with  curious  painting,  very  exact,  so 
that  it  much  resembles  the  person's  natural  face,  yet  it  is  not  the  same,  it  is  but  a 
piece  of  paint,  an  artificial  invention.  Even  so  in  like  manner  by  the  improvement 
of  man's  natural  parts,  common  grace,  light  and  knowledge,  he  may  appear  in  the 
view  and  sight  of  men,  as  a  true  child  of  God,  and  may  talk  and  discourse  like  a 
Baint,  read  and  hear  God's  Word — nay,  and  pray  also  with  much  seeming  devotion 
and  piety,  and  may  likewise  bridle  many  unruly  lusts,  and  gross  enormities  ol  life, 
and  give  alms  to  the  poor,  insomuch  that  he  may  very  exactly  resemble  a  true  and 
sinctre  Christian,  and  be  taLiii  by  all  godly  people  to  be  indeed  such  an  one  ;  but 
notwithstanding  all,  it  is  but  an  artificial  piece,  it  is  but  like  a  curious  paint,  or 
vainglorious  garnish;  it.  is  not  the  image  of  God,  it  is  not  the  new  creature; 
though  it  looks  like  it,  much  resembles  it,  yet  is  not  the  same ;  for  the  man  is  a 
tuere  hypocrite,  a  counterfeit  Christian,  the  work  upon  him  being  only  the  product 
of  natural  improvements,  and  not  the  effects  of  the  saving  operations  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.     (B.  Keach.) 

"Vers.  46-50.  The  same  Is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother. — Chrittiant  are 
ChriiVt  Rel'itione : — I.  That  Jchus  here  implies  that  thb  supreme  belationships  or 
LIFE  abb  moral.  1.  It  is  similar  to  that  of  the  family.  2.  It  is  superior  to  that  of 
the  family.  (1)  It  is  non-artificial.  (2)  It  is  intimate.  (3)  It  is  dear.  (4)  It  is 
completer.  (5)  It  is  vaster.  (6)  It  is  more  lasting.  II.  That  Jesus  here  proclaims 
that  the  bond  by  which  men  sustain  this  supreme  relationship  to  Himself,  is  bt 
iHEca  OEEDiENOE  TO  God's  WILL.  When  we  do  His  will.  1.  There  is  the  kinship  ol 
■yxnpathy.     2.  Kinship  of  resemblance.     III.  That  Jesas  here  suggests   that  th« 


«HAP.  xn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  855 


Christian  relationship  to  Christ  is  individuaIi,  varied  and  satisfying.  1.  Brother- 
hood. Active  men.  2.  Sisterhood.  The  intercourse  of  heart.  3.  Motherhood. 
(U.  R.  Thomag.)  Moral  affinity  the  true  ground  of  unity  : — Christ  saw  things 
m  their  superior  relationships.  All  true  relationship  springs  from  moral  states, 
not  from  the  mechanical  arrangements  of  society.  1.  It  is  the  real  and  proper 
tendency  of  all  moral  affections  to  seek  each  other,  and  to  coalesce.  The  lower 
feelings  are  to  a  certain  extent  centrifugal.  Policy,  self  interest,  gifts,  are  per- 
petually separating  men.  All  attempts  to  compromise  union,  to  reason  men  into 
external  union  have  failed.  It  is  not  found  in  contiguity.  It  is  found  in  divergence 
of  thought  and  feeling.  All  harmonies  are  in  the  direction  of  diversity.  Love 
will  do  what  reason  never  could  do.  2.  Human  affections  are  never  carried  to 
their  full  power,  and  sweetness  and  beauty,  till  they  are  lifted  up  into  the  higher 
sphere,  by  their  affinities  and  associations,  religious.  It  is  not  enough  to  love  the 
human  that  is  in  man  ;  but  that  which  is  to  live  after  the  body.  An  unsanctified 
affection  is  an  imperfect  one.  3.  It  is  a  matter  of  gieat  rejoicing  to  those  who 
ponder  the  spirit  of  this  passage,  that  this  world,  after  all,  is  as  rich  as  it  is.  Al- 
though hearts  are  distributed  and  unrecognized,  yet  you  can  feel  what  a  wealth  of 
relationship  there  is  after  all.  4.  The  true  man  of  God,  in  our  day,  is  he  who 
feels  most  sensitively  his  relationship  to  the  Divine  element  which  is  in  his 
fellow  man.  The  largest  man  is  the  man  of  the  largest  heart.  5.  It  is  piteous 
to  see  how  men  have  spent  their  lives  in  resisticg  their  relationships,  and 
in  putting  trust  and  charity  upon  hard  conditions.  We  must  change  away 
from  the  hating  and  fighting  to  the  loving  principle.  (JET.  W.  Beecher.)  A 
wealth  of  relationship : — I  never  read  a  book  of  a  fine  nature  that  I  do  not 
instantly  feel,  "  Well,  he  is  mine,  too."  The  Guerins — brother  and  sister — are  aa 
much  mine  as  though  I  had  been  brought  up  on  their  mother's  knee.  Fenelon  is 
miue.  Bossuet  is  mine.  All  those  noble  men  who  carried  down  the  light  of  a  tme 
Christian  example  through  stormy  times,  and  held  steadfastly  to  the  faith,  and 
Buffered  nobly — they  are  mine.  Pascal  is  mine.  Newton  is  mine.  All  the  great 
natures  of  the  earth  that  have  lifted  themselves  up  under  the  genial  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  and  have  begun  to  show  heavenly  colours  and  heavenly  blossoms — 
they  are  mine.  The  same  Father  is  mine.  The  same  Saviour  is  mine.  And  I  hear 
my  Saviour  saying,  "  All  those  that  do  the  will  of  God  are  mothers  to  each  other, 
brothers  to  each  other,  sisters  to  each  other.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Relatiomhip 
revealed  in  heaven  : — You  do  not  know  how  many  relations  you  have  tiD  you  are  in 
heaven.  Oh !  when  those  that  are  around  you,  and  that  you  meet  from  day  to  day 
with  Uttle  pleasure,  meet  you  again,  and  they  have  thrown  off  the  cerements  of  the 
body ;  when  you  see  that  in  them  which  is  good,  and  in  conditions  in  which  counter- 
poising evil  is  taken  away,  and  the  whole  evolutions  of  their  glorious  nature  are 
disclosed,  you  will  never  know  them  !  It  will  be  as  when  one  looks  upon  the  banks 
in  January,  and  says,  "  How  dreary  are  these  banks  I  "  and  then  in  June  looks  upon 
the  same  landscape,  and  says,  '*  It  is  not  the  thing  that  I  looked  at  before."  It  is 
winter  here,  and  we  are  frost-bitten,  or  ice-clad.  It  will  be  summer  there;  and  we 
shall  be  in  fragrant  leaf  and  glorious  blossom.  And  when  you  reach  heaven,  you 
will  never  be  lonesome,  or  restrained.  Here  the  necessities  of  earth,  and  the 
proprieties  of  life,  and  the  laws  and  conditions  of  our  lower  nature,  partition  and 
divide  us;  and  we  belong  to  each  other  more  than  we  do  to  all  the  world.  But  in 
heaven  all  that  will  be  gone.  Every  soul  there  will  belong  to  every  soul ;  every 
heart  to  every  heart ;  every  love  to  every  love.  We  shall  be  God's,  and  He  shall 
be  ours.  (Tbid.)  The  family  of  our  Lord : — I.  Their  character.  '•  They  do 
the  will  of  His  Father."  1.  Some  do  the  will  of  the  devil.  2.  Some  do  the  will 
of  men.  3.  Some  do  their  own  will.  4.  The  Christian  makes  the  will  of  God  the 
rule  of  his  life.  5.  God  has  revealed  His  will.  Their  obedience  is  (1)  Affectionate; 
(2)  Impartial.  II.  Their  PRiviLEaE.  His  disciples  are  Christ's  kindred.  1.  We 
look  for  family  likeness,  and  we  have  it — "Conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son." 
••We  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly."  The  resemblance  not  complete 
in  this  world :  but  it  is  real.  2.  He  confers  honour  upon  them  as  His  kindred.  It 
is  glorious  to  belong  to  persons  of  illustrious  endowments.  3.  If  they  are  relations, 
Christ  will  love  them.  4.  Since  He  declares  them  to  be  His  relations,  He  will 
provide  for  them.  5.  He  will  keep  up  an  intercourse  with  them.  6.  He  will  defend 
them.  7.  Admire  the  grace  and  condescension  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  8.  The 
advantages  of  reJigion.  9.  The  hohness  of  the  gospel.  10.  The  duty  derived  from 
this  alliance.  (IF.  Jay.)  Description  and  dignity  of  true  Christians  : — I.  A 
DESCRIPTION  OF  Christ's  DISCIPLES — "  They  do  the  will,"  &c.      What  is  the  will 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohab.  im. 

of  God  7  1.  God  would  have  us  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  God  requires  of  na 
to  repent  of  our  sins  and  to  walk  in  newness  of  life.  Naturally  men  cannot  do  these 
things ;  only  the  children  of  God.  II.  The  dionitt  conferred  on  them.  1.  Christ 
here  declares  how  dear  and  precions  to  Him  are  His  true  disciples.  A  true  brother 
will  watch  over  the  interests  of  His  brethren.  IH.  The  privileges  derived  from 
this  dignity.  1,  Coafidence  in  prayer.  2.  Comfort  in  death.  (E.  Coo}^>er.) 
Spiritual  relationship  with  Christ : — Brother  and  sister,  because  of  either  sex.  The 
faithful  soul  is  also  the  mother  of  Christ,  because  by  teaching,  exhorting,  and 
counselling,  she  brings  forth  Christ  in  herself  and  in  others.  Thus  St.  Gregory 
Bays :  "  We  must  know  that  he  who  is  the  brother  or  sister  of  Christ  through 
believing  is  made  His  mother  by  preachiug.  For  he,  as  it  wt^re,  brings  forth  the 
Lord,  whom  he  iufuses  into  the  hearts  of  his  hearers."  He  subjoins  the  example 
of  Felicitas,  who,  by  the  Spirit,  bore  to  God  the  seven  sons  to  whom  she  had  given 
birth  in  the  flesh,  because  she  strengthened  them  in  persecution,  and  animated  them 
for  martvrdom.  These  words  of  Christ  were  also  exemplified  in  Victoria,  a  virgin- 
martyr  under  Diocletian.  She  replied  to  the  pro-consul,  on  his  asking  her  whether 
she  would  join  her  brother  Fortunatianus,  who  was  a  heathen :  "  No,  for  I  am  a 
Christian ;  and  those  are  my  brethren  who  keep  the  commandments  of  God." 
Wherefore  she  was  shut  up  in  prison,  and  perishing  by  hunger,  obtained  the 
martyr's  crovra.  I,  Christians  are  the  relatives  of  Christ.  The  ground  of 
the  relationship  not  natural,  ecclesiastical,  but  spiritual — faith  and  obedience. 
II.  Spiritual  relationship  to  Christ  is  superior  to  nattjrai..  It  is  more  intimate, 
happy,  honourable,  comprehensive,  permanent.  III.  The  love  of  Christ  to  Christians 
as  His  relatives  comprises  within  itssilf  all  the  different  phases  of  natural 
AFFECTIONS.  1.  Let  US  hoHOur  the  relatives  of  Christ.  2.  Seek  to  be  of  theii 
number.  3.  Choose  them  for  our  companions.  4.  Do  them  all  the  good  in  oni 
power.  (VariutM.)  I.  The  character  of  the  disciple  of  Christ.  Eelates  to — What 
we  are  to  believe,  experience,  be,  do,  suffer,  enjoy.  II.  How  near  and  dear  they 
are  to  Christ.  IH.  How  near  and  dear  they  ought  to  be  to  each  other.  {J.  Be7ison.) 
I.  The  spiritual  relatives  of  Jesus.  Close  and  intimate.  All  the  saints  have  one 
Father,  one  nature,  one  mind,  one  name  with  Christ.  II.  The  great  principle  of 
this  relationship.  Obedience.  God's  will  is  revealed  to  us.  Obedience  must  be 
evangelical,  affectionate,  full,  constant.  III.  The  advantages  of  this  relationship. 
Exalted  honour,  greatest  blessings,  everlasting  security.  Rejoice,  walk  worthy,  &q. 
(Dri  Bums.)  Christ's  kindred: — This  reply  of  our  Lord  shows — I.  The  pervad- 
ing spiRiTCALiTT  OF  Christ's  MIND.  He  turned  every  circumstance  to  spiritual 
account.  Christ  spiritualized  because  He  wag  spiritual.  II.  The  pdrk  philas- 
thropy  of  Christ's  heart.  His  love  for  man  as  man.  The  world  is  made  one  in 
relationship  as  it  enters  into  Christ's  love.  III.  It  shows  the  true  bond  of  man's 
CONNECTION  WITH  Christ.  1.  Connection  with  Christ  is  not  determined  by  socisJ 
position.  2.  It  is  not  determined  by  material  relationships.  3.  It  is  determined  by 
obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  (1)  That  there  is  but  one  infallible  will ;  (2)  That 
this  infallible  will  may  be  disregarded ;  (3)  That  this  infallible  will  appeals  for  uni- 
versal obedience.  IV.  It  shows  the  hioh  privxleqes  resulting  from  moral  unioh 
WITH  Christ.  1.  Here  is  the  idea  of  infinite  relationship.  2.  Here  is  the  idea  of 
social  communion.  Inferences  :  1,  If  we  are  to  obey  the  Divine  will,  a  great  change 
must  pass  over  our  moral  nature.  2.  If  our  union  with  Christ  is  moral,  it  will  also 
be  eternal.  3.  If  all  the  good  are  Christ's  kindred,  their  meeting- place  must  be 
heaven.  4.  If  we  are  all  Christ's,  joy  should  be  the  pervading  emotion  ol  oar 
hearta.    (/.  Parker.) 


CHAPTER  Xm, 


Pbeuhinart  beuabkb  oit  tub  bbven  PAitABLEB.  —  The  kingdomU  Hmilitude  i'— 
Not  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is,  but  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like,  so  and  lo. 
Truth  is  a  separate  matter  from  the  forms  of  phrase  along  which  it  is  conveyed,  or 
the  forms  of  thought  under  which  it  is  apprehended.  In  this  respect  it  resemble* 
the  light.  No  painter  can  paint  light.  He  can  give  you  colours,  the  gieens,  the 
blues,  the  crimsons,  but  he  cannot  give  you  light ;  and  yet  if  he  is  a  genius  he  Will 
succeed  in  filling  bis  picture  with  those  tinted  suggestions  that  will  somehow 
quicken  in  yon  a  deep,  thrilling  sense  of  light.     So  Christ,  in  a  similar  manner,  did 


CHAP.  xm.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  257 

not  point  out  to  His  disciples  this  particular  thing  and  that  pn,rticular  thin^,  but 
loaded  His  sentences  with  suggestions,  and  started  in  men's  minds  presentimenta 
that  went  leaping  along  ahead  of  the  spoken  word.  .  .  .  He  cut  no  grooves  for 
men's  opinions  to  slip  in,  fashioned  no  moulds  for  those  opinions  to  be  cast  in ;  did 
not  care  to  have  them  think  precisely  this,  or  precisely  that ;  tisd  them  to  no  nice 
forms  of  declaration  ;  did  not  accentuate  with  periods.  And  so  their  minds  moved 
as  vessels  move  at  sea  ;  at  the  direction  of  the  compass,  to  be  sure,  but  without  the 
sea  ever  being  worn  down  into  ruts  and  roadways.  He  drew  for  them  pictures  of 
the  truth,  and  then  let  them  make  what  they  could  of  those  pictures.  A  truth 
never  can  be  quite  told.  It  is  best  seen  when  we  are  not  trying  too  hard  to  see  it. 
not  straining  our  eyes  to  see  it — as  faint  stars  become  visible  when  we  look  a  littlt 
off  from  them.  {G.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  The  seven  parables  of  the  kingdom : — 
History  of  the  Church  in  all  ages,  from  the  first  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  last 
general  judgment,  tracing  the  different  steps  of  its  advancement,  both  externally 
and  internally,  from  its  commencemeut  to  its  consummation.  1.  Sower — the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  when  the  apostles. and  their  successors  went  through  the 
world,  sowing  everywhere  the  good  seed.  2.  Tares — the  development  of  those  evils 
of  doctrine,  the  germs  of  which  existed  even  in  an  earlier  day.  3.  Mustard  seed — 
the  extension  and  progress  of  the  Church.  It  needs  no  support  for  itself,  but 
affords  a  shelter  to  others  who  resort  to  it.  4.  Leaven — the  manner  in  which  its 
vital  spirit  silently  makes  its  progress,  gradually  changing  the  character  of  the 
whole  mass  into  which  it  has  been  infused.  5.  Hid  treasure — action  of  Christianity 
upon  some.  In  such  a  case  as  this,  some  unlooked-for  occurrence  brings  the  man 
into  contact  with  this  treasure,  for  which  he  was  not  seeking.  He  finds  it  acci- 
dentally, and  at  once  gives  up  all  to  possess  it.  6.  Pearl  of  great  price— action  of 
Christianity  upon  others.  Here  the  man  is  engaged  in  the  business  of  his  life.  He 
gains  that  for  which  he  has  all  along  been  seeldng.  7.  Net — the  solemn  winding-up 
of  the  mighty  drama — the  separation — the  consummation.  {Bishop  Wm.  In;iraham 
Kip.)  The  general  teachingof  these  seven  parables : — No  one  should  miss  gathering 
from  these  parables  some  notion  of  the  all-embracing  character  of  the  kingdom  which 
Christ  came  to  set  up  among  men.  We  need  not  wonder  that  Christ  exhibits  the 
truth  He  wanted  to  impress  upon  them  in  a  great  variety  of  lights.  It  would  have 
been  surprising  if  He  had  not  supplemented  the  parable  of  the  hid  treasure  with 
that  of  the  pearl,  for  the  four  parables  which  precede  these  are  arranged  in  pairs. 
First,  we  have  the  action  of  Christ  upon  the  Church,  in  the  parable  of  the 
BOwer,  supplemented  by  the  field  and  the  tares ;  then  the  expansive  and  permeating 
power  of  the  Christian  society,  in  the  mustard  and  leaven ;  and,  in  the  third  pair, 
we  are  shown  the  attitude  of  the  individual  in  relation  to  the  saving  grace  of  God. 
The  king,  the  kingdom,  the  subjects-sunder  each  of  these  aspects  two  illustrationg 
are  given  to  enforce  important  varieties,  and  to  exhibit,  in  more  than  one  light,  the 
manifold  wisdom  of  God.  (J.  Henry  Burn,  B.D.)  The  diversity  of  Christ's 
parables : — His  parables  were  divers,  when  yet  by  those  sundry  shadows  He  did 
aim  directly  at  one  light.  The  intention  of  which  course  in  our  great  Physician  ia 
to  give  several  medicines  for  the  same  malady  in  several  men,  fitting  his  receipts  to 
the  disposition  of  his  patients.  The  soldier  doth  not  so  well  understand  similitudea 
taken  from  husbandrj',  nor  the  husbandman  from  the  war.  The  lawyer  conceives 
not  an  allusion  from  physic,  nor  the  physician  from  the  law.  Home-dwellers  are 
ignorant  of  foreign  matters ;  neither  doth  the  quiet,  rural  labourer  trouble  his  head 
with  matters  of  state.  Therefore  Christ  derives  a  parable  from  an  army,  to  teach 
soldiers  ;  from  legal  principles,  to  instruct  lawyers  ;  from  the  field  and  sowing,  to 
speak  familiarly  to  the  husbandman's  capacity.  {T.  Adams.)  Parables: — The 
word  used  {masdal)  means  a  "hkeness"  or  "comparison."  Parables  differ  from 
fables  in  being  pictures  of  possible  occurrences — frequently  of  actual  daily  occur- 
rences— and  in  teachmg  religious  truths  rather  than  moral  truths,     {A.  Carr.) 

Ver.  3.  And  He  spake  many  things  unto  them  In  parables. — Christ  a  moral 
painter: — Jesus  did  not  confine  Himself  to  the  mere  announcement  or  proof  of  a 
doctrine.  But  by  means  of  words,  He  often  presented  to  His  hearers  a  moral 
picture — flashed  upon  the  mind's  eye  a  whole  scene  of  truth  with  such  vividness 
and  power  that  it  could  not  be  well  perverted  or  forgotten.  We  should  imitate  His 
pointed,  emotional  preaching.  I.  Some  reasons  for  the  use  of  moral  painting  im 
SERMONS.  1.  It  imitates  the  style  of  Christ's  painting,  and  is  part  of  His  gospel. 
2.  It  meets  a  want  in  our  nature.  It  appeals  to  man's  perceptive  faculties.  God 
has  met  this  want  in  the  natural  world.       .  It  adds  point  and  force  to  the  arga« 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xni. 

ment.  Reasoning  and  illustration  are  both  essential.  4.  Men  who  have  deeply 
moved  the  human  heart  have  used  it.  Poets,  advocates,  orators,  <feo.  And  shall 
the  children  of  this  world  be  wiser,  &c.  ?  Inspiration  is  full  of  it.  IL  The  kind 
OF  MORAii  PAiKTisQ  TO  BE  USED.  Great  Condensation  is  essential  to  a  good  picture 
of  truth.  Deep  emotion.  The  vastness  of  our  work  is  enough  to  make  an  angel 
weep.  (W.  W.  Newell.)  The  design  of  speaking  in  parables  : — 1.  To  convey  truth 
in  a  more  interesting  manner  to  the  mind,  adding  to  the  truth  conveyed  the  beauty 
of  a  lively  image  or  narrative.  8.  To  teach  spiritual  truth  so  as  to  arrest  the  atten- 
tion  of  ignorant  people,  making  on  appeal  to  them  through  the  senses.  8.  To  convey 
Bome  offensive  truth,  some  poimed  personal  rebuke,  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  it 
home  to  the  conscience  (2  Sam.  xii.  1-7,  and  many  of  oar  Saviour's  parables  ad- 
dressed to  the  Jews).  4.  To  coni«eal  from  one  part  of  His  audience  truths  which 
He  intended  others  should  understand  (Mark  iv.  33  ;  Matt.  xiii.  13-16.)  {A.  Bame$, 
J).D.)  Similitude  mentally  stuiulating  : — Christ's  habit,  therefore,  was  not  bo 
much  to  tell  what  things  were,  as  to  draw  pictures  of  them  and  mention  some 
familiar  thing  they  were  like ;  as  a  boy  really  knows  more  about  the  earth  when 
told  that  it  is  shaped  like  a  big  oricket-ball,  than  when  taught  to  say  that  it  is  an 
oblate  spheroid  with  a  polar  diameter  of  8,000  miles.  Thus  Christ  was  continually 
telling,  in  an  easy  way,  what  this  and  that  was  like  (drawing  pictures),  which  is  to 
Bay  that  He  taught  by  parables,  '  and  without  a  parable  spake  He  not  unto  them.** 
...  A  truth  felt  is  more  than  a  truth  stated.  Christ  was  continually  dropping 
hints  that  led  His  disciples  forward  into  a  new  surmise  ;  kept  treading  down  their 
horizon  ;  did  not  let  their  opinio qs  go  to  seed.  He  knew  how  to  talk  with  them  in 
such  a  way  as  to  make  them  feel  that  what  He  did  not  tell  them  was  considerably 
more  than  what  He  did  tell  them  (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  Why  our  L&rd  used 
parables  : — 1.  As  a  means  of  attra sting  attention.  2.  To  prevent  His  auditors  from 
being  repelled  by  a  too  sudden  revtlation,  either  of  His  purpose  or  of  His  message.  3. 
To  stimulate  inquiry.  4.  To  test  tie  character  of  His  hearers.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D,) 
Behold,  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow. — The  parable  of  the  sower: — Four  kinds  ot 
soil :  1.  The  impenetrable.  2.  The  superficial.  3.  The  preoccupied.  4.  The  pre 
pared.  Observation  :  1.  The  seed  is  the  same  in  every  case  ;  the  difference  is  ic 
the  kinds  of  soils.  2.  The  parable  it  Christ's  answer  to  the  objection,  If  the  gospel 
be  from  God,  why  is  it  not  more  elective  ?  The  answer  is,  that,  hke  any  othei 
remedy,  much  will  depend  on  the  way  in  which  it  is  used.  (The  Clergyman'* 
Magazine.)  Parable  of  the  sower : — Where  is  the  fault  of  failure  f  1.  It  does  not  lie 
in  God,  the  sower.  God  does  not  predestinate  men  to  faiL  He  willeth  not  the 
death  of  a  sinner.  2.  The  cause  of  frilure  is  not  in  any  impotency  of  truth.  The 
old  thinkers  accounted  for  it  by  the  depravity  of  matter.  Once  acknowledge  free- 
will in  man,  and  the  origin  of  evil  does  not  lie  in  God.  3.  The  fault  might  be  solely 
in  the  soil  of  the  heart.  I.  The  causes  of  faildbe.  1.  The  first  of  these  is  want 
of  spiritual  perception.  There  are  pewons  whose  religion  is  all  outside,  never 
penetrates  beyond  the  intellect.  Conesptions  of  religious  life,  which  are  only 
conceptions  outward,  having  no  lodgment  in  the  heart,  disappear.  Fowls  of  the 
air  devoured  the  seed.  This  is  a  picture  of  thought  dissipated,  and  no  man 
can  tell  when  or  how  it  went.  2.  A  second  cause  of  failure  is  want  of  depth 
of  character.  This  stony  ground  is  the  thin  layer  of  earth  upon  a  bed  of  rock. 
Shallow  soil  is  hke  superficial  character.  There  is  easily-moved  susceptibility. 
A  pleasant,  sunny  religion  would  be  the  life  to  suit  them.  The  superficial 
character  is  connected  with  the  hard  heart;  beneath  the  thin  surface  lies  the 
bed  of  rock.  It  is  among  those  of  light  enjoyment  we  must  look  for  stony 
heartlessness.  3.  Once  more  impressions  come  to  nothing  when  the  mind  Ib 
subjected  to  dissipating  influences,  and  yields  to  them — "  Some  fell  among 
thorns."  Two  classes  of  dissipating  influences  distract  such  minds.  The  cares  of 
this  world.  Martha  was  "cumbered  with  much  serving."  The  deceitfulnesg  of 
riches  dissipate.     Weeding  work  painful.     U.  Fob  the  pebmanence  of  RELioioug 

lUPBESSIONS    THIS  PARABLE  SDOOESTS  THREE  BEQUIBEMENTS.       1.    An  houest  and  gOOd 

heart.  Earnest  sincerity.  2.  Meditation  is  a  second  requisite  for  perseverance. 
They  keep  the  Word  which  they  have  heard.  Must  not  confuse  reverie  with  medita- 
tion. Truth  is  dwelt  on  till  it  receives  innumerable  applications ;  it  is  done  in 
silence.  3.  The  third  requisite  is  endurance — "  They  bring  forth  fruit  with 
patience."  There  is  an  active  and  passive  endurance,  bearing  pain  without  com- 
plaining ;  and  under  persecution.  It  is  also  the  opposite  of  tbat  impatience  which 
cannot  wait.  We  are  disappointed  if  the  harvest  does  not  come  at  once.  {F.  W. 
Btbertson,  M.A.)  The  parable  of  the  sower: — 1.  The  careless  hearer.     2.  Tht 


CHAP,  xin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  25J 

temporary  hearer.  8.  The  worldly-minded  hearer.  4.  The  Bincere  hearers  of  th« 
Word.  (1)  They  nnderstaiid  it ;  (2)  They  receive  it ;  (3)  They  retain  it ;  (4)  They 
practise  it.  (O.  Burder.)  The  Christian's  unfaithful  hearing  of  the  Word  not 
natural,  but  self-induced  : — 1.  The  unlimited  method  of  the  sower's  work  ;  the 
indiscriminate  manner  in  which  the  seed  is  cast  upon  the  ground.  His  care  not 
limited  to  a  single  spot.  The  overflowing  bounty,  the  merciful  providence  of  God 
towards  all  classes.  2.  The  impediments  to  growth  are  to  be  found  not  in  natural 
defects  or  incapacities,  but  in  self-induced  hindrances  and  wilful  indisposition  to 
listen  to  the  truth.  In  the  gospel  history  these  bearers  are  to  be  discovered  :  1.  The 
Sadducees,  who  denied  the  resurrection.  Infideiil*y  is  a  sad  hardener  of  the  heart. 
2.  Those  of  our  Lord's  disciples  of  whom  mention  is  made  that  they  went  back,  and 
walked  no  more  with  Him.  The  varieties  of  soil  does  not  describe  varieties  of  heart 
as  formed  by  nature,  but  the  condition  which  the  heart  and  mind  assume,  as  men 
either  neglect  or  employ  the  means  of  grace.  They  represent,  not  the  physical  but 
the  moral  oonditi"'u  of  the  human  mind.  Human  and  Christian  society  is  divided 
into  various  classes  of  every  variety  of  feeling  and  conduct ;  but  the  motive  of  good 
or  ill  is  in  the  heart.  {St.  Paul's  Cathedral  Sermons.)  The  parable  of  the  sower : — 
I.  The  soweb.  Jesus  Christ  Himself ;  through  all  the  dispensations  of  dreams, 
angels,  prophets  :  at  last  He  came  Himself  with  the  seed  of  the  kingdom.  II.  Thb 
BEED.  1.  Ordinary  seed  is  covered  with  an  outward  coat.  The  life  principle  is 
hidden  away  from  observation.  So  we  find  Christ  in  appearance  like  a  man.  The  words 
yon  hear  are  but  the  outward  covering ;  there  is  an  inward  life.  There  are  those 
who  split  hairs  about  Christianity ;  they  know  the  outward  form,  but  not  tte  vital 
principle.  Others  ignore  the  outward  form,  and  say  Christianity  is  wholly  spiritual. 
Both  necessary.  2.  The  life-giving  property  is  not  in  the  soil,  but  in  the  seed.  You 
may  enrich  the  soil  as  you  will,  but  without  seed  you  can  have  no  life.  Scientists 
have  given  up  the  idea  of  spontaneous  generation.  There  is  no  salvation  apart  from 
the  indwelling  Christ.  3.  Where  life  is  there  is  power.  Sow  pebbles,  but  they  have 
no  power  to  reach  a  harvest.  The  Word  powerful  because  living.  4.  Every  seed 
brings  forth  after  its  kind.  You  cannot  sow  wickedness  and  reap  religion.  III.  Thb 
SOIL.  1.  The  wayside  hearer.  2.  The  Ptony-ground  hearer.  The  emotional  hearer. 
8.  Among  the  thorns — the  double-minded  hearer.  4.  Good  soil — the  man  who  hears 
aright.  (G.  F.  Pentecost.)  The  parable  of  the  sower: — I.  The  soweb.  1.  Our 
Lord  first  of  all  means  Himself.  His  work  chiefly  was  sowing  the  seeds  of  Divine 
truth  in  the  minds  of  men.  The  reaping  began  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  2.  Then 
by  the  sower  is  meant  our  Lord's  apostles  and  the  seventy  disciples  whom  He  sent 
out  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  all  ministers  of  His  Word.  3.  All  Christian  people  are 
sowers.  By  our  words  and  actions  we  are  sowing  some  kind  of  principle  in  the 
minds  of  others  ;  we  cannot  help  it.  U.  The  seed.  God's  Word.  1.  It  is  some- 
times rather  more  the  word  of  man  than  the  Word  of  God — the  Word  of  God  mingled 
with  the  Word  of  man.  2.  It  may  be  one  part  of  the  Word  of  God  to  the  exclusion 
of  another,  grace  to  the  exclusion  of  works.  3.  Christ  is  in  an  emphatic  sense  the 
Word  of  God ;  so  we  are  to  sow  the  Word  concerning  Christ.  III.  The  ground. 
What  does  the  ground  mean? — the  heart  rather  than  the  head,  the  affections  rather 
than  the  intellect.  A  cold,  feelingless  man  cannot  effect  much  as  regards  religions 
truth.  IV.  The  result  of  the  sowing,  (if.  S.  Brown.)  Bad  soid-eonditiom 
not  unalterable  : — Why,  there  was  a  time,  I  suppose,  when  the  very  fruitfullest 
fields  of  England  were  something  like  either  the  stony  places  or  the  thorny  places 
in  this  parable.  I  have  recently  seen  in  the  distant  parts  of  these  islands,  and  in 
one  of  the  most  rugged  parts  of  the  West  of  Scotland,  ground  which  I  saw  four  or 
five  years  ago,  when  the  present  proprietor  came  into  possession  of  it ;  and  that 
ground — well,  I  cannot  say  there  was  anything  on  it  like  a  wayside,  for  there  was 
not  a  wayside  within  miles  of  it — but  still,  it  was  chiefly  stones,  and  gorse,  and 
heather,  and  all  sorts  of  stuff ;  but  the  application  of  culture,  skill,  some  capital, 
and  so  on,  has  made  it  very  decent  land  indeed,  and  it  is  yielding  something  now 
for  the  support  of  man  and  beast.  There  is  nothing  fatalistic  in  this  parable, 
nothing  to  drive  to  despair  the  man  who  feels  he  is  bad,  and  wishes  to  be  a  true 
Christian,  and  nothing  to  encourage  in  sin  the  man  who  has  no  desire  after  good 
things.  God's  grace  can  do  for  the  heart,  be  what  it  may,  what  man's  skill  has 
done  a  thousand  times  for  the  land  that  he  cultivates.  (Ibid.)  The  parable  of 
the  sower  opened: — I.  The  agent.  The  hearts  of  men  and  women  are  Christ's 
spiritual  husbandry.  1.  Christ  is  the  principal  sower,  the  master  sower ;  ministers 
are  His  servants  (2  Cor.  vi.  1).  2.  Christ  sows  His  own  by  creation.  Ministers 
have  no  seed  of  their  owr :  their  doctrine  and  word  belong  to  Christ.     3    Christ 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnt. 

is  a  most  wise  and  skilful  sower ;  He  hath  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  sorts  of  ground. 
4.  Christ  is  a  universal  sower.  5.  Jesus  Christ  is  an  efficacious  sower.  He  can 
cause  the  seed  to  take  root ;  but  so  cannot  a  minister.  II.  His  action.  Jesui 
Christ  may  be  said  to  go  forth  in  three  ways :  1.  In  His  own  person.  2.  In  th« 
mmistry  of  His  servants.  3.  To  sow  His  seed  by  the  Spirit.  III.  His  DESias. 
{B.  Keach.)  Ministers  are  ChrisCs  seedsmen : — 1.  They,  like  seedsmen,  must  sow 
the  seed  in  its  proper  season  (2  Cor.  vi.  2),  2.  They  must  sow  their  seed,  let  it  be 
what  weather  it  will,  a  time  of  peace,  or  a  time  of  persecution.  3.  They  must  sow 
no  seed  of  their  own,  but  Christ's  doctrine  (Deut.  xxii.  9).  4.  They  must  aciv  all 
Christ's  seed.  5.  Constantly,  as  long  as  seed-time  lasteth  (Eccl.  xi.  6).  6.  They 
sow,  but  the  whole  success  is  of  God.  Why  the  Word  is  compared  to  seed : — 1. 
Seed  springs  not  out  of  the  ground  naturally;  it  must  first  be  sown.  The  heart 
must  first  have  the  seed  of  grace  infused.  2.  Seed,  let  it  be  of  wheat  or  barley,  is 
the  choicest  of  each  sort  respectively.  True  grace  is  of  an  excellent  nature.  3.  Until 
seed  is  sown  there  will  be  no  increase.  So  the  heart  must  take  in  the  Word  by  faith. 
4.  Seed  sometimes  which  is  sown  lies  a  considerable  time  in  the  ground  before  it 
springs  up,  or  visibly  appears  ;  it  must  have  time  to  take  root.  5.  Clods  of  earth, 
being  not  broken,  oftentimes  obstruct  the  springing  up  of  the  seed,  or  it  is  from 
thence  it  appears  not  to  have  taken  root  so  soon  as  in  some  other  ground ;  so  like- 
wise, through  the  power  of  Satan's  temptations  and  corruption  of  the  heart,  the  Word 
is  for  a  time  hindered.  6.  A  husbandman  observes  the  proper  time  and  season  of 
sowing  his  seed.  7.  Men  are  not  sparing  in  sowing  their  seed,  but  scatter  it  plenti- 
fully, though  they  expect  not  all  to  take  root.  8.  A  husbandman  soweth  his  seed 
on  what  ground  he  pleaseth ;  some  he  lets  lie  barren.  There  are  nations  to  whom 
the  gospel  is  not  sent.  9.  That  the  earlier  seed  is  sown  the  better  it  ia  rooted  j  so 
with  the  Word  sown  in  the  hearts  of  young  people.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  4  and  19.  Some  seeds  fell  by  the  wayside,  and  the  fowls  came  and  devoured 
them  up. — Way  seed  devoured  by  birds : — The  birds  devour  the  truth  we  neglect  to 
cover.  Let  us  study  these  birds : — 1.  The  first  belongs  to  the  heron  species,  having 
long  legs,  a  long  bill,  broad  strong  wings,  and  an  eye  keen  as  an  eagle's,  yet  filmy 
at  times,  which  causes  serious  mistakes.  This  is  the  bird  of  intellectual  scepticism. 
It  delays  vour  acceptance  of  the  truth  with  all  kinds  of  questions.  2.  There  is 
another  bird,  of  dirty  and  rullied  feathers,  a  nondescript,  but  a  hearty  eater  of 
the  seed  dropped  by  the  wayside.  It  is  evil  associations.  They  neutralize  the  in- 
fluences of  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  There  is  the  muscular  bird  with  curved  beak  that 
holds  like  a  vice.  It  is  a  moth  eater  of  the  falcon  order,  and  ravenous,  evil  habits, 
and  belongs  to  a  large  family.  4.  There  is  a  bird  of  bad  odour.  Carrion  drops 
from  feather  and  from  bill.  It  is  of  the  buzzard  tribe.  Let  us  call  it  the  inconsis- 
tencies of  Christian  professors.  5.  There  is  a  dull  and  heavy  bird,  not  easily  scared 
away,  of  the  booby  order.  It  is  religious  indecision.  AU  these  hinder  our  salvation, 
(r.  E.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  seed  by  the  wayside: — The  truth  described  as  a  "  seed." 
There  are  manifold  facilities  about  the  emblem  on  which  we  may  dwell.  The  seed 
has  a  germinating  power  in  itself  that  leads  to  endless  reproduction.  So  has  every 
true  word.  Then  man  is  but  the  soil.  If  you  are  to  get  Divine  desires  in  the 
human  heart,  they  must  be  sown  there :  they  are  not  products  of  the  soil.  Again, 
man's  part  is  accurately  described  as  a  simple  reception,  not  passive,  but  a  co-opera- 
tion. Then  these  different  kinds  of  soil  are  not  >inalterably  different :  it  is  an  ac- 
quired disposition,  not  a  natural  characteristic  that  is  spoken  of.  I.  The  beaten 
path.  II.  The  lost  seed.  I.  Let  us  think  about  that  typk  of  character  which  is 
HERE  SET  FORTH  UNDER  THE  IMAGE  OF  "THE  WATSiDE."  It  is  a  heart  trodden  down 
by  the  feet  that  have  gone  across  it ;  and  because  trodden  down,  incapable  of 
receiving  the  seed  sown.  The  seed  falls  upon,  not  in  it.  Point  out  ways  in  which  the 
heart  is  trodden  down.  1.  By  custom  and  habit.  The  process  of  getting  from 
childhood  to  manhood  is  a  process  of  getting  less  impressible.  2.  The  heart  is 
trodden  down  by  sin.  It  is  an  effect  of  sin  that  it  uniformly  works  in  the  direction 
of  unfitting  men  to  receive  God's  love.  Every  transgression  deprives  us,  in  some 
degree,  of  power  to  receive  God's  truth,  and  make  it  our  own.  3.  The  heart  is  trod- 
den down,  so  far  as  receiving  the  gospel  is  concerned,  by  the  very  feet  of  the  sower. 
Every  sermon  an.  ungodly  man  hears,  which  leaves  him  ungodly,  leaves  him  harder 
by  the  passage  of  the  Word  once  more  across  his  heart.  II.  The  lost  seed.  Piatan's 
chosen  instruments  are  those  light,  swift-winged,  apparently  innocent  flocks  of 
flying  thoughts,  that  come  swooping  across  your  souls,  even  whilst  the  message  of 
God's  love  is  sounding  in  your  ears.      (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)      Hardened  by  ain  : — 


CHAP.  xm.  ST.  MATTHEW.  261 

Every  transgression  deprives  us,  in  some  degree,  of  power  to  receive  the  Divine 
Word  of  God's  truth,  and  making  it  our  own.  And  these  demons  of  worldliness,  of 
Belfishuess,  of  carelessness,  of  pride,  of  sensuality,  that  go  careering  through  your 
soul,  my  brother,  are  hke  the  goblin  horseman  in  the  old  legend;  wherever  that  hoof- 
fall  etries,  the  ground  is  blasted,  and  no  grass  will  grow  upon  it  any  more  for  ever  I 
{Ibid.)  Hardened  by  habit: — The  best  way  of  presenting  before  you  what  I  mean 
will  be  to  take  a  plain  illustration.  Suppose  a  httle  child,  just  beginning  to  open 
its  eyes  and  unfold  its* faculties  upon  this  wonderful  world  of  ours.  There  you  get 
the  extreme  of  capacity  for  receiving  impressions  from  without,  the  extreme  of  sus- 
ceptibihty  to  the  influences  that  come  upon  it.  Tell  the  little  thing  some  trifle  that 
passes  out  of  your  mind ;  you  forget  all  about  it ;  but  it  comes  out  again  in  the 
child  weeks  and  weeks  afterwards,  showing  how  deep  a  mark  it  has  made.  It  is  the 
law  of  the  human  nature  that,  when  it  is  beginning  to  grow,  it  shall  be  soft  as  wax 
to  receive  all  kinds  of  impressions,  and  then  that  it  shall  gradually  stiffen  and  become 
hard  as  adamant  to  retain  them.  The  rock  was  once  all  fluid,  and  plastic,  and 
gradually  it  cools  down  into  hardness.  If  a  finger-dint  had  been  put  upon  it  in  the 
early  time,  it  would  have  left  a  mark  that  all  the  forces  of  the  world  could  not  make 
nor  can  obliterate  now.  In  our  great  museums  you  see  stone  slabs  with  the  marks 
of  rain  that  fell  hundreds  of  years  before  Adam  lived  ;  and  the  footprint  of  some 
wild  bird  that  passed  across  the  beach  in  those  old,  old  times.  The  passing  shower 
and  the  light  foot  left  their  prints  on  the  soft  sediment ;  then  ages  went  on,  and  it 
has  hardened  into  stone ;  and  there  they  remain  and  will  remain  for  evermore. 
That  is  like  a  man's  spirit ;  in  the  childish  days  so  soft,  so  susceptible  to  all  impres- 
sions, so  joyous  to  receive  new  ideas,  treasuring  them  all  up,  gathering  them  all  into 
itself,  retaining  them  all  for  ever.  And  then,  as  years  go  on,  habit,  the  growth  of 
the  soul  into  steadiuess  and  power,  and  many  other  reasons  beside,  gradually  make 
us  less  and  less  capable  of  being  profoundly  and  permanently  influenced  by  anything 
outside  us  ;  so  that  the  process  from  childhood  to  manhood  is  a  process  of  getting 
less  impressible.  (Ibid.)  The  seed  soicn  on  the  wayside : — I.  What  13  iue  wayside  ? 
1,  The  wayside  hearers  are  such  as  are  unpioughed,  unbroken  up  by  the  cutting 
energy  of  the  law.  2.  It  is  trampled  upon  by  every  passer  by.  The  want  of  "  under- 
standing "  lies  in  this  :  that  they  do  not  see  their  own  connection  with  the  Word.  IL 
What  is  the  seed  ?  No  matter  where  the  seed  fell,  in  itself  it  was  always  good ;  that 
which  fell  on  the  wayside  was  the  same  as  that  which  fell  on  good  ground.  Thua 
the  blame  of  man's  condemnation  is  in  himself.  The  seed  is  the  Word  of  God. 
III.  What  are  the  disadvantages  which  prove  fatal  to  its  being  beceived  at 
ALL  ?  1.  The  hardness  of  the  ground.  2.  The  active  agents  of  evil  which  were 
near  at  hand  snatched  it  away.  You  give  no  advantage  to  the  devil  which  is 
not  immediately  seized  by  him.  (P.  B.  Fower,  M.A.)  The  seed  and  the  huttk: — 
Christ  is  the  living  seed,  and  the  Bible  is  the  husk  that  holds  it.  The  husk  that 
holds  the  seed  is  the  most  precious  thing  in  the  world,  next  after  the  seed  that  it 
holda.  [W.  Arnot.)  The  Word  falling  on  the  external  semes : — Falling  only  upon 
the  external  senses,  they  are  swept  off  by  the  next  current ;  as  the  solid  grain  thrown 
from  the  sower's  hand  rattles  on  the  smooth  hard  roadside,  and  lies  on  the  surface 
till  the  fowls  carry  it  away.  (Ibid.)  Unskilful  soioiny  fruitful : — If  the  seed  is 
good,  and  the  ground  well  prepared,  a  very  poor  and  awkward  kind  of  sowing  will 
BuflSce.  Seed  flung  in  any  fashion  into  the  soft  ground  will  grow ;  whereas,  if  it  fall  on 
the  wayside,  it  will  bear  no  fruit,  however  artfully  it  may  have  been  spread.  My  father 
was  a  practical  and  skilful  agriculturist.  I  was  wont,  when  very  young,  to  follow 
his  fobtsteps  into  the  field,  further  and  oftener  than  was  convenient  for  him  or  com< 
fortable  for  myself.  Knowing  well  how  much  a  child  is  gratified  by  being  permitted 
to  imitate  a  man's  work,  he  sometimes  hung  the  seed-bag,  with  a  few  handfuls  in  it, 
upon  my  shoulder,  and  sent  me  into  the  field  to  sow.  I  contrived  in  some  way  to 
throw  the  grain  away,  and  it  fell  among  the  cloda.  But  the  seed  that  fell  from  ap 
infant's  hands,  when  it  fell  in  the  right  place,  grew  as  well  and  ripened  as  fully  as 
that  which  had  been  scattered  by  a  strong  and  skilful  man.  In  like  manner,  in  the 
spiritual  department,  the  skill  of  the  sower,  although  important  in  its  own  place, 
is,  in  view  of  the  final  result,  a  subordinate  thing.  The  cardinal  points  are  the  seed 
and  the  soil.  In  point  of  fact,  throughout  the  history  of  the  Church,  while  the  Lord 
has  abundantly  honoured  His  own  ordinance  of  a  standing  ministry.  He  has  never 
ceased  to  show,  by  granting  signal  success  to  feeble  instruments,  that  results  in  Hia 
work  are  not  necessarily  proportionate  to  the  number  of  talents  employed.  (Ibid.) 
The  xoayside  hearer: — The  proposals  made  to  the  wayside  hearer  suggest  nothing 
at  all  t-o  him.    His  mind  throws  off  Christ's  offers  as  a  slated  roof  throws  off  h&U. 


862  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zin. 

Ton  might  as  well  expect  seed  to  grow  on  s  tightly-braced  drum-head  as  the  Word 
to  profit  such  a  hearer;  it  dances  on  the  hard  surface,  and  the  slightest  motion 
ehakes  it  off.  {^Marcus  Dods.)  What  can  we  do  with  the  trodden  path  t  May  it 
not  be  possible  to  do  as  the  farmer  would  do,  if  he  had  some  piece  of  field  across 
which  men  and  animals  were  constantly  passing  ?  Mav  we  not  pray  forabihty  to  put 
Bome  sort  of  hurdles  across,  to  prevent  the  mere  animal  portion  of  our  hfe,  whether 
of  pleasure  or  busiusss,  or  of  our  own  animal  passions,  frorn  crushing  the  spiritual 
life,  and  prevent  us  from  giving  earnest  heed  to  the  things  which  we  have  heard, 
lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them  slip.  (Robert  Barclay,)  2Vo  timt  for  under- 
$tanding  :— "  How  is  it,  my  dear,"  inquired  a  schoolmistress  of  a  little  girJ,  "  inat 
you  do  not  understand  this  simple  thing  ?  "  "I  do  not  know,  indeed,"  she  answerc-d, 
with  a  perplexed  look  ;  •'  but  I  sometimes  think  I  have  so  many  things  to  learn  that 
I  have  not  the  time  to  understand."  Alas  I  there  may  be  much  hearing,  much 
reading,  much  attendance  at  public  services,  and  very  small  result ;  and  all  because 
the  Word  was  not  the  subject  of  thought,  and  was  never  embraced  by  the  under* 
standing.  Wliat  is  not  understood  is  like  meat  undigested,  more  likely  to  h% 
injurious  than  nourishing.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  5,  20, 21.— Some  fell  upon  stony  places,  where  they  had  not  much  earth. — 

Stony  places  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  ground.  1.  Stony  ground  wants  breaking  up. 
These  persons  enter  into  a  profession  of  religion  before  their  hearts  are  thoroughly 
broken  in  the  souse  of  sin.  2.  Stony  ground  is  cold;  what  colder  than  a  stone f 
These  persons  are  without  spiritual  warmth.  3.  Their  hearts  may  be  compared  to 
stony  ground  from  the  heaviness  or  lumpisbness  of  their  spirits.  These  hearts  are 
heavy  and  not  soon  removed  out  of  their  evil  course.  4.  Stony  ground  doth  not 
drink  in  the  rain  that  falls  from  heaven.  5.  All  the  hearts  of  men  are  naturally 
hard.  6.  Stony  ground  t-eems  to  be  the  fruit  of  the  curse  for  man's  sin.  So  these 
persons  seem  still  to  be  under  the  curse.  7.  Stony  ground  by  reason  of  the  little 
earth  that  is  found  there,  never  brings  forth  fruit  to  perfection.  So  these  persona 
onlv  bring  forth  the  externals  of  religion.  8.  Stony  ground,  when  the  sun  rises 
high  and  be;?iu8  to  shine  hot  upon  it,  the  scorching  beams  thereof  soon  causes  the 
blade  to  wither  away.  II.  The  success  of  tbk  seed.  Stony  or  hard  hearted 
hearers  may  go  a  great  way  in  the  profession  of  rehgion.  1.  They  may  hear  the 
Word  of  God  with  diligence.  2.  They  may  be  zealous  hearers.  3.  They  may 
receive  the  Word  into  their  hearts.  4.  They  receive  it  with  joy.  6.  They  believe 
for  a  while.  6.  They  may  yield  obedience  to  all  external  duties.  6.  They  may 
become  members  of  a  visible  church.  6.  They  may  leave  all  gross  acts  of  sin.  7. 
They  may  have  some  inward  joy  as  to  the  hopes  they  have  of  heaven.  Why  they 
go  BO  far  ?  1.  From  the  common  illuminations  of  God's  Word  and  Spirit.  2.  Be- 
cause a  temporary  faith  is  not  wholly  without  product.  3.  It  may  arise  from  regard 
for  some  ministers.  4.  Self-respect  and  honour  may  cause  them  to  go  bo  far.  5.  It 
may  be  self-profit.  6.  It  may  arise  from  that  seeming  sweetness  and  satisfaction 
they  meet  with  from  within  themselves  whilst  they  continue  in  the  profession  of 
religion.  7.  It  may  be  from  a  natural  desire  of  being  saved.  8.  It  may  be  from  the 
shame  and  reproach  which  are  attached  to  open  wickedness.  From  whence  it  arises 
that  these  hearers  go  no  further  :  1.  It  may  arise  from  the  great  ignorance  that  ifl 
in  them.  2.  It  ariseth  from  the  nnsouudness  of  their  hearts,  the  ground  is  not 
good.  3.  It  ariseth  from  the  deceitfulness  of  their  hearts.  4.  They  go  no  further 
because  of  their  pride.  6.  Because  they  had  no  vital  but  artificial  principle  in 
them.  6.  Because  there  is  some  secret  sin  hid  in  their  hearts.  {B.  Keach.)  Wither- 
ing is  the  fearful  fate  of  all  stony-ground  hearers : — I.  As  to  the  evil  of  the  causk 
THAT  rnoDUCES  SUCH  EVIL  EFFECTS.  1.  The  principal  cause  is  the  stoniness  of  their 
hearts.  2.  Privative  cause.  (1.)  Want  of  moisture.  (2.)  Want  of  earth.  (3.)  Want 
of  taking  root.  II.  The  badness  of  those  effects  that  proceed  from  such  evil 
CAUSES.  1.  Barrenness.  2.  Another  effect  that  attends  these  professors  is  earthli- 
ness.  S.  Lukewarmness  in  rehgious  duties.  4.  Pride.  5.  Uncharitableness.  6. 
Contention.  7.  Inconstancy.  8.  Apostacy.  (1)  In  judgment.  (2)  In  affection. 
(3)  In  practice.  (4)  In  respect  of  means.  III.  The  danger  and  fearful  conditiom 
OF  SUCH  THAT  WITHER.  1.  They  disappoint  God  of  His  expectation.  2.  These  per- 
sons are  hateful  to  God,  as  they  seem  to  declare  to  all  the  world  that  there  is  not 
that  good  to  be  found  in  God  which  the  Word  and  ministers  do  affirm.  3.  They 
bring  scandal  upon  the  Church.  4.  In  respect  of  the  world  these  men's  sin  and 
danger  is  also  aggravated.  5.  In  respect  to  the  sin  itself,  none  is  more  odious  and 
dangerous.     Belapse  more  dangerous  than  the  disease.    6.  This  sin  of  wi  thering  if 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  359 

genf-rally  punished  with  other  sins,  (1)  with  blindness  of  mind ;  (2)  with  judicial 
hardness  of  heart ;  (3)  with  a  seared  conscience ;  (4)  with  final  impeniteuce.  7. 
How  may  it  be  known  that  a  man  is  withering  ?  1.  Self-confidence.  2.  When  ha 
cannit  bear  a  searching  doctrine.  3.  When  his  conscience  is  not  so  tender  &n  it  was- 
4.  When  a  man's  prayers  are  short.  6.  When  he  cannot  stand  in  the  hour  of  temp 
tation.  6.  Deaduess  of  spirit.  (Ibid.)  The  teviporary  Christian:. — This  man's 
faith  has  five  stages  :  1.  He  knows  the  Word.  2.  He  assents  to  it.  3.  He  professes 
it.  4.  He  rejoices  inwardly  in  it.  5.  He  brings  forth  some  kind  of  fruit ;  and  yet, 
fOT  all  this,  hath  no  more  fruit  in  him  than  a  faith  that  will  fail  in  the  end  ;  because 
he  wants  the  effectual  application  of  the  promise  of  the  gospel,  and  is  without  all 
manner  of  eound  conversation.  This  faith  is  like  corn  on  the  housetop,  which  grows 
for  a  while  ;  but,  when  the  heat  of  summer  comes,  it  withers.  {W.  Perkins).  An 
easily-moved  susceptibility  : — There  is  deep  knowledge  ol  human  nature  and 
exquisite  fidelity  to  truth  in  the  single  touch  by  which  the  icapression  of  religion 
on  them  is  described.  The  seed  sprang  np  quickly ;  and  then  withered  away  as 
quickly,  because  it  had  no  depth  of  root.  There  is  a  quick,  easily-moved 
Busceptibility,  that  rapidly  exhibits  the  slightest  breath  of  those  emotions  which 
play  upon  the  surface  of  the  soul,  and  then  as  rapidly  passes  oil.  In  such 
persons  words  are  ever  at  command — voluble  and  impassioned  words.  Tears 
flow  readily.  The  expressive  features  exhibit  every  passing  shade  of  thought.  Every 
thought  and  every  feeling  plays  upon  the  surface — everything  that  is  sown  springs 
tip  at  once  with  vehement  vegetation.  But  slightness  and  inconstancy  go  together 
with  violence.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  True  ; 
but  also  out  of  the  emptiness  of  the  heart  the  mouth  can  speak  even  more  volubly. 
He  who  can  always  find  the  word  which  is  sppropriate  and  adequate  to  his  emotions, 
is  not  the  man  whose  emotions  are  deepest :  warmth  of  feeling  is  one  thing — per- 
manence is  another.  {F.  W.  Robertson.)  Shallow  soil  like  superficial  charac- 
ter : — You  meet  with  such  persons  in  life.  There  is  nothing  deep  about  them — all 
they  do  and  all  they  have  is  on  the  surface.  The  superficial  servant's  work  is  done : 
but  lazily,  partially — not  thoroughly.  The  superficial  workman's  labour  will  not 
bear  looking  into — but  it  bears  a  showy  outside.  The  very  dress  of  such  persons 
betrays  the  slatternly,  incomplete  character  of  their  minds.  When  religion  comes 
in  contact  with  persons  of  this  stamp,  it  shares  the  fate  of  everything  else.  (Ibid.) 
The  superficial  character  connected  with  the  hard  heart: — Beneath  the  light  thin 
surface  of  easily  stirred  dust  lies  the  bed  of  rock.  The  shallow  ground  was  stony 
ground.  And  it  is  among  the  children  of  Hght  enjoyment  and  unsettled  hfe  that  we 
must  look  for  stony  heartlessness — not  in  the  world  of  business — not  among  the 
poor,  crushed  to  the  earth  by  privation  and  suffering.  These  harden  the  character, 
but  often  leave  the  heart  soft.  If  yon  wish  to  know  what  hollowness  and  heartless- 
ness are,  you  must  seek  for  them  in  the  world  of  light,  elegant,  superficial  Fashion 
— where  ficivolity  has  turned  the  heart  into  a  rockbed  of  selfishness.  Say  what  men 
will  of  the  heartlessness  of  Trade,  it  is  nothing  compared  with  the  heartlessness  of 
Fashion.  Say  what  they  will  of  the  atheism  of  Science,  it  is  nothing  to  the  atheism 
of  that  round  of  pleasure  in  which  many  a  heart  lives  :  dead  while  it  Uves.  (Ibid.) 
Warm  affections  easily  moved: — Among  the  affections,  when  they  are  warm  and 
newly  stirred,  the  seed  speedily  springs.      (W.  Arnot.)  Christ  not  to  be  on  th« 

turf  ace : — Do  not  keep  Christ  on  the  surface;  let  Him  possess  the  centre,  and  thence 
direct  all  the  circumference  of  your  life.  (76?d.)  Hasty,  but  not  lasting  .--—The 
marked  antithesis  between  the  immediate  reception  and  the  immediate  rejection  is 
to  be  carefully  observed.  That  which  is  hasty  is  not  lattting.  Grace,  in  almost 
every  case,  is  slow  and  progressive  ;  for,  in  the  human  heart,  it  has  much  to  contend 
atrainst ;  ar.d  God  treats  us  as  free  agents,  patting  no  force  on  any  man's  will.  {J. 
Ford.) 

Vers.  7,  22.  And  some  fell  among  thorns. — 1.  Thorns  and  thistles  oconpying  the 
field  suck  in  the  sap  which  should  go  to  nourish  the  good  seed.  The  capability  of 
the  ground  is  limited.  2.  Thorns  and  thistles  favoured  as  indigenous  plants  by  the 
snitabihty  of  soil  and  climate  outgrow  the  grain.  The  thorns  are  at  home,  the 
wheat  is  an  exotic.  3.  Anxieties  about  work,  clothes,  &c.,  become  the  thorn  plants, 
harmless  in  appearance  at  first,  which  in  the  end  may  choke  the  seed  of  grace  in 
your  heart.  4.  Worldly  cares  nursed  by  indulgence  into  a  dangerous  strength  are 
further  like  thorns  growing  in  a  corn  field,  in  that  they  interpose  a  veil  between  the 
face  of  Jesus  and  the  opening,  trustful  look  of  a  longing  soul.  The  seed  must  be 
sxposed  to  the  sun.     6.  As  long  as  weeds  live  they  grow.    They  must  be  oast  out 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [citap.  xin. 

of  the  field.  6.  The  tLorn  is  a  prickly  thing;  it  tears  the  husbandman's  flesh,  at 
well  as  destroys  the  fruit  of  his  field.  (W.  Arnot.)  Th^  deceitfulness  of  richen: — 
Greek  mytholo;cy  tells  of  one  who,  being  offered  a  valuable  reward  if  successful 
in  a  race,  resolved  to  outstrip  all  competitors.  But,  alas  1  she  did  not,  and  why? 
Because  enemies  ever  and  anon  flung  pieces  of  gold  just  before  her.  The  tempation 
was  too  strong ;  as  often  as  she  saw  the  glittering  coins,  she  stopped  to  pick  them 
up,  and  so  lost  the  prize.  A  picture  that  of  some  who  start  on  the  spiritual  course ; 
they  forfeit  the  recompense  because  they  stop  to  pick  up  gold.  "  The  deceitfulness 
of  riches  choke  the  word,  and  it  becometh  unfruitful."  The  deceitfulness  oj 

riches : — 1.  Riches  are  deceitful  in  the  insidious  growth  which  they  promote 
of  the  desire  for  wealth,  quite  independent  of  what  it  is  worth  in  its  positive 
power.  2.  In  the  transition  from  anormal  desire  for  wealth  to  the  fervour  of  avarice, 
there  is  great  danger  of  deception  among  men.  3.  Wealth  is  deceitful  in  taking 
the  place  of  legitimate  enjoyments  in  life.  4.  The  relative  growth  of  the  selfish 
over  the  generous.  6.  In  the  gradual  development  of  self-esteem  and  self- 
Bufi&ciency.  6.  In  an  entire  perversion  which  takes  place  in  the  minds  of  men. 
7.  Wealth  deceives  men  by  promises.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Worldliness : — In  gold 
tl'Brc  is  a  halter ;  in  silver  there  is  bird-lime  ;  in  the  farm  there  is  a  bond ;  in  the 
love  of  the  world  there  is  a  chain.  While  we  search  for  gold  we  are  strangled ; 
while  for  silver  we  stick  fast ;  while  we  seize  upon  the  farm,  we  are  taken  prisoners. 
(Ambrose.)  The  soul  has  a  limited  capacity  for  growth: — There  is  nutriment 
enough  in  the  ground  for  thorns,  and  enough  for  wheat ;  but  not  enough,  in  any 
ground,  for  both  wheat  and  thorns.  The  agriculturist  thins  his  nursery-ground, 
and  the  farmer  weeds  his  field,  and  the  gardener  removes  the  superfluous  grapes, 
for  that  very  reason  :  in  order  that  the  dissipated  sap  may  be  concentrated  in  a  few 
plants  vigorously.  So  in  the  same  way,  the  heart  has  a  certain  power  of  loving. 
But  love,  dissipated  on  many  objects,  concentrates  itself  on  none.  God  or  the 
world — not  both.  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  "  If  any  man  love  the  world, 
the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  He  that  has  learned  many  accomplishments 
or  Bciances,  generally  knows  none  thoroughly.  Multifariousness  of  knowledge  is 
commonly  opposed  to  depth — variety  of  atfections  is  generally  not  found  with 

intensity.     {F.  W.Robertson.)        The  word  choked : — A  merchant  of .engaged 

in  a  lucrative  trade,  was  convinced  by  the  Spirit  of  God  that  he  was  an  heir  of  hell, 
but  might,  by  repentance  and  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  become  an  heir  of  heaven. 
The  god  of  this  world  tempted  him  with  much  earthly  gain  ;  and  God.  in  the  Per. 
son  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  offered  him  durable  riches  and  righteousness.  He  was  fully 
convinced,  as  he  said,  that  the  riches  of  earth  and  the  riches  of  heaven  were  set 
before  him,  and  that  he  could  not  obtain  both,  but  might  take  his  choice.  He 
glanced  at  heaven's  durable  riches,  and  then  settled  his  covetous  gaze  on  earth's 
gUttering  tinsel.  He  paused,  feeling  his  choice  was  for  eternity  1  but,  at  length, 
gtrangely,  madly  cried,  '*  Give  me  my  portion  here.'*  His  prayer  was  answered — 
his  riches  were  multiplied  ;  "  but,"  said  he,  "  I  know  that  to  gain  the  world,  I  have 
lost  my  Boul."  Deceitfulness  of  riches : — Some  years  ago,  when  preaching  at 
Bristol,  amongst  other  notes  I  received  to  pray  for  individuals,  one  was  this  :  "  A 
person  earnestly  desires  the  prayers  of  the  congregation,  who  is  prospering  in  trade." 
"  Ah,"  said  I  to  myself,  "  here  is  a  man  who  knows  something  of  his  cwn  heart, 
and  who  has  read  the  Scriptures  to  some  purpose."  (W.  Jay.)  Riches  like 
thorns : — Riches  are  like  thorns ;  they  may  be  touched,  but  not  rested  upon.  Can'st 
thou  set  thy  heart  upon  a  thorn  without  piercing  thyself  through  with  many 
■orrowB  1    ( Venning. ) 

Vers.  8,  23.  But  other  fell  on  good  ground  and  brought  forth  fruit.  The  fruit 
thirty -fold  seems  to  represent  the  case  of  those  who  fear  ;  sixty -fold  the  case  of  those 
who  hope;  the  hundredfold  those  who  love.  (Hermann.)  As  in  the  bad  ground,  the 
diversity  was  threefold — the  wayside,  the  stonv,  and  the  thorny ; — so  m  the  good 
ground  there  is  a  like  diversity — the  fruit  yielding  some  a  hundredfold,  some  sixty, 
some  thirty.  (Jerome.)  Qualifications  for  the  reception  of  God's  truth: — 1.  Sensi- 
bility to  religious  impressions.  2.  Thoughtfulness.  3.  Unworldliness.  4.  An 
honest  and  good  heart.  Growth  precious  because  perilous: — In  the  soil  of  the 
heart  is  found  all  the  nutriment  of  spiritual  life,  and  all  the  nutriment  of  the 
weeds  and  poisons  which  destroy  spiritual  life.  And  it  is  this  which  makes  Chris- 
tian character,  when  complete,  a  thing  so  inestimably  precious.  There  are  thing* 
pipcious,  not  from  the  materials  of  which  they  are  made,  but  from  the  risk  and 
diihculty  of  bringing  them  to  perfection.     Tlie  speculum  of  the  largest  telescope 


CHAP.  xiiLj  ST.  MATlUKw.  aM 

foils  the  optician's  skill  in  casting.  Too  much  or  too  little  heat — the  interposition 
of  a  grain  of  sand,  a  slight  alteration  in  the  temperature  of  the  weather,  and  all 
goes  to  pieces — it  must  be  recast.  Therefore,  when  successfully  finished,  it  is  a 
matter  for  almost  the  congratulation  of  a  country.  Rarer,  and  more  difficult  still 
than  the  costliest  part  of  the  most  delicate  of  instruments,  is  the  completion  o! 
Christian  character.  Only  let  there  come  the  heat  of  persecution — or  the  cold  of 
human  desertion — a  little  of  the  world's  dust — and  the  rare  and  costly  thing  ii 
cracked,  and  becomes  a  failure.  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  Good  ground : — 1.  A  good 
end  honest  heart  is  a  perfect  and  sincere  heart.  2.  It  is  an  obedient  heart.  3.  It 
is  a  faithful  heart.    4.  It  is  a  jealous  heart.     5.  It  is  a  fruitful  heart.    {B.  Reach.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Because  It  is  given  unto  yoa  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  Mngdom 
of  heaven. — The  preparation  neces>^ary  for  understanding  the  mysteries  of  the 
gospel : — I.    To   explain    what   it   is   that  we   ought    to    bats    in   order   to 

ATIAIN   AN    UNDEBSTANDINQ   OF  THE     MYSTERIES     OF     THE     GOSPEL.      1.    We    OUght    tO 

have  an  honest  desire  after  light,  and  if  we  have  this  desire  it  will  not 
remain  unproductive.  There  is  a  connection  announced  in  Scripture  between 
desire  and  its  accomplishment.  The  hungry  are  filled.  Thousands  are  content 
that  the  Bible  shall  remain  a  sealed  book — unto  them  it  will  not  be  given  to  know 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  We  ought  to  have  a  habit  of  prayer 
conjoined  with  a  habit  of  inquiry ;  and  to  this  more  will  be  given.  It  is  in  the 
Bible  and  not  out  of  the  Bible,  where  this  hght  is  to  be  met  with.  It  is  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  shining  upon  the  Word,  that  His  truth  is  reflected  with  clearness  upon 
the  soul.  3.  We  ought  to  do  all  that  we  know  to  be  God's  will,  and  to  this  habit 
of  humble,  earnest,  desirous  reformation,  more  will  be  given.  Doiug  stands  in  the 
same  relation  to  prayer  that  reading  does.  Without  the  one  or  the  other  it  is  the 
prayer  either  of  presumption  or  hypocrisy.  Christ  is  given  to  those  who  obey  Him. 
Reading,  prayer,  and  reformation  are  obvious  things  ;  and  it  is  the  neglect  of  these 
obvious  things  which  involves  guilt.  It  is  for  want  of  seeking  if  you  do  not  find 
II.  Explain  how  it  is  that  the  mtsteries  of   the  gospel  are,  in  mant  cases, 

EVOLVED    CPON   THE    MIND   IN   A   CLEAR    AND    CONVINCING    MANIFESTATION.        The    Camal 

mind  is  enmity  against  God  ;  and  Divine  truth  must  be  brought  to  man  from  above. 
{Dr.  Chalmers.)  For  whosoever  hath,  to  Mm  shall  be  given. — Increase  of 
gifts : — God  heaps  upon  His  faithful  and  elect  people  (such  as  the  apostles  were) 
new  graces  and  benefits  day  by  day,  so  that  they  abound  in  virtue  and  holiness : 
but  from  the  unbelieving,  the  ungrateful,  and  the  unworthy.  He  gradually  takes 
away  His  gifts,  both  of  nature  and  of  grace.  I.  He  who  hath  faith,  to  him  shall 
be  given  the  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  God's  kingdom ;  for  these  cannot  be 
known  without  faith.  II.  They  who  have  ears  of  hearing,  who  come  to  God 
with  a  pure  desire  to  learn  and  to  obey,  to  them  shall  be  revealed  celestial  verities ; 
but  from  those  who  have  not  this  pure  desire,  and  who  indulge  in  their  own  lusta 
and  errors,  shall  be  taken  away,  by  degrees,  that  little  knowledge  of  Divine  things 
which  they  possess.  HI.  He  who  hath  doctrine — in  tho  sense  of  using  it — he  who 
diligently  preaches  and  communicates  to  others  that  which  ho  has  received,  shall 
never  be  at  a  loss  for  doctrine  and  words  which  he  may  speak  and  preach,  for  God 
will  supply  them  to  him.  But  if  any  one  does  not  make  use  of  doctrine,  he  will 
gradually  forget  it  and  lose  it.  (Lapide.)  More  and  more,  or  less  and  le.^s: — I. 
This  principle  as  it  is  illustrated  in  the  parable  of  the  sower.  II.  In 
beference  to  the  experience  of  all  gracious  sools.  Let  us  give  instances :  1. 
When  a  man  believes  the  gospel  in  its  most  elementary  form,  that  man  will  soon  be 
taught  the  higher  truths.  Use  starlight  and  you  shall  have  sunlight  soon.  2.  And 
as  it  is  with  faith  so  is  it  with  the  possession  of  any  genuine  grace.  Faith,  love, 
zeal,  increase  by  use.  3.  The  way  in  which  thia  promise  is  carried  out  by  our 
gracious  God  is  worthy  of  observation.  God  gives  more  by  a  process  of  growth,  as 
in  parable  of  the  sower.  The  main  point  is,  have  we  the  living  principle  7  IIL 
The  other  side  of  the  truth  as  exemplified  in  the  experience  of  the  insincere.  They 
who  have  heard  the  gospel  from  childhood,  now  give  up  hearing.  No  taste  for  it. 
Lost  power  to  appreciate  it.  Others  receive  the  grace  of  God,  but  not  acting  upon 
it,  lose  its  power.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  law  of  increase  : — In  the  world  among 
men  it  is  commonly  observed  that  it  never  rains  but  it  pours.  Where  you  see  a 
sheep  there  is  generally  a  flock.  Money  makes  money.  Poverty  remains  poor. 
Want  of  capital  brings  bankruptcy.  A  company  starts  on  imaginary  or  borrowed 
capital'  it  makes  a  fuss  and  a  noise,  but  it  never  prospers.  By-and-by  it  breakg 
up,  and  all  is  lost,  and  yet  it  never  had  anything  of  its  own  to  lose :  thus  it  verifiei 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  xn^ 

to  the  letter  the  truth — "  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  away  even 
that  he  hath. "  Ordinarily,  profcperity  is  a  hen  which  likes  to  lay  where  there  is  • 
nest  egg,  aud  when  one  swallow  of  success  comes  others  will  follow  it.  Certainly 
we  have  found  it  so  in  the  things  of  grace  ;  wheie  grace  has  been  given  more  grace 
comes ;  spiritual  capital  w^ell  worked  multiplies  the  stock,  and  spiritual  wealth  la 
realized  where  there  is  a  solid  basis  to  begin  upon.  (Ibid.)  Increase  gradual 
through  effort : — Why  did  not  the  Lord  give  us  the  largest  measure  of  grace  to  begin 
with — why  promise  more  abundance  as  an  after  result  f  I  think  it  is  because  we 
value  grace  all  the  more  when  it  comes  to  ns  by  little  and  little.  Again,  it  is  to 
our  good  to  be  exercised  to  get  more  grace.  A  poor  woman  is  allowed  to  go  and 
glean  in  a  field  ;  your  generosity  might  say,  "  (Jome,  my  good  woman,  I  will  give 
you  the  com,  and  you  shall  not  have  the  trouble  of  gleaning ;  "  but  this  might  not 
be  BO  good  a  thing  for  her  as  to  allow  her  to  gather  the  wheat  by  her  own  efforts. 
It  is  often  much  better  to  enable  the  poor  to  help  themselves  than  to  help  them 
without  their  own  exertions.  God  is  wise  towards  us;  he  means  to  give  ne  the 
com,  but  he  decides  that  we  shall  glean  it,  and  bo  exercise  ourselves  unto  godli- 
ness. We  are  to  become  rich  in  grace,  but  it  is  to  be  by  heavenly  trading.  Growth 
is  gift,  remember  that.  (Ibid.)  Life  before  increase  : — A  dead  post  which  we 
saw  in  the  ground  twenty  years  ago  is  the  same  post  still,  no  bigger,  no  smaller, 
and  only  altered  by  becoming  rotten  underground ;  but  the  tree  which  yoo  saw 
twenty  years  ago,  what  a  difference  there  is  in  it.  It  was  then  a  sapling  which  yon 
could  bend,  but  now  it  has  become  as  an  iron  pillar,  and  there  is  no  moving  it.  80 
ought  it  to  be  with  us,  and  we  must  aspire  to  have  it  so.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  Because  seeing  they  see  not ;  and  hearing  they  hear  not. — Insensibility  to 
the  truth  : — Christ  here  touches  upon  a  common  fact  of  our  human  nature — spiritual 
insensibility — that  state  in  which  spiritual  things  pass  before  a  man  ;  and  instead 
of  being  beautiful  and  blessed  realities,  they  are  meaningless  to  him.  There  ia 
nothing  strange  or  fanciful  in  this  representation.  We  understand  how  a  man  may 
be  face  to  face  with  anything,  and  yet  not  perceive  it,  through  the  appropriate 
faculty  in  him  being  beclouded  or  dormant.  Men  are  coming  into  contact  with 
nature,  art,  charity,  and  yet  are  insensible  to  them.  Not  that  God  decrees  arbitrarily 
that  a  certain  few  shall  be  blessed  with  the  power  of  vision  and  receptivity,  and 
others  deprived  of  it.  It  is  not  imposed  upon  men,  but  is  the  result  of  certain  lines 
of  conduct.  I.  What  abe  some  of  the  steps  by  which  this  gross,  iNSENSiTnni 
STATE  IS  BEACHED.  1.  It  is  induced  by  all  kinds  of  depravity.  It  is  one  of  the 
penalties  of  wrong-doing  that  the  moral  nature  is  made  unresponsive  to  spiritual 
things.  2.  It  grows  on  a  man  through  the  mastery  of  worldly  pursuits — of  business, 
home,  social,  and  political  Ufe.  3.  The  habit  of  cherishing  doubt  is  another  cir- 
cumstance which  tends  to  weaken  spuitual  vision  and  understanding.  Caution 
must  not  degenerate  into  procrastination.  II.  Fobmal  endobseuent  of  thb 
Christian  verities  is  one  thing,  living  realization  of  them  is  another.  IIL 
Hb  who  opened  the  understanding  of  His  disciples  is  with  vb  now  to  do  thb 
dAiiB  FOB  cs.  "  Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight."  (T.  Hammond.)  Seientifia 
ingensibility  : — There  is  a  huge  boulder  stone  close  by  a  man's  cottage  on  the  moor. 
He  has  been  familiar  with  that  stone  from  the  early  days  of  childhood.  He  has 
passed  it  a  thousand  times.  He  has  climbed  over  it  when  a  boy,  and  rested  in  the 
shadow  of  it  when  hot  and  tired  with  the  toil  of  manhood.  It  was  there  in  his 
father's  time  before  him.  And  yet  he  has  never  seen  that  stone.  Ask  him  the 
composition  of  it.  Ask  him  the  geological  history  of  it  and  he  cannot  tell.  But  a 
geologist  passes  that  way,  and  at  a  glance  he  sees  what  the  cottager  Las  never 
caught  a  gliuipse  of.  To  him  the  stone  tells  stories  of  agps  long  anterior  to  Adam ; 
he  hears  in  imagination  the  wash  of  primaeval  waters  and  the  mighty  crash  of  vol- 
canic upheavals ;  to  the  one  man  the  rock  reveals  no  secrets ;  to  the  other  it  is  a 
scroll  written  within  and  without.  There  is  a  man,  cold,  guileful  as  a  serpent,  who 
is  full  of  an  insatiable  hoarding  propensity.  The  one  object  of  his  hfe  is  to  amass 
wealth.  He  will  allow  himself  no  luxury,  no  recreation,  but  toils  and  saves  with 
hungry,  greedy  avarice  unremittingly.  His  eye  glitters  like  lightning,  and  his  busy 
brain  is  for  ever  concocting  plans  for  lucrative  investment.  The  money-fever  bnma 
like  a  fire  in  his  heart.  TLe  one  ruling  motto  of  his  sordid  life  is  get — get  gold. 
Now  such  a  man  hears  of  a  philanthropist,  who  has  parcelled  out  his  fortune  for 
certain  needy  classes  of  the  community.  And  the  whole  thing  is  an  enigma,  • 
puzzle  to  him.  He  cannot  understand  how  any  one  can  have  any  pleasure  in 
giving  away  anything.     "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  is  a  saying 


CHAP,  xui.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  907 

which  he  simply  cannot  and  will  not  believe.  And  he  calls  the  philanthropist  a 
fool,  an  idiot,  a  madman.  He  has  no  vision  for  the  duty  and  blesbedness  of  gene- 
rosity. Hia  whole  nature  rises  up  in  antagonism  to  it,  and  he  thiusts  the  idea  of 
benevolence  mockingly  away  from  him.  (Ibid.)  Worldliness  causes  insensibility : — 
Their  sympathy  and  force  gradually  get  concentrated  around  one  object  in  life  : 
around  trade,  or  art,  or  science,  or  legislation  ;  and  what  hes  outside  of  that  they 
do  not  see,  or  hear,  or  understand.  In  this  way  the  higher  or  heavenward  side  of 
men's  natures  is  often  stifled  and  dimmed.  It  is  hindered  from  coming  into  play, 
until,  by  and  by,  it  becomes  crystallized,  fixed  in  its  Btate  of  inaction  and  torpor. 
We  are  exceeding  delicate  and  critical  beings  to  keep  in  order.  On  the  one  hand, 
rehgiouEness  is  apt  to  overshadow  our  lawful  worldly  activity — and  that  leads  to 
asceticism,  a  morbid  love  of  seclusion.  On  the  other  hand,  our  worldly  activity  is 
apt  to  overshadow  and  blight  the  religious  side  of  our  nature—  and  that  leads  to 
moraC  insensibility.  It  is  exceedingly  dirucuit  to  preserve  a  true  balance.  (Ibid.) 
Sin  causes  vwral  inst-nsihiUty  : — The  evil  thing  in  which  you  have  indulged  is  not 
like  a  wave  which  lifts  a  ship  for  a  moment,  aud  then  passes  on,  leaving  everything 
as  it  was  before.  Far  from  that  I  It  has  entered  as  a  poison  into  your  spiritual 
nature — it  has  become  an  actual  blightuig  force  in  your  character.  You  are  essen- 
tially a  different  man  :  the  measure  of  your  religious  capacity  is  so  much  less  than 
it  was.  Let  any  one  yield  to  selfishness,  to  falsehood,  to  cynical  ill-humour,  to 
lust,  and  darker  and  darker  every  day  the  chambers  of  the  inner  man  become ; 
feebler  and  feebler  the  energies  for  all  heavenly  belief  and  obedience ;  more  and 
more  earthly  the  tastes  and  inchuations ;  narrower  and  more  circumscribed  the 
horizon  of  life ;  deeper  and  more  profound  the  loss  of  the  soul.  This  is  one  of  the 
most  solemn  aspects  of  sin.  (Ibid.)  Intellectual  conception  not  spiritual  reali- 
tation : — There  are  many  whose  creed  is  accurate  enough,  who  subscribe  intellec- 
tually to  all  the  essentials  of  the  Christian  faith,  but  to  whom,  after  all,  they  are 
no  more  than  words — mere  words.  As  a  person  may  sit  down  before  a  piano,  poB- 
jessing  a  capital  knowledge  of  the  technicaUties  of  music,  and  able  to  touch  skilfully, 
and  yet  never  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  piece  he  is  playing,  so  you  may  sit  down 
before  the  Word  of  God,  sweep  your  fingers  over  its  glorious  keys,  and  yet  never 
bring  forth  one  strain  of  its  sweet  Divine  harmony.  Ignorance  and  familiarity  are 
two  things,  seemingly  very  unhke  each  other,  and  yet  they  are  often  yoked  together. 
It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  a  man  who  has  filled  up  stores  of  infoi-mation  in  bis 
memory.  History,  science,  biography,  have  been  laboriously  studied  through  long 
toilsome  years.  Eut  his  knowledge  is  not  digested  ;  it  Ues  in  his  mind,  like  pieces 
of  rock  in  water,  undissolved.  Ask  him  the  date  of  a  battle,  and  he  will  tell  yoa. 
But  ask  him  to  expound,  unfold  in  a  living  manner,  any  event  of  histoiy,  and  be 
cannot.  He  is  not  a  learned  man — simply  a  stuii'ed  one.  What  he  carries  with 
him  is  nothing  better  than  a  collection  of  fossilized  lore.  And  the  gospel  may  be 
known  in  such  a  way  that  it  does  not  vitalize  and  inspire  you.  It  may  lie  outside 
of  you,  be  no  more  to  you  than  Ught  to  a  blind  man,  or  sweet  sounds  to  a  deaf  man, 
or  poetry  to  an  unpoetic  man.  (Ibid.)  "Hearing,  they  hear  not'*: — I.  Why 
THIS  IGNOBANCK  AND  LACK  OF  APPEEHENSiON  ?  1.  Bias,  prejudice.  So  the  Jews, 
because  our  Lord  did  not  come  in  the  character  they  anticipated,  rejected  Him. 
Our  faith,  to  be  strong  and  healthy,  must  rest  on  conviction.  2.  Inattention.  3i. 
Love  of  the  world.  Man's  mind  is  often  preoccupied,  and  so,  like  the  seed  which 
fell  amongst  thorns,  the  word  sown  is  choked.  4.  Pride  of  heart.  It  is  right  for 
every  man  to  sift  Christian  evidence,  but  he  must  do  bo  with  humility — there  must 
be  a  teachable  disposition.  II.  Danger  oj  contindino  thos  ignorant.  1.  The 
Inger  we  continue  in  sin,  the  more  inveterate  will  become  our  habits  of  sin.  2.  To 
resist  light  adds  to  our  guilt.  The  privileges  of  a  Christian  land,  a  Christian  home, 
and  a  Christian  training,  bring  with  them  corresponding  obligations  (Luke  xii. 
47,  48).  3.  Sometimes  brings  as  its  punishment  judicial  blindness  and  hardness  of 
heart.  4.  Neglected  opportunities  will  aggravate  future  woe — "  Son,  remember." 
III.  How  MAY  THIS  iQNOKANCE  BE  ovEBooME  ?  1.  By  the  enlightenment  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  'Tis  He  who  knows  "  the  deep  things  of  God,"  and  He  alone  who  can 
teach  them.  2.  Labotir  to  know  the  mind  of  God — "Search  the  Scriptures."  3, 
Sanctify  the  Sabbath — not  simply  a  day  of  physical  resi,  but  of  spiritual  labour. 
4.  Do  not  stifle  the  voice  of  conscience.  5.  Look  up  to  Christ  as  your  "  all  in  alL" 
(Essex  Renembrancer.)  Moral  impotence  no  excuse  for  irreligion : — That  hobak 
IMPOTENCE  IS  no  EXCUSE  FOB  iBBELioioN.  Examine  the  true  character  of  their  in- 
ability, and  hence  discover  the  equity  of  their  condemnation.  They  were  inoom* 
petent  for  the  holy  service  of  reUgion ;  they  were  in  efiect  blind,  deaf,  insensible.   1. 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm. 

Their  spiritual  incompetency  did  not  arise  from  the  absence  of  sufficient  information 
as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  their  sacred  obligations.  The  obligations  of  man  are 
in  proportion  to  the  means  he  might  possess  for  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  duty. 
The  reepunsibilities  of  the  Jews  were  great.  In  the  gospel  no  plea  is  left  for  ignor- 
ance. 2.  It  could  not  be  ascribed  to  any  natural  incapacity.  They  had  eyes, 
though  they  saw  not ;  not  by  the  want,  but  abuse  of  these  capacities.  The  Jews 
rejected  Christ  in  spite  of  clear  evidence.  3.  The  inability  was  moral.  It  waB 
their  own,  in  contempt  of  entreaty,  from  the  bias  of  their  own  will.  4.  The  effec- 
tive restoration  is  ejected  by  moral  influence.  The  true  cause  of  man's  inability  to 
believe  in  Christ,  is  love  of  sin.  How  can  the  spirit  wedded  to  the  earth  soar  as  on 
an  eagle's  wing  to  heaven  ?  This  view  of  moral  impotence  does  not  do  away  with 
responsibility ;  is  no  excuse  for  irreligion  ;  not  a  misfortune,  but  rebellion ;  a 
depraved  nature  no  excuse.  The  day  will  come  when  all  excuses  for  moral  im- 
potence will  fail.  {A.  Tillman.)  The  guilt  and  doom  of  impenitent  hearers  : — The 
presages  and  symptoms  of  the  approach  of  the  tremendous  judgment — the  judgment 
of  having  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  continued,  not  as  the  means  of  salvation,  but 
as  the  occasion  of  more  aggravated  sin  and  punishment.  1.  The  abuse  or  neglect 
of  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  in  time  past.  2.  Incorrigible  obstinacy  under  chas- 
tisements. 3.  Growing  insensibility  or  hardness  of  heart.  4.  Repeated  violences 
to  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  convictions  of  conscience,  or  obstinate  sinning 
against  knowledge.  5.  The  withdrawing  of  Divine  influences.  6.  And,  as  the  conse- 
quence of  all,  a  general  decay  of  religion.  {President  Davies.)  The  effects  of  God^a 
communications : — Correspond  to  the  willingness  or  wilfulness  of  men.    I.  Divinb 

TRUTH     ELICITS     HUMAN     DISPOSITIONS.         II.    DiVINE     TBDTH8     BEPELLED     BECAUSE    OF 

DISLIKE.  III.  Divine  tbdth  cannot  be  rejected  without  injury.  {M.  Braith- 
waite.)  I.  Christ's   parables — Roused  inquiry;   Rendered   subjects  familiar; 

Removed  prejudice ;  Convinced  of  wickedness ;  Impressed  subjects  on  the  mind. 
II.  Their  superiority  over  all  others.  Others  were  cold  and  dry — His  were  inte- 
resting. Others  were  trifling — His  were  important.  Others  founded  on  improbable 
and  impossible  subjects — Christ's  were  founded  on  common  scenes  and  familiar 
things.     (Bishop  Porteus.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  But  blessed  are  your  eyes,  for  they  see. — I.  The  two  classes  o» 
PERSONS  here  mentioned.  Prophets — inspired  men.  Righteous  men — saints. 
Every  prophet  was  not  a  righteous  man.  To  be  a  righteous  man  is  more  desirable 
than  to  be  a  prophet.  Grace  is  a  higher  endowment  than  inspiration  or  genius. 
II.  These  two  classes  op  persons  eagerly  anticipated  the  Christian  dispensa- 
tion. Various  dispensations — one  religion,  as  one  ocean.  Every  degree  of  experi- 
mental knowledge  of  the  true  religion  awakens  a  desire  for  additional  information. 
It  satisfies,  yet  it  stimulates.  Moses,  &c.  The  Divine  revelation  of  the  true  roJigion 
has  bef^n  progressive.  The  desires  of  the  great  and  good  are  not  always  gratified 
according  to  their  intensity.  They  must  submit  to  the  will  of  God.  HI.  OuB 
privileges  are  fab  superior  to  those  of  these  two  classes  of  persons.  1.  We 
should  be  grateful.  2.  We  should  cherish  a  sense  of  responsibility.  3.  We  should 
strive  to  outstrip  in  attainment  those  whom  we  surpass  in  privilege.  (Various.) 
Divine  illumination: — I.  To  whom  these  words  were  addressed.  1.  They  were 
not  addressed  indiscriminately  to  the  people.  2.  They  were  addressed  to  Hig 
chosen  di~ciples.  3.  The  same  distinction  must  be  observed  when  these  words  are 
applied  to  ouiselves.  II.  The  spiritual  import  of  these  words  when  thus 
APPLIED.  1.  What  the  faithful  disciples  saw — "  the  Lord's  Christ."  2.  How  it 
was  the  disciples  saw  those  things  in  Him.  3.  Unspeakably  blessed  are  they  who 
thus  see.  Are  you  in  possession  of  these  privileges  ?  what  do  you  know  of  them  T 
(1)  Do  you  know  that  you  are  destitute  of  them  ?  (2)  Do  you  humbly  hop«  that 
light  has  visited  your  soul,  but  lament  how  dim  it  is  7     (F.  Close.  M.A.) 

Vers.  34-30  ;  34-^1.  But  while  men  slept,  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares. — 
The  tares  and  the  wheat : — This  parable  relates  chiefly  to  the  condition  of  the 
Church.  I.  The  mixed  condition  of  His  Church  in  our  world.  II.  The  causk  of 
this  mixed  condition  of  the  Church.  The  existence  of  His  people  Christ  traces  to 
Himself.  The  tares  traoed  to  a  spiritual  author — stealthily.  Satan  does  not  show 
himself  while  doing  his  work.  III.  The  conduct  of  the  Chrihtian  servants  with 
respect  to  this  mixture  in  the  Church.  1.  They  notice  it.  2.  They  wish  to  alter 
this  state  of  things — to  put  an  end  to  this  mixture.  IV.  The  end  which  shall  at 
ZiAST  BB  PUT  TO  THIS  MixTURB  IN  THE  Chubch.   (C.  Bradley ,  M.A.)        The  reheat  and 


CHAP,  xra.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  869 

the  tares  : — I.  Who  abe  the  takes  ?  1.  Those  who  outwardly  profess  religion,  but 
inwardly  reject  it.  2.  It  is  likeness  to  wheat  which  makes  tares  specially  mis- 
chievous. II.  Why  are  there  tabes  ?  1.  The  servants  of  Christ,  loving  their 
Master,  make  His  interests  their  own.  They  look  anxiously  to  the  crop.  2.  Th« 
same  question  BtOl  disturbs  us — "  Why  does  God  permit  His  crop  to  be  marred  ?  " 

(1)  It  has  always  been  so.  David  complains  of  this  (Psa.  Iv.  12).  The  apostles 
grieved  by  it  (2  Cor.  xi.  26  ;  Gal.  ii.  4).  (2)  The  reason  is  brief — *•  An  enemy  hath 
done  this."  It  is  Satan's  chief  triumph  to  hinder  Christ's  work  by  false  brethren 
(2  Cor.  xi.  13-14).  (3)  Beyond  this  we  must  not  inquire ;  sufficient  that  God 
permits  this  present  trial  of  faith  and  patience.  III.  What  to  do  with  tabes.  1. 
Zealous  servants  who  grieve  at  spoilt  crops  would  fain  pull  up.  2.  Their  seal 
natural  and  creditable.     Natural :  (1)  Because  these  cause  enemies  to  blaspheme ; 

(2)  Because  foes  within  more  dai^gerous  than  foes  without ;  (3)  Because  trust  is 
shaken  and  love  quenched.  Creditable :  because  love  for  Christ  is  the  source  of  the 
wish.  3.  Yet  mistaken.  4.  The  reason  given.  5.  It  is  sad  to  retain  in  Church 
impostors,  more  sad  to  cast  out  faithful.  Better  trust  men  too  much  than  too  little. 
(E.  Gray,  M.A.)  Fifth  Sunday  after  Epiphany  : — I.  The  two  planters — •*  He 
that  soweth  eood  seed  is  the  Son  of  Man."  "  The  enemy  that  sowed  them  is  the 
devil."  1.  The  One  is  good  and  beneficent.  He  cultivates  His  own  rightful  pos- 
session.  He  acts  as  a  gracious  Benefactor.  The  other  is  only  malignant,  the 
common  foe  of  all  good.  2.  The  Planter  of  good  is  first ;  the  planter  of  evil  cornea 
after.  As  Satan  followed  the  planting  in  Eden,  so  he  follows  every  holy  planting. 
3.  The  Planter  of  all  good  does  His  work  openly,  in  the  eyes  of  all.  It  is  the  nature 
of  good  and  truth  to  be  open ;  falsehood  and  sin  are  cowardly.  II.  Thb  two 
GBOW) HS.  1.  They  are  intermingled  in  the  same  field.  2.  They  are  hard  to  dis- 
tinguish. 3.  They  both  grow.  UI.  The  two  policies.  1.  That  of  the  servants  is 
natural,  and  seemingly  founded  on  just  zeal  for  what  is  good,  but  is  unwise  and 
hurtful.  We  are  not  able  to  judge  rightly.  2.  The  policy  of  the  Master,  though 
more  perplexicg,  is  far  better.  It  leaves  things  less  satisfactory  for  the  time,  but 
accomplishes  the  greatest  good  in  the  end.  3.  The  policy  of  the  Master  will  prevail, 
despite  all  efforts  to  the  contrary,  even  to  the  end  of  the  age.  IV.  The  ultimath 
coNSDMMATioN.  1.  Note  the  reapers — not  the  "  servants."  Mightier  strength  and 
higher  wisdom  than  theirs  is  needed.  2.  Note  the  commands  which  tbey  execute — 
*•  Gather  ye  together,"  &c.  3.  Note  the  final  result.  (-/.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The 
tares  and  the  wheat : — I.  The  diffeeence  between  these  two  classes.  1.  The 
first  have  solid  spiritual  excellence.  2.  They  are  useful.  The  false  disciples  have 
neither — they  are  useless  and  noxious.  II.  How  they  come  to  be  thus  associated. 
The  good  seed  Divioely  planted.  Satan  has  a  hand  in  the  life  of  the  wicked  in  this 
world.  The  tares  are  known.  III.  His  intention  that  believers  and  false  pbo- 
FESsoBS  should  ABIDE  TOGETHEB  UNTIL  THE  HABVE8T.  1.  There  is  nothing  SO  likely 
to  convert  false  professors  as  seeing  real  Christians  amongst  them.  2.  That  the 
faith  and  patience  of  believers  may  be  tested  and  manifested  to  the  world.  IV. 
This  association  cannot  last  for  ever.  1.  The  return  to  judgment — "  Gather  ye 
the  tares."  2.  "The  bundles."  Let  the  companions  in  sin  be  grouped  in  doom. 
3.  '•  To  be  burned  " — punishment  and  pain,  4.  We  are  also  animated  by  hope — 
•*  Gather  the  wheat  into  My  barn."  {B.  W.  Noel.)  Tares  and  wheat: — We  are 
to  understand  mixture  of  good  and  bad  in  the  Church.  There  are  persons  whose 
blind,  intemperate  zeal  would  bid  fair  to  be  injurious  to  the  Church.  Our  Lord 
reserves  the  judgment  to  the  end  of  the  world.  From  this  mixture  of  good  and  bad 
advantages  result  to  both.  1.  The  persecutions  which  the  righteous  experience  from 
the  wicked  are  inconvenient,  but  become  proper  trials  of  virtue.  2.  They  give  the 
good  an  opportunity  of  testifying  their  sincerity.  3.  The  good  in  their  intercourse 
with  the  bad  may  reclaim  them.  4.  The  good  by  dwelling  amongst  the  wicked  see 
the  pernicious  consequences  of  vice.  5.  The  good  are  a  restraint  upon  the  wicked- 
ness of  the  evil  doers.  6.  For  the  good  of  both  God  mercifully  permits  this  mixtun 
of  the  pious  and  the  wicked.  {The  Puluit.)  The  two  sowers  : — Why  did  thii 
enemy  thus  go  his  way  ?  L  He  did  not  wish  to  be  seen.  He  did  not  care  for  the  fame 
of  doing  the  thing  ;  all  he  cared  for  was  that  it  should  be  done.  How  dilf erent  from  as  I 
Satan  does  his  work  unknown,  &c.  II.  He  had  done  his  work.  He  needed  but  one 
sowing  time.  III.  He  had  confidence  in  the  sred.  It  would  not  fail.  It  wai 
the  tiue  need  of  hell.  "Wh&t  confidence  does  this  exhibit  in  the  vigour  and  vitality 
of  error.  Have  we  like  confidence  in  the  life  and  power  of  truth  7  IV.  He  had 
confidence  in  the  soil.  The  soil  was  evil — wonld  not  fail  him — it  would  do  its 
^ork.     V.  He  had  confidence  in  the  atmosphebb.     It  is  on  the  air  as  much  as  oi 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  tcHAP.  xm. 

the  Boil  that  the  harvest  depends.  He  trusts  to  the  evil  air  and  the  evil  seed  suiting 
each  other,  VI.  He  had  other  wo3k  to  do.  He  does  not  abide  in  one  place,  h« 
goes  aboat  to  do  work  elsewhere.  He  is  an  incessant  worker.  What  an  enemy 
have  we  to  fight  with.  ••  Eesist,"  <tc.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  conditions  and 
limitations  of  moral  growth: — The  good  and  the  worthless.     I.  These  abe  bxteb- 

KALLY  ALIKE,  BUT  V1TAI.LT  DIFFERENT.  11.  As  THEY  GROW  THEIB  VITAL  DIFFEBENCBB 
BECOME   MORE   MANIFEST.      III.    ThE   WOBLD-FIELD    IN  WHICH    THEY   OBOW  18   THE    PBO- 

PEETY  OF  Christ.  It  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  government  that  God 
should  allow  an  enemy  in  the  field  at  all.    IV.  Though  they  aee  permitted  io 

GROW  together   FOR  A  TIME   THERE   18   A   DESTINED   PERIOD   OF    SEPARATION.       Many  ft 

sinner  might  have  been  worse  than  he  is,  but  for  restraining  contact  with  Christiani. 
We  must  not  think  that  forbearance  ia  equal  to  complacency  of  evil.  A  strong 
government  can  afford  to  tolerate  its  foes.  (E.  D.  Green.)  Why  Ood  delays  to 
punish  the  sins  of  men  in  this  world,  reserving  them  to  the  judgment  which  shall  be 
hereafter : — I.  As  they  begabd  the  particulab  case  in  view,  and  account  fob  th« 
JUSTICE  Of  God  in  suspending  His  jtudoments.  1.  The  sinners  in  the  text  are 
spared  on  account  of  the  righteous  that  they  may  not  be  involved  in  the  punishment 
due  to  the  sins  of  others.  But  some  sinners  are  spared  out  of  mercy  to  themselves, 
in  hope  of  their  amendment.  The  interests  of  good  and  bad  men  are  so  united  in 
this  world  that  no  signal  calamity  can  befall  the  wicked  but  the  righteous  share  it ; 
hence,  oat  of  mercy  to  the  righteous  God  spares  the  incorrigible  sinnerg.  This  was 
Abraham's  plea  for  Sodom.  But  are  there  not  many  ways  of  punishing  men  with- 
out including  others  in  the  calamity?  Could  not  these  single  oat  desperate 
sinners  ?  1.  How  do  yoa  know  but  that  the  wicked  are  often  thus  punished  ?  God 
does  exercise  judgment  on  the  wicked  in  silent  manner.  2.  But  allow  the  objection 
that  a  great  number  of  wicked  men  ripe  for  destruction  are  spared  and  allowed  to 
flourish  in  the  world,  this  is  for  the  sake  of  the  good.  The  wicked  man  has  friends 
whose  welfare  depends  upon  his  prosperity.  All  men  are  related  to  others.  Are 
all  these  relatives  as  great  sinners  as  the  man  himself,  would  you  not  turn 
innocent  children  into  the  streets  I  We  cannot  arraign  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of 
God.  The  day  is  coming  which  will  dissolve  all  these  present  relations  between 
men,  when  every  one  shall  stand  singly.  I.  But  why  does  God  permit  sin  ?  •*  The 
enemy  sowed  his  tares."  Such  is  the  condition  of  human  nature  that  no  care  can 
prevent  the  growth  of  vice.  Those  who  demand  that  God  should  prevent  evil  by 
irresistible  power  demand  nothing  less  than  that  He  should  destroy  all  law  and 
religion,  and  divest  men  of  reason  and  understanding,  their  chief  characteristic 
Since  offences  must  needs  come,  why  are  not  men  as  certainly  distinguished  by 
rewards  and  punishments  as  by  virtue  or  vice  7  1.  Reason  fails  for  a  due  adminig. 
tration  of  rewards  and  punishments,  as  it  does  not  know  men's  hearts  in  this  world. 
2.  This  is  inconsistent  with  the  present  condition  of  men,  and  the  goodness  of  God. 
They  are  in  a  state  of  trial,  and  should  have  time  to  show  themselves ;  and  as  to 
the  goodness  of  God,  it  would  ill  become  Him  to  destroy  men  as  long  as  there  were 
hopes  of  amendment.     3.  Who  has  reason  to  complain  ?    H.  As  fubnishino  U8 

with   ▲    PBINCIPLB    OF  BEASON  AND  EQUITY  APPLICABLE  TO   MANY  CASES.      BecaUSe  God 

spores  the  wicked  who  deserve  punishment  for  the  sake  of  the  righteous,  is  it 
reasonable  that  men  and  magistrates  should  act  in  like  manner?  Temporal  judg- 
ments are  executed  immediately,  the  law  does  not  consider  those  related  to  the 
offender.  Magistrates  are  not  at  liberty  to  suspend  the  execution  of  justice.  The 
reason  of  the  two  cases  is  very  different.  The  punishments  of  this  world  are  not 
final,  but  the  means  to  secure  virtue ;  but  this  end  can  never  be  secured  by  allowing 
criminals  to  go  unpunished.  In  a  word,  offences  in  this  world  must  be  discouraged 
by  present  punishment  or  else  the  world  will  be  a  scene  of  misery  to  the  best  men. 
Offences  against  God,  though  of  a  deeper  dye,  have  not  in  them  the  same  call  for 
immediate  vengeance.  The  ends  of  justice  are  best  served  by  delay.  (T.  Sherlock, 
D.D.)  The  parable  of  the  tares : — L  The  sowing.  II.  The  growing.  HI.  Thb 
BEAPiNG.  (J.  C.  Jones.)  Points  in  the  parable : — L  Inability  to  form  perfect 
TODGUSNT  OF  individuals  NOW.  Men  are  to  be  known  by  their  fruits,  but  the  fruits  of 
a  man's  life  cannot  be  fairly  judged  until  they  are  ripened  and  complete.    IL  Thb 

DUTY  OF  AOCBPTINO  PBOFESEION  NOW  AND  LEAVING   FINAL  JUDGMENT  FOB  GOD'B  FUTUBB. 

IIL  The  distinction  between  good  and  evil  is  vital,  and  there  can  be  no  real 
confusion  between  them.    IV.  The  distinction  between  good  and  bad  pebsonb 

will  one  DAY  be  CLEABLY  SHOWN.  V.  ThE  TEMPTATION  TO  USE  OUTWABO  AND  PHY- 
SICAL   FOBOES    TO   ACCOMPLISH    THB    AIMS   OF    ChBIST's     ChURCH     MUST     BE     BE8I8TBD. 

{Anon,)       The  tares  and  wheat : — ^We  have — L  A  bbnbfiobnx  opbbation — "  Sowed 


•HAP.  iiu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  271 

good  seed."  1.  The  man  that  sowed  was  Jesus.  This  was  His  special  work  during 
His  public  life  on  earth.  2.  The  good  seed  are  the  righteous.  In  the  former 
parable  the  good  seed  is  the  Word  of  God.  3.  The  field  is  the  world.  Whether  this 
is  to  be  understood  in  its  general  and  most  comprehensive  sense,  or  whether  it  sig- 
nifies  the  Church  in  the  world,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  II.  A  ualicious  deed — 
"  While  men  slept  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares  among  the  wheat,  and  went  his 
way."  Notice:  1.  The  agent.  2.  The  season — "while  men  slept."  It  is  said  of 
the  ungodly  that  "  they  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are 
evil."  There  is  nothing  they  hate  so  much  as  the  light,  for  there  is  nothing  so 
contrary  to  their  nature  and  so  unfavourable  to  their  designs.  As  John  Bnnyan 
says :  "  My  Lord  Understanding's  house  was  too  light  for  the  Prince  of  Darkness, 
and  therefore  he  built  a  high  wall  to  darken  all  the  windows."  3.  The  result. 
UI.  A  NATUBAii  BEQUEST.  From  attempting  such  a  work  we  are  debarred  on  account 
of — 1.  Its  difficulty.  It  seems  that  the  apostles  and  early  Christians  were  endowed 
with  a  pecuhar  gift  called  the  "  discerning  of  spirits,"  so  that  for  them  to  separate 
the  precious  from  the  vile  might  have  been  an  easy  matter.  We  do  not  know  what 
degree  of  imitation  is  compatible  with  a  total  absence  of  true  piety.  2.  Its  danger — 
"  Nay  ;  lest  while  ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root  up  also  the  wheat  with  them."  rV. 
An  liTPOBTANT  DECISION — "  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest ;  and  in  the 
time  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  the  reapers,  Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares,  and  bind 
them  in  bundles  to  bum  them;  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  bam."  But  con- 
cerning this  separation,  notice — 1.  The  period  when  it  will  take  place.  It  will  be  at 
••  the  time  of  harvest; "  which  harvest,  we  are  told,  is  the  end  of  the  world.  2.  The 
instruments  to  whom  the  work  will  be  committed — "  The  reapers  are  the  angels: " 
who  are  free  from  the  manifold  infirmities  by  which  we  are  now  encompassed — 
ignorance,  selfishness,  prejudice,  impatience,  partiality,  animosity.  3.  The  manner 
in  which  it  will  be  accomplished.  4.  The  final  results  which  will  follow — "  to  bam 
them:"    '♦My  bam."      (Expository  Outlines.)  The  parable  of  tlie  wheat  and 

the  tares: — This  parable  shows  that  persecution  npon  the  account  of  rehgion  is 
utterly  unlawful,  though  men  may  hold  grand  errors:  1.  Because  the  best  men 
on  earth  are  not  infalliblo.  They  do  not  know  but  that  what  they  call  heresy 
may  be  a  truth  of  Christ.  2.  Because  Jesus  Christ  is  only  the  King  and  Sovereign 
of  the  conscience.  None  ought  to  impose  upon  the  consciences  of  men  in  matters 
of  religion.  3.  Because  it  is  directly  contrary  to  that  golden  rule,  or  true 
moral  precept,  "Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  yon,  do  ye 
the  same  unto  them."  4.  Because  such  severities  have  no  tendency  to  con- 
vince the  conscience.  Believers  are  a  choice  people— choice  grain : — They  appear 
to  be  a  choice  and  precious  people,  and  are  so — 1.  Because  of  the  seed  from 
whence  they  sprang;  they  are  the  seed  of  God,  the  seed  of  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  11). 
2.  In  respect  of  that  holy  image  which  is  stamped  on  them.  3.  In  respect 
to  their  union  with  Christ.  4.  If  we  consider  what  an  excellent  spirit  they  are 
of,  and  how  they  walk  with  God  every  day,  and  have  communion  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  it  shows  they  are  a  precious  people  in  God's  esteem.  Why 
are  the  naints  compared  to  wheat  ? — 1.  Wheat  is  the  product  of  a  rare  and  choice 
seed ;  they  are  the  product  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  seed  of  wheat  must  first  be 
sown  in  the  earth  before  it  can  produce  increase,  so  must  the  seed  of  grace  be  first 
BOWE  in  men's  hearts  before  they  can  bear  God's  image  or  bring  forth  fruits  of  holi- 
ness,  3.  Wheat  is  a  profitable  sort  of  grain.  So  the  saints  and  people  of  God  are 
a  profitable  people  to  the  world  (Prov.  x.  21 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  19).  4.  Wheat  will  abide 
and  live  in  the  sharpest  winter,  when  some  other  grain  will  not.  So  true  believers  do 
abide,  endeavour,  and  live  in  the  times  of  sharpest  trials,  persecutions,  tribulations, 
and  temptations*  5.  Wheat  seems  sometimes  as  if  it  were  quite  dead,  you  can  in 
winter  hardly  see  one  green  blade,  so  the  saints  seem  sometimes  to  themselves  as  if 
they  were  almost  dead  (Psa.  Ixxxviii.  15).  6.  Wheat  is  sometimes,  by  reason  of 
tmseasonable  weather  in  the  spring,  very  sickly,  the  colour  being  changed.  So  in 
like  manner,  by  reason  of  Satan's  temptations,  and  the  corruptions  of  their  hearts, 
and  evils  of  the  times,  poor  believers  are  very  sickly  and  weak.  7.  Yet  when  the 
sun  sbines  sweetly  npon  wheat  and  God  pends  dry  and  seasonable  weather,  it 
wonderfully  on  a  sudden  revives  (Hos.  xiv.  7).  8.  Wheat  needs  weeding,  and  if  it 
be  not  it  will  soon  be  grown  over  with  weeds  (Matt.  xiii.  22).  9,  Full  ears  of  wheat 
hang  down  their  heads,  being  full  of  com.  So  sincere  believers  are  homble  and 
lowly-minded.  10.  Wheat  is  not  ripe  presently,  but  must  have  time  to  grow  to 
maturity,  and  receive  the  former  and  latter  rain  before  it  is  fit  for  the  sickle. 
11.   Tares  oft-times   are  found  to  grow  amongst  wheat,  which  tends  greatly  to 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  xm. 

mar  its  beauty.  12.  Vv'heat,  when  it  is  fully  ripe,  is  gathered  into  the  bam. 
So  when  Christ  sees  a  believer  is  ripe  for  heaven,  He  gathers  it  as  a  shock  of 
com  fully  ripe.  13.  Sometimes  a  harvest  seems  much  in  bulk,  but  there  is  but 
little  corn.  So  the  spiritual  harvest  may  seem  much  in  bulk — a  mighty  appearance 
of  a  great  harvest,  but  there  may  be  but  few  sincere  believers  amongst  them.  14. 
Wheat  dies  hrst,  before  it  rises.  "  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not 
quickened,  except  it  die."  While  men  slept  the  devil  sowed  his  evil  seed: — This 
may  caution  all  ministers  of  Christ  to  take  heed  and  watch,  lest  evil  seed  be 
sown  amongst  them,  the  seed  of  error  and  heresy.  1.  Many  may,  under  fair  pre- 
tence of  exaUiug  Christ,  sow  pernicious  and  poisonous  seed.  2.  By  way  of  council, 
beware  of  such  men  who  are  lifted  up  with  pride,  who  to  magnify  themselves  seem 
to  despise  others,  perhaps  more  worthy  than  themselves.  3.  Beware  of  such  that 
effect  novelty  and  strive  to  promote  new  notions  in  matters  of  religion.  4.  Likewise 
have  a  watchful  eye  of  such  that  cry  up  this  and  that  man,  and  cry  down  others. 
6.  Moreover,  watch  such  who  are  subject  to  wander  from  their  own  fold  and  pas- 
turage, and  such  also  that  are  ready  on  every  small  occasion  to  take  offence.  / 
will  show  you  hoic  the  wheat,  or  sincere  Christians,  ripen  for  the  harvest : — 1.  As  the 
wheat  after  it  is  sown  hath  the  ripening  time,  so  have  the  saints  and  people  of  God. 
2.  Wheat  ripens  gradually,  that  it  is  hardly  discerned ;  so  the  godly  ripen  gradually 
also,  it  is  hardly  discerned  by  themselves  or  others.  3.  Wheat  must  have  showers 
to  ripen  it.  So  must  the  saints  have  the  showers  of  Divine  and  heavenly  doctrine, 
or  spiritual  dew  to  ripen  them  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).  4.  Moreover,  believers  grow  and  ripen 
for  the  harvest  by  means  of  the  shining  and  sweet  fructifying  mflueuces  of  the  "  Sun 
of  Righteousness."  5.  Some  Christians  are  like  wheat  smitten  or  blasted  in  respect 
of  their  hope,  peace,  and  joy,  and  so  seem  to  languish  {Amos  iv.  9).  What  should 
a  believer  do  to  ripen  for  the  harvest  f — 1.  Improve  all  opportunities,  ah  seasons  of 
grace.  2.  Observe  well  and  cherish  all  those  convictions  of  your  consciences,  and 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  either  in  respect  of  sin  or  duty,  lest  ye  sin  them  away.  3. 
Improve  all  the  dispensations  and  providences  of  God,  or  those  various  trials,  afiSic- 
tions,  and  temptations  you  meet  with.  4.  Live  much  in  the  sense  and  thoughts  of 
death  and  of  the  judgment  day  (Deut.  xxxii.  29).  5.  See  that  you  gather  day  by 
day,  get  more  strength  against  sin.  6.  Labour  to  add  to  your  faith  virtue 
(2  Peter  1.  5,  6,  7).  7.  The  way  to  ripen  for  heaven  is  to  strive  against  all  those 
things  that  hinder  or  obstruct  your  growth,  as  thorns  and  briars  (Matt.  xiii.  22). 
I  shall  slum  you  how  the  tares,  or  the  wicked,  npenfor  the  harvest  of  sorrow : — 1. 
Mercies  not  improved,  but  slighted  and  neglected,  ripen  the  wicked  apace  for  harvest. 
2.  When  conscience  is  disregarded,  men  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  those  checks  and 
sharp  rebukes  they  find  in  their  own  breasts,  this  tends  to  ripen  them  for  ruin.  3. 
When  the  judgments  of  God,  instead  of  suftening,  harden  the  sinner.  4.  Wlien  the 
motions  of  the  Spirit  in  His  common  operations  (Gen.  vi.  3)  are  quenched 
(Rom.  ix.  22).  5.  The  tares,  or  wicked  men,  ripen  for  the  harvest  by  letting  lusts 
conceive  in  them.  6.  Another  gradation  or  progressive  motion  to  ripening  sirmers 
is  when  lusts  conceived  break  forth  into  acts,  or  the  abominable  commission  thereof 
(James  i.  15).  7.  A  third  step  is  when  sins,  yea,  great  sins,  are  extenuated  and 
rendered  small.  8.  When  sin  is  delighted  in  ;  some  men  take  pleasure  in  wicked- 
ness. 9.  When  they  are  told  of  their  sins  and  hellish  polution,  and  they  plead 
excuses  as  if  the  fault  was  not  theirs.  10.  Such  men  are  certainly  ripe  for  harvest 
who  are  found  glorying  in  tlieir  sin  and  shame  ;Phil.  iii.  19).  Lastly,  a  hardened 
heart,  a  seared  conscience,  final  unbelief  and  impenitence  follows,  and  so  they  come 
to  be  fully  ripe  for  the  harvest.  /  shall  show  you  how  fitly  the  eiid  of  the  world 
viay  be  compared  to  Jutrvest : — 1.  The  harvest  is  the  time  that  the  husbandman 
longs  for,  and  hath  much  patience  until  it  cometh.  So  this  spiritual  harvest  is  the 
day  which  all  the  godly  long  for,  and  are  exercised  with  patience  under  all  their 
trials  until  it  comes.  2.  When  the  harvest  is  fully  ripe  then  both  the  wheat  and 
tares  are  severed  one  from  another  by  the  servants  of  the  husbandman.  So  all 
■incere  Christians  and  hypocrites  shall,  by  the  angels,  be  separated  one  frorn  another. 
8.  When  the  harvest  is  fully  ended  there  is  no  more  wheat  or  tares  growing,  or  to 
be  found  in  the  field.  So  when  this  world  is  ended  there  will  be  no  people,  either 
godly  or  wicked,  to  be  found  to  live  as  they  do  together  now  in  this  world,  any 
more.  4.  Harvest  is  a  time  of  great  joy  to  an  industrious  husbandman,  but  the 
sluggard  meets  then  with  great  disappointment,  and  is  perplexed  with  grief  and 
sorrow  (Gal.  vi.  8).  Horo  shall  the  tares  be  known  from  the  wheat,  or  hypocrites 
be  discerned  from  sincere  believers  at  the  end  of  tlie  world  t—l.  The  tares  shall 
be  known  by  their  contemptible  bodies— th   r  bodies  shall  not  be  glorious  as  the 


CHAP.  xin.J  ST.  MAT'THEW.  S7S 

bodies  of  the  saints,  (Phil.  iii.  21).  2.  The  ungodly  will  be  known  by  their 
company — the  saints  shall  be  attended  by  all  the  glorious  angels.  3.  The  wicked 
will  be  known  by  their  cries  and  lamentations  (Isa.  Ixv.  14.)  4.  The  ungodly 
will  that  day  be  known  by  that  signal  act  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  xxv.  22). 
6.  Moreover,  it  will  be  known  by  the  different  placing  of  the  one  and  the  other — "  and 
He  shall  set  the  sheep  on  His  right  hand,  the  goats  on  His  left."  (B.  Keach.)  The 
tares : — This  parable  does  not  forbid  Church  discipUne :  1.  Because  Church  dis- 
cipline  is  enjoined  by  many  plain  passages  of  the  New  Testament,  and  that  no  inter- 
pretation of  any  parable  may  be  put  against  that.  2.  Discipline  rightly  understood 
is  for  the  saving  of  a  man  to  the  Church,  and  not  for  the  casting  of  him  out  of  it. 
3.  What  the  parable  here  recommends  is  not  so  much  the  following  of  a  certain 
eourse  as  the  cultivation  of  a  certain  spirit.  I.  Do  as  we  will,  wk  shall  neveb  get 
■viL  BNTiRBLT  OUT  OF  THE  Chcrch — the  ideal  Church  is  in  heaven  (Rev.  xxi.  27). 
This  truth  has  a  two-fold  lessoA.  1.  It  is  well  fitted  to  comfort  those  who  are 
labouring  in  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  and  to  all  who  are  tenderly  solicitous  for 
the  honour  of  the  Church.  2.  It  is  calculated  to  correct  the  error  of  those  who 
decline  to  enter  into  the  membership  of  the  Church  because  it  is  not  absolutely 
pure.     II.  The  great  lesson  taught  us  is  that  the  bash  attempt  to  sbpabate  thb 

OOOD  rSOM  THE  BAD  IN  THE  ChURCH  MAT  BESDLT  IN  A  STATE  OF  THINGS  THAT  IS  WOBSB 
THAN  THAT  WHICH  18  SOUGHT  TO  BE  AMENDED.  Ill,  At  TH3  LAST  JUDGMENT  THEBB 
WILL  BE  AN  ABSOLUTE  SEPABATION  BETWEEN  THB  GOOD  AND  THE  BAD.       {W.    M,    TaylOT, 

D.D.)  A  rash  zeal  for  amendment  injurious : — The  best  all  round  is  often  lost  by 
attempting  to  have  the  absolute  best  in  any  one  department.  In  the  organ,  if  every 
note  be  separately  tuned  up  to  the  scale,  discord  will  be  the  effect  when  one  attempts 
to  play  upon  it ;  for  it  is  an  imperfect  instrument,  and  most  of  the  fifths  must  be 
left  somewhat  flat,  and  the  few  others  made  somewhat  sharp,  the  octaves  alone 
being  put  in  perfect  unison.  So,  if  we  attempt  to  bring  up  the  music  to  the  point 
of  perfection,  we  shall  most  likely  put  the  whole  church  out  of  tune.  We  must  make 
the  best  of  things  as  a  whole,  and  be  content  sometimes  with  a  little  less  in  some 
departments,  and  a  httle  more  in  others,  in  order  that  we  may  have  harmony  in  all. 
Peace  in  a  church  is  essential  to  progress.  (Ihid.)  The  mixed  state  of  society  : — 1. 
It  is  apt  to  make  the  darnel  think  itself  as  good  as  the  wheat.  2.  The  urgency  of  the 
call  to  Christ  is  deadened  by  the  fact  that  we  are  not  treated  differently  at  present. 
8.  The  wheat  is  apt  to  think  itself  no  better  than  the  darnel.  (Dr.  M.  Dods.) 
Likeness  of  wheat  and  tares  : — If  by  tares  is  meant  the  bearded  darnel  of  our  Eng- 
lish fields,  then  the  tares  and  the  wheat  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  each  other. 
They  both  belong  to  the  tribe  of  grasses,  and  to  the  special  group  Triticinoe,  or 
wheat-hke  grasses.  Their  structure,  mode,  and  conditions  of  growth  are  almost 
the  same ;  when  in  the  blade  they  present  an  appearance  so  very  similar,  that  the 
Jewish  fanner,  who  is  careful  in  weeding  his  field,  cannot  distinguish  between  them, 
and  it  is  only  when  the  fruit  is  formed  that  the  impostor  is  detected  by  its  smaller 
and  darker  ear.  (Hugh  Macmillan.)  Mixture  of  tares  and  wheat: — Adam's 
family  was  the  one,  and  the  only  one  visible  Church  for  a  time.  Therein  there  was 
a  Cain,  as  well  as  an  Abel ;  both  sacrificed,  though  both  were  not  sanctified.  In 
Abraham's  family  (a  visible  Church)  there  was  an  Ishmael,  as  well  as  an  Isaac :  in 
Isaac's  house  an  Esau  as  well  as  a  Jacob.  Among  the  patriarchs,  Simeon  and 
Levi,  with  Joseph  and  Benjamin.  In  Noah's  ark  (a  type  of  the  Chur<>.h),  there  was 
iHam;  among  the  apostles,  a  Judas ;  among  the  deacons,  a  Nicholas.  (Bishop 
Thomas.)  The  end  of  the  world: — The  end  is  not  a  mere  running  down  of  the 

machinery  that  keeps  the  world  going,  it  is  not  8  mere  exhaustion  of  the  life  that 
keeps  us  all  alive,  it  is  not  a  hap-hazard  cutting  of  the  thread ;  it  is  a  conclusion, 
eoming  aa  truly  in  its  own  fit  day  and  order,  as  much  in  the  fulness  of  time  and 
because  things  are  ripe  for  it,  as  the  birth  of  Christ  came.  It  is  the  time  of  the 
gathering  up  of  aU  things  to  completion,  when  the  few  last  finishing  strokes  are 
given  to  the  works  that  suddenly  show  the  connection  of  things  which  seem  widely 
separate,  and  reveal  at  once  the  purpose  and  meaning  of  the  whole.  Men  will  then 
nnderstand,  what  now  scarcely  one  can  constantly  believe,  that  it  is  God's  purpose 
that  is  silently  being  accompUshed,  and  that  it  is  usefulness  to  Him  that  is  the  final 
standard  of  value.  (Marcus  Dods.)  Blending  of  wicked  with  godly  : — Six  reasons 
why  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  wicked  men  should  be  inseparably  mingled  with  godly. 
1.  Because  hypocrites  can  never  be  severed  but  by  Him  that  can  search  the  heart. 
8.  Because  if  men  should  make  the  separation  weak  Christians  would  be  counted 
no  Christians,  and  those  who  have  a  grain  of  grace  under  a  load  of  imperfections 
woo^d  be  accounted  reprobates.    3.  Because  God's  vessels  of  honour  for  sdl  etemitjr 

IS 


174  TUE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  jnx. 

not  an  yet  appearing,  bnt  wallonnnp;  in  Bin,  wouM  bo  made  caHtawayn.  4.  Becaasa 
Go'l,  by  the  mixture  of  the  wifkcd  with  the  K^xlly,  will  try  the  watchfulneHB  and 
patience  of  IIIh  nervantH.  6.  Because  thereVjy  He  will  hf^stow  many  favoara  on  th« 
wicked,  to  clettr  HIh  juHtice  and  render  them  the  more  inexcuHable.  6.  BecanBe  the 
mixture  of  the  wicked,  (jrieving  the  godly,  will  make  them  the  more  heartily  pray 
for  the  day  of  judfjment.  {A.  Fuller.)  Hcparate  bundles  of  tares: — HinnerH  of  the 
ume  Hort  will  be  bundled  together  in  the  great  day:  a  bundle  of  atheiatfl,  a  bundle 
of  epi'-ureg,  a  bundle  of  pernecnforB,  and  a  groat  bundle  of  hypocriteH.  ThoBe  who 
have  been  aHH'jciated  in  Bin  will  be  go  in  Hharne  and  Bf>rrow,  and  it  will  be  an  ap'gra- 
vation  of  their  rniHcry,  aB  the  Bociety  of  glorified  Haintfl  will  add  to  their  blisa. 
{Mdttliew  Henry.)  Difficulty  of  rifihtjmlfjment  in  nociety : — Ah  we  grow  np  in  society 
iog'ither,  one  man  is  in  the  main  very  like  another.  Of  two  of  your  friends,  it  may 
bo  the  one  who  makea  least  profenHion  of  nligion  that  yon  would  go  to  in  a 
diflionlty  in  which  much  genorouH  holp  and  toil  are  necfled.  Take  a  regiment  of 
soldiers,  or  a  ship's  crew,  and  you  may  find  the  ungodly  as  brave  and  Belf-Bacrificing 
in  action,  as  observant  of  discipline  as  the  othfira.  Thr  re  may  be  little  to  ahow  that 
there  is  a  railical  diCferenr^  in  cliaracter.  {Marcus  l)od».)  Separating  tarenfrom 
ipheat: — The  most  tronblesome  of  the  for»igM  Feeds  in  wheat  are  the  tares  (the 
weed  commonly  called  darnel,  and  in  botnny  Lolium  t'-mertulum).  Its  kenielB  are 
Bomewhat  smaller  than  those  of  wheat,  and  the  uaual  way  to  separate  them  is  that 
adopted  by  the  women,  who  sit  at  homo  with  the  cliildren  around  a  pile  of  wheat 
and  patiently  pick  out  the  tares  one  by  one.  (Van  Lennep.)  Sowing  taren  in 
malice: — Illustrating  from  Hinrloo  life,  Kobert-?  saya,  "  This  is  still  literally  done  in 
the  Eaat.  Hee  that  lurking  villain,  watching  for  the  time  when  his  neighbour  shall 
plough  his  field ;  he  carefully  marka  the  period  when  the  work  has  been  finished, 
and  cxsts  in  wliat  the  natives  call  pandlnellu,  that  is  pig-paddy  ;  this,  being  of  rapid 
growtli,  springs  up  before  the  good  seed,  and  scatters  itself  before  the  other  can  be 
reaped,  bo  that  the  poor  owner  of  the  field  will  be  years  before  he  can  yet  rid  of 
this  tronblesome  weed.  But  tliere  is  ancjther  noinome  plant,  called  pcrum-pirav/li, 
which  is  more  destructive  of  vegetation  than  anv  other  plant.  Has  a  man  pur- 
ehased  a  field  out  of  the  hands  of  another?  The  oileuded  says,  *I  will  plant 
perum-pirandi  in  his  grounds.' " 

Vers.  81,  82.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  1b  like  to  a  g^raln  of  mustard  seed, — 
The  mwttard  teed: — I.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  in  tiik  wour<n  is  like  a  mustard  seed 
Bown  in  the  ground,  both  in  the  amallncBB  of  its  begmning  and  the  greatness  of  its 
increase.  The  first  promise  given  at  the  gate  of  Eden  contained  the  gospel  as  a 
seed  wjntaina  the  tree.  Never  to  human  eye  did  the  seed  seem  emaller  than  at  the 
coming  of  Christ;  the  infant  in  a  manrer.  II.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  in  a  ncMAif 
HEABT  is  like  a  mustard  seed,  both  in  the  smallncss  of  its  beginning  and  the  great- 
nosfl  of  its  Incrf-ase.  In  the  design  of  God  moral  qualities  hobJ  the  first  place, 
physical  magnitude  is  subordinate  and  instrumental.  Origin  imperceptible,  result 
great,  Bruall  on  earf.h,  it  will  be  great  in  heaven.  From  the  diminutive  life  of  grace, 
the  life  of  glory  will  grow.  The  kingdom  of  darkness  also  grows  gradually  from 
email  to  great ;  tiie  first  sin  a  small  seed.  {W.  Arnot.)  A  great  growth  from  a 
anuill  seed: — The  ofieration  of  tlie  same  law  may  be  observed  in  later  ages.  In  the 
Popish  convent  at  Erfurt  a  studious  young  monk  sits  alone  in  his  cell,  earnestly 
examinitg  an  ancient  r<<"ord.  The  student  is  Luther,  and  the  book  the  Bible.  Hit 
has  road  many  books  before,  but  his  reading  has  never  made  him  wretched  till  now. 
In  other  books  he  saw  other  people ;  but  in  this  book  for  the  first  time  he  saw  him- 
self. Ilia  own  nin,  when  conscience  was  quickened  and  enlightened  to  discern  it, 
became  a  burden  heavier  than  he  could  bear.  For  a  time  he  waa  in  a  horror  of 
great  darkness ;  but  when  at  last  he  found  ••  the  righteousness  which  is  of  Ood  by 
faitii,"  he  grew  hopeful,  happy,  and  strong.  Here  ia  a  living  seed,  but  it  is  very 
ftmall :  an  awakened,  exercised,  conscientious,  believing  monk,  ia  an  imperceptible 
atom  which  superstitious  multitudes,  and  despotic  princes,  and  a  perfecuting  priest- 
hood will  overlay  and  smother,  aa  the  heavy  furrow  covers  the  microscopic  mustard- 
iieed.  But  the  living  seed  burst,  and  sprang,  and  pierced  through  all  these  coverings. 
How  great  it  grow  and  how  far  it  spread  history  tells  today.  We  have  cause  to 
thank  Ood  for  the  grealness  of  the  Jl-formation,  and  to  rebuke  oursolveH  for  its 
smallnesa.     {Ihid.)  Tlie  grain  of  mustard  seed: — I.  We  are  taught  by  nature 

that  email  beginnings  are,  nnder  God,  productive  of  great  ends.  II.  We  are  taughl 
it  in  the  kingdom  of  providence.  111.  We  are  taught  it  in  the  kingdom  of  p'raoe. 
Ib  the  change  produced  upon  the  human  heart.    In  the  progrevs  of  the  goepel 


CHAP,  xni.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  VJt 

(Psa.  Ixxii.  16).  (J.  Campbell.)  The  mustard  teed: — The  kingdom  of  heaven. 
I.  Its  pbesent  apparent  insiomificanck.  IL  Its  vitality.  III.  Its  f0tup.b 
6BANDEUB.  It  might  seem  less  likely  to  prevail  and  to  become  a  universal  benefit, 
than  some  other  contemporary  systems  or  influences.  Christ,  as  a  Jew,  belonged 
to  the  exclusive  people.  He  was  rejected  by  His  own  people.  The  few  who  were 
attached  to  Him  misunderstood  His  teaching.  After  the  resurrection  His  kingdom 
became  slightly  more  visible.  But  our  Lord  was  confident  even  under  adverse 
oontlitions ;  His  truth  was  of  the  nature  of  a  seed.  What  is  the  vital  element  in 
Christianity  but  the  wisdom  and  beauty  of  His  teaching.  Not  the  holiness  of  Hit 
life,  or  the  love  He  showed,  but  the  revelation  of  God  in  Him  which  draws  men 
to  Him  ;  in  His  death  our  Lord  points  to  the  eventual  greatness  of  His  kingdom. 
It  has  indeed  become  a  tree.  To  all  disheartened  in  work  ;  we  must  not  measure 
work  by  size  but  by  vitality.  Have  we  joined  the  Church  because  it  is  large  or 
because  it  id  living.    (JLf.  Doda,  D.D.) 

Ver.  83.  The  kingdom  of  beaven  la  like  unto  leaven. — The  parable  of  the  leaven  t 

I.   Tmt  POWEB  WHICH  IS  TO   BA18E   MAN   MUST   00MB   PROM  WITHOUT. — '♦  Took  leaveU." 

It  is  assumed  that  man  needs  raising,  and  this  is  possible  only  through  the  intro. 
dnction  from  without  of  an  energy  distinctly  Divine.      Humanity  has  no  sell- 
leavening  power.    I  would  ask  those  who  imagine  that  we  need  no  oelential  leaven 
to  raise  us  how  long  our  moral  elevation  as  a  people  would  continue  if  the  influences 
which  come  from  the  Bible  could  be  shot  oflff    U.  That  the  leaven  must  bi 
LODGED  AND  woBK  WITHIN.    The  leaveu  was  hidden  in  the  meal.     This  denotes  that 
the  mysterious  element  which  possesses  such  penetrative  powers  is  for  a  time  con- 
cealed from  sight.     The  chief  mischief  connected  with  man  lies  within.     Many 
systems  of  reformation  proceed  on  the  supposition  that  the  unhappy  condition  of 
man  is  external,  not  in  himself,  but  in  his  circumstances.     But  vice  is  not  confined 
to  slums.    The  chief  elements  of  man's  degradation  are  ignorance,  selfishness,  and 
misery ;  these  are  within  a  man,  and  can  be  counteracted  only  by  that  which  shall 
work  within.    III.  The  penetrative  and  diffusive  power  of  this  leaven.     It 
spread  till  the  whole  was  leavened.    This  it  does  because  it  is  leaven,  and  works 
according  to  the  law  of  its  own  essence.     It  was  not  leavened  in  an  instant,  but  by 
gradual  infection  ;  an  emblem  of  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  the  soul.     Professors 
do  not  become  perfect  all  at  once.     Religion  operates  from  individual  to  individual. 
Where  leaven  is  at  work  it  will  be  felt.     It  works  amidst  seeming  improbabilities. 
(E.  Mellor,  D.D.)        Leaven  a  hiddtn  force  : — It  was  hidden  ;  so  liidden  that  those 
who  will  believe  in  nothing  but  what  tl)ey  see  migLt  doubt  whether  it  was  there  at 
all.     It  was  hidden  but  not  lost ;  hidden  that  it  might  not  be  lost ;  hidden  that  its 
searching  and  diffusive  energy  might  be  tested  and  revealed.     From  this  feature  of 
the  parable  we  not  only  do  not  shrink,  but  we  give  to  it  the  utmost  possible  pro- 
minence.     It  holds  strict  analogy  with  the  great  fact  that  the  mightiest  forces  in 
the  world  are  all  lodged,  if  I  may  so  speak,  out  of  sight,  and  work  outwards,  and 
upwards,  and  downwards  from  their  deep  home  of  mystery.     The  chief  Worker- 
He  without  whom  no  one  and  nothing  could  work  at  all — "  hideth  Himself,"  so 
that  no  eye  hath  seen  Him,  or  can  se)^  Him.    From  His  secret  pavilion  He  sustains 
all  the  forces  of  the  universe,  whether  they  be  mechanical  or  vital,  and  yet  His 
Hand  is  never  seen.     The  leaven  of  man  himself — that  leaven  without  which  there 
would  be  no  man — his  soul,  is  hidden.     How  hidden,  we  know  not ;  where  hidden, 
ws  know  not ;  but  it  is  hidden,  and,  amid  all  the  marvels  of  its  working,  is  never 
seen.    No  eye  hath  seen  man  at  any  time,  any  more  than  it  has  seen  God.     {Ilnd.) 
Leaven  a  living  force  : — The  yeast  used  in  making  bread  ia  by  no  means  the  dead, 
inoperative  thing  it  seems.    It  is  a  plant  as  much  alive  as  the  snowdrop  that  has 
just  burst  its  way  through  the  soil,  and  foretold  by  its  graceful  bell  the  coming  of 
the  spring.    It  is  a  vegetable  growth,  of  enormous  energy  for  its  size,  multiplying 
itself  at  a  rate  incredible  to  any  but  the  scientific  mind  ;  feeding  its  active  life,  as 
it  grows  from  spot  to  spot,  npon  the  material  into  which  it  has  been  introduced, 
antil  there  is  nothing  left  for  it  to  feed  upon  and  assimilate  to  itself.     The  change 
it  effects  in  its  progress  is  described  by  the  chemist  as  a  decomposition  of  the  sugar 
contained  in  the  dough,  and  a  liberation  of  carbonic  aoid ;  but  the  principal  fact 
revealed  by  the  microscope  is  that  you  have  a  congregation  of  living  cells,  gathered 
about  a  living  central  nucleus,  all  charged  to  the  full  with  that  subtle  and  snprema 
force,  which  we,  in  our  ignorance,  call  lite.  Like  that,  says  Christ,  is  the  kingdoia 
of  heaven — the  rule  of  a  living  presence,  of  a  living  God.     The  gospel  is  the  puwer 
of  God  at  work  for  the  salvation  of  souls.    Christianity  is  itself  a  living,  breathinf 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm, 

presence,  cot  a  mere  dull,  dead  thing ;  a  life.  It  is  characteristic  of  leaven  to  show 
an  almost  insatiable  greed  of  activity.  It  is  a  type  of  stupendous  increase.  With 
a  rapidity  that  is  marvellous,  it  passes  on  from  particle  to  particle  of  the  meal  in 
which  it  is  placed,  until  the  last  stroke  of  work  is  done.  Give  it  an  appropriate 
temperature,  and  favourable  materials,  and  an  express  engine  will  stop  sooner  than 
it.  In  no  point  is  the  teacher's  simile  better  sustained  by  facts  than  in  the  un- 
speakable and  irrepressible  activity  of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  living  force  :  and  action 
is  essential  to  its  life,  as  air  is  to  the  life  of  man.  Only  with  tremendous  difficulty 
can  it  be  checked.  (<7.  Clifford,  M.A.)  Christianity,  like  leaven,  works  in  a 
congenial  and  much  assisting  sphere : — It  is  hid,  according  to  Christ's  parable, 
in  MEAL,  not  amongst  stones  on  which  it  could  have  no  efiect,  not  amongst 
iron-<iling3  where  a  magnet  would  be  better  placed,  not  in  the  earth  where  seeds 
would  get  better  nourishment ;  but  in  meal ;  in  that  material  which  has  an 
affinity  for  it,  and  upon  which  it  is  specially  fitted  to  act.  The  leaven  is  placed 
where  it  is  wanted,  where  it  can  work,  and  where  it  can  work  with  success. 
Leaven  is  not  better  suited  to  work  in  meal  than  Christ  in  men's  hearts  for 
their  salvation.  (Ibid.)  Leaven  an  assimilating  force : — The  portion  of  dough 
taken  as  a  ferment,  and  inserted  within  the  three  measures  of  meal,  makes  that 
meal  Uke  itself,  subjugates  it,  and  impresses  its  own  character  upon  it,  pene- 
trating it  totally,  and  assimilates  its  nature  to  its  own.  It  is  not  simply  that 
it  touches  particle  after  particle  of  the  flour,  as  water  might  do — that  would  only 
make  a  paste ;  or  comes  into  contact  with  the  whole  meal,  as  a  hand  might 
do^that  would  simply  move  it  without  altering  it ;  but  it  really  puts  its  own  life 
into  the  meal  and  penetrates  it  with  its  living  nature  from  centre  to  circumfer- 
ence. It  is  in  the  nature  of  leaven  to  make  all  the  meal  like  itself ;  eo  it  is  in  the 
nature  of  the  gospel  to  Christianize  those  who  receive  it;  i.e.,  Christ  subjugates, 
penetrates,  and  assimilates  the  believer  to  Himself.  He  puts  His  life  into  each 
part  of  him  ;  (1)  the  life  of  His  thoughts  into  his  thinking,  so  that  every  thought  is 
brought  into  captivity  to  Christ ;  (2)  the  Ufe  of  His  love  into  his  heart,  so  that  he  is 
unselfish  and  beneficent ;  (3)  the  life  of  His  righteoupness  into  his  conscience,  so  that 
the  law  of  right  is  his  rule ;  (4)  the  life  of  His  obedience  into  his  will,  so  that  it  is 
his  meat  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father.  (Ibid.)  The  parable  of  the  leaven  : — "We 
learn — I.  God  employs  human  agency  fob  the  conversion  op  the  soul.     II.  To 

OUTWABD  APPEABANCE,  THE  MEANS  ARE  VERY  UNLIKELY  AND  INSIGNIFICANT.  III.  ThB 
change  PRODUCED  18  RADICAL,  GRADUAL,  FINAL,  AND  MANIFEST.  IV.  FaVOURABLB 
CIRCUMSTANCES  ARE  NECESSARY   FOB  THE   LEAVEN  TO  WORK  SUCCE88FULY.      {A.  Griffin.) 

The  law  of  "  leaven  "  has  signally  characterized  the  entire  history  of  the  "  kingdom 
of  heaven'  in  the  world : — The  leaven  illustrates — I.  The  history  of  God's  bevel.\tion 
TO  MAN.  II.  The  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  III.  The  history  of  opinions 
or  doctrines.  IV.  The  history  of  iNLrviDUAL  conversions.  1.  Do  not  despise  the 
day  of  small  things.  2.  Infer  hope  for  the  world.  (J.  M,  Sherwood.)  A  symbol 
of  Christianity :  —I.  Chp.istianity  is  beally  alive.    II.  Christianity  is  at  wobk 

AS  WELL  AS  ALIVE.  HI.  CHRISTIANITY,  LIKE  LEAVEN,  WOBKS  IN  A  CONGENIAL  AND  MUCH 
assisting   8PHEBE,      IV.   ThE  MOST   DISTINGUISHED   FEATURE  IS  THAT  IT  LEAVENS  TH» 

MEAL  IN  THE  MIDST  OP  WHICH  IT  IS  PLACED.  So  the  most  characteristic  effect  of 
Christianity  is  that  it  Christianizes  men  ;  it  assimilates  them  to  Christ  by  filling 
them  with  the  life  of  Christ.  V.  The  leaven  is  hidden  in  the  meal,  and  all  thb 
WORK  IT  DOES,  IT  DOES  8ECBETLT.  Chxist's  bcst,  most  real,  and  most  powerful  work, 
is  always  unseen.  VI.  But  it  advances  victoriously  and  totally.  {J.  Clifford, 
M.A.,  LL.B.,  B.Sc).  This  parable  represents — I.  The  penetrating  power  of 
Divine  grace.  The  grace  of  God  is  a  vital  and  holy  force.  II.  The  mystekious 
power  of  Divine  grace.  The  grace  of  God  is  imparted  to  the  soul.  But  is 
imperceptible  in  the  soul.  III.  The  transforming  power  of  Divine  grace.  Th« 
grace  of  God  works  slowly,  successfully.  (J.  T.  Woodhouse.)  Children  to  b« 
educated,  not  ordy  in  the  truth,  hut  for  its  diffusion : — This  parable  describes  the  pro- 
gressive influence  of  the  truth  of  God  within  the  heart,  and  also  without  in  the 
world.  Leaven  woiks  strongly,  so  does  the  Word  on  the  thoughts  and  feeUngs. 
It  works  silently  ;  so  does  the  gospel  secretly  diffuse  its  influence  through  the  soul. 
Leaven  works  permanently,  imparting  qualities  which  remain  fixed  in  the  substance 
which   it  penetrates.      I.  The  Bible  states  that    the   whole  wobld  is   to  bi 

LEAVENED  BY  THE  TBUTH  OF  GoD  (Psa.  Xxii.  27,  28).  II.  ThB  BiBLB  WHICH  CON- 
TAINS this  heavenly  TBUTH  is  admirably  fitted  fob  UNIVERSAL  DIFFUSION.       1.    It  If 

a  Divine  anthority.  2.  It  speaks  to  the  heart  of  man.  3.  It  prescribes  to  man  hii 
duty  in  every  possible  station  and  relation  in  which  he  can  be  placed.    4.  It  is  a 


OHAP.  xin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  277 

bond  of  union.     5.  It  inspires  and  fills  the  heart  with  hope.     III.  Little  has  yei 

BKEX  DONE  FOB  LEAVENING  THE  WORLD  WITH  TEUTH.  IV.  WhY  HAS  NOT  MORE  BEEN 
DONE  FOR  THE  LEAVENINO  OF  THE  WORLD  WITH  TRUTH.  V.  HoW  SHALL  WE  PRS- 
PABE  TO  DO  MORE  THAN  HAS  TET  BEEN  DONE  FOB  LEATENINO  THE  WORLD  WITH 

TRUTH.  VI.  Never  will  the  Chorch  make  successful  effort  for  the  leaven- 
ing OF  the  would  with  truth  until  every  child  under  heb  care  be  educated 
with  a  view  to  this  noble  object.  {W.  B.  Kirkpatrick.)  I.  The  elements 
which  are  HEBE  BROUGHT  TOGETHEB.  1.  The  first  of  thsse  may  be  considered  as 
representing  human  nature.  The  parable  represents  the  possibility  of  man's 
restoration.  2.  The  second  element  used  in  this  parable  may  be  regarded  aa  an 
emblem  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel,  when  compared  to  the  world,  exhibits  an  amaz- 
ing disproportion  (1)  as  to  quantity.  The  leaven  is  small  in  proportion  to  the 
meal.  The  small  origin  of  the  gospel  in  contrast  with  the  mighty  change  effected 
by  it ;  (2)  the  contrast  as  to  quality.  There  is  a  natural  adaptation  in  the  one 
element  to  the  other,  tke  one  is  moist,  the  other  dry ;  this  is  favourable  to  the 
process.  So  in  the  gospel  there  is  moral  adaptation.  (3)  A  contrast  as  to  their 
influence.  We  might  despise  the  hiding  of  the  leaven  as  trivial ;  but  the  result  is 
Been.  The  progress  of  the  gospel  irresistible.  II.  The  mode  of  operation  bt 
WHICH  THIS  RESULT  ENSUES.  1.  These  elements  must  be  brought  into  actual  con- 
tact. 2.  The  operation  is  gradual.  3.  It  is  invisible.  4.  It  is  irresistible.  III.  Thb 
FINAL  PROQBBBS  AND  TRIUMPH  OP  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  That  all  aualogy  leads  us  to  expect 
its  universal  progress.  2.  This  is  the  purpose  of  God.  3.  This  is  the  burden  of 
prophecy.  4.  The  musings  of  holy  men  on  the  future  glory  of  the  Church  point  in  this 
direction.  5.  The  prayers  of  the  pious  refer  to  this  event.  6.  This  result  is  highly 
desirable.  7.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  fettered  by  no  analogy,  His  influence  may  be 
signally  exerted.  (T.  StnWi.)  Christianity  an  iuipartation,  not  an  evolution : — The 
kingdom,  then,  is  not  an  off-shoot  from  the  world,  but  some  sort  of  an  importation 
ioto  it :  not  an  outgo,  but  an  income.  It  is  a  new  ingredient  put  into  society.  The 
woman  put  the  yeast  into  the  dough ;  the  dough  did  not  develop  the  yeast.  Scripture 
is  everywhere  consistent  with  this  representation.  History  did  not  produce  Christ :  He 
eame  into  the  world  from  beyond  and  above.  The  Law,  too,  came  into  the  world  ;  it 
was  not  a  Mosaic  transplant  from  Egypt,  but  entered  the  world  at  the  point  where 
Sinai  and  the  sky  meet.  The  whole  series  of  communicationg  from  Eden  to 
Patmos  is  consistently  exhibited  as  so  much  importation.  Our  own  experience, 
too,  has  something  to  say  in  the  same  line.  We  are  succumbing  every  day  to 
influences  that  are  not  set  down  in  the  books.  A  world  of  unseen  facts  and  forces 
lies  against  us  as  the  sea  lies  against  the  shore.  What  we  call  conscience  is  no 
barren  discernment  between  what  is  bad  and  what  is  good ;  it  is  the  organ  through 
which  the  nnseeu  comes  near  to  as  and  becomes  within  ns  both  as  a  consciousness 
and  a  power.  We  are  not  left  alone,  or  let  alone.  O  God,  Thy  Kingdom  comes  I 
It  does  come,  keep  coming.  An  eye  peeps  in  at  the  skyhght.  Impalpable  fingers 
tap  at  the  window  and  knock  at  the  door.  The  sky  mixes  itself  with  the  ground, 
the  sea  stiimmers  under  the  hght  of  the  stars,  and  the  meal  stirs  and  is  made  quick 
at  the  touch  of  the  entering  leaven.  {C.  H,  Parkhurst,  D.D.)  The  loork  of 
Christianity  will  be  complete  : — I  do  not  know  that  anything  exact  is  denoted  by 
the  three  measures.  It  may  refer  to  the  totaUty  of  the  race  as  represented  by  the 
three  sons  of  Noah  by  whom  the  earth  was  peopled ;  or  perhaps  to  the  totality  of 
the  individual  man  as  composed  of  body,  mind,  and  spirit.  At  any  rate,  this 
threefoldness  points,  as  usual,  to  eutireness  and  completeness.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  has  come  on  earth  to  stay  and  to  work  a  whole  work.  This  irresistibleness 
is  a  ground  of  vast  encouragement.  To  be  sure  this  force  is  one  that  works 
stealthily.  We  do  not  see  the  processes.  God  constructs  the  machinery  of  event 
as  we  make  clocks,  with  all  the  pinions  and  a3des  packed  in  behind  the  dial-plate. 
We  see  the  pendulum  swing,  but  we  do  not  think  of  it  as  result,  because  we  do  not 
see  the  weight  that,  with  cunning  indirection,  is  all  the  time  pulling  at  the  pen- 
dulum. .  .  .  We  must  be  careful  not  to  underrate  the  influences  that  work  without 
show  or  noise.  The  nnseeu  and  the  auheard  really  make  out  a  good  deal  mora 
than  half  the  universe.  .  .  .  Christianity  is  not  a  matter  of  places  and  days,  rites 
and  observances ;  it  is  a  matter  of  having  the  leaven  of  God  to  work  in  us  that  we 
shall  be  gentle  and  pure,  unselfish  and  sympathetic  as  God  is.  And  men  haT« 
made  at  least  a  commencement  towards  becoming  so.  It  is  not  natural  for  men 
to  devote  their  time  to  others'  interests.  But  more  and  more  time  is  being  devoted 
in  this  way,  and  money  too,  which  means  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  gaining 
a  closer  and  closer  grip  upon  us :  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  coming.    Men  art 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

sorry  for  the  distresBed,  and  try  to  relieve  them.  Why,  that  is  Christianity.  We 
know  that  we  love  God,  because  we  love  the  brethren.  .  .  .  Not  as  though  we  were 
already  perfect.  There  is  knavery,  selfishness,  uncleannoss  of  all  sorts  and  degrees. 
Yet  the  leaven  is  certainly  working,  and  such  a  review  of  the  centuries  as  has  been 
suggested  makes  it  clear,  to  the  point  of  demonstration,  that  the  will  of  God  is 
being  increasingly  done,  and  eppecially  that  the  ideals  of  gentleness,  mutual 
interest,  reciprocal  sympathy,  with  which  the  gospel  is  so  thickly  strewn,  are  being 
growingly  reahzed.  {Ibid.)  The  religion  which  will  save  a  man's  soul  is  a 
religion  that  goes  into  his  whole  being,  and  changes  hira  into  something  quite 
different  from  what  he  was  before,  when  in  the  service  of  the  world.  A  great  deal 
less  than  this  will  enable  a  man  to  live  respected  by  his  neighbours ;  a  great  deal 
less  will,  after  a  time,  satisfy  even  his  own  conscience,  and  enable  him  to  live  con- 
tentedly in  his  present  measure  of  strictness.  For  conscience  soon  lowerg  ita 
demands  when  they  have  been  made  and  rejected ;  and  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief 
rests  content  at  last,  on  a  conscience  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron.  (W.  J,  Iroru,  D.D.) 
The  Leaven : — We  may  reduce  the  parable  to  three  general  heads.  I.  What  is 
COMPARED  ?  The  matter  compared  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  II.  To  what  is  it 
COMPARED?  Leaven.  III.  In  what  is  it  compared.  Now  the  concurrence  of 
these  lies  in  the  sequel — "  which  a  woman  took,  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal, 
till  the  whole  was  leavened."  Wherein  are  remarkable  (1)  the  agent — a  woman; 
(2)  the  action — which  is  double,  taking  and  hiding,  or  putting  in  the  leaven  ;  (3)  the 
subject — is  meal,  or  flour  ;  (4)  the  continuance — until  the  whole  mass  be  leavened. 
{T.  Adams.)        Need  of  leavening : — No  flesh  that  is  putrefied,  except  it  be  first 

Surified,  shall  he  glorified.  No  man  goes  to  heaven  as  by  a  leap,  but  by  climbing, 
iow  this  sanctity  is  called  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (Hid.)  Leaven  sour  but 
gweetem'ng : — Leaven  hath  a  quahty  somewhat  contrary  to  the  meal,  yet  serves  to 
make  it  fit  for  bread.  The  gospel  is  sour  and  harsh  to  the  natural  soul,  yet  works 
it  to  newness  of  life.  It  runs  against  the  grain  of  our  affections,  and  we  think  it 
troubles  the  peace  of  our  Israel  within  us.  It  is  leaven  to  Herod  to  part  with  hia 
Herodias ;  to  Naaman  to  be  bound  from  bowing  before  Bimmon.  Christ  gives 
the  young  man  a  sour  morsel  when  he  bids  him  give  his  goods  to  the  poor.  Yea 
choke  the  usurer  with  leaven  when  you  tell  him  that  his  sins  shall  not  be  forgiven 
till  his  unjust  gains  be  restored.  You  may  as  well  prescribe  the  epicure  leaven 
instead  of  bread,  as  set  him  the  voider  of  abstinence  instead  of  his  table  of  surfeits., 
This  is  leaven  indeed,  to  tell  the  encloser  that  he  enters  commons  with  the  devil, 
while  he  hinders  the  poor  to  enter  common  with  him  ;  or  to  tell  the  sacrilegious 
that  Satan  hath  just  possession  of  his  soul,  while  he  keeps  unjust  possession  of  the 
Church's  goods,  When  his  leaven  is  held  to  carnal  lips  it  will  not  go  down,  no,  the 
very  smell  of  it  offends.  The  combat  of  faith,  the  task  of  repentarice,  the  merciful- 
ness of  charity,  this  same  rule  of  three  is  very  hard  to  learn.  To  deny  a  man's 
self,  to  cashier  his  family  lusts,  to  lay  down  whole  bags  of  crosses,  and  to  take  up 
one,  the  cross  of  Christ.  Oh  sour,  sour  leaven  1  (Ibid.)  Signs  of  leaiiening  : — 
He  hath  an  unleavened  hand,  that  is  not  charitable ;  an  unleavened  knee,  that  is 
not  humble ;  an  unleavened  tongue,  that  blasphemes ;  an  unleavened  eye,  that 
malioeth ;  an  unleavened  heart,  that  securely  offendeth.  The  outward  working 
shows  the  inward  leavening,  and  the  diffusion  is  an  argument  of  the  being.  (Ibid.) 
What  leaven  can  do : — The  world  begins  with  great  promises  ;  but  could  it  give  as 
much  as  ever  the  prince  of  it  proffered  to  Christ,  it  cannot  keep  thy  bones  from 
the  ague,  thy  flesh  from  worms,  nor  thy  soul  from  hell.  Behold,  a  little  leaven 
shall  sanctify  thee  throughout,  the  folly  of  preaching  shall  save  thy  soul,  and  raise 
thy  body  to  eternal  glory.  (Ibid.)  The  nature  of  leaven : — It  consists  of 
myriads  of  the  cells  of  the  common  green  mould  in  an  undeveloped  state.  If  a 
frajiment  of  the  dough  with  the  leaven  in  it  be  put  aside  in  a  shady  place,  the  cells 
of  the  fungus  in  the  leaven  will  vegetate,  and  cover  the  dough  with  a  slight  downy 
substance,  which  is  just  the  plant  in  its  complete  form.  The  swelling  of  the  dough, 
and  the  commotion  which  goes  on  in  the  leavened  mass,  are  owing  to  the  multiph- 
cation  of  the  plant-ceUs,  which  takes  place  with  astonishing  rapidity.  By  this 
process  of  vegetation,  the  starch  and  sugar  of  the  dough  are  converted  into  other 
chemical  products.  But  it  is  only  allowed  to  go  a  certain  length,  and  then  tha 
priuci^jle  of  growth  is  checked  by  placing  the  dough  in  the  oven,  and  baking  it  into 
oread.  Leaven  is  thus  a  principle  of  destruction  and  construction — of  decay  and 
of  growth — of  death  and  of  life.  (Unqh  Macmillan.)  The  parable  of  the  leaven 
hid  in  three  measures  of  meal : — The  Word  of  God  may  be  compared  to  leaven.  1. 
Leaven  is  of  a  difiasive  quality.    So  the  Word  of  God,  through  the  Spirit,  is  of  • 


CHAP,  xni.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  279 

diffusive  nature,  but  in  respect  to  every  soul  that  receiveth  it,  and  also  in  lespect 
of  people  to  whom  it  comes  ;  for  though  at  first  but  a  few  at  Jerusalem  and  there- 
•bouts  received  the  gospel,  yet  how  did  it  apread.  2.  Leaven  diffuses  itself 
gradually.  So  the  gospel  spread  and  operated  by  degrees  ;  as  it  diffuseth  itself 
into  every  faculty  of  the  sonl  at  first,  so  it  never  ceaseth  until  the  life  and  whole 
man  is  leavened  therewith.  8.  Leaven  is  of  assimilating  nature ;  makes  all  the 
meal  that  is  leavened  to  be  of  one  and  the  same  lump.  So  the  Word  of  God  and 
the  grace  of  God  makes  the  whole  soul  like  itself,  or  a  whole  family  or  nation 
where  it  is  once  in  truth  received,  the  very  same  people,  both  in  doctrine  and  con- 
versation. 4.  Leaven  is  of  a  quickening  and  powerful  nature ;  bo  the  Word  of  God 
(Heb.  iv.  12).  6.  Leaven  is  hid  in  the  meal  which  leaveneth ;  so  the  Word  of  God 
must  be  hid  in  the  heart,  both  in  the  understanding,  will,  and  affection,  if  the  person 
be  spiritually  leavened  with  it  (Psa.  cxix.  11).  It  is  not  enough  to  receive  it  into 
our  mouths,  or  to  have  it  in  our  Bibles,  but  we  must  receive  it  (in  the  love  thereof) 
into  our  hearts,  or  else  Satan  will  steal  it  away,  or  it  will  not,  it  cannot,  work 
either  upon  oar  hearts  or  lives.  6.  Leaven,  it  is  observed,  is  of  a  softening  nature  i 
though  the  meal  be  crushed  down  hard,  yet  if  the  leaven  be  hid  in  it,  it  will  make 
it  soft  and  mellow.  So  the  Word  of  God  makes  the  hard  heart  soft  and  tender. 
7.  Lea*en  secretly  and  invisibly  worketh  and  altereth  the  meal,  and  makeih  a 
ehange  of  it,  turning  it  into  dough.  So  the  workings  and  operations  of  the  Word 
of  God  are  secret  and  invisible.  8.  A  Uttle  leaven  will  leaven  the  whole  lump  ;  so 
a  small  quantity,  or  but  a  dram  of  grace,  or  one  word  set  home  upon  the  heart  of 
three  thousand  souls,  it  will  leaven  them  all  (Acts  ii.  4).  9.  Leaven  answers  a 
great  design.  It  is  to  prepare  the  meal  to  be  moulded  into  a  loaf  and  so  become 
the  bread  for  the  family.  So  this  spiritual  leaven,  the  Word,  is  by  Jesus  Christ 
appointed  for  a  great  design,  viz.,  even  to  mould  and  fashion  poor  sinners  for  Him- 
self, and  so  fit  them  for  His  own  use,  and  that  they  may  be  meet  and  fit  matter  for 
His  Church  on  earth,  and  for  the  Church  triumphant  in  Heaven  (1  Cor.  x.  17). 
{W.  Keach.)  The  leaven: — L  Our  Lord  teaches  that  the  change  He  meant  to 
effect  in  the  world  was  a  change,  not  so  much  of  the  outward  form,  as  of  the  spirit 
and  character  of  all  things.  U.  The  method  by  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to 
grow,  or  by  which  the  world  is  to  be  Christianized.  Religion  spreads  by  contagion. 
There  must  be  a  mixing ;  contact  between  those  that  are  Christians  and  those  who 
are  not.  This  mixing  is  provided  for  in  various  ways.  (1)  By  nature,  which  sets  ua 
in  families ;  (2)  By  commerce ;  (3)  Casual  acquaintance.  There  is  a  culpable 
refusal  to  mix,  as  well  as  an  inconsiderate  eagerness  to  do  so.  (M.  Dods,  D.D.) 
Leavened  by  character  rather  than  by  speech : — It  is  rather  the  all-pervading  and 
subtle  extension  of  Christian  principles  than  their  declared  and  aggressive  advocacy 
that  is  brought  before  the  mind  by  the  figure  of  leaven.  It  reminds  us  that  men 
are  most  susceptible  to  the  infiuence  that  fiows  from  character.  This  infiuenoa 
sheds  itself  off  in  a  thousand  ways  too  subtle  to  be  resisted,  and  in  forms  so  fine 
as  to  insinuate  themselves  where  words  would  find  no  entrance.  A  man  is  in 
many  circumstances  more  Ukely  to  do  good  by  acting  in  a  Christian  manner,  than 
by  drawing  attention  to  the  faults  of  others  and  exposing  their  iniquity.  The  less 
ostentatious,  the  less  consciona  the  infiuence  exercised  upon  as  is,  the  more  likely 
are  we  to  admit  it.     {Ibid.) 

▼tr.  38.  The  field  is  the  world. — The  moral  dignity  of  the  mi$$ionary  enterprite  .♦— 
1.  Thb  ob^'deub  OS  THB  OBJECT.  Survey  the  field  geographically.  Estimate 
the  miseries  of  the  world.  Consider  these  human  beings  as  immortal,  and  can- 
didates for  an  eternity  of  happiness  or  misery.     H.  The  missiona.by  UMDEBiAKiNa 

IS   ABDOOnS   ENOTJOH    TO   OALL   INTO     ACTION     THB    NOBLEST   ENKROIES   Or     MAN.       ThiS 

enterprise  requires  consummate  wisdom,  unwavering  perseverance,  undaunted 
courage,  sublime  faith.  IIL  The  means  bt  which  this  uobal  revolution  is  to 
BB  EFrECTED.  By  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  Contemplate 
the  simplicity,  benevolence,  and  efficacy  of  this  means.  (F.  Waylund,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  sphere  : — I.  Its  oeoobaphical  and  statistical  extent.  II.  Its  moba& 
condition,  m.  Its  redeemed  condition.  IV.  Its  globiods  destinatios.  A 
destiny  of  universal  knowledge,  righteousness,  peace,  felicity.  V.  Its  oommandino 
CLAIMS  UPON  D8.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  1.  The  field  is  the  world,  because  the  com- 
mission of  Christ  does  not  restrict  the  pubhcation  of  the  gospel  to  any  one  class  or 
nation.  U.  The  world  is  the  field  in  which  the  Church  is  to  sow  the  seed  of  the 
Word,  because  the  world  has  been  given  to  Christ  her  Head.  III.  Because,  how- 
erer  wide  it  may  be,  ample  means  exist  for  its  cultivation.    lY.  That  the  field  to 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

be  onltivated  by  the  Church  is  the  world,  is  shown  by  the  example  of  the  inspired 
apostles.  V.  Follows  from  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is  suited  alike  to  all  the  nations 
of  the  world.  VI.  The  very  nature  of  moral  principle  in  the  heart  of  man  requires 
that  the  Church  regard  the  world  as  the  field.  Til.  The  composition  of  the  con* 
gregation  assembled  in  heaven  proves  that  the  field  is  the  world.  1.  Send  the 
gospel  to  all.  2.  Value  souls.  3.  Cultivate  a  lively  sympathy  with  the  glory  of 
Christ.    4.  Lay  the  foundation  of  all  usefulness  in  personal  godliness.    {J.  Stewart.) 

Ver.  43.  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun. — Tht  glory  of  the  right- 

gous : I.  Its  present  concealment.     The  whole  structure  of  the  parable  implies 

that  the  beauty  of  the  righteous  man  is  hidden  in  the  present ;  tares  and  wheat 
scarcely  distinguished.     The  glory  has  begun  in  men  here,  though  veiled.     The 
wheat  had  in  it  the  germ  of  the  golden  grain.     The  sun  shines  forth  from  the  clouds 
which  had  obscured  his  radiance.     Beasons  of  this  concealment : — 1.  The  first 
reason  is  the  nature  of  the  only  true  righteousness  in  man.   Man  becomes  righteous 
by  denying  his  own  righteousness  and  accepting  that  of  another ;  this  why  it  is 
hidden  now.     Our  faith  is  cradled  in  tears  and  made  strong  by  storms.     2.  We  find 
a  second  reason  for  concealment  in  the  discipline  by  which  the  righteous  are  per- 
fected.    Faith  grows  by  trials,  which  conceal  glory.     The  world's  eye  sees  little 
beauty  in  the  crown  of  thorns.     11.  Its  future  MANirssTATioN.     The  present  con- 
cealment will  pass  away ;  the  germ  of  faith  will  ripen  unto  eternal  glory.     By  the 
silent  growth  of  faith  the  image  of  the  heavenly  is  being  secretly  formed  within. 
Who  can  tell  how  the  souls  of  the  righteous  will  ripen  in  the  sun-light  of  Christ's 
smile.     III.  Its  mighty  lessons.     "  Who  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear."    Hear  it, 
slothful  Christian.    Hear  it,  earnest,  struggling  soul.   Hear  it,  downcast  spirit.   Hear 
it,  unbeliever.     (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)       Moral  beauty  manifested  after  death: — Just  as 
the  flower  bursts  forth  in  beauty  from  its  concealment  in  the  seed,  so  shall  it  be 
with  the  righteous  when  the  last  temptation  has  been  vanquished,  and  the  body,  so 
frail  and  weary,  has  been  laid  aside.     We  see  it  not  in  our  dying  friends.     We  see 
only  the  expiring  animal  nature.     We  see  not  how  the  Christlike  grew  within  them 
during  the  hushed  endurance  of  pain,  and  while  their  faith  held  on  during  that  long 
horror  of  darkness.    We  see  not  this  rising  inner  life.     We  see  only  their  failing 
humanity.     {Ibid.)        T lie  Divine  tracery  not  seen  at  present: — But  we  cannot  see 
the  glory  which  is  behind.     We  cannot  fully  understand  how  the  discipline  of  life 
is  fitting  the  soul  for  the  fruition  of  the  future.     At  present  we  cannot  read  the 
Divine  tracery  inscribed  by  the  hand  of  sorrow ;  it  has  all  a  heavenly  compensation, 
infinitely  greater  than  its  present  misery.  .  ,  .  The  veil  is  over  us ;  we  do  not  see 
what  royal  souls  are  being  formed  by  it  here.    But  in  the  end  it  shall  be  seen  that 
all  the  feelings  of  pain  and  weakness,  solitude  and  weariness,  have  a  corresponding 
weight  of  joy.     (Ibid.)        These  words  describe  the  happiness  of  the  righteous : — I. 
In  its  elements.     "  Like  the  sun  " — visible,  pure,  active,  glorious.     II.  Its  plat- 
form.    It  is  "  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father. "     This  imports — 1.  All  the  privileges 
and  security  of  an  organized  society  of  the  highest  order.     2.  For  ever  to  dwell  at 
home.    III.  Its  juncture.     "  Then  " — day  of  judgment,  when  the  righteous  shall 
be  publicly  recognized  as  such.     IV.  Its  truth.     On  what  do  we  ground  these  ex- 
pectations?    On  the  express  declarations  of  God  ;  the  nature  of  the  gospel,  and  the 
work  of  grace  on  the  heart ;  and  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Suggests — self- 
scrutiny  and  submission.      {J.  Hirst.)        I.  The  present  concealment  of  thb 
EiQHTEOUS.     On  account  of — The  nature  of  their  excellence — not  discerned  or  ap- 
preciated by  the  world ;  the  sphere  within  which  it  is  displayed — in  the  common 
walks  of  life;  the  imperfections,  d'c,  with  which  it  is  often  accompanied;  the 
reserve  by  which  it  is  sometimes  hidden — unobtrusive,  silent.   II.  The  future  mani- 
festation of  the  righteous.   The  time,  place,  splendour,  duration.   (Brooks.)       We 
have  here  a  description  of  the  glorious  state  of  believers,  called  the  righteous : — Believers 
have  a  twofold  righteousness.     I.  The  righteousness  of  justification.    2.  The  right- 
eousness of  sanctification.     What  need  shall  the  saints  have  to  shine  in  Christ's 
righteousness,  when  they  shall  be  perfectly  holy  in  themselves  7     1.  Because  it  was 
not  their  own  inherent  righteousness  which  was  their  title  to  heaven,  but  the  right- 
eousness of  Christ  alone ;  therefore  they  shall  boast  of  and  shine  in  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  for  ever.     2.  Because  their  own  inherent  righteousness  was  imperfect 
and  full  of  spots  whilst  they  lived  upon  the  earth,  and  it  was  made  perfect  only  as 
an  act  of  Christ's  purchase,  or  the  fruits  of  His  merits  and  obedience,  to  make  them 
meet  for  that  inheritance.     The  glory  of  believers  is  reserved  to  that  time ;  now 
their  life  is  a  hidden  life,  and  their  gloiy  is  veiled  (1  John  iii.  1-3^.     When  the  end 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  281 

of  the  world  comee,  or  at  the  day  of  the  resurrection,  the  saints  shall  shine  forth 
gloriously.  1.  Because  being  God's  jewels,  they  are  then  all  made  up,  or  completed 
every  way,  and  shall  shine  before  wicked  men  and  devils,  to  the  shame  and  confu- 
sion for  ever  of  these  wretches.  2.  Moreover,  as  heirs,  they  then  come  to  a  perfect 
Bge,  and  to  possess  the  purchased  inheritance,  to  the  praise  of  God's  glory  and  grace. 
3.  Then  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  will  be  celebrated,  and  the  bride  be  adorned  in 
all  her  marriage  robes  and  rich  attire  (Rev.  xix.  7).  4.  Because  then  the  bodies 
and  souls  of  all  believers  shall  be  reunited,  both  being  made  perfect ;  a  curious 
piece  of  work,  whether  a  jewel  or  clockwork,  never  appears  so  glorious  until  it  is  all 
joined  together,  and  every  way  perfected.  So  the  glory  of  the  saints  will  then  be 
©very  way  full  and  perfect,  both  in  respect  of  soul  and  body  too,  5.  Because  Christ 
will  then  appear ;  "and  when  He  appears,  we  shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory" 
(Col.  iii.  4 ;  John  iii.  4).  6.  Because  then  will  be  the  time  of  the  manifestation 
of  the  sons  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  19).  Then  they  shall  be  crowned  with  glory.  That 
will  be  the  saints*  coronation  day,  7.  Then  will  be  the  time  of  the  saints  reapmg, 
as  now  is  their  time  for  sowing,  and  "  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy"  (Psa. 
cxxvi.  6).  "  Shine  as  the  sun,"  &c.  This  denotes  the  greatness  of  the  glory  of  the 
saints.  The  glory,  excellence,  and  splendour  of  believers  in  that  day  will  be  amazing. 
Consider :  1.  The  sun  is  the  greatest  glory  of  this  world,  or  far  excels  in  glory  all 
other  things.  So  the  saints  shall  shine  forth  in  the  greatest  glory,  beyond  the  glory 
of  Solomon,  or  all  earthly  potentates  whatsoever.  2.  When  the  sun  shines  forth  in 
his  full  strength,  all  dark  clouds  and  mists  are  vanquished  and  driven  away.  So 
when  the  saints  shall  shine  in  their  greatest  glory,  all  dark  mists  of  ignorance,  and 
clouds  of  sin  and  corruption,  shall  be  expelled  from  them  for  ever.  No  more  dark 
days  or  unbelief  for  ever.  3.  The  sun  is  a  singular  light,  and  shines  with  a 
singular  glory.  There  are  many  stars,  but  one  sun.  So  the  glory  of  the  sainta 
shall  be  a  singular  glory.  No  glory  like  that  glory,  or  to  be  compared  to  it.  4. 
The  sun  is  a  pure,  bright,  and  spotless  creature,  far  brighter  than  the  moon  or 
Btars,  so  the  glory  of  the  saints  will  be  a  pure,  bright,  and  spotless  glory,  not  like 
the  glory  of  this  world,  nor  like  the  glory  which  attends  the  saints  while  they  are 
here  in  this  mortal  body,  6.  The  glory  of  the  sun  is  an  unchangeable  glory ;  he 
alters  not,  changes  not  in  his  glory  as  the  moon  doth.  So  the  glory  of  the  saints  in 
that  day  will  ever  abide  the  same,  and  never  change  or  be  less,  because  they  then 
shall  arrive  to  a  full  perfection  of  glory  ;  nay,  it  shall  exceed  that  of  the  sun.  1. 
Because  the  sun  sets,  or  goes  out  of  our  sight,  but  the  saints'  sun  shall  never  go 
down,  their  glory  never  sets  (Isa.  Ix,  20).  2.  The  sun  is  sometimes  clouded,  ita 
glory  appears  not,  but  the  glory  of  the  saints  shall  never  be  clouded  any  more  as  it 
was  in  this  world.  3.  The  sun  shall  then  be  ashamed  (Isa.  xxiv.  23).  That  is, 
the  glory  of  the  saints  shall  so  far  excel  the  glory  of  the  sun,  that  the  sun  shall,  aa 
it  were,  be  ashamed  (as  such  are  said  to  be,  when  they  are  outshined),  or  outdone 
by  others.  4.  The  sun  Is  sometimes  eclipsed  by  the  gross  body  of  the  moon  inter- 
posing betwixt  us  and  it ;  but  the  glory  of  the  saints  shall  by  no  dark  body  of  sin, 
corruption,  or  of  this  world,  be  eclipsed  any  more  for  ever.  6.  The  sun  is  so 
glorious,  that  mortals  cannot  behold  it,  but  their  eyes  will  dazzle.  So  the  glory 
of  the  saints  will  be  too  great  fur  sinners  to  behold,  it  would  even  put  out  their  eyes, 
or  confound  them.     0  happy  believers  1     (B.  Keach). 

Yer.  44.  Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  tmto  treasure  bid  In  a  field. — 

Treasure : — 1.  The  Holy  Scriptures  contain  an  inestimable  treasme — wisdom,  grace, 
comfort,  joy.  2.  Many  not  aware  of  this.  They  are  like  some  landowners,  who 
can  watch  with  delight  the  growth  of  grass,  corn,  and  flowers  in  their  fields,  but 
who  lose  sight  of  the  precious  ore  beneath  the  surface.  Can  cull  a  bouquet  o£ 
flowers — the  poetiy,  history,  and  imagery — but  lack  the  tools  (repentance,  faith, 
hope)  for  delving  to  the  rich  mineral  beneath.  8.  This  treasure  can  only  be  dis- 
covered by  careful  search.  4,  The  greater  our  desire  for  the  blessings  of  Divine 
grace,  the  greater  will  be  our  fear  lest  we  should  fall  short  of  them,  5,  The  dis- 
covery of  this  hid  treasure  should  fill  the  believer  with  gladness — the  Ethiopian 
Eunuch  "went  on  his  way  rejoicing,"  6.  Having  discovered  the  excellency  of 
Divine  things,  we  should  be  ready  to  renounce  such  pleasures  and  habits  as  hinder 
their  attainment.  Moses  gave  up  the  attractions  of  the  Egyptian  court,  "  choosing 
rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God."  So  now  the  true  convert  will 
give  up  worldly  vanities,  unfair  dealing,  uncharitableness,  insincerity,  and  will  learn 
to  "  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts."  (Essex  Remembrancer.)  Th« 
parables  qf  the  hid  treasure  and  the  pearl,  or  how  men  find  Christ: — I.  There  are 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  un. 

certain  eBtimates  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  certain  things  that  are  done  in  re- 
lation to  it,  WHICH  BOTH  PABABLE8   AGREE   IN   BEPRE8ENTINQ.       1.    The   first  and  lUOSt 

prominent  is  that  both  parables  represent  the  gospel  as  a  very  precious  thing,  and 
as  commending  itself  to  men  as  a  very  precious  thing.  A  forgiven  soul  the  highest 
good  of  in  an.  2.  The  parables  further  agree  in  representing  the  secret  character 
of  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  new  kingdom.  It  is  a  secret  life  as  well  as  a  visible 
Bociety.  Its  truths  require  the  spiritual  faculty  to  discern  them.  3.  The  parables 
agree  further  in  their  representation  of  the  eamestness  and  determination  with 
which  the  precious  treasure  of  the  gospel  is  secured.  II.  But  now  they  broadly 
diverge  and  teach  important  lessons  oonoernino  the  diversities  op  the  Chbistiah 
UPE.  1.  The  first  point  of  difference  is  the  way  in  which  the  riches  of  the  kingdom 
are  discovered.  The  treasure-finder  stumbles  upon  his  prize  unexpectedly;  the 
pearl-merchant  finds  his  in  earnest  search.  This  is  not  the  representation  of  a 
careless,  unspiritual  man,  who  does  not  so  much  find  the  gospel  as  he  is  found  by 
it ;  but  of  a  man  whose  dei^ires  and  efforts  are  right,  but  who  does  not  all  at  once 
find  the  thing  that  he  wishes.  The  pearl-seeker  seeks  with  determination.  He  has 
many  pearls.  It  is  one  pearl  amongst  many  that  can  satisfy  him.  Touching  the 
law  he  was  blameless,  but  what  was  gain  he  now  counts  loss  for  Christ.  2.  Bat 
the  different  ways  in  which  men  meet  God  are  also  indicated  in  the  contrasted 
emotions  and  conduct  of  the  two  finders  of  treasure ;  and  these  are  in  ezquisite 
harmony  with  the  character  described.  The  man  who  unexpectedly  finds  treasure 
is  impulsive  in  his  joy ;  the  other  is  joyous,  but  calm.  The  treasure-finder  buya 
the  entire  field ;  this  indicates  the  feverish,  unintelligent  way  in  which  such  cha- 
racters realize  their  salvation.  We  must  not  think  more  of  the  field  than  of  the 
treasure.  The  pearl-seeker  buys  only  the  pearl.  He  distinguishes  the  essential 
from  the  accidental.  {H.  Allon.)  The  kingdom  of  heaven: — Subject  religion  to 
the  ordinary  tests  of  value :  there  are  four  great  tests  of  value.  I.  The  first  is 
BABiTT.  An  old  master  who  painted  pictures  many  a  hundred  years  ago,  and  sent 
down  a  worthy  name  and  fame  to  posterity,  is  represented  in  these  days  by  only 
two  or  three.  One  canvas  is  hung  here,  we  will  say  in  the  National  Gallery,  and 
another  in  Vienna,  and  another  somewhere  else  :  all  the  rest  are  burned  by  fire  or 
rusted  and  moulded  away  by  the  influence  of  time.  The  bare  fact  that  there  are 
only  three  specimens  extant  of  that  man's  master-pieces  gives  them  a  value  that 
cannot  be  covered  even  though  you  cover  that  canvas  with  gold.  According  to  their 
rarity  is  their  value.  For  what  is  true  religion  ?  If  there  is  anything  in  it  at  all, 
if  it  is  not  a  gross  deception,  I  will  tell  you  what  it  is.  It  is  holiness  and  happiness 
— rare  things  in  the  world,  my  masters,  look  for  them  where  you  will.  II.  Let  us 
take  another  test  of  value,  one  that  you  are  all  acquainted  with  more  or  less — I 
MEAN  THE  VEEDicT  OP  k  COMPETENT  AUTHORITY.  If  a  child  is  playing  at  the  mother's 
door  with  what  appears  to  be  a  piece  of  beautifully-coloured  or  transparent  glass,  it 
may  flash  so  brightly  that  even  the  mother  is  curious  enough  to  take  it  from  the 
little  palm  of  her  child  and  hold  it  up  to  see  how  the  sun  rays  dance  around  it ;  but 
she  is  content  then  to  pass  it  back  again  as  a  thing  of  no  more  moment.  But  lo,  a 
lapidary  comes  that  way  who,  with  keen  and  practised  eye,  catches  the  peculiar 
Bcintillations  that  rise  from  it,  and  he  takes  it  in  his  hand,  holds  it  letween  him 
and  the  sun,  weighs  it,  judges  of  the  comparative  weight  and  measure,  and  then 
passes  it  into  the  mother's  hand,  saying,  "Madam,  are  yon  aware  that  that  is  a 
diamond,  and  not  glass?  "  In  a  moment  the  verdict  of  a  competent  authority  has 
increased  its  value  fifty  thousand  fold.  So  with  a  picture  which  has  hung  on  a 
cottage  wall  for  years,  an  unvalued  heirloom,  that  hangs  there  simply  b«cause  it  is 
its  accustomed  place.  There  comes  in  one  who  knows,  and  he  uses  means  to  take 
away  the  canker  and  the  rust  of  time,  and  unburies  a  patch  of  snbtle  colour  that 
lies  beneath,  and  he  says  in  a  moment,  "  Why  that  is  a  Bembrandt,"  and  in  a 
moment  the  verdict  of  a  competent  authority  gives  it  a  value  that  it  never  possessed 
before.  I  want  to  rest  religion  on  the  same  ground,  the  verdict  of  a  competent 
authority.  "  Ah,"  but  I  hear  somebody  there  saying,  *'  where  will  you  find  an 
authority  that  is  sufficient  for  us  ?  Where  will  you  find  one  that  we  are  bound  to 
believe  ?  "  Brothers,  on  the  principle  that  experience  is  the  grandest  teacher.  IIL 
Not  only  rarity,  not  only  the  verdict  of  a  competent  authority,  but  ddeabilitt  is 
AN  IMPORTANT  TEST  OF  VALUE.  Why,  you  will  Scarcely  give  your  child  a  sixpence  to 
go  and  buy  a  toy  without  giving  it  a  little  wise  motherly  counsel  at  the  same  time 
not  to  buy  something  that  will  break  almost  before  it  gets  home.  That  is  true  right 
along  the  whole  of  your  business  transactions.  How  long  will  it  last?  as  old 
Hompbreys  says,  is  one  of  the  wisest  questions  that  a  buyer  can  inqair«  after< 


CHAP,  im.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  283 


Well,  let  us  pat  that  test  to  religion.  You  know  beauty  has  a  value,  a  wondrouH 
value,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  diamond  already  ;  but  if  you  ask  for  the  value  of  beauty 
alone,  then  I  protest  to  you  that  I  know  nothing  in  this  world  that  is  more  beautiful 
than  a  full-blown  bubble  rising  from  the  lips  of  a  schoolboy  on  a  summer's  after- 
noon, floating  out  in  a  stately  silence  of  its  own,  a  beautiful  crystal  globe,  dancing 
in  the  sunhght  as  though  it  loved  its  congeners.  As  it  passes  over  field  and  tree  and 
house  and  passer-by,  is  photographed  in  many  colours  upon  its  brilliant  walls,  and 
as  it  rises  higher  and  higher  in  the  sunlight,  you  are  ready  to  say,  "  How  beautiful  1 " 
And  yet  you  say,  "  As  worthless  as  a  bubble."  "vVhy  ?  Because  it  will  not  last. 
IV.  Now,  there  is  only  one  more  that  I  know  anything  about  myself,  but  I  declare 

to  you  I   THINK   IT   IS   THE    MOST    IMPORTANT    OF   THE    FOUR,  AND    THAT   IS   THE  TEST    0» 

ADAPTATION.  What  is  tJbe  use  of  a  telescope  that  does  not  bring  a  thing  nearer  and 
magnify  it  to  the  eye  ?  What  say  you  of  yonder  sailor  who  is  out  on  the  seas  ship- 
wrecked  ;  all  his  chance  of  life  is  his  gripping  power  to  a  slippery,  craggy  rock  that 
rises  just  above  the  surging  seas  ;  he  can  see  nothing  ;  no  hope  of  life,  blood  starts 
from  his  fingers'  ends  as  he  grips,  lest  he  plunges  in  the  deep.  What  is  the  most 
precious  thing  in  the  world  to  him  ?  You  won't  offer  him  a  fortune,  will  you  ? 
Millions  are  of  no  use :  the  most  precious  thing  to  that  man  is  a  boat ;  it  ia 
adapted  to  his  special  necessity.  (J.J.  TVray.)  Th.e  parable  of  the  treasure: — 
I.  The  excellency  of  the  gospel  is  not  generally  understood  by  men.  It 
is  a  hid  treasure.  Illustrate  the  fact :  1.  In  its  nature.  The  reference  under  this 
metaphor  is  not  designed  to  apply  so  much  to  the  case  of  men  to  whom  the  gospel 
is  not  exhibited,  as  with  the  heathen.  It  applies  to  men  who  have  the  gospel ; 
yet  they  will  not  estimate  it.  2.  In  its  source.  The  cause  is  the  universal  depravity 
of  the  heart.  II.  The  gospel  does  intrinsically  possess  vast  and  inestimable 
VALUE.  It  is  a  treasure.  The  value  of  the  gospel  will  appear  if  you  consider 
(I)  The  source  in  which  it  originates ;  (2)  The  blessings  which  it  communicates  ; 
(3)  The  mediation  upon  which  it  rests ;  (4)  The  diiiusiveness  of  which  it  is  sus- 
ceptible ;  (5)  The  permanence  with  which  it  is  invested.     III.  The  discovery  or 

the  ACTUAL  VALUE  OF  THE  GOSPEL  MUST  EXERT  A  MASTER  INFLUENCE  UPON  THE  PRIN- 
CIPLES AND  HABITS  OF  THOSE  BY  WHOM  IT  IK  ACQUIRED.  1.  The  discoveiy  of  the  valuo 
of  the  gospel  must  arise  from  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  2.  Then  men 
practically  abandon  all  that  may  interfere  with  their  enjoyment  of  the  blessings 
which  the  gospel  exhibits.  3.  This  abandonment  will  never  fail  of  procuring  the 
desired  result.  4.  The  treasure  is  offered  to  aU  freely  and  fully.  {J.  Parsons.) 
Hid  treasure : — Says  old  Thomas  Fuller,  "  Lord,  this  morning  I  read  a  chapter  in 
the  Bible,  and  therein  observed  a  memorable  passage  whereof  I  never  took  notice 
before.  Why  now,  and  no  sooner,  did  I  see  it  ?  Formerly  my  eyes  were  as  open, 
and  the  letters  as  legible.  Is  there  not  a  thin  veil  laid  over  Thy  Word,  which  ia 
more  rarified  by  reading,  and  at  last  wholly  worn  away ? "  The  Word  of  God  "is 
like  unto  treasure  hid  in  a  field."  Its  best  things  are  ever  below  the  surface.  Then 
shall  ye  seek  them  and  find  them,  when  ye  shall  search  for  them  with  all  your 
heart.  Points  in  parable  of  hid  treasures : — I.  Vital  religion  is  an  individual 
matter.  2.  To  the  individual  it  must  come  in  direct,  personal  relations.  3.  A  man 
must  be  prepared  for  effort  and  sacrifice  to  gain  a  personal  interest  in  religion. 
idnon.)  Hiding  treasures: — Owing  to  the  insecmity  of  property  in  the  East, 
irom  war  and  oppression,  joined  to  the  necessity  of  keeping  valuable  property  in 
hand,  for  want  of  secure  banks  of  deposit,  the  practice  of  hiding  precious  utensils 
and  ornaments,  money  and  jewels,  has  always  been  common.  Often  these  are 
built  up  into  the  walls  of  the  owner's  house,  often  buried  in  fields  and  gardens. 
(Kitto.)  Jewish  law  of  things  found: — According  to  Jewish  law,  if  man  found 
treasure  in  loose  coins  among  the  corn,  it  would  certainly  be  his,  if  he  bought 
the  com.  If  he  had  found  it  on  the  ground,  or  in  the  soil,  it  would  equally 
certainly  belong  to  him,  if  he  could  claim  ownership  of  the  soil.  {Ederaheim.) 
The  parable  of  treasure  hid  in  a  field : — There  is  a  twofold  hiding  of  this  treasure. 
I.  An  evil  hiding  which  is  not  intended  here.  When  a  man  hath  received  light 
and  knowledge  of  Christ  and  Divine  truth,  and  he  (through  Satan's  temptations, 
and  the  evil  of  his  own  heart)  strives  to  smother  it  in  his  own  breast,  or  conceals 
what  he  knows,  this  is  an  evil  hiding.  Now  the  reason  why  some  do  this  I  shall 
show.  1.  Because  truth  is  only  discovered  to  his  understanding.  They  may  be  much 
enlightened,  but  his  will  consents  not,  subjects  not  to  *>><»  p^wer  of  it.  Nor  is  he  in 
love  with  it,  his  affections  being  not  changed,  or  &s  tue  apostle  say^  "  Such  do  not 
receive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it. "  2.  It  may  be  occasioned  through  sname.  Ha 
ifl  ashamed  of  Christ  and  His  word ;  the  visible  profession  of  religion  ezposetli 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

much  to  reproach  and  contempt.  3.  It  may  be  through  idleness  he  is  not  willing 
to  be  at  further  pains,  nor  at  the  charge  to  sell  all  that  he  hath  to  buy  this  field,  or 
publicly  to  receive  Christ.  4.  Moreover,  fear  may  be  one  cause  of  the  sinful  hiding 
of  this  treasure.  He  knows  not  what  the  losses  may  be  he  may  meet  withal,  or  what 
he  may  suffer  for  Christ's  sake,  if  he  visibly  confesseth  Him.  5.  An  evil  hiding 
impoits  a  non-improving  of  their  light  and  knowledge  (Matt.  xxv.  18).  IL  Thebb 
MAY  B«  A  GOOD  HIDING  OF  THIS  TEEASOKE,  which  may  denote — 1.  Such  endeavour 
to  the  uttermost,  whatsoever  it  may  cost  them,  to  make  it  their  own,  and  will  not 
\yickedly  conceal  what  Christ  hath  done  for  them  (Psa.  Ixvi.  16).  2.  They  make 
use  of  all  means  to  s«cure  it,  and  in  prayer  crying  to  God  continually  to  help  them 
to  persevere  and  keep  this  treasure  against  all  attempts  of  enemies  whatsoever, 
Why  Christ  is  called  treasure : — 1.  Kich  treasure  is  counted  an  excellent  thing,  and 
therefore  it  is  much  desired  ;  the  hearts  of  mankind  naturally  run  after  riches  and 
earthly  treasure  ;  Christ  may  upon  this  account  be  compared  to  treasure.  2.  This 
spiritual  treasure  makes  all  that  find  it  very  rich  (Eev.  iii.  18).  3.  Much  earthly 
treasure  makes  men  to  be  envied  and  hated  by  many  persons,  and  are  in  danger  to 
be  robbed  by  thieves.  So  a  beUever  is  hated  and  envied  by  the  devil  and  wicked 
men.  Satan,  like  a  cunning  thief,  strives  to  rob  them  of  their  treasure.  4.  Such 
who  have  much  riches,  or  store  of  earthly  treasure,  live  high ;  they  feed  or  fare 
not  as  the  poor  do  ;  also  they  are  more  richly  clothed,  and  deUvered  from  the  care 
and  fears  which  the  poor  are  vexed  with  continually.  5.  A  man  that  hath  much 
earthly  treasure  can  do  more  good  to  his  neighbour  than  multitudes  of  others  are 
able  to  do.  So  believers,  rich  in  faith,  rich  in  promise,  rich  in  experience,  can  do 
more  good  to  others — they  can  give  better  counsel,  more  and  better  comfort  (Prov. 
X.  21).  6.  He  that  bath  much  earthly  treasure  values  himself  accordingly,  rich  and 
honourable  are  his  comijanions,  and  with  them  he  communes  every  day.  So  he 
that  hath  much  spiritual  treasure  values  himself  upon  the  best  grounds ;  he  is  a 
child  of  God ;  he  hath  God  for  his  portion ;  he  is  allowed  communion  with  God ; 
he  is  assured  he  ehall  never  want  any  good  thing  (Psa.  cxix.  68).  7.  Hid  treasure 
is  not  found  without  much  pams  and  diligent  searching,  no  more  is  this  spiritual 
treasure  (Prov.  ii.  2,  5).  8.  He  that  hath  much  earthly  treasure,  commonly  seta 
his  heart  upon  it,  and  it  is  his  chiefest  delight ;  so  he  that  hath  found  this  treasure, 
sets  his  heart  upon  it.  God  and  Christ  are  his  chiefest  delight  (Matt.  vi.  21).  9. 
Such  who  find  great  treasure  rejoice ;  so  he  that  finds  Christ,  this  spiritual  treasure, 
rejoiceth ;  he  selleth  for  joy  all  he  hath  to  buy  that  field.  A  believer  has  cause  of 
joy,  he  is  happy  for  ever.  I  shall  noxo  show  you  the  nature  of  this  treasure  : — 
1.  It  is  heavenly,  not  earthly,  treasure ;  as  far  as  heaven  excels  the  earth,  so  far 
htavenly  treasure  excels  all  the  riches  and  treasures  of  this  world.  2.  It  being 
heavenly  and  spiritual  treasure,  it  foiloweth  that  it  must  be  incorruptible  treasure. 
8.  It  is'  soul-satisfyiug  treasure,  the  treasures  of  this  world  can  never  satisfy  the 
immortal  soul  of  man.  4.  It  is  durable  and  everlasting  treasure,  not  uncertain 
riches,  which  are  compared  to  va])our  (Prov.  xxiii.  5).  1  shall  show  you  how 
this  treasure  is  hid: — Christ  is  like  hidden  treasure.  1.  He  was  long  hid  in  God, 
or  covered  and  out  of  sight  of  men.  The  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ  was  hid  from 
the  Jews  who  believed  not  under  the  law,  under  dark  shadows  and  beggarly  ele- 
ments, so  that  they  could  not  find  this  treasure.  2.  Christ  and  His  benefits  are 
hid  in  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel,  so  that  very  few  can  find  this  rich  treasure. 
They  have  the  field,  viz.,  word  and  administration  of  the  gospel,  but  carnal  men  see 
not  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel.  3.  This  treasure  was  hid  (and  is  still) ;  dark,  pera- 
bolical,  symbolical,  or  tropical  expressions  uttered  by  our  blessed  Lord.  Many  had 
the  field ;  the  parables  and  similitudes  were  spoken  to  multitudes,  but  the  treasure 
in  them  few  saw.  It  is  evident  that  the  treasure  is  still  hid  from  most  in  our  days. 
4.  This  treasure  is  hid  by  the  Lord  from  multitudes,  as  an  act  of  His  Sovereign  will 
and  pleasure  (Eom.  ix.  18 ;  Matt.  xxi.  25,  26).  5.  That  may  be  said  to  be  hid  which 
mankind  cannot  find  without  God  reveals  it  to  them  in  a  supernatural  way.  Now 
the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel  mankind  naturally 
cannot  know.  6.  That  which  needeth  many  gradations  to  unfold  it  is  a  hidden 
thing,  but  the  knowledge  of  Christ  the  Redeemer,  and  mysteries  of  salvation, 
needed  many  gradations  to  nnfold  it.  To  our  first  parents  it  was  made  known  by 
the  promise,  "The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  break  the  serpent's  head."  Then  to 
Abraham  God  gave  a  further  discovery  thereof  (Gen.  xiii.  18).  Afterwards  it  was 
revealed  by  types,  ceremonies,  and  sacrifices  of  the  law,  and  then  we  come  to  the 
gospel  dispensation.  7.  That  which  requires  our  uttermost  skill,  wisdom,  and 
diligence  to  search  and  find  out  is  a  hidden  thing,  but  the  true  knowledge  oi 


CHAP.  xin.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  285 

Jesna  Christ  requires  our  nttermost  skill,  wisdom,  and  diligence  in  searching 
to  £nd  out,  and  therefore  it  is  a  hidden  thing  (Prov.  ii.  1-5).  As  men  kuow 
not  the  price  thereof,  bo  manj  know  not  the  place  thereof  where  it  is  hid.  It 
is  hid  from  many  by  the  devil  (2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).  I  shall  now  show  why  he 
rejoices  that  finds  this  treasure.  He  that  finds  this  treasure,  finds  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Pearl  of  great  price,  which  far  exceeds  all  hid  treasure  and  mountains  of 
prey.  Therefore  it  is  from  the  worth  of  this  treasure  that  a  believer  that  finds  it 
doth  rejoice.  It  may  be  from  the  great  use  of  this  treasure  to  him.  He  was  poor 
before,  this  treasure  enricheth  him ;  he  was  naked,  he  is  gloriously  clothed ;  he  was 
forced  to  feed  on  husks,  now  he  is  fed  with  rare  food,  the  Bread  of  Life.  This 
treasure  mainly  consisteth  in  the  saving  knowledge  of  God  and  JesuB  Christ  (2  Cor. 
iv.  7).  It  is  au  experimental,  not  a  mere  speculative  knowledge.  It  is  a  practical 
knowledge  (Job.  xxii.  21,  22 ;  1  John  ii.  4).  It  is  an  enlivening  knowledge  (Col.  iii. 
10).     It  is  a  translating  and  transforming  knowledge  (Bom.  vi.  3,  4,  6).     It  is  a 

E regressive  knowledge  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  He  that  finds  this  treasure  makes  the  field 
is  own.  he  secures  the  field.  (B.  Keach.)  The  hidden  treaures,  and  the  pearl  of 
great  price : — 1.  These  pabables  do  not  teach  that  the  blessing  of  salvation  is 
CONFINED  TO  ANT  ONE  PABTicDLAB  ENCLOSTiBE.  1.  It  is  uot  coutined  to  the  Church. 
2.  The  field  is  not  confined  to  the  Bible.  Many  are  saved  who  do  not  know  the 
Bible.  In  whatsoever  connection  it  is  that  a  man  first  discovers  Christ,  that  to 
him  is  the  field.  II.  These  parables  abb  not  to  be  constboed  as  teaching  that 
8ALVATI0N  18  A  THING  WHICH  A  MAN  CAN  BDY.  It  is  not  a  Commodity  outside  of  the 
man  which  he  can  transfer  by  purchase;  it  is  a  nature  within  him  that  can  be 
imparted  only  by  God.  III.  These  parables  do  not  counsel  concealment  in  thb 
MATTER  of  oub  SALVATION.  Men  hide  that  of  which  they  are  ashamed  ;  none  need 
be  ashamed  of  Jesus  and  His  salvation.  Men  hide  that  which  they  are  afraid 
of  losing,  or  of  having  stolen  from  them ;  but  who  can  deprive  of  that  which  ia 
within  ns.  No  man  has  any  exclusive  property  in  salvation.  The  new  life  will 
make  itself  felt.    (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Vera.  45,  46.  Seeking  goodly  pearls. — Parable  of  the  pearl: — I.  The  boo!  seeking 
good.  II.  The  soul  seeking  good  will  always  want  a  better.  III.  The  aoul,  seek- 
ing good,  wants  a  better  untU  it  finds  Christ  the  best.  {Anon.)  The  priceless 
pearl : — Salvation  is  the  pearl.  I.  This  pearl  cost  a  vast  amount  to  procure  it  for 
the  children  of  men.  II.  It  is  of  great  price  in  that  it  is  of  inestimable  value. 
III.  It  is  of  great  price  because  it  loses  none  of  its  brightness  and  beauty  by  length 
of  time  or  constancy  of  use.  IV.  Its  great  price  is  proved  by  the  efforts  the  mer- 
chant made  to  secure  it.  V.  This  pearl  costs  heavily  the  one  who  procures  it.  VI. 
This  pearl  costs  the  surrender  of  all  sin.     (T.  T.  Eaton,  D.D.)        Goodly  pearl*:— 

I.  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  pearl  because  He  is  hidden,  and  to  be  sought  after. 

II.  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  pearl  because  of  its  durability  and  its  unchange- 
ableness.  Time  does  not  rust  a  pearl.  III.  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  pearl 
because  He  is  such  an  adornment  to  the  aoul  that  seeks  him.  IV.  Christ  may  be 
compared  to  a  pearl  because  of  its  value.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Sham  pearls  : — The 
fact  is  they  would  rather  have  a  sham  pearl  than  a  genuine  pearl.  The  factorie* 
of  Bohemia  and  Nuremburg  are  full  of  activity  making  artificial  pearls.  With 
alabaster,  and  scales,  and  glue,  and  wax,  they  manufacture  Bomething  which  ia 
a  sham  pearl,  and  substitute  it  for  the  real  pearl.  And  so  the  whole  world  now 
is  full  of  attempts  to  manufacture  a  new  salvation,  a  new  pearl  of  great  price. 
They  take  a  few  grains  of  good  works  and  a  few  grains  of  fine  poetic  Bentiment, 
and  they  put  them  together,  and  they  call  it  a  pearl.  But  it  will  not  wear ;  it  will 
crumble  to  pieces  at  the  last  in  the  fires  which  shall  be  kindled  around  about  our 
world.  In  Brazil,  when  a  slave  finds  a  diamond  beyond  a  certain  value,  he  gets 
hia  deliverance.  He  may  have  searched  for  days  and  months  and  years  for  » 
diamond,  but  finding  it  of  a  certain  size,  he  hastens  home  to  his  master,  shouting, 
"  Free  1  free  1 "  And  if  to-night  you  would  only  find  this  pearl  of  great  price,  it 
would  insure  yon  eternal  emancipation.  Oh  I  plunge  this  hour  into  the  deep 
ocean  of  God's  mercy,  and  though  you  may  be  submerged  for  a  while  in  darkness 
and  doubt  and  convictions,  your  soul  will  come  up  after  a  while  enriched  and 
Bparkling  with  an  immortal  briUiant.  {Ibid.)  Pearls  durable : — Time  does  not 
rast  a  pearl.  It  passes  down  from  one  royal  family  to  another,  from  one  genera- 
tion to  another,  the  same  beautiful,  exquisite  thing — worth  as  much  now  aa  it  wm 
ever  worth — alwaya  to  be  valuable,  and  a  type  of  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever.    Other  gems  may  be  split  or  ground,  but  this  pear]  of  great 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

price  is  unbroken  of  the  wheel,  and  it  is  uninjured  of  fire.  Paul  wore  it  through 
imprisonment,  and  darkness,  and  shipwreck,  and  martyrdom.  Howard  wore  it 
through  the  plague  in  feBtering  lazarettos.  It  heaved  on  the  dying  heart  of  Robert 
South  and  of  Jeremy  Taylor.  Shadrach  carried  that  gem  through  the  furuaca 
Beven  times  heated.  It  is  always  bright.  It  is  always  beautiful,  Eutherford,  in 
hia  dying  moments,  caught  a  glimpse  of  it,  and  was  filled  with  infinite  exultation, 
and  there  are  multitudes  of  the  suffering  who,  after  all  other  staffs  were  broken,  and 
all  other  lights  were  extinguished,  and  all  other  strength  was  exhausted,  cried  out, 
•'  Pearl  of  great  price,  comfort  me  1  "  The  sapphire,  and  the  topaz,  and  the  emerald, 
and  the  diamond  shall  perish ;  but  this  pearl  of  great  price  shall  go  uninjured  long 
after  the  globe  has  been  tOEsed,  a  miserable  hulk,  charred,  dismasted,  and  ship- 
wrecked, amid  the  howhng  blasts  of  the  judgment  gale.  (Ibid.)  Pearls  an 
adornment : — Again,  I  remark  that  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  pearl,  because 
He  is  such  an  adornment  and  decoration  to  the  soul  that  seeks  Him.  I  have  no 
sympathy  with  the  Puritanic  notion  that  God  despises  jewellery.  I  think  if  God 
despised  jewellery  He  would  not  make  so  much  of  it.  Instead  of  the  variegated 
seasons,  the  earth  would  have  had  the  same  colour  all  the  year  round ;  the  tree 
would  have  yielded  its  fruit  without  leaf  or  blossom  ;  Niagara  would  let  down  its 
water  without  thunder  or  winged  spray ;  the  clouds  would  have  drawn  their  black 
bodies  through  the  skies  where  now  they  resemble  silvery  skiffs  with  angelic  crew, 
sailing  through  the  archipelago  of  stars.  If  God  had  despised  beauty  and  adorn- 
ment. He  would  not  have  made  the  caverns  of  the  ocean  great  gardens  of  coral,  and 
sponge,  and  seaweed,  and  pearls.  No.  God  loves  adornment  from  the  fact  that 
He  has  made  it,  and  allows  Jesus  Christ  to  be  compared  to  a  pearl.  I  know  there 
are  some  people  who  suppose  that  reUgion  distorts  one ;  that  reUgion  damages  a 
man's  nature;  that  reUgion  cows  him  down ;  that  religion  takes  all  the  spirit  out 
of  him ;  that  it  turns  a  man  into  a  snuffling  bigot ;  that  it  puts  handcuffs  on  the 
wrists  and  hopples  on  the  ankles,  and  that,  like  a  retreating  army,  it  poisons  all 
the  wells  along  where  it  goes.  No,  no.  It  is  a  decoration ;  it  is  an  embellishment ; 
it  is  a  pearl.  Why,  my  friends,  as  an  adornment  religion  was  mere  than  philosophy 
to  Bacon,  more  than  prowess  to  Havelock,  more  than  geology  to  Sillirnan,  more 
than  science  to  Agassiz,  more  than  music  to  Mozart.  ReUgion  I  It  has  sung  the 
Bweetest  sougs,  and  it  has  built  the  highest  monuments,  and  it  has  Ufted  the 
noblest  arches,  and  it  has  puinted  the  finest  pictures,  and  it  has  worked  the 
richest  embroideries,  and  it  has  composed  the  subUmest  tragedy.  {Ibid.)  Pearl* 
valuable: — Again,  I  remark:  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  pearl  because  of  its 
value.  It  does  not  take  a  very  large  pearl  to  be  worth  thousands  of  dollars.  The 
King  of  Persia  paid  six  hundred  thousand  livres  for  one  pearl ;  Cleopatra  had  a 
pearl  worth  three  hundred  and  seventy-five  thousand  dollars,  and  she  dissolved 
ft  at  a  feast,  and  then  drank  it  to  the  health  of  Marc  Antony  ;  the  King  of  Portugal 
bad  a  pearl  of  almost  indescribable  value — so  that  the  pearl  most  appropriately 
becomes  a  symbol  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  of  infinite  value.  I  come  io 
a  soul  that  has  just  awakened  out  of  sin  and  been  pardoned,  and  I  say  :  "  0 1  soul, 
what  is  Christ  worth  to  you  ?  "  and  the  soul  responds,  "  All  in  all  to  me  is  Christ." 
The  parable  of  the  pearl  of  great  price : — I.  I  shaU  show  you  why  Christ  is  com- 
pared to  a  pearl — to  the  richest  pearL  Pearls,  naturaUsts  tell  us,  have  a  strange 
birth  and  original.  II.  Some  pearls  are  of  great  worth.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  no 
doubt  is  compared  to  a  pearl  of  great  price  upon  this  account  chiefly — He  is  of 
inestimable  value  (Isa.  xUu.  4).  III.  Pearls  have  a  hidden  virtue  in  them,  though 
but  smaU  in  bigness,  yet  great  in  efiicacy.  Jesus  Christ  had  a  hidden  virtue  in 
Him — though  little  in  the  eyes  of  carnal  persons,  yet  such  as  receive  Him  in  faith, 
find  wonderful  virtue  in  Him  (Luke  viii.  46).  Such  is  the  hidden  virtue  ol 
Jesus  Christ,  of  this  Pearl,  that  when  a  man  finds  it,  and  partakes  thereof  inwardly — 
it  fills  him  with  joy  and  earthly  comfort.  IV.  Pearls  are  of  a  splendid  and  oriental 
brightness — both  without  and  within.  Jesus  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  pearl  on 
this  account  (Heb.  i.  3).  V.  Pearls — nay,  oiu  pearl  of  great  price,  enriches  him  that 
finds  it  So  they  that  find  the  pearl  of  great  price,  Jesus  Christ,  and  lay  hold  ou 
Him,  are  greatly  enriched,  they  are  spirituaUy  rich,  eternally  rich  (Eph.  iii.  8). 
VI.  Some  men,  when  they  have  found  a  pearl  of  great  price,  they  know  not  the 
worth  of  it.  They  perhaps  think  some  other  pearls  are  of  equal  value,  or  as  rich 
M  that  which  they  have  found.  So  some,  when  they  have  found  Christ,  kaow  not 
the  worth,  the  riches  of  Him,  but  are  ready  to  esteem  other  pearls  equally  with 
Christ.  VIL  This  being  so,  it  followcth  hence,  that  it  behoveth  him  that  finds  • 
pearl  ol  great  price  to  know  it  weU  what  it  is,  and  also  its  just  value,  lest  he  be 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  287 

cheated  aud  part  with  it  for  pearls  of  little  value  in  comparison  of  that.  VIIL 
Pearls,  rich  pearls  of  great  price,  are  commonly  kept  in  the  possession  of  noble 
persona,  who  are  adorned  with  them,  and  are  known  to  be  noble  persons.  So  the 
saints,  born  of  God,  are  the  most  excellent  in  all  the  earth,  and  these  onlj  are 
adorned  with  goodly  pearls  (Ezek.  xvi.  11).  {B.  Reach)  The  parable  of  th» 
pearl: — As  to  the  place  where  you  should  seek  Jesus  Clurist,  the  Pearl  of  great 
price.  Pearls  must  be  sought  where  they  are  to  be  found.  I.  Ton  must  seek  Him 
in  the  depths  of  God's  eternal  councils,  there  you  may  find  Him — for  He  lay  there 
from  everlasting.  II.  You  must  seek  Him  in  the  depths  of  eternal  wisdom.  III. 
You  must  seek  Him  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  of  redemption,  as  the  head  and 
great  r^jpresentative  of  God's  elect.  IV.  You  must  seek  Him  in  the  depths  of 
God's  eternal  love.  V.  You  must  seek  this  pearl  in  the  revelation  of  God'a 
council,  in  the  types  and  sacrifices  under  the  Law.  You  must  seek  Him  in  the 
revelation  God  made  of  Him  in  the  prophecies  of  the  prophets.  And  more 
especially  you  must  seek  Him  in  the  glorioles  gospel.  VI.  You  must  seek  this  pearl 
by  faith.  VII.  You  must  seek  this  peail  in  the  promises  of  God,  in  the  promises  of 
the  New  Covenant,  or  of  the  Gospels,  VIII.  You  must  seek  Christ  in  the  way  of 
your  duty,  in  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer,  as  well  as  hearing  the  Word.  Now 
I  shall  show  when  you  should  seek  Him.  I.  Early  (Prov.  viii.  17).  II.  To  seek 
Him  early  is  to  seek  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found  (Isa.  It.  6).  IIL  When  we 
have  a  full  gale  of  the  Spirit,  when  we  have  a  strong  operation  of  the  Word  and 
Spirit  upon  our  hearts.  IV.  Seek  Him  to-day  (Heb.  iii.  7).  V.  Seek  Him  before 
it  is  too  late.  How  must  the  pearl  of  great  price  he  nought  f  I.  Diligently.  II. 
With  skill  and  divine  wisdom.  III.  With  full  purpose  and  resolution  of  heart  and 
Boul.  IV.  As  one  that  knows  the  great  want,  need,  and  necessity  of  Christ.  V. 
As  one  who  is  convinced  of  the  great  worth  and  excellence  of  Christ.  VI.  Be- 
lievingly,  not  doubting.  VH.  With  longings  after  Him.  VIII.  With  a  heart 
touched  with  the  loadstone  of  His  love  (Prov.  ii.  1-4).  IX.  Constantly, 
nnweariedly ;  never  cease  till  thou  hast  found  Him.  X.  Sincerely,  not  for  the  loaves, 
nor  for  applause,  not  simply  to  be  saved,  but  for  His  own  sake  (John.  vi.  26). 
{Tbid.)  The  parable  of  the  pearl  of  great  price: — Why  He  must  be  sought. 
Why  sinners  should  seek  Him.  I.  Sinners  shoiild  seek  Christ,  the  Pearl  of  great 
price,  because  He  came  to  seek  them.  II.  Sinners  should  seek  Christ  because 
seeking  and  finding  Him  are  coupled  together  (Jer.  xxix.  13).  III.  Because  the 
promise  runs  to  them  that  seek  (Matt.  vii.  7).  IV.  Sinners  should  seek  Him,  be- 
cause they  are  commanded  to  do  so  (Isa.  Iv.  6).  V.  Because  salvation  is  only  in 
Jesus  Christ.  All  that  seek  justification  and  eternal  life,  and  do  not  seek  Him, 
shall  certainly  perish  (Acts  iv.  12).  VI.  Sinners  should  seek  Christ  because  by 
nature  they  are  without  Him  (Eph.  ii.  12).  How  will  sinners  lament  their  folly  in 
seeking  other  things  more  than  Christ ;  nay,  have  utterly  neglected  Him.  Those 
who  have  got  Christ,  who  have  found  this  pearl,  are  the  most  happy  people  in  the 
world.  I  shall  now  show  you  what  may  be  m^ant  by  telling  all  he  had.  Selling 
all,  signifies  no  more  than  parting  with  whatsoever  his  heart  was  inordinately  set 
upon  before  he  found  this  pearl.  I.  With  all  his  sins  and  horrid  lusts ;  all  that  find 
Christ,  part  willingly  with  every  evil  habit,  and  with  every  evil  act  of  sin  ;  and  by  the 
spirit  and  grace  of  Christ,  he  is  enabled  to  do  this.  II.  All  his  old  company  with 
whom  he  took  deUght,  and  among  whom  he  dishonoured  God.  III.  All  his  former 
hopes  of  heaven,  and  the  foundations  he  built  those  hopes  upon.  IV.  All  his  own 
external  privileges.  V.  All  His  own  good  works — and  inherent  righteousness — in 
point  of  justification  he  sold  all.  He  bought  it:  I.  He  that  buys  a  pearl,  must 
know  where  it  is  to  be  had,  and  seek  it.  A  sinner  must  know  where  to  find  Christ. 
n.  They  that  buy  must  know  the  market-day,  and  repair  thither  to  buy.  So  must 
a  sinner  attend  on  the  word  and  ministry  that  would  have  Jesus  Christ.  III. 
Buyers  commonly  ask  the  price  of  what  they  buy.  So  sinners  must  learn  theterma 
on  which  they  can  have  Christ,  that  is  without  money,  and  without  price.  IV, 
Some  come  only  to  cheapen — to  ask  the  price,  that  is  all.  So  do  some  here — they 
think  there  is  time  to  buy  hereafter.  V,  Some  who  come,  like  not  the  terms — they 
are  full  of  money  and  scorn  to  receive  freely.  They  are  proud.  VL  Some  come 
too  late,  the  market  day  is  over.  VH.  In  buying,  some  things  are  parted  with. 
Such  as  would  have  Christ — must  part  with  all  that  is  gain  to  them.  VUI.  Some 
refuse  to  buy  at  the  proper  season  and  afterwards  cry  out  against  their  own  folly. 
(B.  Keach.)  The  parable  of  the  pearl  of  great  price : — I  shall  show,  in  what 
respects  a  man,  in  seeking  after  heavenly  things,  may  be  compared  to  an  earthly 
merchant.    L  A  merchant  ia  one  that  trades  or  deals  for  the  good  things  of  this 


f88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHi*.  rxa, 

world,  and  be  makes  it  his  chief  business.  So  a  man  that  seeks  after  heavenly  thin^^s, 
he  trades  or  deals  in  spiritual  commodities,  and  he  makes  religion  his  chief  busi- 
ness. Hence  eaith  Paul  to  Timothy,  "  Meditate  upon  these  things,  give  thyself 
wholly  to  them,  that  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  all  men."  (1  Timothy  iv.  15). 
II.  A  merchant  sometimes  trades  and  deals  in  things  of  great  worth,  as  here  in 
this  parable  is  expressed,  viz.,  goodly  pearl.  What  is  more  valued  than  gold,  silver, 
precious  stones,  and  goodly  pearl  7  III.  A  merchant  sais  his  heart,  his  mind,  and 
chiefest  thoughts  upon  his  merchandize ;  I  mean  he  prefers  these  things,  and  in 
good  earnest  pursues  after  them  above  all  things  upon  the  earth.  So  a  spiritual 
merchant  or  Christian  sets  his  heart  and  chiefest  thoughts  upon  heavenly  things; 
he  sets  his  afiection  on  things  above,  and  not  on  things  that  are  upon  the  earth. 
IV.  A  merchant  sometimes  ventures  to  sea,  and  runs  many  dangers  (in  seeking 
goodly  pearls,  and  after  rich  merchandize)  both  by  storms,  rocks,  sands,  and  pirates 
also.  So  a  true  Christi.'in  is  exposed  to  great  difficulties,  and  runs  many  dangers, 
■who  ventures  out  into  a  visible  profession  of  religion ;  on  the  sea  of  this  world, 
what  Btorms  of  reproaches;  temptations  and  persecutions,  is  he  oft  exposed  unto? 
"V.  A  merchant  at  first  hath  not  that  skill  in  trading  as  he  attains  or  gets  after- 
wards. Old  dealers  have  more  ju'dgment  and  greater  experience  than  such  who 
have  newly  begun  to  trade.  So  a  man  when  he  first  begins  to  seek  after  God,  or  to 
mind  heavenly  things,  he  hath  not  that  understanding,  that  knowledge  and  judg- 
raent  in  rehgion,  as  an  old  Christian.  VI.  A  merchant  ought  to  know  the  nature 
and  value  of  those  commodities  he  deals  in,  and  the  whole  mystery  of  merchan- 
dizing. So  a  true  Christian  or  spiritual  merchant  labours  to  know  the  transcendent 
worth,  nature  and  value  of  all  spiritual  things,  and  the  whole  mystery  of  godliness; 
indeed,  this  knowledge  is  not  easy  to  attain  unto.  VII.  A  merchant  is  very  careful 
of  his  business,  when  he  hath  met  with  loss,  lest  he  run  out  and  waste  his  substance, 
and  so  at  last  be  undone.  So  a  spiritual  merchant  is  very  thoughtful,  and  full  of 
trouble,  and  takes  the  more  care,  when  he  sees  he  goes  backward  rather  than  for- 
ward, or  decays  in  zeal,  love,  faith,  etc.  VIIL  A  merchant,  if  he  know  not  what 
pearls  be,  may  soon  be  easily  cheated  by  false  and  counterfeit  pearls.  So 
many  a  spiritual  merchant,  if  he  know  not  what  the  person  of  Christ  is,  may 
easily  be  cheated  of  the  true  Christ,  and  believe  in  a  false  Christ,  IX.  A  merchant 
trades  to  foreign  parts,  they  fetch  their  treasure  from  afar.  So  a  spiritual  merchant 
trades  to  heaven,  a  far  country.  X.  A  merchant  has  his  correspondent  in  those 
far  countries  to  which  he  trades,  who  receives  his  merchandize,  and  makes  returns. 
So  all  true  Christians  have  their  Blessed  Correspondpnt  in  heaven,  who  manageth  all 
their  concerns ;  viz. ,  the  Lord  Jesus.  XI.  A  merchant  is  very  careful  to  atiend  the 
exchange,  or  place  where  merchants  meet  together,  and  where  they  hear,  and  learn 
how  their  affairs  go  abroad,  and  those  have  opportunities  to  sell  or  buy  more  goods. 
Moreover,  if  they  neglect  or  are  retniss  in  their  attendance,  it  gives  cause  of  am- 
picion  that  they  may  soon  break,  and  cease  to  be  merchants.  So  spiritual  merchants 
are  very  careful  to  attend  solemn  meetings  of  the  saints,  where  they  hear  of  and 
from  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  they  there  receive  from  Him,  so  they  make  returns  of 
praise  to  Him.  XII.  Merchants  take  great  care  to  keep  their  books  or  accounts 
well,  they  are  oft  in  their  counting-house — that  they  may  know  whether  they  gain 
or  lose ;  that  they  may  see  a  good  end  of  their  affairs,  and  that  they  are  not 
wronged.  And  thus  also  do  the  saints,  they  labour  to  cast  up  their  accounts,  viz., 
examine  and  try  their  hearts.  Secondly  :  I  shall  show  you  these  are  the  best  and 
chiefest  merchandize  in  the  world,  or  no  merchandize  like  spiritual  merchandize. 
I.  Because  the  nature  of  these  things  these  merchants  trade  in,  far  excel  all  the 
things  in  the  world.  All  other  things  are  of  httle  worth  to  the  grace  of  God,  the 
love  of  God,  union  and  communion  with  God,  to  trade  in  gold  tried  in  the  fire 
(Rev.  ii.  S-18).  II.  "All  things  of  the  world  are  vanity  "  (Eccl.  i.  2).  But  there  is 
real  substance  in  these  merchandize.  HI.  These  merchandize  sire  best  because  in- 
corruptible, neither  moth  nor  rust  can  corrupt,  fire  consume,  or  thieves  steal  these 
goodly  pearls.  IV.  The  rareness  or  scarcity  of  these  merchandize,  show  their 
most  excellent  nature.  Things  are  not  only  esteemed  for  their  worth,  but  for  their 
rarity.  Now  these  things  that  spiritual  merchants  seek,  are  exceeding  rare  ;  hardly 
one  man  in  a  thousand  finds  these  goodly  pearls,  the  pearl  of  great  price.  V. 
These  merchandize  were  bought  with  a  great  price,  by  the  Son  of  God.  He  first  laid 
down  the  full  sum  that  Divine  justice  demanded,  and  got  them  into  His  own  hand 
for  His  elect.  VI.  They  are  soul  treasures  such  that  suit  with  and  answer  all  the 
wants  of  the  precious  and  immortal  soul  of  man.  VII.  These  merchandize  are 
the  best,  because  of  their  duration ;  all  the  things  of  this  world  are  but  momentazy. 


CHAP,  xin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  289 

Bometimes  gone  in  a  moment — the  world  passeth  away ;  bnt  spiritual  things,  which 
are  not  seen,  are  eternal.  VIII.  Their  correspondent,  with  whom  these  merchants 
trade,  that  manages  all  their  concernments,  and  is  engaged  to  make  them  sure  and 
safe,  returns  from  afar.  Now,  as  Jesus  Christ  is  their  correspondent,  so  he  is  such  an 
undertaker  that  they  need  not  fear  anything  can  miscany,  which  is  in  His  hand, 
IX.  These  merchandizes  are  the  best  merchandizes,  and  these  merchants  the  wisest 
merchants  doth  appear  in  respect  of  the  terms  on  which  they  trade.  They  are  the 
best  merchandize  because  their  commodities  are  freely  given,  "  without  money, 
without  price."  It  cannot  indeed  stand  consistent  with  the  design  of  redemptive 
grace,  which  is  to  advance  the  glory  of  God  in  His  goodness,  and  to  cut  oS  all 
boasting,  and  cause  of  boasting,  to  admit  of  anything  of  the  creatuTe  that  looka 
like  money,  to  procure  a  right  to  these  things.  X,  These  are  the  best  merchan- 
dize— this  the  best  trade — because  of  the  returns  these  merchants  have  from  Jesus 
Christ.  They  have  quick  returns  (Isa.  Ixv.  24.).  It  is  the  best  trade — they  only 
trade  for  things  of  inestimable  worth.  The  returns  are  certain — sure  of  growing 
eternally  rich.  Not  only  rich,  but  great  and  noble.  These  merchants  are  advanced 
to  mighty  honour   (Proverbs  xii.   26).      (Ibid.)  What  shall  we  buy: — When 

the  pilgrims  were  in  Vanity  Fair,  one  chanced  mockingly  to  say  to  them,  •'  What 
will  ye  buy?  "  But  they,  looking  gravely  on  him,  said,  "We  buy  the  truth."  At 
that  there  was  occasion  taken  to  despite  them  the  more ;  some  mocking,  some 
taunting,  and  some  calling  upon  others  to  smite  them.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  all 
the  abuse,  these  good  pilgrims  would  only  buy  the  truth ;  and  when  they  bought  it, 
not  for  any  price  would  they  sell  it  again.  Usually,  in  ordinary  merchandize,  what 
we  buy  we  are  at  liberty  to  sell ;  but  it  is  not  so  here,  for  the  command  is  express, 
"Buy  the  truth,  and  sell  it  not."  And  a  most  merciful  provision  it  is ;  for,  as  one 
Bays,  "  Those  who  sell  the  truth  sell  their  own  souls  with  it."  (Robert  Macdonald.) 
The  Pearl : — The  true  lessons  of  the  parable,  as  I  understand  them,  are  briefly 
these : — I.  It  represents  the  experience,  not  of  a  careless  or  a  profane  man,  who 
stumbles  suddenly  upon  the  gospel  when  he  was  in  search  of  other  things,  but  of 
one  who  is  awakened,  and  has  begun  to  seek  the  true  religion,  endeavouring  to  add 
attainment  to  attainment  sincerely,  according  to  his  light.  His  conscience  is  un- 
easy. There  is  truth  in  the  man,  though  not  wisdom.  He  is  honestly  seeking 
the  way,  and  the  Lord  leads  him.  He  is  seeking;  he  shall  find.  II.  It  represents 
the  unparalleled,  inconceivable  richness  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ,  taking  away  all 
a  sinner's  sin,  and  bestowing  on  him  freely  the  peace  and  privileges  of  a  dear  child. 
III.  It  represents  that  these  riches  lie,  not  in  an  accumulation  of  goodly  attain- 
ments, such  as  men  are  wont  to  traffic  in,  but  in  one  undivided,  indivisible,  hitherto 
unknown  and  unimagined  treasure.  IV.  It  represents  that  the  inquirer,  the  instant 
he  discovers  that  this  one  incomparable,  all-comprehending  treasure  exists  and  is 
offered  to  him,  cheerfully,  eagerly,  unhesitatingly  gives  away  all  that  he  possesses, 
in  order  to  acquue  it.  That  is,  he  gives  all  for  Christ,  and  then  enjoys  all  in 
Christ.  (W.  Amot.)  Christ  the  pearl  of  great  price  : — I.  Those  who  would  find 
pearls  must  search  diligently  for  them,  and  encounter  many  dangers  by  diving,  &o. 
II.  Pearls  are  very  valuable.  III.  Pearls  possess  a  splendid  brightness.  Their 
beauty  is  as  much  within  as  without.  IV.  Pearls  are  so  firm,  strong,  and 
compact,  that  fire  cannot  consume  them,  nor  ordinary  strength  break  them. 
y.  Pearls  are  a  rich  ornament,  and  those  who  wear  them  are  accounted  the 
honourable  of  mankind.  VI.  Yet  many  are  ignorant  of  them,  and  many  esteem 
them  no  more  than  pebbles.  (Pulpit  Helps.)  How  visibly  the  providence  of 
God  appears  to  favour  honest  perseverance  in  our  worldly  callings.  Man 
seeks  for  the  chief  good — He  seeks  for  this  pearl  in  the  mines  of  learning, 
business,  ambition,  pleasure.  The  true  pearl  lies  not  in  these.  (E.  Scobell,  M.A.) 
The  pearl  of  great  price  : — No  gem,  in  the  estimation  of  the  ancients,  surpassed 
the  pearl  in  value.  The  old  writers  speak  of  it  as  altogether  wonderful,  and  to  be 
honoured  above  all  jewels  that  the  eyes  of  man  have  beheld.  Nothing  else  was  so 
pure,  so  rare,  so  exquisite.  As  for  its  origin,  they  thought  it  was  at  first  a  drop  of 
dew  from  heaven,  condensed  within  the  sea-shell,  and  doubling  there  its  native  per- 
fections. They  thought,  moreover,  that  though  bom  beneath  the  waves,  it  retained 
some  unknown  connection  with  its  home  in  the  sky,  taking  its  beauty  from  the 
aspect  of  the  heavens,  and  drawing  virtue  from  them,  limpid  and  clear  when  they 
were  serene,  turbid  and  cloudy  when  they  were  overcast.  Its  irrideecence  seemed 
the  result  of  sympathy  with  the  seven  colours  of  the  sunbeam  ;  even  the  shell  which 
enclosed  it  partook  of  its  silver  beauty  and  many-hued  reflections ;  while  it  was 
«oeotmted  the  very  queen  of  gems,  as  that  to  which  no  graver's  tools  nor  implement 

19 


ttO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

of  man  can  add  a  charm.  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  The  pearl  scker: — Thig 
merchantman  i3  no  lover  of  the  degraded  and  the  base :  no  profligate,  no  sensualist ; 
the  pearl  is  not  the  type  of  the  delights  by  which  such  men  are  attracted.  Rather 
is  he  one  of  those  who  follow  after  things  worthy  of  immortals ;  who,  though  in 
error  as  to  what  our  real  good  is,  and  where  it  is  to  be  found,  are  true,  notwith- 
standing, to  pure  and  honest  ideals ;  who  wish  to  do  right,  whose  hearts  are  the 
home  of  high  and  worthy  thoughts,  who  love  and  honour  virtue  and  righteousness, 
and,  like  the  scribe  of  old,  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  Goi  .  .  .  The  quest 
for  pearls  had  been  the  aim  of  this  man's  life  :  he  was  not  prompted  by  sordid  views 
of  gain,  but  simply  by  the  desire  for  the  loveliest,  purest,  and  best  that  can  be  found 
in  this  troubled  world.  And  when  at  length  he  discovered  what  outshone  all  he  had 
ever  seen  or  imagined,  his  resolve  was  instant — to  give  up  all  he  had  for  that  one 
thing,  knowing  that  having  it  he  was  rich  indeed,  though  everything  else  was  gone 
from  his  hands  for  ever.  .  .  .  This  is  no  fancy  sketch  :  it  is  a  picture  of  what 
happens  day  after  day;  it  occurs  as  often  as  any  noble  soul,  long  astray,  finds  at 
last  his  rest  in  God.  He  only  who  guides  them  into  that  rest  can  tell  how  many 
such  there  be ;  yet  even  we  suspect  the  number  to  be  considerable,  and  have 
seen  such  instances  ourselves.  We  have  seen  men  who  have  long  sought  for 
true  joys,  without  finding  them  ;  who  have  had  in  possession  many  excellent  gifts, 
yet  not  the  highest;  who,  after  much  experience,  felt  sure  that  there  must  be  some- 
where  a  better  thing,  which  fadeth  not  away.  At  length,  perhaps  late  in  life,  they 
find  it ;  whereupon  their  former  thoughts  are  replaced  by  another  mind — the 
wisdom  of  this  world  is  given  up,  pride  of  soul  suppressed ;  trust  in  self  also  goes, 
with  the  confidence  which  once  was  felt  in  earthly  things.  A  man,  in  a  spiritual 
and  metaphorical  sense,  may  be  said  to  sell  all  he  has,  to  become  poor  in  spirit,  and 
lowly  of  heart,  because  he  has  found  the  pearl  of  great  price,  after  travelling  many 
years  through  waste  places,  and  because  self-renunciation  is  the  price  for  which  that 
treasure  is  to  be  bought.  (Ibid.)  Persevere  in  quest  of  pearl : — He  who  seeks 
what  is  honest  and  good  is  journeying  in  the  right  direction ;  it  does  not  follow  that 
all  such  men  will  find  at  last  what  the  Lord  promises.  He  who  can  be  content 
without  that  pearl  of  great  price,  will  never  find  it.  The  danger  is  that  we  may 
rest  content  with  some  lower  forms  of  good,  without  discerning  how  much  is  beyond 
them,  and  how  poor  they  are  in  comparison.  When  we  go  about  this  world,  buying 
whatsoever  of  rare  and  precious  we  can  lay  our  hands  on,  for  our  own  satisfaction, 
or  for  a  name  among  men  as  possessors  of  things  which  many  covet,  or  to  adorn  our 
persons,  our  life,  or  those  whom  we  love ;  when  self  is  thus  at  the  bottom  of  the 
pursuits  to  which  we  give  our  years  away ;  when  the  pearls  which  we  thus  collect 
are  gathered  only  for  our  own  delectation,  as  if  to  deck  our  garments  now,  and  light 
up  our  houses,  or  perchance  to  be  inwoven  with  our  winding-sheets  or  strewed  about 
Dur  coflBns  ;  when  this  search  for  what  is  good  has  reference  to  time  only,  to  the 
pride  of  the  eyes,  and  to  the  greater  glory  of  this  fading  life — then  all  that  we  gather 
shall  be  vain  and  without  profit,  nor  shall  we  see  those  Divine  things  in  which  there 
is  no  spot  now  and  no  fading  hereafter.  But,  when  a  man  hears  the  voice  of  God 
speaking  to  him  of  riches  that  cannot  be  taken  from  him,  and  of  something  worth 
more  than  the  world,  which  he  ought  to  possess  and  may  have  if  he  will,  at  the 
price  fixed  for  the  same ;  and  when,  at  such  tidings,  he  feels  that  he  must  arise  and 
go  to  his  Father,  taking  his  possessions  to  give  in  exchange  for  that  best  thing : 
then  is  the  parable  fulfilled.  {Ibid.)  One  pearl: — In  these  days  of  safety,  easy 
transport,  and  credit,  the  bulk  of  any  object  of  desire  makes  comparatively  little 
difference  to  its  worth.  But  in  the  former  ages  of  insecurity,  diflicult  conveyance, 
limited  commercial  transactions,  when  there  were  no  railways,  banks,  or  paper 
money — one  of  the  great  recommendations  of  precious  stones  was  the  ease  and  safety 
with  which  they  could  be  transported  from  one  place  to  another.  .  .  .  The  merchant 
might  have  to  pass  through  districts  torn  with  wars,  or  infested  by  robbers ;  if  he 
attempted  to  take  his  gold  and  silver  and  precious  wares  with  him,  he  was  more 
than  likely  to  be  relieved  of  them  all  before  he  got  far,  and  to  lose  his  own  life  aa 
well ;  what  was  he  to  do  then  ?  This — he  might  sell  all  he  had,  and  invest  it  all  in 
one  gem  of  surpassing  value  I  this  he  might  safely  hide  about  his  person ;  then, 
clothing  himself  in  mean  attire,  and  taking  his  staff  in  his  hand,  he  might  set  forth 
on  foot,  and  travel  as  a  pilgrim  or  a  beggar  towards  his  destination.  Then,  when 
the  perils  of  the  way  were  past,  and  he  had  reached  the  city  to  which  he  was  bound, 
he  bad  but  to  show  hie  pearl,  and  its  immense  value  would  at  once  be  recognized. 
This  Ib  a  parable  of  ourselves.  We  ha  e  a  journey  to  go,  to  a  far  city.  It  is  uselosa 
for  us  to  attempt  to  take  our  wealth  wit    na :  those  old  thieves,  sin  and  death  and  hell. 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  991 

beset  the  road ;  they  have  robbed  all  who  have  passed  their  way,  and  how  can  we 
escape  t  Besides,  a  thousand  enemies  lay  wait  to  make  us  afraid — flood,  drought, 
fire,  the  dishonesty  of  some,  the  incompetence  of  others — all  these  are  ready  to 
deprive  us  of  our  wealth.  Even  our  loved  ones  we  cannot  take  with  us.  Lonely 
we  came  into  this  world,  lonely  we  must  go  out  of  it ;  no  human  companion  can  go 
down  with  us  to  the  grave.  Is  there  then  nothing,  no  treasure,  which  we  may  take 
in  safety  with  us,  and  keep  securely  by  us  ?  Yes,  there  is  one ;  even  the  pearl  of 
great  price,  Jesus  Christ.  No  one  can  deprive  us  of  tfiat  treasure  ;  it  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  any  enemy  or  thief.  And  when  we  reach  the  end  of  our  journey,  with  Him 
for  our  Saviour  and  Friend,  then  shall  we  find  ourselves  passing  rich,  although  we 
have  nothing  at  all  beside,  where  Jesus  is  Lord  of  all,  and  where  everything  takes 
its  value  only  from  Him,  there  is  He  Himself  the  one  possession  which  includes  in 
itself  the  possession  of  everything  worth  having.  {R.  Winterbothum,  M.A.)  The 
pearl  of  great  price : — I.  This  pearl  mat  bb  appboprutelt  beoabded  as  a  be- 
PBESENTATiON  OF  THE  LoRD  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  rarity  of  a  gem  greatly  enhances 
its  value.  2.  A  gem  that  is  entirely  free  from  flaws  is  regarded  as  highly  precious. 
He  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners.  3.  The  value  of  a 
gem  materially  depends  upon  the  size  of  it.  To  measure  Him,  not  physically,  but 
morally  and  spiritually,  is  far  beyond  our  power.  II.  Before  we  can  feel  a  beai< 
desibe  to  possess  Ghbist,  His  inestimable  value  must  be  in  some  measure 
APPBEHENT>ED.  I.  Of  this  truth  the  case  of  the  Jews  affords  a  convincing  demon- 
stration. 2.  To  reveal  Jesus  in  His  matchless  worth  is  the  special  office  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.     IH.  Those  who  have  been  brought  to  see  and  feel  the  Savioub's 

WORTH    WILL    REOABD     NO   SACRIFICE     TOO   GREAT    TH    ORDER    TO     BE  MADE  PARTAKERS   OF 

Him.  1 .  We  must  be  willing  to  part  with  our  own  righteousness.  2.  With  the 
favour  of  our  dearest  friends,  should  their  claims  clash  with  His.  3.  With  every 
known  sin,  however  agreeable  or  profitable.  {Expository  Outliiiea.)  A  great  bar- 
gain:— The  merchantman : — I.  Watch  him  while  he  is  seeking.  1.  He  has  his 
mind  aroused  and  engaged.  His  heart  is  in  his  business.  2.  He  has  a  fixed  definite 
object.  He  has  given  himself  to  pearl  hunting.  3.  He  had  an  object  which  was  not 
at  all  commonplace.  Other  people  might  go  for  stones,  he  for  pearls.  4.  He  sought 
them  with  diiigeace.  5.  He  used  discrimination  at  the  same  time.  6.  He  went  into 
the  b'lsiness  with  moderate  expectations.  II.  His  finding.  1.  This  find  was  a  re- 
markable one.  2.  He  found  all  in  one.  3.  He  was  resolved  that  he  would  have  it. 
III.  His  selling  out.  1.  Sell  out  old  prejudices.  2.  Self-righteousness.  3. 
Sinful  pleasures.  IV.  The  buying.  1.  An  immediate  purchase.  2.  A  joyful  one. 
3.  An  enriching  one.  4.  A  final  purchase.  6.  A  purchase  he  nevei  regretted. 
(C  H.  Spurgcon.) 

Vers.  47-50.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  Is  like  unto  a  net  that  was  cast  Into 
the  sea. — Tlie  draw-mt : — 1.  We  of  this  generation,  a  miscellaneous  multitude  of 
old  and  young,  good  aid  evil,  move  about  at  liberty  in  the  wide  expanse  of  life,  as 
fishes  move  about  in  the  deep  broad  sea ;  but  certain  mysterious,  invisible  lines, 
have  been  let  down  into  the  water,  and  are  silently,  slowly  creeping  near,  and 
winding  round  us.  2.  Good  and  bad  alike  are  drawn  in  company  towards  the  shore, 
but  the  good  and  bad  are  separated  when  they  reach  it.  (IF.  Arnot.)  Separating 
good  and  bad  : — There  is  amachine  in  the  Bank  of  England  which  receives  sovereigns, 
as  a  mill  receives  grain,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  wholesale  whether  all  are  of 
full  weight.  As  they  pass  through,  the  machinery,  by  unerring  laws,  throws  all 
that  are  light  to  one  side,  and  all  that  are  of  full  weight  to  another.  That  process  is 
a  silent  but  solemn  parable  for  me.  Founded  as  it  is  upon  the  laws  of  nature,  it 
affords  the  most  vivid  similitude  of  the  certainty  which  characterizes  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  {Ibid.)  The  net : — Here  the  mixture  of  good  and  bad  is  not 
attributed  to  an  enemy,  but  is  exhibited  as  resulting  from  the  nature  of  the  case. 
In  fishing  no  selection  is  possible.  We  are  here  reminded  that  we  are  all  advancing 
through  life  towards  its  final  issue.  This  suggests — 1.  Enclosure.  2.  Enlarge- 
ment. But  the  main  points  of  the  parable  are — I.  The  truth  that  the  net 
oathebs  "of  every  kind."  The  Church  embraces  every  variety.  This  mixture 
arises  from  the  manner  in  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  proclaimed  among 
men  ;  publicly  to  alL  But  this  mixture  is  at  length  to  give  place.  On  the  shore  a 
real  and  final  distinction  will  be  made  and  acted  on.  The  test  will  be  our  value  to  Ood. 
{M.  Dods,  D.D.)  The  drag-net : — I.  The  occupation  implied.  Ministers  of  the 
gospel  are  set  forth  under  various  simiUtudes.  II.  The  besult  declabed.  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  onto  a  net  that  .  .  .  gathered  of  every  kind ; "  to  the 


292  TUB  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  nu. 

Christian  Chnrch  is  at  present  in  a  mixed  condition.  There  are  two  important  use« 
to  which  this  tmth  may  be  applied.  1.  To  refute  a  common  objection.  When 
religious  professors  bring  scandal  on  the  cause  with  which  they  are  identified,  tha 
enemies  of  Christianity  should  remember  that  in  this  respect  things  turn  out  just 
as  the  great  Founder  of  our  religion  foretold.  2.  Inasmuch  as  the  visible  Church 
is  thus  mixed,  all  who  name  the  name  of  Christ  should  be  jealous  over  themselves 
with  a  godly  jealousy,  and  not  rest  without  seeking  to  ascertain  what  is  their  true 
character.  III.  The  explanation  ofven — "  So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world." 
Notice :  1.  The  period  when  the  separation  will  take  place.  2.  The  agents  by 
whom  it  will  be  accomplished.  3.  The  solemn  issue  in  which  it  will  terminate. 
{Expository  Outlines.)  The  parable  of  the  net  cast  into  the  sea  : — The  gospel 
preached  may  fully  be  compared  to  a  net.  1,  A  net  is  a  proper  engine  or  in«tra- 
ment  to  catch  or  gather  fish  ;  so  the  gospel,  or  the  Word  of  God  preached,  is  a 
proper  instrument  to  gather  sinners  out  of  the  world  into  the  Church,  both  visible 
and  invisible  (1  Cor.  i.  2).  2.  A  net  is  cast  into  the  river  or  sea  before  it  can  take 
fish,  so  the  word  of  the  gospel  must  be  preached  that  sinners  may  be  converted. 
3.  A  net  takes  fish  (when  they  are  caught)  out  of  their  proper  element,  and  they 
die  immediately ;  so  those  sinners  who  are  indeed  taken,  or  spiritually  and  savingly- 
wrought  upon  by  preaching  the  Word,  are  taken  out  of  that  element  where  they  Uved, 
and  loved  to  live  before — i.e.,  out  of  a  course  of  sin  and  wickedness  ;  and  such  die 
presently  to  sin  and  to  all  the  vanities  of  the  sea  of  this  world.  4.  A  net  must  be 
cast  into  the  sea  or  river  with  judgment  by  a  skilful  fisherman  ;  it  requires  wisdom 
to  use  it  to  answer  the  end  appointed.  So  ministers,  Christ's  spiritual  fishermen, 
ought  to  be  men  of  great  skill,  knowledge,  wisdom,  and  experience  (2  Cor.  xii.  16). 
5.  A  net  is  cast  where  a  fisherman  hath  ground  to  hope  he  may  take  store  of 
fish;  so  a  minister  should  preach  where  multitudes  of  people  are  gathered  together, 
when  an  opportunity  doth  present;  thus  did  our  Lord  (Matt.  v.  1).  6.  Sometimes 
fishermen  labour  all  night  (as  Peter  and  John  did)  and  take  nothing  ;  it  is  God  that 
blesses  their  labour  when  they  succeed  well.  7.  A  net  takes  fish  of  every  kind, 
Bome  great  ones,  some  email  ones  ;  some  good,  and  some  bad.  So  the  gospel  nel 
gathers  of  every  sort,  some  rich,  some  poor,  some  great  ones  (but  not  many  of  that 
kind).  Borne  little  ones,  who  are  despised  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  8.  A  fisherman's 
work  is  very  hard,  and  he  is  exposed  oftentimes  to  be  tossed  on  the  tempeetuoas  sea  | 
80  is  the  work  of  Christ's  ministers.    {B.  Keach.) 

Ver.  51.  Have  ye  tmderstood  all  these  thlngrsT — A  clear  understanding : — ^I  fear 
there  are  hundreds  of  rehgionists  in  this  country  who  never  think  of  understanding 
that  which  they  attend  to  under  the  name  of  religion.  It  can  never  be  a  sanctifying 
word  to  any  except  so  far  as  they  receive  it  into  their  understanding.  To  realize 
by  experience  a.  doctrine  is  the  only  way  of  knowing  it.  Those  men  never  forget  a 
truth  who  have  had  it  burned  into  them  as  with  a  hot  iron.  1.  Let  us  consider 
this  searching  question,  "Have  ye  understood  all  these  things?"  as  spoken  to 
those  who  can  humldy,  but  yet  confidently,  say,  "  Yes,  I  have  undebstood  thbsi 
THINGS,"  We  can  say,  •*  One  thing  I  know ;  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  II 
we  have  understood  these  things,  what  then  ?  1.  Let  us  be  thankful  to  God,  for 
this  understanding  of  Divine  truth  is  not  due  to  any  natural  intelligence  we  possess. 
2.  If  you  have  been  led  to  understand  these  things,  ought  not  this  to  encourage  you 
to  seek  to  understand  more?  8.  You  should  not  be  backward  to  tell  them  to  others. 
We  are  to  be  pupil  teachers ;  pupils  always,  but  teachers  too.     II.  Box  some  who 

THINK  THEY  UNDERSTAND  ALL  THESE  THINGS  DO  NOT  UNDERSTAND   THEM.      Is  yOUr   life 

in  accordance  with  what  you  know?  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  have  an  nuderstanding 
of  Divine  truth,  but  not  to  be  affected  by  it  to  repent  of  sin.  Many  professors  with 
big  heads  and  small  hearts.  III.  Abe  there  not  some  who  would  hardlt  know 
HOW  TO  answer  this  question  ?  They  understand,  and  yet  they  do  not :  theoretically 
but  not  spiritually.  Yon  know  Jesus  Clirist;  but  have  you  accepted  Him?  {G.H, 
Spurgeon.)  God  tcill  perfect  the  knowledge  of  the  humble  believer: — If  I  find  my- 
self growing  in  God's  garden,  though  I  be  the  tiniest  plant  in  all  the  bed,  yet  it  is 
such  a  mercy  to  be  in  the  garden  at  all — I  who  was  a  wild  rank  weed  out  in  tha 
wilderness  before — that  I  will  not  doubt  but  what  He  will  water  me  when  I  need  it, 
and  that  He  will  tend  and  care  for  me  till  I  shall  come  to  perfection.  {Ibid.) 
Knowledge  to  he  eommunieated  to  others : — Let  other  candles  be  lit  from  thy  candle, 
and  thy  candle  shall  burn  none  the  less  brightly ;  but  the  rather  in  this  it  may  b« 
said,  that  to  enrich  yourselves  in  all  knowledge  you  must  enrich  others  with  th« 
knowledge  that  yon  have.    {Ibid.)        The  responsibility  of  kruneledge : — I  charge 


aHAP,  xm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  29S 

thee,  knowing  professor,  to  remember  thy  solemn  responsibility.  I  beseech  thee, 
as  thou  lovest  thine  own  soul,  not  to  make  a  downy  bed  out  of  thy  knowledge,  for 
it  shall  be  a  thorn  in  thy  dying  pillow.  I  charge  thee,  man,  not  to  make  hell  hotter 
to  thyself  than  it  need  be  by  taking  all  this  knowledge  in,  and  panting  after  more, 
while  you  forget  that  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  to  trust  is  better  than  to  boast, 
to  love  is  better  than  to  rival,  and  to  serve  out  of  simple  alfection  is  better  than  to 
prate,  and  to  discuss,  and  to  criticize,  and  to  censure.    (Ibid.) 

Yet.  62,  Out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old. — Things  new  and  old : — I.  The 
preacher  should  bring  forth  out  of  his  treasure  "  things  new."  His  teaching  should 
be  living,  and  therefore  have  the  characteristics  of  Ufe.  newness,  and  fieshness. 
II.  The  preacher  should  not  forget  to  bring  forth  out  of  his  treasure  "iniNoa 
OLD."  Many  have  gone  to  as  great  an  extreme  in  the  direction  of  the  old,  as 
others  in  the  direction  of  the  new.  It  is  not  a  trimming  between  the  old  and  new 
that  is  expected.  The  old  facts  of  the  gospel  must  be  brought  out.  The  oldest 
truths  of  the  gospel ;  God's  great  love.  (D.  Longwill,  M.A.)  Teaching  that  it 
new : — No  tree  can  long  survive  the  period  when  it  ceases  to  unfold  fresh  shoots, 
and  make  new  growth.  And  no  teaching,  with  however  great  ability  it  be  main- 
tained, can  long  survive  the  period  when  it  shall  cease  to  give  fresh  stimulus  or 
furnish  information  that  is  new.  (Ibid.)  A  ready  scribe  : — I.  Tna  subject  ov 
HIS  STUDY.  II.  His  PROFICIENCY  IN  DiviNE  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  Correct.  2.  Compre- 
hending. III.  The  means  of  his  pboficiency.  1.  Diligent  research.  2.  Daily 
meditation.    3.  Devout  breathings.    IV.  The  usefulness  of  his  life,    V.  Thh 

BENEFITS  OF  BEilEMBEBINO  THE  LIFE  AND  LABOUBS  OF  ONE  WHO  WAS  A  SCBIBE  IN- 
STRUCTED UNTO  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN.  1.  To  admire  the  dealings  of  God  with 
His  servant.  2.  To  exercise  the  spirit  of  patient  continuance  in  well  doing.  (S. 
Eldridge.)  The  parable  of  the  scribe  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Ministers  are  but  stewards  or  deputy-householders.  1.  They  may  be  called 
householders  in  this  sense,  because  as  a  deputy-householder  chosen  by  his 
Lord  to  that  office.  So  is  every  true  and  faithful  minister  or  pastor  of  a  Church 
chosen  and  called  by  the  Lord  to  that  holy  office.  2.  They  may  be  called  house- 
holders in  respect  of  that  great  charge  and  trust  which  is  committed  to  them.  3. 
A  minister  or  pastor  of  a  Church  of  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  steward  or  deputy- 
householder,  in  respect  of  that  faithfulness  that  he  ought  to  manifest  in  the  dis- 
charge of  his  great  trust  and  office  (1  Cor.  iv.  2).  I  showed  you  why  they  ought  to 
be  well  stored.  1.  They  ought  to  be  well  provided,  because  Jesus  Christ  hath  made 
plenteous  provision  for  His  spiritual  family,  which  blessed  food  He  hath  committed 
to  them  to  distribute.  2.  Because  their  Master  is  a  great  King,  and  all  His  children 
are  nobly  descended.  3.  Because  the  preciousness  of  the  souls  which  they  are  to  feed. 
{B.  Keach.)  The  instructed  scribe: — We  should  not  account  him  a  good  and 
generous  housekeeper  who  should  not  have  always  something  of  standing  provision 
by  him,  so  as  never  to  be  surprised,  but  that  he  should  still  be  found  able  to  treat 
his  friend,  at  least,  though  perhaps  not  always  presently  to  feast  him.  So  the 
scribe  here  spoken  of  should  have  an  inward  lasting  fulness  and  sufficiency  to 
support  and  bear  him  up,  especially  when  present  performance  urges,  and  actual 
preparation  can  be  but  short.  Thus  it  is  not  the  oil  in  the  wick,  but  in  the  vessel, 
which  must  feed  the  lamp.  The  former,  indeed,  may  form  a  present  blaze,  but  it 
is  the  latter  which  must  give  a  lasting  blaze.  It  is  not  the  spending  money  a  man 
has  in  his  pocket,  but  his  hoards  in  the  chest  or  in  the  bank,  which  must  make  him 
rich.  A  dying  man  has  his  breath  in  his  nostrils,  but  to  have  it  in  the  lungs  is  that 
which  must  preserve  life.  Nor  will  it  suffice  to  have  raked  up  a  few  notions  here 
and  there,  or  to  rally  all  one's  little  utmost  into  one  discourse,  which  can  constitute 
a  divine,  or  give  a  man  stock  enough  to  set  up  with,  any  more  than  a  soldier  who 
has  filled  his  knapsack  should  thereupon  set  up  for  keeping  house.  No,  a  man 
would  then  quickly  be  drained ;  his  short  stock  would  serve  but  for  one  meeting  in 
ordinary  converse,  and  he  would  be  in  danger  of  meeting  the  same  company  twice. 
And  therefore  there  must  be  a  store,  plenty,  and  a  treasure,  lest  he  ^urn  broker  in 
divinity,  and,  having  run  the  round  of  a  beaten,  exhausted  commonplace,  be  forced 
to  stand  still  or  go  the  same  round  over  again,  pretending  to  his  auditors  that  it  ia 
profitable  for  them  to  hear  the  same  truths  often  inculcated  to  them,  though  I 
humbly  conceive  that  to  inculcate  the  same  truths  is  not  of  necessity  to  repeat  th« 
same  words.  And  therefore  to  avoid  such  beggarly  pretences,  there  most  be 
habitual  preparation  to  the  work  we  are  now  speaking  of.  (R.  South,  D.D.) 
Thingi  new  and  old: — The  new  life  cannot  perform  its  fuuctionB  withoat  tb« 


«94  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

presence  and  aid  of  that  which  has  lived,  but  is  alive  no  longer.  The  old  furnishea 
the  mould  in  which  the  new  is  fashioned :  the  support  on  which  the  new  rests 
while  it  is  coming  into  being.  Apply  this  law  to  the  spiritual  life.  1.  On  its  intel- 
lectual side.  A  creed  that  is  not  growing  steadily  is  a  dead  creed,  and  ought  to  be 
buried.  The  old  is  not  to  be  banished  altogether,  or  all  at  once ;  the  new  must  be 
grafted  on  to  it.  2.  On  the  side  of  conduct.  The  great  elements  of  manhood  are 
no  novelties.  Faith,  hope,  love,  obedience,  patience,  fidelity,  are  all  old-fashioned 
virtues  ;  but  nothing  better  has  been  invented  yet.  We  have  got  to  give  new  life  and 
meaning  to  them  by  bringing  them  to  bear  upon  our  altered  conditions.  (Washington 
Gladden.)  Old  and  new  in  the  formation  of  character : — That  which  is  old  in  uur 
experience  is  that  part  of  our  life  which  has  become  habitual.  That  ought  to  be  the 
largest  part  of  our  moral  and  religious  life.  The  ormation  of  good  habits — habits 
of  devotion — such  as  church-going,  Bible  study,  private  meditation,  secret  prayer ; 
habits  of  just  and  considerate  and  kindly  speech;  habits  of  careful  and  discriminat- 
ing thought ;  habits  of  activity  in  all  good  work,  and  of  fidelity  in  the  discharge  of 
every  obligation  we  assume ;  habits  of  benevolence  in  giving  and  in  serving ;  habits 
of  courtesy  and  temperance,  and  manly  dignity  and  womanly  grace — this  is  a  most 
important  element  in  moral  and  religious  culture.  .  .  .  Yet  the  character  thus 
formed  needs  to  be  continually  reformed.  New  light,  new  truths,  new  relations, 
new  powers,  call  for  new  adjustments  of  our  thoughts  and  new  departures  in  our 
conduct.  A  religious  life  that  is  summed  up  in  its  habits ;  that  is  wholly  formed 
and  never  renewed  ;  into  which  no  new  motives,  no  new  inspirations,  no  new 
endeavours  enter,  is  a  poor  and  barren  hfe.  .  .  .  While  therefore  the  Christian 
character  needs  those  elements  of  permanence  and  solidity  which  are  furnished  by 
good  habits,  it  needs  also  fresh  thinking,  resolution,  and  endeavour  every  day.  It 
thrives  only  upon  the  wise  combination  of  things  new  and  old.  It  joins  the  stead- 
fastness and  strength  of  new  habits  with  the  freshness  and  joy  of  daily  inspirations. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  55.  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son  ? — The  Divine  rejected  in  the  common: — 
Thus  the  spiritual  gem  was  dishonoured  because  of  its  earthly  setting,  and  Christ  was 
rejected  on  account  of  that  which  should  have  secured  His  acceptance.  A  small 
amount  of  thought  would  have  sufiQced  to  say,  "  Out  of  the  soil  of  our  common  life 
has  arisen  a  plant,  of  uncommon  flower  and  fruit,  without  any  special  tiaining." 
What  cannot  be  explained  by  C)rdinary  laws  must  be  sougbt  for  in  the  extraordinary, 
and  that  which  He  could  not  have  derived  from  men  must  have  been  given  Him  by 
Godl  There  were  probably  many  feelings  expressed  in  the  words.  1.  Perhaps 
there  was  envy.  They  did  not  hke  to  think  that  one  of  themselves  should  be  so 
much  above  them.  2.  There  was  a  prejudice  against  Christ  because  of  the  worldly 
circumstances  of  His  family.  Poverty  has  always  been  a  sore  hindrance  to 
acceptance.  3.  There  was  certainly  a  feeling  in  the  Jews  against  Christ  from  the 
absence  of  any  apparent  means  of  His  attaining  uncommon  eminence.  "  Whence 
hath  this  man."  4.  A  stronger  feeling  against  Christ  arose  in  their  minds  from 
the  commonneFS  and  familiarity  of  His  associations.  The  effect  of  His  teaching  was 
lost  through  the  nearness  of  His  lower  life.  Had  He  come  from  far,  had  He  been 
shrouded  in  mystery,  then  they  might  have  received  His  claims.  They  had  not 
spirituality  enough  to  counteract  the  suggestions  and  influences  of  His  carnal  re- 
lations. Men  are  still  backward  to  recognize  the  Divine  in  connection  with  the 
common  ;  earthly  geuf  alogy  disproves  the  heavenly  descent.  Illustrations  of  this 
fact :  I.  The  first  shall  be  taken  from  Christ  Himself.  Christ  is  God  manifest  m 
the  flf^sh  :  we  have  felt  that  the  great  God  might  have  chosen  some  other  and  higher 
mode  of  display  ;  have  clothed  Himself  with  light.  II.  The  same  may  be  said  of 
Cbbistianitt.  None  can  fail  to  recognize  the  thoroughly  human  character  of  the 
records  of  the  New  Testament.  It  has  been  objected  that  they  are  common  and 
insignificant,  that  they  mention  trifling  matters.  Men  want  a  more  stately  book — 
but  then  it  bad  lost  its  charm.  The  human  is  Divine.  III.  A  third  illustration  we 
will  take  from  the  operation  in  nature.  We  are  prevented  from  recognizing  the 
Divine  power  by  the  commonness  of  daily  operations.  IV.  A  fourth  illustration  is 
taken  from  Divine  Providence.  Men  seem  only  to  recognize  the  Divine  working  in 
extraordinaiy  events.  V.  The  last  illustration  is  taken  from  our  common  life. 
There  is  a  great  craving  for  extraordinary  positions ;  had  we  more  splendid  con- 
ditions how  we  could  display  the  energy  of  our  faith.  All  life  is  Divine.  The 
Divine  man  makes  the  Divine  life ;  seek  to  detect  the  spiritual  and  Divine  everywhere, 
(A.  J,  Morris.)        The  carpenter'a  ton: — When  the  Emperor  Julian  was  about  ^lO 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  291 

wage  war  against  the  Persians  and  had  threatened,  when  the  war  should  be  over, 
bitterly  to  persecute  the  Christians,  insolently  mocking  tJie  carpenter's  son  as  one 
quite  unable  to  succour  them,  Didymas,  an  ecclesiastic,  pronounced  this  sentence 
upon  him:  "This  carpenter's  son  is  even  now  making  a  wooden  coffin  for  Julian  1  " 
The  Emperor  went  into  the  battle,  and  was  suddenly  struck  in  the  breast  with  an 
arrow.  He  pulled  it  out,  and,  finding  the  wound  inflicted  by  it  to  be  deadly,  he 
cursed  the  Lord;  then,  taking  some  of  the  blood  from  the  wound,  he  threw  it  up 
into  the  air,  exclaiming,  "Thou  hast  conquered,  O  Galilean."  The  son  of  the 
carpenter: — Christ  was,  indeed,  the  son  of  a  workman ;  but  of  Him  who  made  thft 
frame  of  the  universe,  not  by  a  hammer,  but  by  His  command  ;  who  disposed  the 
composition  of  the  elements,  not  by  skill,  but  by  His  Word ;  who  kindled  the  sun, 
not  by  earthly  fire,  but  by  His  supreme  heat ;  who  made  all  things  out  of  nothing, 
and  made  them,  O  man,  for  thee — that  thou  mightest  reflect  on  the  Artificer  by 
considering  His  work.     (Crysologus.) 

Ver.  58.  Because  of  their  unbelief. — Unbelief : — An  empty  vessel  capable  of 
holding  water,  if  tightly  corked,  none  can  enter  it,  though  water  is  poured  upon  it 
in  great  abundance ;  nay,  it  may  be  thrown  into  the  sea,  and  still  remain  empty. 
So  it  is  with  our  hearts;  unbelief  closes  them,  so  that  the  water  of  life  cannot  fill 
them,  however  abundantly  it  may  be  poured  upon  and  around  us.  Could  not  do 
many  mighty  works,  Ac.  Unbelief  hinders  grace.  This  sin  not  only  locks  up  the 
heart  of  a  sinner,  but  also  binds  up  the  hands  of  a  Saviour.  (Burkitt.)  The 
imperfection  of  the  religion  of  modfan  society  has  its  root  in  the  obscure  perception 
of  Divine  truth.  If  is  only  a  clear-sighted  faith  which  can  grasp  the  truths  of 
revealed  religion,  and  show  to  us  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  God.  If  it  does 
not  bring  into  clear  view  the  obhgatious  and  duties  which  it  imposes,  and  the 
privileges  and  graces  which  it  imparts,  the  life  of  holiness  and  devotion  will  not  be 
seen.  ....  We  may  trace  our  imperfect  Christian  characters,  our  defective 
morality,  and  our  almost  godless  civilization,  to  a  want  of  faith  in  our  Lord's 
doctrines  and  in  His  view  of  life,  and  our  relations  to  Him  and  to  eternity.  It  is 
faith  primarily,  which  will  alone  bring  us  into  union  with  Himself,  and  enable  ns  to 
■ee  and  realize  our  relations  to  God  aa  our  Creator,  Bedeemer,  and  Sanctlfie£- 
{R.  B.  Fairbaim,  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vers.  1-11.  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  fame  of  Jestis. — A  Court  preacher  s-— 
Herod  is  favourable  to  John,  how  could  he  be  more  unfortunate  than  to  strike  in 
the  face  the  king  who  protects  him  7  Is  not  the  confidence  of  Herod  an  indication 
of  the  providence  of  God,  not  to  be  cast  aside?  This  is  what  Court  preachers  of 
almost  all  epochs  say  to  themselves.  Moses  was  taught  at  the  Court  of  Pharaoh, 
but  said  to  the  King,  "  Let  the  people  of  God  go."  John  says  to  Herod,  "It  is  not 
lawful."  I.  His  fidelity.  He  might  have  taken  another  means  of  fulfilling  his 
mission,  completely  saving  his  life.  He  might  have  aroused  the  people  against  the 
King,  and  have  made  himself  a  popular  hero.  That  is  the  protestation  which  God 
demands,  not  noisy  indignation,  but  that  humble  and  firm  testimony  in  Xh/i 
presence  of  evil.  But  you  suffer  for  your  frankness ;  but  who  has  found  the  secret 
of  loving  truly  without  suffering.  False  love  always  seeks  itself ;  it  will  not  alienate 
a  heart  to  save  it.  True  love,  which  seeks  the  good  of  others,  and  not  its 
own  interest,  consents  to  be  forgotten,  sacrificed.  II.  The  recompense  of  this 
FiDELiTT.  Life  for  us  60  easy  and  for  the  old  saints  so  terrible ;  we  are  tempted 
to  accuse  God  of  inexplicable  severity.  John  dead  1  are  you  sure?  Ask  the  authors 
of  the  crime.  Herod  sees  him  haunting  him  everywhere.  Dead  1 — one  cannot  die 
when  one  has  served  God.  To-day  John  speaks  to  us,  his  example  has  cheered  our 
souls.  Dead !  no,  in  the  cause  which  he  has  served  nothing  is  uself^ss,  and  if  the 
most  obscure  devotion  does  not  lose  its  recompense,  what  will  be  the  recompense  of 
a  martyrdom  such  as  his  ?  Dead  I  but  is  that  dying,  to  go  to  rejoin  those  who 
were  witnesses  of  God  on  earth.  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,"  Ac 
(JB.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The  Church  built  and  enlarged  by  humble  but  heroic  fidelity 
to  truth : — ^It  is  from  similar  devotedness  that  the  Church  has  been  able  to  arise 
•nd  enlarge.    When  jon  eee  glittering  in  the  air  some  massive  cathedral,  whiok 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xtf. 

remains  standing  as  a  testimony  to  the  faith  of  past  generations,  think,  then,  of 
*he  blocks  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  ground.  None  look  to  see  them,  but  without 
those  layers  the  edifice  would  fall  at  the  first  gust  of  a  storm.  Well,  if  to-day 
there  is  in  the  world  a  Christian  Church,  if  there  is  a  refuge  accessible  to  all  the 
sorrows  of  earth,  an  asylum  where  the  soul  escapes  for  ever  from  the  oppressiona 
of  this  world,  a  spiritual  home  where  faith,  hope,  and  love  abide  for  ever;  if  we 
ourselves  have  been  able  to  find  there  a  place ;  it  is  certain  that  at  its  base  there 
are  acts  of  devotion  without  number,  obscure  deaths,  unknown  sufferings,  silent 
sacrifices,  which  none  can  count.  (Ibid).  Compromising  Court  preachers  : — Who 
knows  now  but  that  the  favour  of  the  monarch  is  a  providential  arrangement  by 
God,  for  the  furtherance  of  His  Truth?  Will  you  go,  and  by  an  early  and 
unseasonable  speech  overthrow  the  designs  of  God  ?  Yes,  my  brethren,  this  is 
that  which  Court  preachers  of  almost  all  epochs  say  to  themselves.  This  is  that 
which  was  said  at  the  Court  of  Constantine,  and  thus  it  was  that  that  emperor  was 
deified  who  murdered  his  own  son.  Alas  1  this  is  that  which  was  saiA  in  the 
sixteenth  century,  at  the  Court  of  Henry  VIII.,  while  that  monarch  stained  the 
English  Eeformation  with  his  disgraceful  profligacy.  This  is  that  which  was  said 
at  the  Court  of  Philip  of  Hesse,  and  it  was  thus  that  Luther,  in  a  day  of  weakness, 
covered,  with  a  cowardly  compromise,  the  profligacies  of  that  prince.  This  is  that 
which  was  said  at  the  Court  of  Louis  XlV.,and  it  was  thus  that  Bossuet,  so  implacable 
upon  this  point  against  Luther  himself,  had  scarcely  a  courageous  word,  in  presence 
of  scandals  far  more  crying  still.  This  is  how  Massillon  reassured  himself  at  the 
Kegent's  Court.  This  is  how,  upon  the  free  soil  of  America,  in  the  face  of  negro 
slavery  and  of  all  the  infamy  which  accompanied  it,  some  thousands  of  ministers  of 
the  gospel  remained  a  long  time  silent,  or  only  spoke  so  peaceably  that  a  clap  of 
thunder  might  have  come  to  startle  their  sleeping  consciences.  Ah  1  deplorable 
allurement  of  the  favour  of  the  world  1  That  is  why  dishonoured  Eeligion  has  had 
some  Te  Deum  for  every  fortunate  action  of  power,  some  absolutions  for  all 
Bcandals,  and  why  to-day  it  is  miserably  compromised  in  all  the  complicationa 
of  human  politics,  when,  alone,  and  without  other  support  than  its  very  truth,  it 
•would  have,  perhaps,  brought  over  the  world  to  Jesus  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Conscience 
and  the  vioral  law  : — Herod  had  a  motive  which  shut  out  all  reason  and  argument. 
It  was  his  guilty  conscience  told  him  this  was  John  the  Baptist.  The  use  I  make 
of  this  passage  is  to  set  before  you  such  considerations  as  naturally  £irise  from  it, 
and  are  proper  for  the  direction  and  government  of  ourselves.  I.  Observe  thb 
GREAT  FORCE  AND  EFFICACY  OF  CONSCIENCE.  The  fears  which  surround  the  guilty 
are  so  many  undoubted  proofs  and  records  of  the  Judge's  authority.    II.  The 

MOR.Ui  LAW  IS  PBOMTJLQATED   TO   EVERT  RATIONAL   CREAT0EE  :   the  WOrk   Of  the  LaW  iS 

written  in  the  heart.  The  rebukes  of  conscience  will  sooner  or  later  restore  the 
true  sense  to  the  Law,  which  was  darkened  by  the  shades  of  false  reason  serving 
the  inclinations  of  a  corrupted  heart.     III.  What  care  the  wise  Author  of  odr 

BEING    has   taken,  NOT  ONLY   TO  MANIFEST   HiMSELF  AND  HiS  LAWS  TO  US,  but  likewise 

to  secure  our  obedience,  and  thereby  our  eternal  happiness  and  welfare.  (T.  Sher- 
lock, D.D.)  The  rewards  and  punishment  of  religion  are  in  the  present  as  well 
as  in  the  future: — It  is  thought  a  great  disadvantage  to  religion  that  it  has  only 
Buoh  distant  hopes  and  fears  to  support  it ;  and  it  is  true  that  the  great  objects 
of  our  hopes  and  fears  are  placed  on  the  other  side  of  the  grave,  whilst  the  tempta- 
tions to  sin  meet  us  in  every  turn,  and  are  almost  constantly  ]iresent  with  us.  But 
then  to  balance  this  it  must  be  considered  that  though  the  punishments  and 
rewards  of  religion  are  at  such  a  distance,  yet  the  hopes  and  fears  are  always 
present,  and  influence  the  happiness  of  our  lives  here,  as  much,  and  often  much 
more,  than  any  other  good  or  evil  which  can  befall  us.  The  peace  of  mind  which 
flows  from  doing  right,  the  fear,  anxiety,  the  torments  which  attend  the  guilty, 
will  inevitably  determine  the  condition  of  men  to  happiness  or  misery  in  our 
life.      (Ibid.)  The    terrors    of   cojiscience :—1he    state    of    the  wicked  is  a 

very  restless  one.  The  wildness  and  inconsistency  of  Herod's  imagination.  L 
The  reproaches  of  conscience  unavoidable,  proved  from  (1)  Scripture ;  (2) 
Eeason;  (3)  Experience.  Tales  of  ghosts  and  spectres  accounted  for  upon  this 
principle.  II.  To  account  for  the  difficulties  that  attend  the  proof  of  this 
proposition,  it  is  to  be  observed — 1.  That  our  judgments  often  mislead  us  when 
they  are  formed  only  upon  the  outside  and  surface  of  meu's  actions.  2.  That  the 
reprehensions  of  conscience  are  not  a  continued,  but  intermitting,  disease.  3.  The 
few  instances  of  wicked  men  that  go  out  of  the  world  without  feeling  the  stings 
of  conscience,  to  be  ascribed  either  to  ill  principles  early  and  deeply  imbibed,  or  to 


CHAP,  nv.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  891 

an  obstinacy  of  temper,  or  to  a  natural  and  acquired  stupidity.  These  only  prove 
that  there  are  monsters  in  the  moral,  as  well  as  in  the  natural  world,  but  maKe 
nothing  against  the  settled  laws  of  either  appUcations.  Even  for  pleasure's  sake 
we  ought  to  abstain  from  all  criminal  pleasures.  It  is  the  best  way  to  secure  peace 
to  ourselves  by  having  it  always  in  our  consciences.  Let  those  chiefly  listen  to 
this  reprover  who  are  otherwise  set  in  great  measure  above  reproof.  {F.  Atterhury.) 
Wounds  of  conscience : — Whatever  doth  violence  to  the  plain  dictates  of  our  reason 
concerning  virtue  and  vice,  duty  and  sin,  will  as  certainly  discompose  and  afilict 
our  thoughts  as  a  wound  will  raise  a  smart  in  the  flesh  that  receives  it.  (Ibid.) 
Herod,  a  man  governed  by  fear : — I.  He  is  an  example  of  how  cowabdice,  supersti- 
tion, AND  CRUELTY  NATURALLY  GO  TOGETHER.  1.  Fear  of  his  bad  wife  leads  him  to 
imprison  John.  2.  Fear  of  the  multitude  stays  him  from  killing  him.  3.  Fear  of 
his  oath  and  fear  of  ridicule  drive  him  to  carry  out  a  vow  which  it  was  wicked  to 
make,  and  tenfold  more  wicked  to  keep.  4.  Fear  of  a  bad  conscience  makes  him 
tremble  lest  Jesus  should  prove  to  be  John  risen  from  the  dead  to  trouble  him.  II. 
Only  when  jesus  is  brought  bound  before  him,  and  is  surrounded  by  his  men  of 
WAR,  does  the  coward  GAIN  COURAGE  TO  MOCK  HIM,  (J.  P.  Norris.)  CoJiscicnce  a 
preacher : — I.  There  can  be  no  dispute  that  he  is  lawfully  in  office.  II.  He  has 
been  long  in  ofGce.  III.  This  preacher  never  lacks  clearness  of  discrimination. 
IV.  Boldness  is  another  characteristic  of  this  preacher.  V.  Awakening.  VI. 
Preaches  everywhere.  VII.  And  as  for  effectiveness,  when  has  this  preacher  been 
surpassed?  VIII.  Benevolent.  IX.  Will  never  stop  preaching.  1.  All  other 
preaching  can  be  effective  only  as  it  harmonizes  with  that  of  this  preacher.  2. 
Shall  the  everlasting  ministrations  of  this  preacher  be  to  us  a  blessing  or  a 
curse?  (H.  B.  Hooker,  D.D.)  Herod;  or,  the  power  of  conscience : — I.  Con- 
science will  not  be  silenced  by  wealth  or  earthly  surroundings.  II.  A  guilty  con- 
science is  troubled  with  not  only  real,  but  imaginary,  troubles.  III.  A  guilty  con- 
science will  torment  a  sinner  in  spite  of  his  avowed  scepticism.  (T.  Kelly.) 
Conscience-fears : — A  man  will  give  himself  up  to  the  gallows  twenty  years  after 
the  treacherous  stroke.  Nero  was  haunted  by  the  ghost  of  his  mother,  whom  he 
had  put  to  death.  Caligula  suHered  from  want  of  sleep — he  was  haunted  by  the 
faces  of  his  murdered  victims.  We  can  still  see  the  corridors  recently  excavated  on 
the  Palatine  Hill.  We  can  walk  under  the  vaulted  passages  where  hie  assassins  met 
him.  "  Often  weary  with  lying  awake,"  writes  Suetonius,  "  sometimes  he  sat  up 
in  bed,  at  others  walked  in  the  longest  porticos  about  the  house,  looking  out  for  the 
approach  of  day."  You  may  see  the  very  spot  where  his  assassins  waited  for  him 
round  the  corner.  Domitian  had  those  long  walls  cased  with  clear  agate.  The 
mark  of  the  slabs  may  still  be  seen.  The  agate  reflected  as  in  a  glass  any  figure 
that  might  be  concealed  round  an  angle,  so  that  a  surprise  was  impossible.  It  is 
said  that  Theodoric,  after  ordering  the  decapitation  of  Lysimachus,  was  haunted  in 
the  middle  of  his  feasts  by  the  spectre  of  a  gory  head  upon  a  charger.  And  how 
often  must  a  nobler  head  than  that  of  Lysimachus  have  haunted  a  more  ignoble 
prince  than  Theodoric  as  he  sat  at  meat  and  muttered  shudderingly  aside,  "  It  is 
John  whom  I  beheaded  !  •'  (H.  R,  Haweis.)  Conscience  in  defiance  of  sceptical 
denial: — Herod  was  a  Sadducee  ;  he  appears  to  have  been  the  avowed  patron  and 
protector  of  that  sect  which  believed  neither  in  the  existence  of  spiiit,  whether 
angels,  men,  or  devils.  Yet  see  how  the  conscience  of  Herod  crushes  his  creed  to 
pieces  ;  though  he  belieted  not  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  yet  he  feared  that 
John  had  risen  from  the  dead  ;  though  he  despised  the  idea  of  hell  as  a  fable,  and 
as  a  bugbear,  he  felt  within  him  all  the  horrors  of  Gehenna,  the  gnawings  of  a 
"worm  that  dieth  not,"  the  scorchings  of  a  "fire  that  is  not  quenched."  Men 
may  try  to  believe  that  there  is  no  existence  beyond  the  grave ;  they  may  write 
upon  the  sepulchre,  "  Death  is  an  eternal  sleep  "  ;  these  flimsy  pretences  burst 
through  them  like  a  river  rushing  through  a  mound  of  sand,  or  a  roaring  lion 
through  a  spider's  web.  (Dr.  Thomas.)  Head  in  a  charger  : — History  tells  of 
similar  instances  of  barbarity.  Mark  Antony  caused  the  heads  of  those  whom  he 
had  proscribed  to  be  brought  to  him  while  he  was  at  table,  and  entertained  himself 
by  looking  at  them.  Cicero's  head  being  one  of  those  brought,  he  ordered  it  to  be 
placed  on  the  very  tribune  whence  Cicero  had  ?poken  against  him.  Agrippina,  the 
mother  of  Nero,  sent  an  officer  to  kill  LoUia  Paulina,  her  rival  for  the  throne. 
When  her  head  was  brought,  she  examined  it  with  her  hands,  till  she  discovered 
some  mark  by  which  the  lady  had  been  distinguished-  Troubled  conscience  : — 
Though  Herod  thought  good  to  set  a  face  on  it  to  strangers,  unto  whom  it  was  not 
■afe  to  bewray  his  fear;  ^  H  hia  domestics  he  freely  discovered  his  thuoghts; 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xni 

••This  is  John  Baptist."  The  troubled  conscience  will  many  a  time  open  that  t« 
familiars,  which  it  hides  from  the  eyes  of  others.  Shame  and  fear  meet  together 
in  guiltinegs.  (Bishop  Hall.)  Need  of  ministerial  faithfulness  : — There  was  a 
foolish  law  among  the  Lacedsemonians,  that  none  should  tell  his  neighbour  any  ill 
news  which  had  befallen  him,  but  every  one  should  be  left  to  find  it  out  for  them- 
selves. There  are  many  who  would  be  glad  if  there  was  a  law  that  could  tie  up 
ministers'  mouths  from  scaring  them  with  their  sins ;  most  are  more  offended  with 
the  talk  of  hell  than  troubled  for  that  sinful  state  that  should  bring  them  thither. 
But  when  shall  ministers  have  a  fitter  time  to  tell  sinners  of  their  dangers,  if  not 
now,  for  the  time  cometh  when  no  more  offers  of  love  can  be  done  for  them. 
{H.  Smith.)  Bold  in  reproof: — A  minister  without  boldness  ishke  a  smooth  file, 
a  knife  without  an  edge,  a  sentinel  that  is  afraid  to  let  off  his  gun.  If  men  will  be 
bold  in  sin,  ministers  must  be  bold  to  reprove.  (Gurnall.)  Conscience  a 
tormentor : — A  wicked  man  needs  no  other  tormentor,  especially  for  the  sins  of 
blood,  than  his  own  heart.  Revel,  0  Herod,  and  feast  and  frolic;  and  please 
thyself  with  dances,  and  triumphs,  and  pastimes :  thy  sin  shall  be  as  some  Fury, 
that  shall  invisibly  follow  thee,  and  scourge  thy  guilty  heart  with  secret  lashes,  and 
upon  all  occasions  shall  begin  thy  hell  within  thee.  {Bishop  Hall.)  Herod  a 
hypocrite  : — Is  there  a  worldly-minded  man,  that  Uves  in  some  known  sin,  yet 
makes  much  of  the  preacher,  frequents  the  church,  talks  godly,  looks  demurely, 
carries  fair  ?  Trust  him  not ;  he  will  prove,  after  his  pious  fits,  like  some  resty 
horse,  which  goes  on  some  paces  readily  and  eagerly,  but  anon  either  stands  still, 
or  falls  to  flinging  and  plunging,  and  never  leaves  till  he  have  cast  his  rider. 
(Ibid.)  Influence  of  Balls : — I  was  employing  a  very  respectable  woman  a 
few  days  to  do  some  work  for  me,  and  one  evening  she  said  to  me,  "You  must 
please  to  let  me  off  earlier  to-night,  ma'am  ;  I'm  going  to  the  ball."  "  To  the  ball," 
I  exclaimed  in  amazement,  "  to  the  ball  1  "  "  Yes,"  she  said  ;  "  I  am  at  all  the 
balls."  I  could  not  understand  her  ;  for,  never  going  to  such  places  myself,  I  am 
somewhat  ignorant  of  what  goes  on.  So  she  added,  ' '  I  am  keeper  of  the  chinr , 
and  am  tea-maker  ;  so  I  am  obliged  to  be  there ;  and  I  shall  not  get  to  bed  before  six 
o'clock  to-morrow  morning.  Ob  ma'am  I  "  she  burst  out,  "  it's  a  dreadful  life  I 
I  have  seen  young  ladies,  when  they  first  came  to  this  town,  looking  so  bright,  their 
cheeks  so  rosy,  their  eyes  so  dancing  with  joy  ;  and  before  the  winter  was  over  I 
have  not  known  them,  they  looked  so  old  and  pale  and  haggard  and  miserable." 
(S.S.  Teacher's  Journal.)  Dancing  : — Dancing,  in  itself,  as  it  is  a  set,  regular, 
harmonious  motion  of  the  body,  cannot  be  unlawful,  more  than  walking  or  running. 
Circumstances  may  make  it  sinful.  The  wanton  gesticulations  of  a  virgin,  in  a 
wild  assembly  of  gallants  warmed  with  wine,  could  be  no  other  than  riggish  and 
unmaidenly.  (Bishop  Hall.)  Known  by  our  pleasures  : — There  cannot  be  a 
better  glass,  wherein  to  discern  the  face  of  our  hearts,  than  our  pleasures; 
such  as  they  are,  such  are  we ;  whether  vain  or  holy.  (Ibid.)  Blundering 
wickedness: — ^I.  Hebod  in  his  first  act  moves  too  late.  Herod  im- 
prisoned John,  intending  a  crushing  blow  against  the  good  cause ;  but  it  waa 
ineffectual.  He  was  powerless  to  hinder  John's  work.  That  work  wag  done,  and 
not  to  be  undone.  His  influence  was  already  abroad  in  the  air.  His  words  were 
pricking  the  hearts  of  thousands.  Herod  could  not  arrest  this,  any  more  than  he 
could  lock  up  the  atmosphere  within  prison  bars.  II.  Even  if  Herod  could  have 
stopped  the  revolution  he  had  seized  the  wrong  man.  John  had  passed  over 
the  leadership  to  his  chief.  The  Messiah  was  spreading  His  truth  in  the  villages,  to 
the  northward,  out  of  reach.  III.  In  bringing  John  to  his  castle  to  confront  hia 
royal  authority,  he  only  gives  the  fearless  prophet  a  chance  to  comb  to  oIjOSH 
QUARTERS  WITH  HIM.  The  ruler  furnished  a  great  opportunity  to  Goi's  prophet  and 
he  took  it.  IV.  Incontinent  depravity  reels  through  revelry  to  BLOon-ooiLTiNESS. 
Poor  and  comfortless  is  evil's  triumph.  (W.  V.Kelley.)  The  deadpropliet  yet  alive  t : 
— The  prophet's  voice  is  not  silenced  by  the  executioner's  hand,  but  sounds  on  in  the 
guilty,  haunted  soul.  John  troubles  Herod  more  now  than  when  he  was  alive.  The 
prisoner  does  not  stay  down  in  the  dungeon  any  more,  but  rooms  with  Herod,  sits 
spectral  at  the  Tetrarch's  feasts,  makes  festival  doleful  as  funeral,  wakes  bim  in  the 
night,  and  keeps  saying  unpleasant  things  on  the  inner  side  of  his  ear-drum.  (Ibid.) 
Martyrdom  of  John  Baptist: — Learn  from  this — I.  That  if  wk  faithfully  do  oub 
Dunr,  WB  must  be  prepared  to  buffer  fob  it.  John  would  have  received  many  marks 
of  favour  and  acts  of  kindness  from  Herod,  if  only  he  would  have  kept  silence  on  one 
Bobjeot ;  because  he  dared  not  be  silent,  he  met  with  prison  and  death.  So  with  us. 
If  we  are  really  in  earnest  in  serving  God,  Satan  will    be  sure  to  stir  up  some 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  29t 

opposition  against  us.  These  hindrances  are  the  tef>ts  of  our  faithfulness.  II.  That 
God's  qbacb  is  always  sufficient.  The  Bajjlist's  Hfe  and  death  were  lonely  ;  but, 
though  separated  from  Jesus  in  the  body,  he  was  nearer  to  Him  in  spirit  than  the 
multitude  which  thronged  Him.  It  is  blessed  to  be  constantly  in  God's  house,  to 
live  in  an  atmosphere  of  Divine  consolation  ;  but  it  is  even  more  blessed  to  be  con- 
tent if,  through  no  fault  of  our  own,  we  are  deprived  of  this ;  nothing  can  take 
away  from  us  the  satisfaction  of  reposing  our  soul  simply  upon  the  will  of  God. 
III.  That  death  may  be  viewed  not  with  hobkor  but  with  joy.  Herodiaa 
sought  to  wreak  cruel  vengeance  on  John ;  she  did  but  release  him  from  a  weary  im- 
prisonment, and  open  the  door  to  his  eternal  bliss.  If  only  we  are  ready  for  death, 
can  death  come  too  soon  ?  It  ia  the  door  of  release  from  storm  and  cloud,  sorrow  an^ 
sin.  (5.  W.  Skejfington,  M.A.)  Contrast  (1)  the  fearlessness  of  the  witness  to  the 
truth,  with  the  fickleness  of  the  truckler  to  public  opinion  ;  (2)  the  true  consistency 
which  adheres  unswervingly  to  the  truth  and  does  not  shrink  from  bearing  testimony 
at  all  hazards  and  against  all  transgressors,  with  that  false  consistency  which  holds 
to  a  sinful  promise  rather  than  own  itself  to  be  in  the  wrong ;  (3)  the  external 
fortunes  in  this  world  of  the  friends  and  the  enemies  of  the  truth ;  its  enemies 
feasting  in  pomp,  and  carrying  out  unchecked  their  own  wicked  will,  while  its  friends 
lie  solitary  in  a  dungeon  or  are  cruelly  murdered ;  (4)  their  spiritual  and  eternal 
condition — the  witness-bearer  passing  from  prison  to  rest  and  peace,  the  blasphemer 
going  on  from  one  enormity  to  another,  and  finally  going  down  to  his  own  place. 
{Vernon  IF.  Hutton,  B,A.)  Herod's  marring e  with  Herodias: — The  marriage  was 
unlawful  for  three  reasons.  1.  The  former  husband  of  Herodias,  Philip,  was  still 
living.  This  is  expressly  asserted  by  Josephus.  2.  The  former  wife  of  Antipas  was 
still  living,  and  had  fled  to  her  father,  Aretas,  on  hearing  of  his  intention  to  marry 
Herodias.  3.  Antipas  and  Herodias  were  already  related  to  one  another  within  the 
forbidden  degrees  of  consanguinity.  Dislike  of  faithful  rebuke: — Lais  broke  her 
looking-glass  because  it  showed  the  wrinkles  on  her  face.  Many  men  are  angry  with 
those  who  tell  them  their  faults,  when  they  should  be  angry  with  the  faults  that  are 
told  them.  A  charger : — A  somewhat  capacious  platter,  often  made  of  silver,  which 
was  charged  or  loaded  with  meat  at  banquets.  The  sight  of  the  Baptist's  head  would 
be  a  feast  to  Herodias  and  her  daughter.  (J.  Marison.)  Monarclis  subject  to 
law : — How  different  a  part  did  John  act  from  that  of  the  judges  of  Persia  in  the 
times  of  Cambyses.  That  madman  of  a  monarch  wished  to  marry  his  sister ;  and 
he  demanded  of  the  judges  whether  there  were  any  Persian  law  that  would  sanction 
Boch  a  marriage.  They  pusillanimously  answered  that  they  could  find  no  such  law, 
but  they  found  another — that  the  monarch  of  Persia  was  at  liberty  to  do  whatsoever 
he  pleased.  (Ibid.)  Reproving  the  rich : — It  is  not  uncommon  for  men  to  reprove 
the  poor  and  the  humble  in  society  for  their  offences,  but  it  is  a  rare  virtue  to  cbarge 
crime,  with  unflinching  fidelity,  upon  the  higher  classes.  The  poor  are  lectured  on 
all  hands,  and  the  most  contemptible  clap-traps  are  adopted  to  catch  their  ear. 
But  where  are  the  Johns  to  lecture  the  rich  and  the  royal,  the  Herods  t 
(D.  Tlwmas,  D.D.)  Fidelity  often  provokes : — Faithful  rebukes,  if  they  do  not 
profit,  usually  provoke.  {M.  Henry.)  Faithful  prelates : — So  Latimer  presented 
for  a  new-year's  gift  to  King  Henry  VIII.,  a  New  Testament,  with  a  napkin,  having 
this  posy  about  it,  "  Whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will  judge."  Archbishop 
Grindal  lost  Queen  Elizabeth's  favour,  and  was  confined,  for  favouring  prophecies, 
Ac,  as  it  was  pretended ;  but  in  truth,  for  condemning  an  unlawful  marriage  of 
Julio,  an  Italian  physician,  with  another  man's  wife.  (John  Trapp.)  Herod's 
birthday : — A  mere  plot.  A  great  feast  must  be  prepared,  the  states  invited,  the 
damsel  must  dance,  the  king  swear,  the  Baptist  thereupon  be  beheaded,  that  the 
queen  may  be  gratified.  And  this  tragedy  was  new  acted  at  Paris,  a.d.  1572,  when 
the  French  massacre  was  committed  under  pr* tence  of  a  wedding  royal.  (Ibid.) 
Like  mother,  like  daughter: — Neither  good  bird  nor  good  egg.  Such  another  hussy 
as  this  was  dame  Alice  Pierce,  a  concubine  to  our  Edward  III.  For  when,  as  at  a 
parhament  in  the  fiftieth  year  of  that  king's  reign,  it  was  petitioned  that  the  Duke 
of  Lancaster,  the  Lord  Latimer,  chamberlain,  and  this  dame  Alice,  might  be 
removed  from  court,  and  the  petition  was  vehemently  urged  by  Sir  Peter  la  Mare ; 
this  knight  afterwards,  at  the  suit  of  that  impudent  woman,  was  committed  to 
perpetual  imprisonment  at  Nottingham.  And  another  such  hiBtory  we  have  of  one 
Diana  Valentina,  mit-tress  to  Henry  II.,  King  of  France,  whom  she  had  so  subdued, 
that  he  gave  her  all  the  confiscations  of  goods  made  in  the  kingdom  for  cause  of 
heresy.  Whereupon  many  were  burned  in  France  for  religion,  as  they  said,  bat 
indeed  to  maintain  the  prids  and  satisfy  the  covetoasness  of  that  lewd  woman. 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxf. 

{Ibid.)  Herod's  oath : — Were  his  oaths  an  absolute  bar  npon  retraction  ?  No 
doubt  the  original  promise  was  the  original  sin.  He  shoald  not  have  made 
such  an  unconditional  promise.  He  made  it  in  the  spirit  of  a  braggart  and 
a  despot.  His  oaths  were  hatched  in  wickedness.  But  though  thus  hatched, 
was  he  not  bound,  when  they  were  once  in  existence,  to  adhere  to  them  ?  There 
was  something  good  in  adhering  to  them — something  of  respect  and  reverence 
for  the  Divine  Being,  who  is  either  explicitly  or  implicitly  appealed  to  in  all 
oaths.  But  there  was  also  something  appallingly  bad.  There  was  adherence 
to  what  was  utterly  unlawful  and  wicked.  He  had  no  business  to  peril  such 
lives  as  that  of  John  on  the  freak  and  pleasure  of  Salome,  or  on  the  hate  of 
Herodias,  or  on  any  rash  words  of  his  own.  It  was  criminal  to  put  any  lives  in 
Buch  peril.  If  his  oath  had  merely  perilled  valuable  goods  and  chatties,  then,  though 
he  had  sworn  to  his  own  hurt,  it  would  have  been  his  duty  not  to  change.  But  no 
oath  whatsoever,  and  no  bond  whatsoever  within  the  limits  of  possibility,  could 
constitute  an  obligation  to  commit  a  crime.  Illegitimate  oaths  are  immoral,  and 
should  be  repented  of,  not  fulfilled.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Herod's  sorrow  at  death 
of  the  Baptist : — As  Andronicus,  the  Greek  Emperor,  that  deep  dissembler,  would 
weep  over  those  whom  he  had  for  no  cause,  caused  to  be  executed,  as  if  he  had  been 
the  most  sorrowful  man  alive ;  so  this  cunning  murderer  craftily  hides  his  malice, 
and  seeming  sad  in  the  face  is  glad  at  heart  to  be  rid  of  the  importunate  Baptist, 
that  he  may  sin  uncontrolled.  (John  Trapp.)  The  last  struggle  of  conscience : — 
In  that  moment  there  must  have  come  before  his  mind  his  past  reverence 
for  the  prophet,  the  joy  which  had  for  a  time  accompanied  the  strivings  of  a 
better  life,  possibly  the  counsels  of  his  foster-brother,  Manaen.  Had  there  been 
only  the  personal  influence  of  Herodias,  these  might  have  prevailed  against  it ;  but, 
like  most  weak  men,  Herod  feared  to  be  thought  weak.  It  was  not  so  much  his 
regard  for  the  oath  which  he  had  taken  (that,  had  it  been  taken  in  secret,  he  might 
have  got  over),  but  his  shrinking  from  the  taunt,  or  whispered  jest,  or  contemptuous 
gesture,  of  the  assembled  guests,  if  they  should  see  him  draw  back  from  his  plighted 
word.  A  false  regard  for  public  opinion,  for  what  people  will  say  or  think  of  us  in 
our  own  narrow  circle,  was  ?n  this,  as  in  so  many  other  instances,  an  incentive  to 
guilt,  instead  of  a  restraint.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  Salome's  death  retributive: — 
A  tradition  or  legend  relates  that  Salome's  death  was  retributive  in  its  outward  form. 
She  feu  upon  the  ice,  and  in  the  fall  her  head  was  severed  from  the  body.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  12.  And  went  and  told  Jesus. — Salve  for  the  sore  heart : — I  commend  the 
behaviour  of  these  disciples — 1.  To  all  who  are  sinful  and  unpardoned.  Go  and 
tell  Jesus  the  unpardoned  sins  of  your  life.  2.  To  all  who  are  tempted.  3.  To  all 
who  are  slandered  and  persecuted.  4.  To  all  who  have  been  be)eaved.  5.  Christ 
is  always  near.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  The  true  Friend  and  Interpreter : — 1.  In  Jesus 
we  have  the  true,  Divine  Fnend  of  humanity,  not  of  our  circumstances,  but  of  our- 
selves, who  undertakes  for  us  just  what  no  one  else  can.  2.  The  providence  which 
permitted  the  removal  of  Johu  from  their  head  was  necessary  to  send  them  forward 
to  the  great  Teacher.  3.  When  we  make  great  ones,  heroes,  of  the  servants,  we 
are  in  danger  of  dishonouring  and  keeping  at  a  distance  from  the  Master.  4.  By 
this  critical  turn  in  their  history,  John's  disciples  were  not  only  brought  forward 
to  Christ,  but  actually  brought  closer  and  nearer  to  Him  than  they  otherwise  could 
or  would  have  been.  They  found  the  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  5.  They  learnt 
and  did  the  right  thing.  They  brought  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  providence  to 
Him  who  alone  could  throw  light  upon  it.  6.  Of  what  use  is  it  to  have  such  a 
Friend  unless  we  make  use  of  Him  ?  No  religious  means  can  be  put  in  place  ol 
this ;  we  may  be  with  Him  more  intimately  in  the  spirit  than  His  disciples  in 
the  flesh,     (fv.  Smith.)        Tell  Jesus — a  word  to  the  troubled: — I.  Somb  of  thb 

©BOUNDS  DPON  WHICH    THE   BELIEVER   IS  WARRANTED   TO   BEPAIB  TO  THE  LoRD   JeSDR  IM 

BVEBY  TKYiNO  HOUR.  1.  His  mediatorial  work — anticipates  every  objection,  and 
answers  every  argument  growing  out  of  a  deep  and  painful  sense  of  unworthiness, 
&o.  Ever  accessible,  2.  His  earthly  experience  enables  him  to  sympathize  with 
all  the  forms  of  human  suftering.  3.  The  mutual  relations  which  exist  between  the 
Christ  and  the  believer.     4,  The  invitations  and  declarations  of  His  Word.     II. 

BOUE    OF    THE    blessings    THAT    WILL   FOLLOW    THE    CULTIVATION    OF   THIS    HABIT.       1. 

Intimate  communion.  2.  It  will  nouribh  and  strengthen  all  the  Christian  graces. 
3.  It  will  tree  us  from  anxious  care.  4.  It  will  bring  continuous  honour  and 
glory  to  Jesus.  (O.  Winslow,  D.D.)  A  complaining  Christian  once  said  to  a 
cheerful,  happy  Christian,  "  Things  always  seem  to  go  smoothly  with  you ;  J  neveC 


OHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  Mi 

hear  you  make  any  complaints."  To  which  he  replied,  "  I  have  fonnd  out  aa 
effectual  way  of  guarding  against  that  fault — telling  Jesus  all,  and  telling  Him 
before  I  tell  any  one  else ;  then,  I  find,  I  seldom  need  tell  any  one  else,  for  in  telling 
Him  about  my  troubles,  I  often  find  the  burden  entirely  removed."  (A.  Tucker.) 
*♦  60  and  tell  Jesus  "  : — I.  A  lesson  of  encouragement  for  weary  laboubers.  The 
twelve  disciples  fatigued  from  their  mission.  II.  A  lesson  for  Christian  moubnebb. 
1.  The  last  act  of  affection — "  They  took  up  the  body  and  buried  it."  2.  The  best 
Btep  for  consolation.  There  ia  access  to  Jesus,  sympathy  with  Jesas,  relief  from 
JesuB,  IC.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M. A.)  The  body,  not  the  man,  buried: — "The  disciples 
came  and  took  up  the  body  and  buried  it."  I  like  that  way  of  speaking  of  human 
burial ;  it  is  the  true  way ;  it  is  emphatically  the  Christian  way  of  speaking  of  the 
act.  You  buried  it,  not  Him.  "  By  and  by,"  said  Socrates  to  his  friends,  "  yon 
will  be  saying,  ♦  Socrates  is  dead,  but  Socrates  will  not  be  dead.  By  and  by  yoo 
will  be  saying,  '  Socrates  is  in  his  coffin,'  but  Socrates  will  not  be  in  his  coffin.  By 
and  by  you  will  be  saying,  *We  are  going  to  bury  Socrates,'  but  you  will  not  bury 
Socrates,  you  will  only  bury  something  that  belouged  to  him."  Well  spoken,  thou 
Old  World  philosopher ;  the  fuller  hght  of  Christianity  comes  to  confirm  thy  con- 
jecture, and  to  verify  thy  reasoning.  No ;  there  is  no  buiying  a  man.  You  cannot 
buiy  a  soul.    (J.  B.  French.) 

Vers.  13, 14.  When  Jesus  heard  of  It  He  departed  thence  by  ship. — The  torrowing 

Saviour  .-^lesus  hears  of  John's  death,  and  thereupon  seeks  seclusion.  I.  Here  we 
learn  how  to  behave  in  time  of  trouble.  1.  Christ  was  deeply  affected  by  John's 
death — that  event  gave  Him  great  sorrow.  2.  There  was  good  reason  for  Christ 
being  deeply  affected.  John  from  the  first  had  been  a  faithful  friend ;  his  sole 
object  was  to  n-agnify  Christ.  XL  How  Christ  acted  when  this  great  sorrow 
riLLED  His  soul.  1.  He  sought  the  desert;  He  desired  to  be  alone.  That  He 
might  pray.  The  multitudes  come ;  He  meets  them.  2.  His  sorrow  for  the  dead  is 
changed  into  compassion  for  the  living.  He  must  now  work,  not  weep.  God  finds 
work  for  every  sorrowing  heart  that  trusts  in  Him,  in  which  reUef  is  found.  {A. 
Scott. )  Solitude  not  permanent : — There  are  some  occurrences  that  simply  make 
ns  quiet.  There  are  shocks  we  can  only  answer  by  eloquent  dumbness.  He  de- 
parted and  went  into  a  wilderness :  it  was  better  to  be  among  the  barren  sands  than 
among  murderers  and  most  cruel-miuded  men.  There  are  times  when  we  are  all 
bat  inclined  to  give  up  our  work.  Our  rain  is  lost,  our  dews  fall  in  stony  places, 
our  best  endeavours  are  returned  to  us  without  echo  or  answer  of  joy  and  gratitude, 
and  we  sigh  for  a  lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness,  some  boundless  contiguity  ol 
shade.  This  will  be  only  for  awhile,  however,  in  the  case  of  Jesus  Christ.  "  When 
He  went  forth  and  saw  great  multitudes  He  was  moved  with  compassion  towards 
them,  and  He  healed  their  sick."  He  was  bound  to  come  back  again :  the  sickness 
would  have  a  greater  ei3fect  upon  Him  than  the  murder.  He  will  not  relinquish  His 
work  because  of  instances  that  might  have  shocked  Him  with  fatal  distress.  He 
looks  upon  the  multitudinous  man  and  not  only  upon  the  individual  mischief-doer 
and  murderer.  He  was  the  Son  of  Man  ;  Jesus  Christ  always  took  the  broad  and 
inclusive  view,  and  this  held  Him  to  His  work  when  individual  instances  might 
have  driven  Him  away  from  it  and  afflicted  Him  with  fatal  discouragement.  (Jotqtk 
Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-21.  They  need  not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to  eat. — Christ  feeding  th» 
multitude : — The  miracles  of  Jesus  were :  (1)  public ;  (2)  beneficent.  L  Thr 
SATDBK  AND  CIBCUM8TANCE8  OF  THE  inBACLB.  1.  When  was  it  wrought  ?  In  '•  the 
evening."  The  evening  of  a  day  that  had  been  well  spent.  2.  Where  was  it  per- 
formed J  In  "  a  desert  place."  The  miracle  as  to  time  and  place  encourages  our 
confidence  in  Christ  in  the  most  trying  and  destitute  situations.  3.  What  was  the 
order  of  its  performance.  (1)  Christ's  tenderness  to  the  people — "  They  need  not 
depart."  (2)  The  all-suflQciency  which  He  possessed  in  Himself.  (3)  The  plainness 
of  their  provision,  as  well  as  the  scantiness  of  the  supply.  (4)  However  little  yon 
have  bring  it  to  Jesus,  and  He  will  make  it  more.  (5)  Bjb  devotion — "looking  up  to 
heaven."  (6)  Our  Lord  employed  the  disciples  as  the  dispensers  of  His  bounty. 
(7)  A  lesson  of  frugality — *•  They  took  up  the  fragments."  IL  Beflections.  1. 
In  this  provision  see  an  emblem  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  true  Bread.  2.  In  the 
distribution  of  this  provision  learn  the  ofiice  and  work  of  Christian  ministers.  S. 
In  the  apparent  deficiency  of  this  provision  we  are  reminded  of  the  treatment  of  the 
Savioor  and  His  gospel  by  an  unbelieving  world.    "  Five  loaves  and  two  fishes  " 


802  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ht. 

appeared  nothing  to  the  supply  of  suoh  an  assembly.  4.  lu  the  real  sufficiency  ot 
this  provision  we  are  instructed  in  the  glorious  ability  of  Christ  to  complete  the 
happiness  of  all  that  beUeve.  The  multitude  *•  did  all  eat  and  were  filled."  {T.  Kidd.) 
The  Jive  barley  loaves  in  the  dessert : — L  Christ's  retbeat  into  the  desert.  Ha 
sought  retirement ;  multitude  intruded,  yet  Christ  was  not  disappointed  or  annoyed. 
n.  The  men  sitting  down  to  the  baelet  loaves.  1.  There  is  the  want  of  bread 
for  the  congregation  in  the  desert.  2.  Jesus  asks  the  disciples  what  supply  they 
have.  3.  Jesus  orders  the  disciples  to  bring  the  loaves  to  Himself.  Christ's  way 
of  giving  us  more  is  to  begin  with  what  we  have.  4.  Jesus  next  commands  the 
multitude  to  sit  down  in  order.  The  multitude  needed  great  faith.  We  cannot 
firbt  eat  and  then  beheve;  must  believe  and  eat.  The  disciples  need  faith  and 
courage;  sent  by  Christ  on  a  trying  errand — "  Give  ye  them  to  eat.  The  foolish- 
ness of  preaching  becomes  the  power  of  God.  III.  The  bread  blessed  and 
multiplied.  1.  Jesus  gave  thanks  to  God  for  the  bread  in  the  face  of  all  the 
multitude.  2.  Jesus  blesses  the  bread  before  he  breaks  and  gives  to  the  people ; 
and  His  blessing  breathed  upon  it  fills  the  bread  with  an  infinite  fulness.  Christ  ia 
the  Bread  of  Life  to  the  sinner  dying  for  want ;  sweet  to  the  soul  in  the  desert.  8. 
Jesus  breaks  the  bread  and  multiplies  in  the  using ;  He  breaks  and  distributes  to 
the  apostles,  and  they  break  and  distribute  to  the  people  ;  and  probably  the  people 
break  and  distribute  to  each  other.  Christ  breathes  upon  and  bTfesses  the  Word. 
IV.  The  fragments  remaining.  1.  After  the  feast  ia  finished  there  are  many 
fragments  over.  2.  Jesus  and  His  disciplea  live  upon  these  fragmiijita.  TJ?e 
fragments  are  more  than  the  entire  supply  for  the  feast.  ~  The  more  we  leSd'on 
Christ,  the  more  always  is  there  of  Christ  to  feed  on  ;  He  increases  to  us.  (A.  M. 
Stuart.)  The  food  of  tlie  world : — I.  Christ  feeds  the  famishing  world  by  means 
of  His  Church.  1.  The  food,  though  supernaturally  provided,  is  carried  to  the 
hungry  by  the  ordinary  means.  2.  The  disciples  were  prepared  for  their  work. 
They  had  to  learn  the  absolute  disproportion  between  the  means  at  their  command 
and  the  needs  of  the  crowd.  3.  Wo  must  carry  our  poor  and  inadequate  resources 
to  Christ.  II.  The  bread  is  enough  for  all  the  world — "  They  did  all  eat  and 
were  filled."  HI.  The  bread  that  is  given  to  the  famishing  is  multiplied  fob 
THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  DISTRIBUTORS.  {American  Homiletic  Review.)  The  miracle 
of  the  loaves  and  fishes : — I.  Explain  and  illustrate  the  various  ciRCOMSTANCEa 

CONNECTED    WITH   THE    MIRACLE.        11.    ThB    SPIRITUAL    LESSONS   WHICH   THE    MIRACLE 

AFFORDS.  In  the  people  we  see  a  striking  representation  of  the  moral  condition  of 
the  human  family.  In  the  provision  we  see  a  true  exhibition  of  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel.  In  its  distribution  we  see  the  nature  of  theoifice  of  the  Christian  ministry. 
In  the  abundance  remaining  we  see  the  boundlessness  of  gospel  supplies.  What 
personal  participation  of  gospel  blessing  is  necessary  to  our  happiness  and  satisfac- 
tion ?  {Dr.  J.  Burns.)  The  food  of  tlu  world : — Scripture  miracles  are  not  merely 
■wonders,  but  signs.  This  one  is  a  symbolic  revelation  of  Christ  supplying  all 
the  wants  of  this  hungry  world.  Three  points — the  distribution,  the  meal,  the 
gathering  up.  I.  Christ  feeds  the  famishing  world  by  means  of  His  Chuboh. 
1.  Economy  of  power.  God  does  not  interfere  supernaturally,  any  further  than 
is  necessary.  Christ's  incarnation  and  sacrifice  are  the  purely  supernatural  work 
of  the  Divine  power  and  mercy;  but,  after  their  introduction  into  the  world, 
human  agency  is  required  for  the  diffusion  of  the  new  power.  Christian  people  are 
henceforth  Christ's  instruments.  2.  Preparation  of  the  disciples  for  this  work. 
Looking  at  their  own  resources,  they  felt  utterly  inadequate  to  the  work.  Humility 
and  self-dietrust  are  necessary  if  God  is  to  work  with  and  in  us.  He  works  with 
bruised  reeds,  and  out  of  them  makes  polished  shafts,  pillars  in  His  house.  In  His 
hands  our  feeble  resources  are  enough.  3.  The  disciples  seem  to  have  partaken 
first.  Those  only  can  distribute  and  impart,  who  have  themselves  found  sustenance 
and  life  in  Christ.  And  an  obligation  lies  on  them  to  do  so.  Power  to  its  last 
particle  is  duty.  II.  The  bread  la  enough  fob  all  the  wobld.  The  gospel 
addressses  itself  to  universal  wants,  brushing  aside  all  surface  distinctions,  and 
going  right  down  to  the  depths  of  our  common  nature.  The  seed  of  the  kingdom 
is  hke  com,  an  ezolio  nowhere,  for  wherever  man  lives  it  will  grow — and  yet  an 
exotic  everywhere,  for  it  came  down  from  heaven.  Other  food  requires  an  educated 
palate  for  its  appreciation  ;  but  any  hungry  man  in  any  land  will  reUsh  bread.  For 
every  soul  on  earth  this  living,  dying  luve  of  Jesas  addresses  itself  to  and  satisfiea 
his  deepest  wants.     It  is  the  bread  which  gives  life  to  the  world.    IIL  Thb  bbeao 

•tVKN  TO  THE  FAUIBBINO  IB  MULTIPLIED  FOB   THB   FOTUBB    OF  THE   DtSTBIBUTOBS.       T« 

impart  to  others  ia  to  gain  for  oneself.    If  you  would  learn,  teach.    If  you  woald 


BHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  >03 

have  your  own  spiritual  life  strengthened  and  deepened,  remember  that  not  by 
Bolitary  meditation  or  raptures  of  silent  communion  alone  can  that  be  accomplished, 
but  by  these  and  by  honest,  manful  work  for  God  in  the  world,  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  work  of  the  Church  in  a  starving  world  : — An  emblem  of  the  whole  work  of  the 
Church  in  this  starving  world.  The  mnltitades  famish.  Tell  Christ  of  their  wants. 
Count  your  own  small  resources  till  you  have  completely  learned  your  poverty :  then 
take  them  to  Jesus.  He  will  accept  tbem,  and  in  His  hands  they  will  becomo 
mighty,  being  transfigured  from  human  thotights  and  forces  into  Divine  words 
epiritual  powers.  On  that  bread  which  He  gives,  do  you  yourself  live.  Then  carrj 
it  boldly  to  all  the  hungry.  Rank  after  rank  will  eat.  All  races,  all  ages,  from  grey 
hairs  to  babbling  childJiood,  will  find  there  the  food  of  their  souls.  As  you  pait 
the  blessing,  it  will  grow  beneath  His  eye ;  and  the  longer  you  give,  the  fuller 
handed  you  will  become.  Nor  shall  the  bread  fail,  nor  the  word  become  weak,  till 
all  the  world  has  tasted  of  its  sweetness,  and  been  refreshed  by  its  potent  life. 
{Ibid.)  Tlie  miracle  of  the  loaves  : — I.  The  nr.oENcr  or  the  need.  1.  What  is 
wanted — food.  2.  The  urgency  of  the  want — in  the  wilderness.  11.  Thb  abundance 
or  THE  SUPPLY — "  He  openeth  His  hand  and  filleth  all  things  living  with  plenteons- 
ness."  1.  Like  the  five  loaves  the  word  is,  in  the  letter  of  it,  contemptible  and 
mean.  2.  The  miracle  instructive  on  account  of  its  typical  character ;  the  disciples 
received  the  food  they  set  before  the  people  from  the  hands  of  Jesus.  We  should 
determine  :  (1)  To  eat  the  food  ourselves ;  (2)  To  distribute  it  to  others.  (C. 
Clayton,  M.A.)  Comvassion  for  the  multitude  : — I.  Cue  mission  and  oub  wbak- 
NEB8.  Hungry  men  around  us.  To  feed  them,  superstition  offers  stones  instead  of 
bread.  Infidelity  tries  to  persuade  that  they  are  not  hungry.  You  say  "  Who  are 
we  that  we  should  feed  this  multitude,  who  can  count  them  ?  "  Do  not  let  the 
magnitude  of  the  work  dispirit  yon.  "  The  supply  is  scant "  you  eay.  There  ia  a 
tendency  to  shift  responsibihty.  "  Let  us  send  them  away  into  the  villages  to  buy 
meat."  II.  Oub  line  of  dctt  and  the  Mastee's  stbenoth.  1.  In  immediate  obedience 
to  Christ's  commands.  2.  In  consecrating  what  we  have  to  Christ.  3.  In  prayer. 
4.  In  active  service.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Communication  begets  plenty  : — I.  The 

PRODUCTIONS  OF  THE  BABTH  AND  OF  THE  EABTH'S  INDUSTRY,  OUTWARD  P08SESSIOKB  AND 
BENEFITS,  THE  THINGS  THAT  ARE  CONSUMED  IN  THE  USING.       Shut   Up   yOUr   bread-OOm 

in  a  granary,  and  though  it  may  not  rot,  it  cannot  grow ;  but  strow  it  abroad  over 
the  furrows  of  the  ground,  and  it  will  swell  into  a  harvest.  Lock  up  your  piece  of 
talver  or  gold,  and  it  is  no  better  than  dead ;  but  send  it  out  into  the  world's  free 
Commerce,  and  the  rusty  solitary  shall  become  a  glittering  host.  An  avaricious 
policy  is  dull-sighted  and  thriftless.  It  saves,  but  to  be  barren.  Modem  science 
teaches  us  that  public  wealth  is  bom  of  trust  and  free  communications.  II.  In- 
telligence AND  knowledge,  THE  POWER  OF  LEARNING  AND  THE  TREASURES  OF  LEABN- 

INO,  ABB  MULTIPLIED  BY  DISTRIBUTION.  The  humau  mind  is  not  less  ready  than  the 
Boil  to  render  back  with  interest  what  is  sown  in  it.  Jesus  gave  to  the  disciples, 
and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude.  That  is  the  way  in  which  instruction  is  im- 
parted. It  passes  from  one  to  the  many.  It  finds  companions.  Truth  begets 
truth ;  and  you  must  have  a  company  to  show  the  supply.  What  would  have 
seemed  inconsiderable  if  left  by  itself,  grows  into  great  account  as  it  is  sent  forward 
among  those  who  apprehend  it,  and  transmit  it  in  new  and  manifold  forms.  It  is 
manifested,  it  is  accumulated,  by  travelling  down  among  the  sympathies  and  wants 
of  those  whose  hearts  love  it,  whose  natures  crave  it,  and  whose  ability  and  experi- 
ence reproduce  and  recommend  it  to  all  men.     III.  Jot,  hope,  and  ai.l  cheebing 

raiLUENCES  ABE  INCBEASED  BY  BEING  SENT  ROUND  FROM  A  SINGLE  MIND  AMONG  THE  BANKS 

OF  THE  world's  POOR  SOJOURNERS.  Nothing  is  more  heightened  by  communication 
than  just  such  impulses  as  those  we  here  require.  Joy  and  hope  are  social ;  they 
ask  for  companionship  ;  they  spread  by  contact  and  mutual  encouragement.  He 
who  has  awakened  them  in  his  own  breast,  finds  them  greatly  enhanced  by  express- 
ing them  ;  and  their  expression  is  caught  up  and  repeated  by  numberless  voices  that 
bad  till  then  slept.  (L.  N.  Frothingliam.)  Sitting  on  grass: — The  tall  grass  which, 
broken  down  by  the  feet  of  the  thousands  there  gathered  together,  would  make  as  it 
were  "  couches "  for  them  to  recline  upon.  (Dean  Stanley.)  Multiplied  by 
giving : — From  whence  God  multiplies  the  crops  of  com  from  a  few  grains,  from 
thence  He  multiplied  the  loaves  in  His  own  hands.  For  the  power  was  in  the 
hands  of  Christ.  For  those  five  loaves  were,  as  it  were,  seed,  not  indeed  committed 
to  the  earth,  but  multiplied  by  Him  who  made  the  earth.  (Augustine.)  When 
you  give  a  loaf  or  a  coin  to  a  poor  man,  you  do  not  lose  it,  but  you  sow  it ;  for,  aa 
from  one  grain  of  seed  many  grains  grow,  so  it  is  likewise  with  loaves  and  money. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 


(Lapide.)  Increase  by  distribution  : — Christ  could  as  vrell  have  multiplied  the 
loaves  whole  ;  why  would  He  rather  do  it  in  the  broaking?  Perhaps  to  teach  us 
that  in  the  distribution  of  our  goods  we  should  expect  His  blessing,  and  not  in  their 
entireness  and  reservation.  There  is  no  man  but  increaseth  by  scattering.  (Bishop 
Ball.)  Strong  charity,  weak  faith: — "Send  them  away^  that  they  may  buy 

victuals."  Here  was  a  strong  charity,  but  a  weak  faith :  a  strong  charity,  in  that 
they  would  have  the  people  relieved ;  a  weak  faith,  in  that  they  supposed  they  could 
not  otherwise  be  so  well  relieved.  As  a  man,  when  he  sees  many  ways  lie  btfora 
him,  takes  that  which  he  thinks  both  fairest  and  nearest,  so  do  they:  this  way  of 
relief   lay  openest  to  their  view  and  promised   most.      {Ibid.)  Baskets  for 

fragments  .-—The  Boman  poet  Juvenal  describes  a  large  provision-basket,  together 
with  a  bundle  of  hay,  as  being  part  of  the  equipment  of  the  Jewish  mendicants  who 
thronged  the  grove  of  Egeria  at  Eome.  The  motive  for  this  custom  was  to  avoid 
ceremonial  impurity  in  eating,  or  in  resting  at  night.  {A.  Carr.)  Our  Lord  in 
prayer : — Likely  he  was  weary  in  body,  and  also  worn  in  spirit  for  lack  of  that  finer 
sympathy  which  His  disciples  could  not  give  Him,  being  very  earthly  yet.  He  who 
loves  his  fellows  and  labours  among  those  who  can  ill  understand  him  will  best 
know  what  this  weariness  of  oar  Lord  must  have  been  like  He  had  to  endure  the 
-Torl'l  prpssure  of  suixounding  humanity  in  ail  its  ungodlike  phases.  (George 
Maedonald.) 

Ver,  23.  He  went  up  Into  a  mottntatn  apart  to  pray. — Beligiout  retirement : — It 
hath  been  disputed  which  is  a  state  of  greater  perfection,  the  social,  or  the  solitary ; 
whereas,  in  truth,  neither  of  these  estates  is  complete  without  the  other :  as  the 
example  of  our  blessed  Lord  (the  unerring  test  and  measure  of  perfection)  informs 

us.      I.    UnDEB  what   limitations   may   the   doty   of   religious  retreat  and  BECOIi- 

LECTION  BE  RECOMMENDED?  No  man  is,  or  ought  to  be,  so  deeply  immersed  in  the 
affairs  of  this  world  as  not  to  be  able  to  retire  from  them  now  and  then  into  his 
closet.  II.  The  advantaqes  attending  the  practice  of  religious  retirement. 
There  are  such  as  these — that  it  unites  and  fixes  our  scattered  thoughts  ;  places  as 
out  of  the  reach  of  the  most  dangerous  temptations  ;  frees  us  from  the  insinuating 
contagion  of  ill  examples,  and  hushes  and  lays  asleep  those  troublesome  passions 
which  are  the  great  disturbers  of  our  repose  and  happiness.  (F.  Atterbury.)  ii«- 
freshment  in  prayer : — The  celebrated  Haydn  was  in  company  with  some  distin- 
guished  persons.  The  conversation  turned  on  the  best  means  of  restoring  the 
mental  energies,  when  exliausted  with  long  and  difficult  studies.  One  said  he  had 
recourse,  in  such  a  case,  to  a  bottle  of  wine;  another,  that  he  went  into  company. 
Haydn  being  asked  what  he  would  do,  or  did  do,  said  that  he  retired  to  his  closet 
and  engaged  in  prayer ;  and  that  nothing  exerted  on  his  mind  a  more  happy  and 
efficacious  influence  than  prayer.  Religious  retirement : — From  the  behaviour  of 
oar  Lord,  as  it  is  here  described,  we  may  draw  these  observations  for  our  own  use. 
I.  That  we  ought  to  bet  apart  some  portions  of  oub  time  fob  private  and 
BiLENT  ACTS  OF  RELIGION,  for  conversation  with  God  and  our  own  hearts.  The 
duties  of  such  times  consist — (1)  in  a  recollection  of  our  past  transgressions,  in 
resolutions  of  amendment  and  improvement,  and  in  praj'ers  to  God  to  forgive  and 
assist  us.  (2)  In  a  review  of  the  favours  and  mercies  which  we  have  received  from 
Him,  and  in  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  them.  (3)  In  meditations  on  the  short- 
ness and  uncertainty  of  Ufe,  on  the  duties  which  more  particularly  belong  to  oar 
station,  on  the  abilities  and  opportunities  we  have  of  improving  our  heart  and 
understanding,  and  of  doing  the  work  of  Him  who  has  sent  us  into  the  world.  (4) 
In  general,  in  a  study  of  religious  truths.  In  all  times  and  places  there  are  many 
who  pass  a  thoughtless  life  in  perpetual  unconcern  for  religion,  who  are  entirely 
taken  up  with  the  follies,  the  amusements,  the  hurry  and  business  of  this  world. 
Trace  out  the  causes  of  this  nnreasonable  conduct.  (1)  A  bad  education  ;  (2)  the 
common  practice  of  the  world  when  we  are  grown  up ;  (3)  desire  for  company.  By 
securing  times  of  meditation,  we  may  hope  to  keep  ourselves  free  from  vicious 
habits ;  to  learn  what  the  defects  are  to  which  we  are  prone,  which  usually  escape 
our  notice ;  to  rule  over  our  passions ;  to  discover  what  abilities  God  has  given  i:>« ; 
to  confirm  in  ourselves  all  good  dispositions,  and  thus  we  shall  be  able  to  converse 
in  safety  with  the  world.    II.  That  we  ouoht  to  employ  all  the  powers  an© 

ABILITIES  which  GoD  HAS  CONFERRED  UPON   US   TO   THE   OLORY  OF  THEIB  AuTHOB,  and 

to  the  benefit  of  mankind,  and  lose  no  opportunity  of  doing  good.  The  actions 
and  the  behavioar  by  which  we  can  be  useful  to  others  are,  Liberality,  Justice,  In- 
•tiQvtiun,  Counsel  and  Advice,  Beproof  and  Correction,  Commendation  and  Eneoo* 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  805 

ragement,  Patience  and  Meekness,  Compassion,  Condescension,  Courteonsness,  and 
Affability ;  and  a  life  suitable  to  the  religion  which  we  profess.     III.  That  the 

ACTIVE  AND  SOCIAL  DUTIES  ABB  MORE  VALUABLE  AND  MOBE  IMPORTANT  THAN  THE  CON- 
TEMPLATIVE VIBTUES  WHICH  ABB   OP  A  PBIVATE    AND    80LITABY  NATUBB.       1.    Man  )S  not 

enfficient  to  his  own  happiness ;  finds  hijuself  made  for  society,  to  which  his  wmts, 
bis  imperfections,  and  his  desires  incline  him  ;  it  cannot  therefore  be  his  duty  to 
check  and  overrule  these  innocent  desires.  2.  By  society  we  are  assisted  not  only 
in  the  conveniences  of  life,  kut  in  the  improvement  of  our  understanding  and  in 
th*}  performance  of  our  duty.  3.  Of  two  persons  who  live  soberly  and  righteously, 
the  one  in  a  public  station,  the  other  in  retirement,  the  former  must  be  allowed  tc 
be  the  more  excellent  person,  and  the  brighter  example  of  virtue.  4.  The  accounts 
which  we  have  of  the  old  solitary  saints,  though  written  by  their  admirers  and 
adorers,  is  often  little  to  their  advantage  or  to  the  credit  of  Christianity.     IV.  That 

WE  MAT  HAVE  SUFFICIENT  TIME  AND  PBOPEB  0PP0BTUNITIE3  FOB  THE  EXEBCISE  OF 
PUBLIC    AND    PBIVATE    DUTIES   AND   VIBTUES,    AND    THAT    THEBEFOBB    NEITHBB    SHOULD 

BE  OMITTED.  (Jortin.)  Closet  prayer : — Christ  often  proposed  His  own  temper 
and  actions  as  the  model,  after  which  all  His  disciples  should  copy.  The  multitude 
and  variety  of  His  public  services  neither  prevented  His  spending  a  social  hour 
among  the  families  to  which  His  disciples  stood  related,  nor  His  finding  oppor- 
tunity for  secret  devotion.  For  this,  Christ  was  singularly  eminent.  An  old 
divine  used  to  say  three  things  were  requisite  to  make  a  good  minister :  "  medita- 
tion, temptation,  and  prayer."  If  Jesus  Christ  found  it  needful  and  advantageous 
to  engage  in  retired  devotion,  how  much  more  so  must  it  be  for  such  weak  and  im- 
perfect creatures  as  we  are — not  only  ministers,  but  private  Christians  also.  I.  Thb 
NATUBB  AND  GEOUNDS  OF  THIS  DUTY — (a)  Precepts  of  Scripture;  (b)  Example  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  (c)  Practice  of  saints  in  every  age ;  {d)  Important  and  indispensable  part  of 
religion.  II.  The  manneb  and  spibit  in  which  it  should  be  pebfobmed — (a) 
Sense  of  God's  presence ;  (b)  Solemn  and  devout ;  (c)  Joined  with  reading  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  meditation,  and  self-examination.  III.  The  pabticulab  objects  i» 
BBLATiON  to  which  IT  IS  PBACTiSED.  Our  progress  in  knowledge,  grace,  and  holi- 
ness, and  the  obtaining  guidance  and  assistance  from  Qod  in  all  seasons  of  peculiar 
need.  There  are  some  particular  occasions  in  regard  to  which  this  duty  may  be 
practised  to  advantage.  There  are  some  particular  seasons  in  which  Christians 
should  be  much  in  private  prayer ;  such  as  times  of  affliction,  public  oalamityv  pre- 
vaihng  departure  from  the  knowledge,  experience,  and  practice  of  true  religion ; 
seasons  of  suspense  and  embarra^'sment ;  seasons  of  ease  and  prosperity.     IV.  Thb 

DXFFICULTT    Of   A    OOMSTANT   AND    BOCCBSSFUL    ATTBNTIOH    TO    CLOSET    PBAYBB.        (J, 

Townsetid.) 

Ver.  24.   For  the  wind  waa  contraiy. — The  wind  was  contrary : — The  Sea  of 

Galilee  lies  low,  being,  in  fact,  six  hundred  feet  beneath  the  level  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  the  water-courses  on  its  banks  have  cut  out  deep  ravines  which  act  like 
funnels  to  draw  down  the  winds  from  the  mountains,  so  that  the  storms  are  often 
both  sudden  and  severe.  On  the  present  occasion  the  wind  came  down  with  such 
fury  that  even  strong  rowers  like  the  fishermen  apostles  could  make  little  way 
against  it,  and  after  "  toiling  "  for  nine  hours  they  had  made  no  more  than  three 
miles.  I.  The  way  of  duty  is  not  always  easy.  Even  when  constrained  by 
love  of  Ciwi^t  to  undertake  any  particular  work,  we  are  often  beset  by  difiiculties 
and  obstacles :  no  plain  sailing,  always  breakers  ahead.  II.  We  may  take  com- 
roBT  TO  ooBSELVES  FBOM  THE  FOLLOWING  FACTS :  1.  We  are  not  responsible  tot 
the  "  contrary  wind."  This  takes  the  sting  out  of  the  trial.  If  a  difficulty  rises 
before  me  in  God's  Providence,  apart  from  any  agency  or  culpability  of  my  own, 
then  I  am  in  better  mood  to  meet  and  overcome  it  than  I  should  be  if  I  knew  it  to 
be  the  result  of  my  own  folly.  2.  The  attention  required  for  bearing  up  against 
the  contrary  wind  may  take  us,  for  the  time  being,  out  of  some  subtle  temptation. 
It  would  seem  that  our  Lord  sent  His  disciples  away  across  the  lake  that  night  to 
keep  them  out  of  harm's  way,  and  to  give  them  something  more  to  think  about 
than  the  glittering  allurements  of  worldly  greatness.  Is  it  not  often  so  with  ua? 
We  have  not  been  conscious  of  it  at  the  moment,  but  we  have  seen  afterwards  that 
the  seeming  interruption  kept  us  out  of  the  path  of  danger.  Better  far  a  strong 
head-wind  than  a  fog  ;  for  in  the  fog  an  iceberg  may  be  veiled,  and  collision  with 
that  would  be  destruction.  8.  The  contrary  wind  may  prepare  ns  for  highta 
Berrice  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  In  this  night  upon  the  deep  the  apostles  had,  as  it 
were,  a  rehearsal  of  the  difficulties  they  would  have  to  contend  with  after  their 

20 


$06  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XI?. 

Master  was  taken  up  into  heaven.  Probably  much  of  their  persistence  in  the  fsM 
of  persecution  had  its  root  in  the  remembrance  of  what  they  had  learned  in  thii 
night's  contest  with  adverse  winds.  It  was  one  of  their  first  experiments  in  walk- 
ing alone,  and  it  helped  to  steady  them.  The  very  necessity  of  rowing  against  the 
wind  develops  new  strength,  and  brings  latent  resources  into  play.  Had  it  not  been 
lor  his  deafness,  John  Kitto  would  probably  never  have  become  an  author.  4. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  closely  watching  us.  The  apostles  knew  not  that  He  "  saw  them 
toihng  in  rowing,"  for  it  was  dark.  Had  they  known  it,  what  new  heart  it  would 
have  put  into  them  I  To  us  this  knowledge  is  given — that  though  Jesus  is  unseen, 
He  is  still  looking  down  with  interest  upon  us,  and  will  at  the  right  time  come  and 
Bnccour  us.  So  we  may  leave  all  care  about  the  issue,  and  attend,  meanwhile,  to 
the  rowing.  Let  ns,  then,  toil  on !  It  is  but  a  little  while  at  the  longest.  No 
contrary  wind  can  last  for  ever.  By  and  by  Christ  wiU  come  to  us,  and  then  there 
■will  be  peace.  Yes,  and  after  a  time  we  shall  reach  the  other  shore ;  and  when  we 
touch  that,  we  shall  be  done  with  difficulties.  So,  as  one  said,  just  before  entering 
the  boat  in  which  he  lost  his  life,  "  Ho !  for  heaven  I "  What  though  the  waves  bo 
rough  7  Ho  1  for  heaven !  What  though  the  wind  be  contrary  ?  Ho  1  for  heaven  I 
What  though  the  labour  be  exhausting  ?    Ho  I  for  heaven  1    {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D^) 

Vers.  22,  27.  And  straightway  Jestis  constrained  His  disciples  to  get  Into  a  aWp, 
and  to  go  before  Elm  unto  the  other  side.  The  midnight  voijuge  home  : — I.  Tea 
FEABT  FOLLOWED  BT  HUMILIATION  AND  TROUBLE.  1.  The  feast  in  the  descrt  was  the 
greatest  work  in  which  the  apostles  were  ever  engaged  during  the  ministry  of  Jesna. 
The  miracle  was  of  a  more  kingly  character  than  others,  shared  by  a  greater 
number,  and  more  plainly  typical  of  great  things  to  come  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
In  this  glorious  work  the  twelve  have  been  active  ministers.  They  were  not  to 
remain  to  receive  the  congratulations  of  the  multitude ;  they  must  go  away  at  once. 
Jesus  constrains  them  to  return  to  the  ship.  Ministers  must  not  intrude  them* 
selves  into  the  Lord's  place  ;  they  must  be  willing  servants,  and  then  go  their  way 
snd  leave  the  rest  to  the  Lord.  The  apostles  had  been  highly  exalted,  and  now 
they  must  be  humbled.  In  the  sight  of  the  congregation  they  are  sent  away  in 
charge  of  the  empty  boat,  as  if  they  were  mere  fishermen  still.  2.  But  they  are 
Bent  also  into  the  midst  of  trouble.  After  we  have  bad  faith  to  distribute  the 
bread  of  life  comes  the  trial  of  obedience.  It  seemed  as  if  providence  were  contrary 
to  their  course.  II.  The  btobm  agobavated  by  CnnxsT's  absence,  and  stilled  by 
His  cominq.  1.  Jesus  sent  the  twelve  away  alone,  and  all  that  the  people  saw  waa 
that  "He  went  not  in  the  ship  with  them,"  Jesus  was  to  come  to  them  by  the 
coast.  2.  Jesus,  meanwhile,  has  not  walked  along  the  coast,  whence  they  expected 
to  take  Him  in ;  but  has  left  the  shore  altogether,  and  gone  up  into  a  mountain 
apart.  In  the  retired  mountain  He  cannot  be  seen  by  the  disciples ;  but  in  His 
prayer  to  the  Father  they  will  not  be  forgotten,  8.  Jesus  comes  to  them  according 
to  His  promise ;  but  not  accordiiig  to  their  thoughts,  either  in  time  or  in  manner. 
4.  There  is  yet  one  more  element  of  trial  mingled  for  these  midnight  wrestlers  with 
the  waves.  Jesus  often  appears  fo  be  "  going  past "  in  our  time  of  need.  Also  Hia 
manner  of  coming  alarms  the  disciples.  In  our  trials  we  often  mistake  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  5.  Jesus  enters  the  ship ;  and  how  glorious  is  the  effect  of 
deliverance  out  of  danger,  of  seasonable  help,  when  obeying  Christ's  command, 
against  all  adversity.  6 .  An  unlooked-for  blessing  now  awaits  them  on  the  shore. 
{A.M.  Stuart.)  Jesus  constrained  Ills  disciples: — Whyf  1,  Lest  they  should 
take  part  with  the  rash,  many-headed  multitude,  who  would  have  made  Him  a 
king.  2.  To  inure  them  to  the  cross,  and  teach  them  to  suffer  hardship.  8.  To 
give  them  proof  of  His  power.  Nature  and  grace : — The  story  of  this  miracle  haa 
instruction  for  us  in  connection  with  the  material  world  in  which  we  live.  Nature 
is  not,  in  all  respects,  to  be  separated  off  too  sharply  from  grace  ;  and  this  miracle 
reminds  us  that  it  is  the  Lord  of  this  universe  who  is  the  Head  of  the  Church  and 
the  Saviour  of  our  souls.  (Dean  Howson.)  The  government  of  nature: — Theso 
miracles,  dealing  with  nature,  show  themselves  as  interfering  with  what  we  may 
call  the  righteous  laws  of  nature.  Water  should  wet  the  foot,  should  engulf  him 
who  would  tread  its  surface.  Yet  even  in  this,  I  think,  the  restoration  of  aa 
original  law — the  supremacy  of  righteous  man,  is  foreshown.  While  a  man  can- 
not order  his  own  house  as  he  would,  something  is  wrong  in  him,  and  therefore  in 
bis  house.  I  think  a  true  man  should  be  able  to  rule  winds  and  waters,  loaves  and 
flshes,  for  he  comes  of  the  Father  who  made  the  house  for  him.  Man  ir  not  master 
in  hia  own  hooae,  because  he  is  not  master  in  himself,  beoaose  he  is  not  a  law  onta 


fHAP.  XIV,]  8T.  MATTHEW.  $0T 

himself — is  not  himself  obedient  to  the  law  by  which  he  exists.  {George  Mae" 
donald.)  Secret  of  Christ's  potoer  over  nature: — A  higher  condition  of  harmony 
with  law  may  one  day  enable  us  to  do  things  which  must  now  afjyar  an  interrup- 
tion of  law.  I  believe  it  is  in  virtue  of  the  absolute  harmony  in  Him,  His  perfect 
righteousness,  that  God  can  create  at  all.  If  man  were  in  harmony  with  this,  if  ha 
too  were  righteous,  he  would  inherit  of  his  Father  a  something  in  his  degree  corre- 
spondent to  the  creative  power  in  Him ;  and  the  world  he  inhabits,  which  is  but  an 
extension  of  his  body,  would,  I  think,  be  subject  to  him  in  a  way  surpassing  his 
wildest  dreams  of  dominion,  for  it  would  be  the  perfect  dominion  of  holy  law — a 
virtue  flowing  to  and  from  him  through  the  channel  of  a  perfect  obedience.  I  sus 
pect  that  our  Lord,  in  all  His  dominion  over  nature,  set  forth  only  the  complete 
man — man  as  God  means  him  one  day  to  be.  I  believe  that  some  of  these  miraelea 
were  the  natural  result  of  a  physical  nature  perfect  from  the  indwelling  of  a  perfect 
■oul,  whose  unity  with  the  Life  of  all  things  and  in  all  things  was  absolute — in  a 
word,  whose  sonship  was  perfect.  [Jhid.)  The  glonfying  of  Christ's  body  : — 
The  difficulty  here  ia  our  Lord's  withdrawing  Himself  personally  from  the  control 
of  earthly  natural  laws.  It  is  common  to  conceive  of  the  glorifying  of  Christ's 
body  as  the  work  of  a  moment,  at  the  Resurrection,  or,  at  least,  at  the  Ascension. 
But  if  we  suppose  the  Spirit's  work  in  glorifying  and  perfecting  Christ's  body  to 
have  been  spread  over  the  Saviour's  whole  Ufe,  certain  periods — such  as  this  walking 
on  the  sea,  and  the  transfiguration — being  still  distinguished  as  seasons  of  special 
activity,  much  that  is  obscure  will  be  made  clear.  A  body  thoroughly  of  the  earth, 
chained  down  by  unseen  hands  to  earthly  matter,  cannot  shake  itself  free  from  its 
origin,  but  that  a  higher  bodily  frame,  teeming  with  the  powers  of  a  loftier  world, 
Bhould  rise  above  the  earthly  level  is  less  surprising.  This  manifestation  of  Christ'g 
hidden  glory  was  designed  to  build  up  His  disciples  in  the  faith.  They  saw 
more  and  more  clearly  with  whom  they  had  to  do,  and  perceived  that  He  was 
the  revelation  of  the  invisible  Father,  who  alone  spreadeth  out  the  heavens,  and 
treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea.  (Olsharu^en.)  The  Divine  coming  unrecog- 
nized: — It  often  happens  that  the  coming  of  Christ  to  His  disciples  for  their  relief 
is  that  which  frightens  them  most,  because  they  do  not  know  the  extent  of  God't 
wardrobe;  for  I  think  that  as  a  king  might  never  wear  the  same  garment  but  once, 
in  order  to  show  hia  riches  and  magnificence,  so  God  comes  to  us  in  all  exigencies, 
but  never  twice  alike.  He  sometimes  puts  on  the  garments  of  trouble  ;  and  when 
we  are  calling  upon  Him  as  though  He  were  yet  in  heaven.  He  is  walking  by  our 
side;  and  that  from  which  we  are  praying  God  to  deliver  us  is  often  but  God 
Himself.  Thus  it  is  with  us  as  with  children  who  are  terrified  by  their  dreams  in 
the  night,  and  scream  for  their  parents,  until,  fully  waking,  behold  they  are  in  their 
parents'  arms  I  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  sea  on  which  Jeswi  icalked  : — Shortly 
after  passing  the  spot  which  was  the  scene  of  the  terrible  discomfiture  of  the  Chris- 
tian hosts  by  Saladin,  we  came  to  the  brink  of  a  vast  hollow,  and  the  Lake  of 
Tiberias  lay  slumbering  far  beneath  our  feet.  The  sun  was  nearly  at  the  zenith, 
and  diffused  a  flood  of  dazzling  light  upon  the  waters,  just  ruffled  by  a  passing 
breeze,  on  which  we  beheld  a  solitary  bark,  a  mere  speck,  slowly  making  its  way 
toward  Tiberias.  TLat  city,  with  its  huge  castle  and  turreted  walls,  a  pile  of 
melancholy  ruins,  lay  scattered  along  the  nearer  shore.  The  lake,  abont  ten  miles 
long,  and  five  or  six  broad,  was  embosomed  in  mountains,  or,  to  describe  it  more 
correctly,  was  hke  a  great  caldron  sunk  in  the  lofty  table-land,  which  broke  down 
to  its  edge  in  steep  clilfs  and  abrupt  ravines.  At  one  end  we  could  see  where  the 
Jordan  flowed  into  it,  and,  beyond,  the  lofty  peak  of  Mount  Hermon  covered  with 
eternal  snow.  There  was  no  wood  on  the  hills,  there  were  uo  villages  on  the  shore, 
no  boats  upon  the  water ;  there  was  no  sound  in  any  direction.  If  there  was 
beauty,  it  was  that  of  the  intense  blue  sky  of  Palestine,  reflected  iu  the  blue  expanse 
of  waters,  and  over-canopying  a  landscape  of  serene,  but  corpse-like,  placidity,  like 
a  countenance  fixed  in  death,  but  upon  which  there  yet  lingers  something  of  a 
parting  smile.    (W.  H.  Bartlett.) 

Yer.  26.  And  when  the  dlsdples  saw  Him  walking:  on  the  sea,  they  wen 
toonbled. — Christ  walking  on  the  sea : — Here  are  presented  two  points.  I.  Human 
need.   U.  Divine  help.   These  two  facts  are  involved  in  the  two  aspects  of  humanity. 

1.    I  ASK  TOU  TO  OONStDEB  THE  ATTITUDB  OF  UAN  T0WABD3  THE  SUFEBNATCBAIi  AND  THS 

WMKNowN.  "  They  cried  out  for  fear."  This  was  the  cry  of  men  tossed  and  toiling 
on  the  wild  deep,  in  the  gloom  of  night.  Very  startling  must  have  been  to  them 
iSoB  appearance  of  that  form,  advancing  through  the  shadow  and  ovei  the  sea.    Bat 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit. 

that  was  a  cry  of  our  common  natare ;  it  was  a  spontaneous  human  utterance  from 
a  mysterious  depth,  which  under  all  forms  of  civilization,  and  all  kinds  of  religion, 
abides  in  the  soul  of  man.  Every  man  awakens  to  the  conviction  that  there  ia 
something  beyond  this  world.  It  may  not  be  a  very  practical  conviction  ;  thousanda 
may  live  without  any  steady  appreciation  of  that  to  which  such  a  conviction  points. 
But  there  are  occasions  when  it  is  suddenly  realized.  There  are  three  conditions 
of  nature  which  are  especially  adapted  to  stir  these  feelings  of  mystery  and  awe, 
and  all  three  are  involved  in  the  circumstances  of  the  text.  These  are  right, 
the  night  sky,  and  the  sea.  1.  Witness  the  common  terror  of  the  dead  night-time 
and  the  dark,  not  a  mere  childish  superstition,  but  a  solemn  awe  creeping  over  the 
innermost  fibres  of  the  heart,  •'  In  thought  from  the  visions  of  the  night,"  said 
Eliphaz,  "  when  deep  sleep  falleth  on  men,"  &c.  Even  the  sceptical  mind  has 
acted  upon  the  conviction  that  something  must  people  that  undefined  space  into 
which  the  visible  world  melts  away.  2.  Or,  agnin,  who  has  ever  looked  up  through 
the  darkness  and  gazed  upon  those  orbs  of  light  and  glory  that  shame  all  splendours 
of  the  earth,  without  the  spontaneous  conviction  of  powers  and  intelligences  dwell- 
ing outside  these  beaten  ways  of  our  traffic  and  our  thought  ?  What  influences 
rain  upon  us  from  those  starry  depths?  What  unseen  messengers  gUde  down  these 
awful  solitudes?  3.  Or,  once  more,  consider  that  element  in  which  the  greatness 
and  the  mystery  of  nature  and  of  life  are  represented.  What  suggestions  of  the 
supernatural  and  the  unknown  rise  upon  us  from  the  bosom  of  the  sea.  What 
intimations  beyond  our  sight ;  what  a  conviction  of  our  impotence.  Eegarding 
thus  this  attitude  of  human  need,  what  help  has  been  found  fob  it  ?  Two 
answers  have  come — one  from  the  side  of  human  sentiment,  the  other  from  human 
reason.  1.  One  answer  ehciled  in  this  attitude  of  human  need  appears  in  various 
forms  of  superstition.  Eock-temples  and  bloody  altars,  and  human  sacrifices  pro- 
claim the  fact  that  human  nature  does  not  all  gravitate  to  sense  and  the  darkness 
of  annihilation.  The  superstitious  sentiments  need  some  explanation.  2.  The 
answer  that  comes  from  the  side  of  reason.  Law,  force,  order,  are  sublime  facts, 
but  not  enough  for  human  nature.  You  cannot  by  scientific  explanation  of  the 
seen  repress  man's  earnest  inquiry  about  the  unseen.  To  our  human  need,  and 
our  attitude  towards  tlie  supernatural,  Christ  has  oome.  There  is  only  one  voice 
that  can  say,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  be  not  afraid."     II.  Consideb  the  attitodk  o» 

MAN   KE8PECTINO    THE    NATURAL    AND    THE    KNOWN,    AND   HERB    YOO    WILL   0B8EBVB   TH« 

conditions  of  HUMAN  NEED  AND  DiviNE  HELP.  Theso  mcu  who  "  Cried  out  for 
fear  "  had  been  "  tuiling  in  rowing."  We  are  troubled  here  amidst  the  perplexities 
and  trials  of  daily  life.  In  one  way  or  another  many  of  as  are  "  toiling  in  rowing" 
— the  toil  of  pleasure — or  we  are  rowing  through  heavy  waves  of  care.  Our  need 
calls  for  Divine  help.  In  seasons  of  gloom,  looking  out  upon  the  world  around  as 
through  shadows,  we  discern  objects  at  which  we  shudder.  That  which  excites  our 
fears  may  be  a  blessing  ;  but  we  know  it  not,  and  need  the  assurance  that  can  bid 
ns  be  of  good  cheer.  {E.  H.  Chapin).  Jesus  no  phantom : — I.  It  is  too  common 
AN  EBBOB  to  MAKE  A  PHANTOM  OF  Chribt.  1.  How  ofteu  is  this  douc  in  the  matter 
of  sin  and  the  cleansing  of  it.  Our  sin  is  real  to  us  ;  but  is  Christ  as  real  to  as  f 
2.  In  the  matter  of  our  acceptance  with  God  after  pardon.  Our  shortcomings  real ; 
equally  real  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  3.  In  the  matter  of  sanctification.  4.  In 
times  of  trial.  5.  In  time  of  death.  6.  In  Christian  work.  II.  We  make  Christ 
A  PHANTOM  MOST  WHEN  He  IS  MOST  BEALLY  Christ.  When  He  Walked  on  the  waves 
there  was  more  of  Christ  visible  than  on  land;  His  Godhead  visible.  In  the 
pardon  of  great  sin  you  see  most  of  Christ ;  so  in  great  distress  and  danger.  IH, 
OuB  greatest  sorrows  arise  from  odb  treating  oub  Lord  as  unbeal.  To  som* 
Christ  is  an  itidifferent  spirit.  Many  a  poor  sinner  imagines  Him  to  be  an  angry  spirit 
and  crif  8  out  for  fear.  IV.  If  we  could  but  be  cured  of  this  desperate  mischief, 
oni  Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  have  a  higher  place  in  our  esteem,  and  many  other 
beneficial  results  would  follow :  1.  Knowledge.  2.  Worship.  8.  Service.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Eastern  belief  in  Spirits : — The  belief  is  quite  general  in  the  East 
that  there  exists  a  class  of  beings  whom  they  call "  Jins,"  both  male  and  female, 
good  and  bad,  which  hold  an  intermediate  position  between  angels  and  men,  were 
created  before  the  latter,  are  made  of  fire,  or  perhaps  of  gas,  and  are  capable  of 
assuming  a  variety  of  forms,  or  of  becoming  invisible  at  pleasure.  They  eat, 
drink,  and  marry — sometimes  human  beings — as  well  as  die,  though  they  live 
several  centaries.  Many  events  are  accounted  for  in  the  East  by  the  agency  of  the 
Jins ;  so  that  tbey  do  not  exist  in  stories  alone,  but  are  recognized  as  active  agents 
fai  human  affairs.     (Fan  Lennep.)        The  magic  of  the  Saviour's  voice.- — Ituift 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  M» 

wonderful  organ,  this  human  voice — wonderful  in  itself,  and  no  less  so  in  ita 
effects.  It  is  wonderful  as  an  exponent  of  individual  mind  and  character,  being 
somehow  very  closely  conneclad  with  a  man,  and  contributing  largely  to  constitute 
that  aggregate  of  special  qualities  we  call  individuality.  So  much  so,  that  one  ia 
known,  is  revealed  and  recognized,  by  his  voice  almost  as  much  as  by  anything 
outward.  And  it  is  wonderful  as  an  instrument  for  affecting  others.  The  Saviour's 
voice  on  this  occasion  operated  hke  a  charm ;  it  wrought  like  magic  upon  them. 
It  is  amazing  what  power  the  living  voice,  especially  a  long-known  and  much-loved 
voice,  has  to  touch  the  heart,  and  to  awaken  confidence  and  peace,  and  emotions 
of  all  kinds,  that  may  have  been  long  dormant  in  the  soul.     {A.  L.  R.  Foote.) 

Vers.  28,  33. — ^And  Peter  answered  Him  and  said.  Lord,  If  It  be  Thou,  bid  m« 
come  imto  Thee  on  the  water. — Impulse  and  regulation  : — There  are  two  powers 
working  side  by  side  under  which  Christ  has  taught  us  He  means  every  true  Christian 
life  shall  move  forward,  undervaluing  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  One  of  these 
is  the  IMPELLING  powEB,  impulse.  This  impulsive  part  of  religious  character  is  in- 
dispensable. St.  Peter  was  right  in  his  outset  "  Bid  me  come  to  Thee,"  <fec.  The 
other  is  the  begclating  power.  It  is  this  that  keeps  alive  the  life  that  has  been 
awakened,  and  fulfils  the  good  intentions.  Impulses  spring  up  in  the  region  ol 
feeUng.  Their  continuance,  regulation,  and  practical  results,  depend  on  the  con- 
science and  the  will.  It  is  easy  to  reach  the  transition  point  between  impulse  and 
principle  ;  some  reach  it  as  soon  as  danger  threatens.  How  shall  I  turn  the  ardent 
impulse  of  penitent  faith  into  consistent  piety  ?  By  leaving  no  good  impulse  to 
grow  cold  or  waste  in  a  neglected  sentiment,  but  by  embodying  it  immediately 
in  its  corresponding  action ;  in  other  words,  by  Christian  regulation.  Steadfast- 
ness will  come  as  you  are  really  planted  in  Christ.  (Bishop  Huntingdon.)  The 
religion  of  impulse  : — The  religious  feeling  is  the  soul  of  humanity.  It  may  exist 
in  these  three  forms :  I.  Acting  without  intellect,  under  the  control  of  the  external. 

II.  Acting  UNDER  intellect — controlled  by  the  judgment.     This  is  as  it  should  be, 

III.  Acting  AGAINST  intellect.  This  is  the  religion  of  impulse,  audit  is  here  exempli- 
fied by  Peter  in  three  aspects.  1.  Urging  an  extravagant  request.  Men  are  not  made 
to  ^alk  on  water  ;  were  never  known  to  do  so ;  have  no  capacity  for  it.  To  guard 
against  this  evU,  we  must  study  general  laws,  cultivate  self-command,  and  seek 
Divine  guidance.  2.  Impelling  to  perilous  conduct.  One  foolish  act  has  often 
plunged  men  :"nto  a  sea  of  difficulties.  8.  Corrected  by  a  merciful  God.  Christ  first 
allows  full  Uberty  for  the  play  of  passion  and  freaks  of  folly.  Then  He  helps,  if 
asked  to.  And,  lastly,  He  exposes  the  error-^"  Wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?  ** 
Peter  ought  not  to  have  engaged  in  the  act  without  faith — and  faith  impUes  the 
full  action  of  intellect.  Do  not  act  from  impulse — nor  even  from  custom  or  habit. 
Act  ever  from  faith.  Eemember  that  faith  implies  intellect,  evidence,  and  reliance. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Peter's  unwise  experiment  in  faith; — 1.  His  walking  on  the 
sea  was  needless.  There  is  no  pressing  necessity  shutting  him  up  to  this  sea-walk- 
ing ;  but  it  is  faith  experimenting  in  high  and  holy  things.  No  important  end  to 
be  served.  2.  He  asks  permission  to  do  that  which  is  not  commanded  by  Christ. 
Peter  asks  help  to  do  what  Christ  had  not  done  ;  to  walk  on  the  sea  for  the  walking's 
sake.  This  Christ  permits  to  prove  what  is  in  him,  but  not  to  his  honour  or  com- 
fort. A  salutary  discipUne.  '6.  Yet  Christ  does  not  fail  Peter ;  it  is  not  the  power 
or  word  of  Christ  that  gives  way,  but  only  the  faith  of  Peter  in  this  power  or  word. 
So  long  as  he  looks  to  Jesus  this  word  supports  him.  It  is  easier  to  believe  in  the 
ship  than  on  the  waters.  Now  he  fears,  his  faith  gives  way.  Peter  in  his  extremity 
cries  aloud  to  Jesus.  He  has  not  faith  enough  to  walk  on  the  waters,  bnt  enough 
to  cry  for  '  elp.  {A.  M.  Stuart.)  Walking  on  the  waters  : — It  is  not  difficult  to 
discover  the  characteristics  of  St.  Peter  as  they  come  out  here.  Whatever  he  felt  for 
the  moment  was  sure  to  come  out  in  his  words  or  actions.  It  is  easy  to  blame  and 
say  that  Peter  should  not  have  been  so  eager  to  meet  his  Lord,  or  he  should  have 
maintained  bis  faith  to  the  last.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  the  very  height  to 
which  his  faith  had  for  the  moment  attained,  exposed  him,  more  than  others,  to  the 
temptation  of  unbelief.  They  who  sit  securely  in  their  boats  are  not  hable  to  sink. 
The  m9n  of  even  temperament  cannit  understand  an  experience  such  as  this.  They 
know  nothing  of  ups  and  downs.  Where  the  hills  are  highest  the  ravines  are  deepest, 
Peter  must  not,  therefore,  be  unduly  blamed.  We  learn  from  the  incident :  1.  That 
when  His  disciples  are  in  danger  of  being  carried  away  by  earthly  influences, 
Christ  sends  them  into  trial.  If  we  are  bent  on  something  which  shall  endaugex 
oor  epiritoality,  God  may  send  us  serious  affliction  to  keep  us  out  of  misohief. 


•10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  tcHAP.  nf. 

8.  That  while  our  trial  lasts  the  Lord  prays  for  ns.  3.  That  when  Christ  comes  to 
UB  in  our  trials  we  are  able  to  ris^e  above  them.  Ha  did  not  come  at  once.  He  cam* 
over  the  big  waves  which  constituted  their  trial.  He  makes  a  pathway  into  our 
hearts  over  the  affliction  which  distresses  us.  The  disciples  did  not  know  Christ  when 
he  came.  Have  we  never  mistaken  him  ?  "When  Christ  comes,  and  is  rec<^ignized. 
He  brings  relief.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Failure  teaching  humility : — Peter  re- 
quired  a  lesson  in  humility  :  and  it  is  instructive  to  observe  in  what  way  he  received 
the  lesson  from  our  Lord.  He  did  not  meet  the  erring  disciple  with  sharp  and 
Budden  reproof.  He  did  not  refuse  the  man's  petition ;  but  He  taught  the  required 
lesFson  by  its  very  fulfilment.  We  have  seen  a  father  adopt  the  same  plan  in  giving 
a  lesson  to  bis  son.  The  boy  was  anxious  to  carry  a  heavy  burden,  believing  that 
he  was  able  for  the  task.  The  father  let  him  try ;  and  as  the  little  arms  struggled 
and  quivered,  and  failed,  the  little  mind  was  taught  its  own  weakness,  and  the  little 
heart  was  truly  humbled.  Just  so  when  Peter  asked  to  walk  with  Jesus  upon  the 
water.  He  said,  •*  Come."  The  request  is  granted,  but  not  approved ;  and  P«.ter  is 
left  to  try  the  work  in  his  own  strength,  and  fail  through  inglorious  weakness.  (P, 
Thompson.)  Failure  in  Vie  midst  of  success : — He  failed  in  the  midst  of  success. 
It  is  difficult  to  carry  a  full  cup,  or  walk  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth.  It  is 
more  difficult  to  walk  erect,  and  firm,  and  far  auiong  the  tossing  waves  of  adversity. 
The  movement  of  Peter  at  the  outset  was  grandly  courageous.  How  truly  the 
other  disciples  would  gaze  upon  him  with  admiration  !  He  stepped  over  the  little 
boat ;  placed  hie  foot  upon  the  rising  billow ;  walked  step  after  step  with  perfect 
safety.  It  was  a  great  moment  in  the  man's  life ;  but  it  was  a  greatness  for  which 
the  man  was  not  equal.  His  nerve  was  too  weak  to  carry  the  full  cup,  or  bear  the 
heavy  burden,  or  tread  the  stormy  water.  He  failed  in  the  hour  of  triumph,  and 
lost  all  by  not  looking  to  Jesus.  The  word  is  very  touching.  "When  he  saw  the 
wtnd  boisterous,  he  was  afraid."  There  was  the  defect.  He  looked  to  the  raging 
winds  and  the  surging  waters.  He  looked  to  the  danger,  and  not  to  the  Saviour. 
He  forgot  the  power  of  Christ,  and  trusting  to  himself,  and  trembling  like  a  break- 
ing wave  beneath  the  boisterotas  wind,  he  began  to  sink.  The  work  was  done,  and 
the  lesson  learned,  with  great  rapidity.  His  faith,  and  courage,  and  devotion,  were 
not  so  great  as  he  imagined.  He  discovered  his  helplessness,  and  prayed  for  safety. 
••  Lord  save  me ; "  and  now  the  daring  man  was  brought  to  regard  the  Lord's  hand 
as  the  fountain  of  spiritual  strength.  {Ibid.)  Peter  in  the  storm : — 1.  The  pre- 
sumption of  faith — "  Bid  me  come  to  Thee  on  the  water."  2.  The  power  of  faith — 
"Come."  3.  The  weakness  of  faith,  4.  The  power  of  prayer.  {T.  Dale,  M.A.) 
The  earnest  prayer : — I.  We  must  feel  our  need  of  salvation.  II.  We  must  know 
the  only  sodece  of  salvation.  III.  We  must  prat  individually  for  salvation.  (JF. 
D.  Harwood.)  The  fear  of  Peter  when  walking  on  the  water : — I.  The  fbab 
WHICH  Petek  beteayed  on  TEia  OCCASION.  1.  The  transient  nature  of  our  best  and 
strongest  feelinca  when  they  are  not  kept  alive  by  Divine  grace.  2.  The  danger  of 
needlessly  putting  to  the  trial  our  highest  graces.  Never  make  a  presumptuous 
display  of  grace.  II.  The  cause  of  Petee's  feab.  "  When  he  saw  the  wind 
boisterous,"  &o.  Here  we  are  taught  not  to  be  unmindful  of  our  dangers,  but  to 
keep  our  thoughts  fixed  on  the  greatness  and  faithfulness  of  Christ  when  we  are 
surrounded  by  them.  III.  The  conbequbnok  of  Peter's  fear.  He  began  to  sink. 
Our  support  in  dangers  and  trials  depends  on  our  faith.  IV.  The  praybb  which 
THE  FEAR  OF  Peter  DREW  FKOM  HIM.  1.  In  all  our  troublcs,  if  we  are  Christians,  we 
shall  be  men  of  prayer.  2.  The  fears  of  the  real  believer,  however  strong,  are  still 
accompanied  with  a  cleaving  to  Christ.  V.  The  conduct  or  Christ  towards  him. 
1.  There  is  no  situation  in  which  Christ  cannot  help  us.  2.  There  is  no  state  in 
which  Christ  will  not  save  us.  (C  Bradley.)  Doubting  a  hindrance  to  thf  Chris- 
tian life.  L  St.  Peter's  desire — "Bid  me  come  unto  Thee."  The  truthfulness 
of  the  Bible  seen  in  the  striking  preservation  of  the  individuality  of  the  characters 
brought  into  view.  Peter  uniformly  rash.  Many  a  time  does  the  yearning  spirit 
of  the  believer  say,  "  Bid  me  come,"  &c.  1.  There  is  the  memory  of  joys  of  which 
earth  knows  nothing,  experienced  in  His  Presence.  2.  There  is  the  conscious- 
ness of  security  from  every  harm.  3,  The  confidence  created  by  so  many  trials  of 
His  love.  No  wonder  that  this  desire  of  Peter  should  be  the  longing  of  Christ's 
faithful  followers.  II.  St.  Peter's  failure.  The  first  part  of  the  history  shows  us 
his  daring  zeal ;  now  his  faihng  faith.  At  first  his  faith  laid  hold  on  Divine  power, 
and  he  was  able  to  tread  the  waves  without  sinking.  There  was  an  element  of  wrong 
in  the  undertaking ;  self-confidence  again.  It  was  regarding  the  danger  more  than 
the  Saviour  that  made  him  we&k.    III.  Ax  the  BEfBooF  uinisiebed  to  St.  Petsi 


rJ^    XJT.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  811 

BY  OTJB  LofiD.  The  rebuke  was  gentle.  After  all  seen  of  the  power  of  Christ  could 
he  doubt  ?  Christ  bids  us  "  come "  to  Him  in  the  gospel.  His  power  works  in 
those  who  heed  the  message.  The  need  and  value  of  true  faith  in  oui 
Lord.  There  is  no  happiness  without  it.  {R.  H.  Baynes,  B.A.)  Begin- 
ning to  sink: — There  are  three  conditions  of  soul,  1.  Some  think  they  are 
sinking,  and  are  not.  2.  Some  are  sinking  and  do  not  know  it.  8.  Some  are 
sinking  and  miserably  do  know  it.  4.  The  consequent  is  evident,  what  was  below 
you  is  now  over  you,  your  servant  has  become  your  master,  cares,  and  anxieties. 
6.  Your  escape  is  in  looking  again  to  Jesus.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  cause  of 
sinking : — Let  me  gather  up  the  steps  to  the  •'  sinking  :  " — an  emotional  state, 
with  abrupt  and  strong  reactions — a  self-exaltation — a  breaking-out,  under  a  good 
and  religious  aspect,  of  an  old  infiincdty  and  sin — a  diBproportion  between  the  act 
and  the  frame  of  mind  in  which  the  act  was  done — neglect  of  ordinary  means,  with 
not  sufficient  calculation  of  difficulties — a  devious  eye — a  want  of  concentration^ 
a  regard  to  circumstances  more  than  to  the  Power  which  wields  them — a  certain 
inward  separation  from  God — a  human  measurement — a  descent  to  a  fear,  unneces- 
sary, dishonouring  fear — depression — a  sense  of  perishing — ♦•  beginning  to  sink," 
{Ibid.)  No  safety  in  mere  feeling  : — In  the  spiritual  navigation,  it  is  well  to 
remember  that  the  feelings  are  the  sails,  and  very  quickly  and  very  beautifully  do 
our  feelings  carry  us  along  while  all  is  favourable.  But  let  once  difficulties  and 
temptations  come,  and  if  we  have  only  feelings,  we  shall  stop.  The  best-spread 
feeUng,  if  it  be  only  feeling,  will  never  make  head  against  a  contrary  wind.  (Ibid.) 
Presumption  of  early  martyrs:  —  Of  this  nature  was  that  extravagant  desire  ol 
martyrdom  in  many  of  the  Primitive  Church,  when  even  novices  in  Christianity, 
and  those  of  the  weaker  sex,  must  needs  be  thrusting  themselves  into  the  hands  of 
the  persecutors,  when  they  might  easily,  and  without  sin,  have  escaped  them  ;  and 
thereby  exposed  themselves  to  such  cruel  torments  as  they  were  not  able  to  endure, 
and  then  did  very  ill  things  to  be  free  from  them  again,  to  the  great  dishonoiur  of 
their  holy  religion,  the  deep  wounding  of  their  consciences,  and  their  lasting  sham« 
and  reproach,  which  they  could  not  wipe  off  but  by  a  long  and  very  severe  repent- 
ance. And,  indeed,  'tis  no  better  than  knight-errautry  in  religion  thus  to  seek  out 
hazardous  adventures,  and  lead  ourselves  into  temptations,  and  then  expect  that 
God  should  support  us,  and  bring  us  safely  off,  'Tis  not  faith,  but  presumption, 
that  engages  men  so  far.  (Francis  Bragge.)  Christ  and  men's  fears  : — In  this 
verse  are  considerable.  1.  The  Person  that  spake ;  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2, 
Those  to  whom  He  spake,  viz.,  the  disciples  in  their  present  distress.  3.  The  kind 
nature  and  design  of  Christ's  speech  to  them  at  this  time.  4.  The  argument  He 
used  to  silence  their  fears,  5.  The  time  when  He  spake  to  them  thus  comfortably 
— straightway,  I.  Whence  is  it,  that  even  real  believers  mat  be  ready  to  sink 
UNDER  their  TROUBLES.  Causes  of  despoudence  are :  we  have  not  thought  of  the 
cross  as  we  ought,  or  not  counted  upon  it  at  all,  and  so  have  taken  little  care  to 
prepare  for  it.  Perhaps  from  our  being  so  long  spared,  we  promised  ourselves  aa 
exemption  from  any  remarkable  trials ;  or  perhajjs  we  mistake  the  nature,  end, 
and  design  of  afflictions  when  they  come,  and  so  are  ready  to  faint  under  Divine 
rebukes.  There  is  a  peculiar  anguish  with  which  some  are  overtaken,  when  they 
are  under  apprehensions  of  approaching  death.  As  to  the  springs  of  this — (a)  We 
are  too  prone  to  put  from  us  the  evil  day.  {b)  Death  may  hnd  us  in  the  dark  aa  to 
our  title  to  the  life  to  come,  or  meetness  for  it.  (c)  Conscience  may  be  awakened 
in  our  last  hours  to  revive  the  sense  of  past  sins,  and  so  may  increase  our  sorrows 
and  terrors,  (d)  Satan  sometimes  joins  in  with  an  awakened  conscience,  to  make 
the  trial  the  more  sore,  (e)  God  sometimes  withdraws  the  light  of  His  counten- 
ance. II.  What  Christ  spake  to  His  disciples  now,  when  they  were  in  sbeat 
DiBTBESS,  He  is  ready  to  speak  to  all  His  members,  whenever  they  are  any  of  them 
distressed.  III.  What  is  carried  in  these  comfortable  words,  and  may  bv 
oatheeed  from  them,  fob  their  support.  It  notes  His  presence  with  them,  and 
His  wisdom,  power,  faithfulness,  and  love  to  be  engaged  for  them,  (Daniel  Wilcox.) 

Ver.  31,  Wherefore  didst  thou  doubt. — Doubting  Christians : — 1.  It  perverts  all 
they  do  by  directing  them  to  a  wrong  end.  2.  It  withdraws  the  mind  irom  Christ. 
8.  It  sours  the  temper.  It  breeds  fears.  4.  It  gives  Satan  peculiar  advantage 
against  the  souL  5.  The  providence  of  God  appears  dark  to  such  a  soul,  6.  It 
occasions  false  comfort.  7.  It  tarnishes  the  profession  of  such  a  person.  {J.  Cooke.) 
Safety  of  believers  in  seeming  perils  : — A  British  subject  may  be  safe  although  sor- 
xoonded  by  enemies  in  a  distant  land — not  that  he  has  strength  to  contend  alone 


812  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it« 

agaiDst  armed  thousands,  but  because  he  is  a  subject  of  our  Queen.  A  despot  on 
his  throne,  a  horde  of  savages  in  their  desert,  have  permitted  a  helpless  traveller 
to  pass  unharmed,  like  a  lamb  among  lions — although,  like  lions  looking  on  a 
lamb,  they  thirsted  for  his  blood — because  they  knew  his  sovereign's  watchfulness, 
and  feared  his  sovereign's  power.  The  feeble  stranger  has  a  charmed  life  in  the 
midst  of  his  enemies,  because  a  royal  arm  unseen  encompasses  him  as  with  a 
shield.  The  power  thus  wielded  by  an  earthly  throne  may  suggest  and  symbolize 
the  perfect  protection  of  Omnipotence.  A  British  subject's  confidence  in  his  Queen 
may  rebuke  the  feeble  faith  of  a  Christian.  "  0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst 
thou  doubt?"  What  though  there  be  fears  within  and  fightings  without?  He 
who  bought  His  people  with  His  own  Blood  cannot  lose  his  inheritance,  and  will 
not  permit  any  enemy  to  wrest  from  His  hand  the  satisfaction  of  His  soul.  The 
man  with  a  deceitful  heart  and  a  darkened  mind,  a  feeble  frame  and  a  slippery  way, 
a  fainting  heart  and  a  daring  foe — such  a  man  would  stumble  and  faU ;  tut  the 
member  of  Christ's  body  cannot  drop  off;  the  portion  of  the  Redeemer  cannot  be 
wrenched  from  His  grasp.  "Ye  are  His."  Christ  is  the  safety  of  a  Christian. 
{W.  Arnot.) 

Ver.  36.  As  many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly  whole. — Christ  healing  the 
diseased: — I.  St)ME  of  the  antecedents  of  the  healing.  They  felt  they  were 
diseased.  They  were  anxious  to  be  healed.  They  were  in  the  right  place  to  be 
healed.  II.  The  condition  of  healing.  Contact  with  Christ.  Illustrates  the 
conditions  upon  which  we  become  partakers  of  the  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 
This  condition  is  simple,  not  only  as  regards  its  operation,  but  also  as  it  springs  out 
of  a  principle  which  all  m<^n  possess.  III.  The  extent  of  the  healing.  Thia  il 
seen  in  the  numbers  healed  and  in  the  completeness  of  the  cores.     {B.  Menry.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Veb.   1.     Why  do  Thy  disciples  transgress  the  tradition    of  the    eldemf 

Pharisaic  evasions : — I.  The  worst  form  of  hypocrisy  is  that  which  sets  aside  plain 
moral  duties  on  the  plea  that  they  hinder  spiritual  worship ;  for,  if  done  as  in 
God's  presence,  they  are  spiritual  worship.  II,  No  moral  duty  is  more  clearly 
expressed,  either  in  the  Bible  or  in  the  heart,  than  that  of  obeying,  honouring,  and 
ministering  to  parents.  1.  They  are  the  first  of  our  fellow-creatures  towards  whom 
we  have  reponsibilities.  2.  They  are  the  representatives  of  God  to  us.  Through 
them  we  are  to  rise  to  know  Him  as  our  Eternal  Father,  and  through  them  we  are 
to  learn  how  to  care  for  and  regard  His  human  family.  III.  Strange  perversion 
of  what  constitutes  the  service  of  God,  to  imagine  that  a  man  can  free  himself 
from  so  fundamental  a  duty  as  ministering  to  his  parents,  by  professing  to  dedicate 
his  property  to  tbe  support  of  the  temple- worship,  and  that  snch  a  freeing  of  him- 
self will  be  acceptable  to  Him  who  prefers  obedience  to  sacrifice,  and  who  is  Him- 
self honoured  in  the  honour  shown  to  parents.  Such  external  worship  is,  in  God's 
sight,  empty  and  worthless.  (V.  W.  Hutton,  M.A.)  Pharisaic  formalism  : — The 
fatal  mistake  of  many  is  that  they  think  of  nothing  but  the  profession — the  mere 
externaUties  of  rehgion — the  name,  the  form,  the  visible  rite,  or,  at  most,  the 
aesthetic  emotion.  Thus,  with  all  their  religiousness,  they  have  no  religion,  no 
spiritual  vitality,  no  renewal  of  nature,  and  no  union  with  Christ.  It  is  recorded 
of  a  certain  Spartan  in  olden  times,  that  he  tried  hard  to  make  a  corpse  stand ; 
but  utterly  failing  to  do  so,  in  spite  of  every  effort,  he  said,  ••  I  see  it  wants  some- 
thing within."  So  it  is  with  these — they  want  life,  and  grace,  and  unction.  Cen- 
aorious  m^en: — Censorious  men  commonly  take  up  magnifying  glasses  to  look  at 
other  persons'  imperfections,  and  diminishing  glasses  to  look  at  their  own  enor- 
!  nities.  {Seeker.)  Fault-finding  reproved : — Reader,  why  will  you  search  another 
man's  wound  while  your  own  is  bleeding  ?  Take  heed  that  your  own  vesture  be 
not  full  of  dust,  when  you  are  brushing  your  neighbour's.  Complain  not  of  dirty 
streets,  when  heaps  lie  at  your  own  doors.  Many  people  are  no  longer  well  than 
while  they  are  holding  their  fingers  upon  other  persons'  sores ;  such  are  /ic  better 
In  their  conduct  than  crows,  which  prey  only  upon  carrion.  {Ibid.)  Washing  oj 
hands  : — Christ,  no  doubt,  would  exceed  all  scribes  and  Pharisees  in  the  love  of  real 
cleanliness,  inner  and  outer.     But  He  felt  constrained  to  lay  His  ban  upon  tht 


fHAP.  XV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  tit 


imaginary  virtue  that  was  supposed  to  be  inherent  in  the  act  of  removing  imaginary 
ancleanness.  It  was  supposed  that  there  was  a  demon  called  Shibta,  which  sits 
upon  men's  hands  during  night ;  and  if  any  person  touches  his  food  with  unwashed 
hand),  then  that  demon  sits  upon  his  food,  and  makes  it  dangerous  ?  {J.  Moriton, 
VD  )  Customs  of  hand  washing : — It  is  customary  with  all,  but  obligatory  for 
Muslims,  to  wash  the  hands  before  eating.  The  sect  of  the  Sunnites,  which  includea 
the  Turks  and  Arabs,  wash  both  hands,  but  the  Sheites,  or  Persians,  only  the  right, 
with  which  the  food  is  taken  and  conveyed  to  the  mouth.  Thus  did  the  Pharisees 
in  the  time  of  our  Saviour.  For  this  purpose  a  ewer  and  basin  are  presented  to 
each  guest  in  turn  by  a  servant,  who  drops  upon  his  right  knee  while  he  rests  the 
basin  upon  the  left ;  the  towel  is  carried  upon  his  shoulder,  or  is  offered  by  another 
Bervant.  (Van  Lennep.)  Scripture  better  than  traditian  : — As  to  those  who 
would  officiously  substitute  their  traditions  in  the  room  of  the  clear  light  of  the 
written  Word  ;  it  is  a  similar  case  as  if  you  should  fall  in  with  one  travelling  on 
the  way,  and  he  offers  himself  to  be  your  companion  and  guide ;  and  tells  you  that 
you  have  eyes  to  make  use  of  in  choosing  your  way,  but  that  these  eyes  are  only 
troublesome  to  you ;  that  they  represent  to  you  diversities  of  objects  that  invite  you 
this  way  and  that,  so  that  you  cannot  mind  your  path.  "  And  pray,"  saith  he, 
"  let  me  pull  out  those  eyes  of  yours,  and  submit  yourself  to  my  guidance  ;  "  and 
all  this  that  he  may  draw  you  into  a  pit  1  (J.  Hoive.)  Tradition  unreliable  : — 
Would  persons  as  readily  believe  the  correctness  of  a  report  transmitted  by  word  of 
mouth  in  popular  rumours  from  one  end  of  the  kingdom  to  another,  as  if  it  came 
in  a  letter  parsed  from  one  person  to  another  over  the  same  space  ?  Would  they 
think  that  because  they  could  trust  most  servants  to  deliver  a  letter  however  long 
or  important,  theref.  re  they  could  trust  the  same  man  to  dehver  the  contents  of  a 
long  and  important  letter,  in  a  message  by  word  of  mouth  ?  Let  us  put  a  famihar 
case :  a  footman  brings  you  a  letter  from  a  friend  upon  whose  word  you  can  per- 
fectly rely,  giving  an  account  of  something  that  has  happened  to  himself,  and  the 
exact  account  of  which  it  concerned  you  to  know.  While  you  are  reading  and 
answering  the  letter,  the  footman  gdes  into  the  kitchen  and  there  gives  your  cook 
an  account  of  the  same  thing,  which  he  says  he  overheard  the  upper  servants  at 
home  talking  over  as  related  to  them  by  the  valet,  who  said  he  had  it  from  your 
Liend's  son's  own  lips;  the  cook  relates  the  story  to  your  groom,  and  he  in  turn 
tells  you.  Would  you  judge  of  that  story  by  the  letter,  or  the  letter  by  the  story  ? 
(Illustrations  of  Truth.)  Scripture,  versus  system  : — The  late  William  Jay,  in  hia 
"Practical  Illustrations  of  Character,"  says,  "  W^bat  a  difference  must  a  Christian 
and  a  minister  feel,  between  the  trammels  of  some  systems  of  divinity  and  the 
advantage  of  Scripture  freedom,  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  The  one 
is  the  horse  standing  in  the  street  in  harness,  feeding  indeed,  but  on  the  contenta 
of  a  bag  tossed  up  and  down  ;  the  other,  the  same  animal  in  a  large,  fine  meadow, 
where  he  lies  down  in  green  pastures,  and  feeds  beside  the  still  waters, 

Ver.  4.  Honour  thy  father  and  mother. — The  duty  of  children  to  honour  their 

parents  : — I.  What  is  it  to  honour  pakents?  To  obey  them  in  all  that  is  right, 
when  they  require  it.  To  do  what  is  right  whether  they  require  it  or  not.  To 
respect  their  feelings  in  reference  to  the  choice  of  companions  or  of  a  profession. 
To  act  on  all  occasions  so  as  not  to  make  their  parents  ashamed  of  their  conduct. 
II.  Insist  on  the  duty  which  this  commandment  enjoins  on  children.  By  so 
doing  they  will  obtain  the  blessing  of  God,  secure  peace  of  conscience,  &c.  God 
requires  it — the  highest  and  most  solemn  of  all  considerations.  (D.  Dobie.)  A 
parent's  honour : — I.  The  command.  Honour  comprises  filial  love,  reverence  and 
esteem,  obedience  and  submission,  succour  and  help.  II.  The  oblioation. 
Natural,  social,  Divine.  (Dr.  Lyth.)  Honouring  parents  : — George  Washington, 
when  quite  young,  was  about  to  go  to  sea  as  a  midshipman.  Everything  was  in 
readiness.  His  trunk  had  been  taken  on  board  the  boat ;  but  as  he  bade  his  mother 
farewell,  he  noticed  that  her  eyes  were  filled  with  tears  and  that  she  was  almost 
overccme  by  emotion.  Seeing  her  distress,  he  turned  to  the  servant,  and  said, 
"  Go  and  tell  them  to  fetch  my  trunk  back.  I  will  not  go  away  to  break  my  mother's 
heart."  His  mother,  struck  with  his  decision,  said  to  him,  "George,  God  has 
promised  to  bless  the  children  that  honour  their  parents ;  and  I  beUeve  He  will 
bless  you."  Working  of  the  law  of  Corban  : — The  scribes  held  that  these  words, 
even  when  pronounced  in  spite  and  anger  against  parents  who  needed  succour, 
excused  the  son  from  his  natural  duty ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  oblige  him 
really  to  devote  the  sum  to  the  service  of  God  or  of  the  temple.    (A.  Carr.) 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?. 


Vers.  7-9.  This  people  draveth  near  to  Me  with  their  mouth.  -Lip  profession : — 
L  Show  who  they  abe  who  answeb  to  the  description  in  the  text.  All  merely 
nominal  Christians.  Formal,  Belf-righteous  persfns.  False  professo^  s.  II.  Expostu- 
late WITH  THEM  ON theik FOLLY.  Isnot  confotmity  to  Christ's  demand  of  the  heart 
practicable?  Is  not  such  consecration  to  Him  necessary?  Will  not  mo^^ely  a  feigned 
allegiance  be  disowned  by  Him  7  Shall  we  not  wish  at  last  that  we  had  een  sincere 
and  upright?  {Pulpit  Studies.)  I.  The  text  describes  A  obeatpbivilegb.  il.  Points 
ODT  A  BEFious  abdse.  (J.  RawUnsoji.)  Contrasts  of  sentiments  and  conduct : — Words 
and  works,  believing  and  doin",  confession  of  the  mouth  and  confession  of 
life,  a  sense  of  religion  and  godliness  in  the  Church,  and  a  sense  of  religion  and 
godliness  in  the  world,  are  things  that  ought  never  to  be  separated.  I.  Endeavour 
to  convince  you,  that  a  various  and  manifest  contrariety  actually  appears  between 
the  sentiments  which  we  express  in  the  Divine  service,  and  particularly  at  the 
orcUnance  of  the  Sacred  Supper,  and  our  conduct  in  the  ordinary  course  of  life. 

II.  Endeavour  to  represent  to  you  the  absurdity  and  the  danger  of  such  a  contra- 
dictious and  inconsistent  behaviour.  {Zollikofer.)  True  sanctity  : — I.  True  sano. 
tity  consists  not  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  religion,  however  extensive,  bow- 
ever  just  and  perspicuous  it  may  be.  Although  that  knowledge  may  be  necessary 
to  sanctity,  it  is  not,  however,  competent  to  it ;  and  though  it  constitutes  the 
basis  of  it,  yet  it  is  no  more  sanctity  itself  than  the  foundation  of  an  edifice  is  the 
edifice  itself.  II.  Neither  does  true  sanctity  consist  in  a  furious  zeal  fob  th« 
known  truth,   or  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  that  religion  which  we  profess. 

III.  Neither  does  true  sanctity  consist  in  the  diligent  or  strict  attendance  on  thh 
bites  and  ceremonies  which  reUgiou  prescribes ;  nor  in  the  observance,  nor  in  the 
multiplication  of  the  devotional  exercises  to  which  it  advises  its  professors  ;  nor  in 
voluutaiy  penances  and  mortifications,  which  they  impose  upon  themselves.  IV. 
Neither  does  true  sanctity  consist  in  our  occasionally  omitting  something  which 
God  has  forbidden  us,  or  doing  something  which  He  has  commanded  us  ;  nor  in 
our  occasionally  performing  single  good  actions,  whether  of  justice  or  beneficence, 
or  of  abstinence.  True  sanctity  is  a  reigning,  constantly  active,  disposition  and 
bent  of  the  soul,  manifesting  itself  in  the  several  parts  of  our  inward  and  outward 
conduct,  and  making  us  always  willing  and  ready  to  do  what,  and  nothing  else  but 
what,  is  agreeable  to  God,  and  correspondent  to  His  will.  (Ibid.)  The  h"art  far 
from  God  : — I.  The  state  described.  1.  Marked  by  absence  of  sincerity  and  honesty. 
2.  Implies  a  state  of  alienation  from  God.  3.  Try  the  meaning  of  the  text  by  the 
common  estimates  we  form  of  professed  friendship.  All  stress  is  laid  on  motive 
and  feeling.  II.  The  lessons  of  the  state  herb  referred  to.  1.  The  need  of 
repentance.  2.  That  in  the  midst  of  religious  ordinances  there  may  be  spiritual 
insensibility.  3.  Yet  though  the  heart  be  far  off,  the  Good  Shepherd  seeks  it. 
{W.  D.  Uarwood.)  The  vanity  of  human  institutions  in  religion: — Show  the 
equity  and  importance  of  this  assertion  of  our  Saviour,  "  that  they  who  ground 
their  religious  practices,  or  any  part  of  them,  upon  human  authority,  do  so  far,  or 
in  that  respect,  worship  God  in  vain  " — that  is,  they  cannot  reasonably  expect  any 
one  good  effect  from  such  worship.  I.  Eest  this  matter  on  our  Saviour's  authority. 
n.  God  is  the  supreme  object  of  religious  worship ;  and  to  Him  aU  our  devotions 
ought  to  be  ultimately  directed.  IH.  It  is  a  matter  of  interest,  as  well  as  duty, 
for  us  so  to  do.  IV.  The  peace  and  wellbeinK  of  mankind  in  general,  and  of  every 
society  in  particular,  are  interested  in  it.  (Wm.  West.)  Teaching  for  doctrines 
the  commandments  of  men : — Our  Lord  is  here  reproving  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
for  imposing  on  the  people  some  commandments  of  their  own,  or  traditions  of  their 
predecessors,  as  of  equal  obligations  with  the  precepts  of  the  law.  L  The  objects 
o»  this  censure,  or  the  persons  specially  affected  by  it.  The  objects  of  the 
reproof  were  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  public  authorized  teachers  of  the  law. 
There  must  be  public  teachers  who  shall  command  and  instruct ;  but  this  authority 
is  committed  to  them  under  restrictions.  II.  When  are  teachers  and  bulibs 
o»  THE  Church  guilty  of  the  crime  here  bepboved  of  teaching  fob  doctrines 
THE  commandments  OF  MEN  f  FoT  the  better  clearing  of  which  it  will  be  of  use  to 
consider — 1.  What  is  meant  by  commandments  of  men.  They  are  three  sorts : 
(1)  Where  the  matter  of  the  human  command  is  the  same  action  that  God  has 
enjoined  by  His  law.  For  human  authority  ought  to  command  what  God  has 
commanded  ;  particularly  in  such  a  society  as  the  Christian  Church  formed  upon  the 
laws  of  the  gospel.  (2)  A  second  sort  of  commandments  of  men  are  such  whose 
matter  contradicts  or  interferes  with  the  prescriptions  of  the  Divine  law.  And 
Buoh  are  not  only  those  which  expressly  forbid  what  GK)d  has  commanded,  ox  inTert 


CHAP.  XV.]  fir.  MATTHEW.  815 

the  prescribed  order  of  God's  commands.  (3)  A  third  sort  of  commandments  of 
men  are  such  whose  matter  is  actions  in  their  nature  indifferent,  and  neither  com- 
manded nor  forbidden  by  God ;  such  as  the  washing  hands  before  meat.  2.  Then 
teaching  these  commandments  of  men  as  doctrines  is  proposing  them  as  precepts 
of  the  Divine  law,  or  of  equal  authority  with  them,  and  obhging  the  conscience 
fts  such.  Bules  supposed  to  be  indifferent  but  convenient  and  orderly  may  obtain 
in  a  society ;  but  this  authority  may  be  abused :  1.  When  such  things  are  pre- 
scribed as  binding  the  conscience  by  direct  obligation.  2.  The  prescription  ol 
indifferent  things  will  be  liable  to  the  censure  in  the  text,  when  it  is  taught  that 
obedience  to  them  will  excuse  disobedience  to  a  law  of  God.  3.  This  censure  will 
also  be  incurred  when  indifferent  things  are  prescribed  by  men  as  means  of  grace, 
as  having  power  to  convey  remission  of  sins,  or  any  other  spiritual  or  supernatural 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  may  be  means  of  grace,  but  God  only  has  autho- 
rity to  make  them  so.  III.  What  our  Lobd  has  hbre  pronounced,  that  they 
woBSHip  God  in  vain.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  How  may  we  cure  difstractions  in 
holy  duties  :—  I.  The  okeatness  or  the  sin.  Proved  by  three  general  considera- 
tions:— 1.  How  tender  God  is  of  His  worship  (Levit.  x.  3  ;  Eccles.  v.  2).  2.  The 
more  sincere  any  one  is,  the  more  he  maketh  conscience  of  his  thoughts.  3.  Care- 
lessness in  duties  is  the  highway  to  atheism.  Particularly  : — 1.  It  is  an  affront  to 
God,  and  a  kind  of  mockery.  2.  It  grieveth  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  It  is  a  spiritual 
disease.  4.  It  arguelh  the  loss  and  non-acceptance  of  our  prayers.  There  is  a 
threefold  distraction  in  prayer : — 1.  An  unwilling  distraction.  2.  A  negligent  dis- 
traction. 3.  A  voluntary  distraction.  II.  The  causes  of  this  aovixa  and  intbo- 
BioN  OF  VAIN  THOUGHTS.  1.  Satau  is  oue  cause.  2.  The  natural  levity  of  our 
spirits.  3.  Practical  atheism.  4.  Strong  and  unmortified  lusts.  6.  Want  of  love 
to  God  and  holy  things.  6.  Shghtness  and  irreverence,  or  want  of  a  sense  of 
God's  presence.  7.  The  curiosity  of  the  senses.  8.  Carking  and  distrustful  cares. 
in.  The  REMEDIES.  1.  Go  to  God  and  wait  for  the  power  of  His  grace.  2.  Medi- 
tate on  the  greatness  of  Him  before  whom  we  are.  3.  Mortify  those  lusts  that 
are  apt  to  withdraw  our  minds.  4.  Before  the  duty  there  must  be  an  actual  pre- 
paration or  a  solemn  discharge  of  aU  impediments,  that  we  may  not  bring  the  world 
along  with  us.  5.  Be  severe  to  your  pui-pose.  6.  Bring  with  you  to  every  holy 
service  strong  spiritual  affections.  7.  Kemember  the  weight  and  consequence  of 
the  duties  of  religion.  8.  Let  every  experimental  wandering  make  you  more 
humble  and  careful.  9,  A  constant  heavenliness  and  holiness  of  heart.  10.  Fre- 
quent and  solemn  meditation.  11.  By  use  a  man  gets  greater  command  over 
himself.  [T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Heart-worship  : — As  the  strength  of  sin  lies  in 
the  inward  frame  of  the  heart,  bo  the  strength  of  worship  in  the  inward  com- 
plexion and  temper  of  the  soul.  Shadows  are  not  to  be  offered  instead  of  sub- 
stance. God  asks  for  the  heart  in  worship,  and  commands  outward  ceremonies, 
as  subservient  to  inward  worship,  and  goads  and  spears  unto  it.  What  value  had 
the  offering  of  the  human  nature  of  Christ  been,  if  he  had  not  had  a  Divine  nature 
to  qualify  Him  to  be  the  Priest  ?  And  what  is  the  oblation  of  our  bodies,  without 
a  priestly  act  of  the  spirit  in  the  presentation  of  it  t  To  offer  a  body  with  a  sap- 
less spirit,  is  a  sacrilege  of  the  same  nature  with  that  of  the  Israelities  when  they 
offered  dead  beasts.  One  sound  sacrifice  is  better  than  a  thousand  rotten  ones. 
{Chamock.)  Mere  outioard  worship  offensive  to  God: — You  would  all  judge  it  to 
be  an  affront  to  the  majesty  of  God  if  a  man  should  send  his  clothes  stuffed  with 
Btraw,  or  a  puppet  dressed  up  instead  of  himself,  into  the  assembhes  of  God's 
people,  and  think  that  this  would  do  instead  of  his  personal  presence.  Yet  our 
clothes  stuffed  with  straw  would  be  less  offensive  to  God  than  our  bodies  without  oar 
Bouls.  The  absence  of  the  spirit  is  the  absence  of  the  more  noble  part.  (T.  Man- 
ton.)  Sincerity  in  worship : — We  may  be  truly  said  to  worship  God,  though  we 
want  perfection ;  but  we  cannot  be  said  to  worship  Him  if  we  want  sincerity :  a 
Btatue  upon  a  tomb,  with  eyes  and  hands  lifted  up,  offers  as  good  and  true  a  Ber- 
vice  ;  it  wants  only  a  voice,  the  gestures  and  postures  are  the  same — nay,  the  service 
is  better ;  it  is  not  a  mockery,  it  represents  all  that  it  can  be  framed  to.  But  to 
worship  without  our  spirits  is  presenting  God  with  a  picture,  an  echo,  voice,  and 
nothing  else — a  compliment,  a  mere  he.  {Chamock.)  Formalism  in  worship : — 
We  have  sometimes  seen  a  tree  which  looked  with  its  great  spreading  arms 
and  massive  trunk  as  stiong  as  other  trees.  "  The  storm  beat  upon  it  and 
it  fell,"  and  then  we  wondered  that  it  could  stand  so  long  when  little  but  the 
bark  and  outer  fibre  supported  it,  and  within  was  nothing  but  decay.  And  do 
we  not  often  find  that  where  zeal  has  grown  cold  and  the  inner  spiritoal  life  has 


»16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  zv 

become  dead,  that  habits  of  formal  attention  to  religious  duties  are  maintained  foi 
a  long  time  before  the  crash  comes  that  reveals  the  utter  ruin  and  desolation  of  the 
spiritual  life?  (-7.  Q.  Pilkington.)  God  only  to  be u-orshipped  and  loved: — I.  Thk 
TBDE  OBJECT  OF  RELIGIOUS  WORSHIP,  'whieh  is  here  called  drawing  nigh  unto  God  and 
honouring  Him.  II.  To  direct  the  right  manner  of  performing  beligiods  wob- 
SHIP.  1.  God  is  to  be  vror&hipped  in  the  way  of  His  own  appoiatmeut.  2.  God  is 
to  be  worshipped  with  the  wliole  man,  with  our  bodies  and  spirits  which  are  His. 
8.  God  is  to  be  worshipped  by  the  assistance  of  His  spirit.  4.  God  is  to  be  wor- 
shipped in  the  exercise  of  all  suitable  graces  under  the  influence  of  His  spirit.  5. 
God  ,s  to  be  worshipped  with  an  eve  to  His  gloiy,  as  our  ultimate  end.  6.  God  is  to 
be  worsliipped  in  the  name  of  Christ  as  our  only  Mediator.  Keflections  :  1.  How 
must  every  one,  more  or  less,  staud  reproved  for  defects  in  worship.  2.  How  be- 
coming,  glorious  aud  delightful  must  it  be  to  ofier  up  such  worship  to  God,  as  ia 
agreeable  to  His  wilL  3.  What  glorious  provision  has  God  made  in  the  gospel  to 
assist  this  noble  homage.  {Dr.  Guyse.)  Scriptural  worship: — All  religion  must 
be  Scripture  religion,  all  worship  Scripture  worsliip,  all  zeal  Scripture  zeal ;  bo  that 
let  a  mau  have  never  such  sublime  knowledge  and  such  burning  zeal,  yet  if  it  be 
not  according  to  the  law  and  the  testimony,  there  is  no  light  in  them.  It  is  but  a 
\ain  worship  of  God,  because  God  doth  not  require  this ;  so  that  the  sum  of  all, 
and  that  into  which  all  religion  must  be  resolved  at  last,  is  the  Scriptures — the 
Word  of  God ;  for  if  you  ouce  lay  this  aside,  why  should  not  the  Turkish  devotion 
be  as  good  as  thine  1  Wliy  should  not  the  Mahommedan  zeal  be  as  acceptable  as 
thine,  but  only  this  makes  the  difference.  What  may  be  proved  by  Scripture  is  ap- 
proved  of  by  God  ;  so  that  all  these  arguments, — "It's  my  conscience  ;  I  verily  think 
I  am  bound  to  do  thus ;  It's  upon  my  spirit ;  I  ^nd  much  comfort  and  much  sweet- 
ness in  religion," — all  this  is  nothing,  for  all  false  religions  can  and  do  say  this ;  but 
hast  thou  tiie  Word  of  God  to  warrant  thee  ?  doth  that  justify  thee?  all  tilings  else 
are  but  an  empty  shadow.     {A.  Burgesi.) 

Ver.  13.  Every  plant,  which  My  heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted,  shall  be  rooted 

up. — Plants  God  has  not  planted  :-^l.  What  is  meant  by  plants,  (a)  Every  doctrine : 
(h)  Every  practice :  (c)  Every  person.  2.  Some  plants  God  never  planted,  (a) 
What  is  meant  by  planting  ?  Planting  is  setting  or  putting  things  into  the  ground, 
as  trees,  herbs,  flowers.  So  mystical  planting  denotes  the  transplanting  (in  a 
spiritual  way)  this  or  that  person,  from  a  course  of  open  profaneness  into  a  visible 
profession,  {h)  Who  is  it  that  plants  people  in  the  gospel  Church?  God,  and 
gospel  ministers.  3.  Run  a  parallel  between  an  external  planting;  and  a  spiri- 
tual planting,  (a)  A  planter,  as  one  instructed  into  the  mystery  of  that  art, 
has  wisdom  and  skill  in  planting  which  others  have  not ;  so  a  minister  of  Christ 
is  one  God  hath  taught  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel  unto,  (h)  A  planter  must 
have  a  call  by  the  owner  of  the  vineyard ;  so  every  minister  must  be  called 
and  regularly  empowered,  (c)  A  planter  must  have  fit  and  proper  instruments  for 
his  work,  (d)  A  planter  doth  not  know  infallibly  the  difference  there  is  in  plants. 
<«)  A  skilful  planter  knows  that  a  wild,  ungrateful  tree  never  bears  good  fruit. 

if)  A  planter  observes  the  proper  season  for  planting,  {g)  He  doth  not  only  plant, 
ut  water,  (h)  He«greatly  rejoices  to  see  his  plants  grow,  thrive,  and  bear  much 
Iruit.  As  to  plants,  (a)  They  must  be  well-rooted,  (b)  They  must  be  pruned  and 
purged,  (c)  Some  plants,  who  promised  well,  prove  barren  and  good  for  nothing. 
(d)  Plants  that  prove  utterly  barren,  are  rooted  up  or  cut  down.  4.  Why  shall 
every  plant  God  hath  not  planted  be  rooted  up  ?  (a)  Because  they  are  wild  plants. 
{b)  Because  all  plants  that  God  hath  not  planted,  have  no  right  to  be  planted  in 
his  vineyard,  (c)  Because  they  do  but  cumber  the  ground,  {d)  Because  they  are 
good  for  nothing  but  the  fire.  The  plants  which  God  Himself  has  planted  shall 
stand  aud  never  be  rooted  up.  (a)  Because  they  are  ordained  to  bring  forth  fruit : 
{b)  They  are  planted  into  Christ :  (c)  The  love  of  God  to  them  is  everlasting  and 
nnchangeable.     (B.  Keach.)  On  the  ejjicacy  of  the  Gospel  in  the  extirpation  of 

error: — L  How  far  has  this  prophetic  declaration  been  already  accomplished? 
IL  There  are  certain  circumstances  which  have  impeded  the  progress  of  Christi- 
anity, and  suspended  its  moral  and  sanctifying  influence.  HI.  We  have  reason  to 
beheve  that  the  final  issue  of  the  gospel  kingdom  will  be  very  glorious  indeed,  and 
that  the  prediction  of  the  text  will  then  be  fulfilled,  in  a  sense  hitherto  unknown  to 
the  world.  (Habakkuk  Crabbe.)  Booting  up  plants : — L  That 'tis  tne  heavenly 
Father's  own  hand  that  plants  every  plant  that  mrst  grow  and  prosper.  U.  That 
•very  plant  which  is  planted  by  any  other  band  or  power,  shall  not  prosper,  but  be 


tBiP.  XV.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  ilT 

rooted  np.  III.  That  those  which  see  not  things  so,  and  cannot  leave  them  to€k)d, 
they  bring  upon  themselves  much  trouble  and  uuquietness.  {John  Webster.) 
Difficult  and  questionable  rule$  of  conduct : — When  we  speak  of  principles  and  rules 
of  life,  which  every  one  knows  and  every  one  believes,  by  which  the  yonng  and  the 
old,  the  learned  and  the  ignorant,  the  prince  and  the  labourer,  are  regulated,  and 
these  principles  and  rales  of  life  are  false,  or  only  true  in  part,  the  mischief  thence 
arising  is  incalculable,  is  immense.  These  are  "  plants  which  the  heavenly  Father 
hath  not  planted."  I.  Most  men  are  of  opinion,  that  we  cannot  pass  a  day  without 
Binning  and  acting  wickedly.  II.  We  think  we  cannot  be  perfect ;  and  with  this  we 
not  unfrequently  excuse  all  the  sins  and  errors  we  commit,  however  various  and 
gross.  III.  We  argue  that  we  should  merrily  enjoy  life,  particularly  youth,  which 
BO  rapidly  passes  by;  we  should  not  embitter  it  by  unseasonable  gravity,  by  un- 
necessary sorrow  or  care.  This  may  be  true,  but  the  consequences  drawn  from  it 
with  reference  to  virtue  and  religion  are  false.  IV.  We  say,  Yv'^e  are  after  all,  weak, 
natm-ally  corrupt  beings,  of  whom  not  much  is  to  be  expected,  and  whom  God,  in 
His  mercy,  will  not  judge  with  rigour.  V.  We  say.  We  should  not  be  particular  ; 
we  should  not  aspire  to  be  wiser  and  better  than  others.  We  should  regulate  our- 
selves by  the  persons  and  the  societies,  in  which  and  vrtth  whom  we  live.  VI.  We 
have  false  conceptions  concerning  daily  repentance.  How  frequent  we  hear  it 
said :  "  If  I  sin  every  day,  I  however  repent  every  day,  and  at  any  rate  we  must  re- 
pent daily."  VII.  It  is  imagined  that  a  certain  devotion,  or  rather,  certain  acta 
of  Divine  worsliip  can  supply  the  defect  of  a  virtuous  life,  or  atone  for  the  disorderly 
life  we  lead,  and  the  sins  which  we  commit.  Or,  VIII.,  we  rely  upon  Divine  grace, 
and  by  it  hope  to  be  saved,  though  we  aie  not  so  virtuous  and  holy  as  we  ought 
to  be,  (Zollikoper.)  The  weeding  of  the  garden  : — I.  Plants  that  God  has  not 
planted.  1.  Some  have  been  planted  by  the  minister's  hand.  Some  conversions 
are  of  human,  not  Divine,  origin.  2.  Some  were  planted  by  their  fathers  and 
mothers.  They  have  got  a  kind  of  family  religion.  3.  Many  professors  of  religion 
are  self-planted.  II.  Theib  upbootinq.  It  sometimes  comes  in  this  life.  III. 
Thi  work  or  SELF-EXAMINATION.  Am  I  a  plant  of  God's  planting?  1.  If  I  am  of 
the  Lord's  planting,  there  was  a  time  when  I  had  to  be  taken  out  of  the  place  where 
I  once  grew.  2.  If  planted  by  God  there  will  be  sorrow  that  we  were  ever  anything 
else.  3.  We  have  learnt  our  utter  helplessness.  4.  We  are  all  planted  on  one  soil, 
and  indeed  on  one  rock.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  plants  grow  everywhere  : — 
Other  plants  which  the  "Heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted  "  have  their  zones  of 
veget^ttion,  and  die  out  of  certain  degrees  of  latitude,  but  the  seed  of  the  kingdom 
is  like  corn,  an  exotic  nowhere,  for  wherever  man  lives  it  will  grow,  and  yet  an  exotio 
everywhere,  for  it  came  down  from  heaven.  {Dr.  Ma^laren.)  Plants  not  planted 
by  God  are  very  beautiful: — If  you  go  into  the  fields,  there  are  many  plants  that 
grow  there  that  are  quite  as  lovely  as  those  in  the  garden.  Look  at  the  foxglove 
and  the  dog  rose ;  look  at  many  of  the  blossoms  we  pass  by  as  insignificant,  they 
are  really  beautiful ;  but  they  are  not  plants  that  have  ever  been  planted.  Now,  how 
many  we  have  in  our  congregations  that  are  really  beautiful ;  yet  they  are 
none  of  God's  planting — men  and  women  whose  character  is  upright,  whose  man> 
ners  are  amiable,  whose  life  is  irreproachable.  They  are  not  immoral,  they  neither 
cheat  nor  lie ;  but  they  are  exemplary ;  their  disposition  is  kind,  tender-hearted, 
and  affectionate.  Yes,  but  there  must  be  something  more  than  this,  for  Jesus  says, 
*' Every  plant  which  My  heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted,  shall  be  rooted  up." 
Though  it  be  a  lovely  plant,  though  it  seem  to  be  a  fair  flower  externally,  yet  sinee 
the  root  of  it  hath  sucked  its  nourishment  out  of  the  wild  wastes  of  sin,  whether  of 
infidehty  or  of  lawlessness,  it  is  evil  in  the  eye  of  God,  and  it  must  be  plucked  up. 
(G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Wild  plants  fruitful : — Further,  how  many  there  are  of  our 
wild  wood  plants  that  even  bring  forth  fruit.  The  schoolboy  in  the  country  eeua  tell 
us  that  the  wood  is  an  orchard,  and  that  often  he  has  had  many  a  luscious  meal 
from  those  wild  fruits  that  grew  there.  Yet,  mark  you,  though  the  birds  may  come 
and  satisfy  their  hunger  from  those  wild  fruits,  and  though  the  seeds  may  be  in  the 
winter  the  sparrow's  gamer,  and  the  linnet's  storehouse,  yet  they  are  not  planted, 
and  they  do  not  come  under  the  description  of  the  text — plants  that  have  been 
planted.  So,  too,  there  may  be  some  of  you  who  really  do  some  good  in  the  world. 
Without  you  a  mother's  wants  might  not  be  provided  for ;  from  your  table  many 
of  the  poor  are  fed.  Oh  !  this  is  good,  this  is  good  ;  I  wonid  that  all  of  you  did 
more  of  it,  but  I  pray  yon  remember  that  this  is  not  enough  ;  there  must  be  God'e 
planting  in  you,  or  else  the  fruits  you  bring  forth  will  be  selfish  fruits.  You  will  be 
like  Israel  who  was  denounced  as  being  an  empty  vine,  because,  forsooth,  he  broa({ht 


818  THE  BIBLICjlL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  w. 

forth  fruit  unto  himself.  Charity  is  good.  Noble  charity,  be  thou  honoured  among 
men!  But  there  must  be  faith,  and  if  we  have  no  faith  in  Christ,  though  we  give 
our  bodies  to  be  burned,  and  bestow  our  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  yet  where  Christ  ig, 
we  certainly  can  never  oome.  (Ibid.)  Many  of  those  wild  plants  have  very 
strong  rootx  : — If  you  were  to  go  and  try  to  dig  them  up,  you  would  have  a  task 
before  you  not  easily  accomplished.  Look  at  the  wild  dock  :  did  you  seek  to  pull 
it  up  7  Piece  after  piece  it  breaks  away,  and  you  have  to  send  some  eharp  instru- 
ment deep  into  the  soil  before  you  can  root  it  out,  and  even  then,  if  there  be  but  a 
piece  left,  it  springs  up  and  thrives  again.  Oh  how  many  there  are  who  have  aa 
much  tenacity  of  life  in  their  false  confidence,  as  there  is  in  the  dock — in  its  root  1 
Some  of  yoo  cannot  shake.  **  I  never  have  a  doubt,"  said  one,  "  I  never  had  a 
doubt  or  a  misgiving."  You  remember  Robert  Hall  said,  "Allow  me  to  doubt  for 
you,  eir,"  because  he  knew  the  man  to  be  an  ill-liver.  And  so  we  have  some — they 
are  not  in  trouble  as  other  men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like  other  men ;  they 
speak  with  an  air  of  satisfaction ;  their  language  sounds  like  assurance,  but  it  is 
presumption  ;  it  looks  like  confidence  in  Christ,  but  it  is  confidence  in  themselves. 
And  such  will  strike  their  roots  very  deep,  and  they  will  be  very  strong  indeed,  so 
that  you  cannot  shake  them  ;  yet,  alas  for  tuem  !  they  are  not  plants  of  the  Lord's 
right-hand  plan''  <t,  and  therefore  the  sentence  is  passed;  and  ere  long  it  shall 
be  executed  wiu.uut    pity — **they   shall   be  rooted  up."      {Ibid.)  Uprooted 

plants  : — 1.  That  system  of  philosophy  which  ignores  Divine  Truth,  or  contradicti 
the  plain  statements  of  God's  Word,  cannot  endure.  2.  In  the  various  departments 
of  science  those  views  wliich  are  tbe  offspring  of  glaring  misconception  or  of  uncer- 
tain hypothesis,  necessarily  possess  the  element  of  perishability.  3.  A  like  course 
of  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  the  different  religions  of  the  world.  CouKidersome 
of  the  plants  which  the  Father  hath  planted : — 1.  Every  disciple  of  Christ.  3. 
The  Church.  3.  The  Bible.  4.  In  the  garden  there  are  also  many  tender  little 
plants  which,  though  not  conspicuous,  are  equally  the  object  of  the  Father's  solici- 
tude. 6.  God  is  pledged  to  estabhsh  the  good  and  to  eradicate  tbe  evil.  The  rose 
will  not  always  have  its  thorn.     {J,  T.  Lament.) 

Ver.  14.  They  Da  blind  leaders  of  the  blind. — Blind  guides : — The  bankrupt  who 
asks  a  bankrupt  to  set  him  up  in  bnsiiiess  again,  is  only  losing  time.  The  pauper 
who  travels  off  to  a  neighbouring  panper,  and  begs  liira  to  help  him  out  of  diffi- 
culties,  is  only  troubhug  himstlf  in  vain.  The  prisoner  does  not  beg  his  fellow, 
prisoner  to  set  him  free.  The  shipwrecked  sailor  does  not  call  on  his  shipwrecked 
comrade  to  place  him  safe  ashore.  Help  in  all  these  cases  must  come  from 
some  other  quarter.  Relief  in  all  these  cases  must  be  sought  from  some  other 
hand.  It  is  just  the  same  in  the  matter  of  cleansing  away  your  sins.  So  long  as 
you  seek  it  from  man,  you  seek  it  where  it  cannot  be  found.  (Bishop  Ryle.) 
Mutual  ruin: — The  falling  of  both  together  will  aggravate  the  fall  of  each  ; 
for  they  that  have  thus  increased  each  other's  mutual  sin  will  mutoaUy  exasperate 
each  other's  ruin.     (M.  Henry.) 

Yen.  17-20. — For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evU  thoughts. — Our  evil  thomghts: — 

1.  When  mat  oub  thoughts  he  counted  voluntary,  and  we  be  tbult  and  justly 
ANSWERABLE  TOE  THEM?  1.  When  cvil  thoughts  are  plainly  occasioned  by  any- 
thing that  was  voluntary  in  us,  then  they  are  to  be  accounted  voluntary  and  sinfuL 

2.  When  evil  thoughts  proceed  from  gross,  supine  negligence  and  carelessness, 
then  we  are  accountable  for  them ;  when  we  keep  no  guard  at  all  over  our  minds 
and  fancies,  but  give  them  free  liberty  wildly  to  rove  and  ramble.  8.  Though  evil 
thoughts  may  be  involuntary  at  the  first  starting  of  them,  being  occasioned  by  what 
we  could  not  avoid  hearing  and  seeing,  or  coming  upon  us  unawares,  or  proceeding 
from  the  temper  and  habit  of  our  bodies,  or  the  accidental  impulses  and  motions 
of  tbe  animal  spirits  in  our  brains,  which  are  the  most  immediate  instruments  the 
soal  uses  in  her  operations ;  though  thus  the  first  rise  of  evil  thoughts  may  be  in- 
voluntary, yet  if  we  with  pleasure  entertain  and  cherish  them,  if  our  fancies  are  tickled 
by  them,  if  they  are  delightful  and  grateful  to  us,  this  impUes  the  consent  of  our  wills. 
Thfly  then  become  greatly  sinful  to  us.  II.  The  nature  and  kinds  ow  Kvn. 
THOUOBTS.  (a)  Especially  dwell  on  the  representing  and  acting  over  sins  in  our 
minds  and  thoughts  ;  wben  we  erect  a  stage  in  our  fancies,  and  on  it  with  strange 
eomplacenoe,  imagine  those  satisfactions  and  filthinesses  which  we  have  not  op- 
porttmity  to  bring  into  outward  act.  1.  Consider  these  lewd  imaginations  as  to 
the  present  time.    There  is  no  sin  or  wickedness  so  vile  and  heinous  but  a  man 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  31i 

may  become  truly  guilty  of  it  in  the  Bight  of  God  only  by  imagining  it  done  in  hiB 
mind,  and  taking  pleasure  in  such  a  thought.  2.  As  to  what  is  past,  there  i« 
reciting  and  repeating  over  those  sins  in  our  thoughts  and  fancies,  which  we  had 
long  before  committed,  and,  perhaps,  as  to  the  external  acts,  quite  forsaken.  3. 
With  respect  to  the  time  to  come,  the  Bpeculative  wickedness  of  men's  fancies  and 
imaginations  shows  itself  in  the  wild  and  extravagant  suppositions  they  make  to 
themselves,  feigning  themselves  to  be  what  they  would  fain  be,  and  then  im- 
agining in  their  minds  what  in  such  circumstances  they  would  do.  (6)  Dwell  on 
unworthy,  atheistical,  profane,  desperate  thoughts  of  God  Almighty,  (c)  Think- 
ings that  become  evil  because  of  the  seasons  of  them,  (d)  Envious,  malicious, 
fretting  thoughts,  (e)  Troublesome,  anxious  thoughts  of  future  events.  (/) 
Haughty,  proud,  admiring  thoughts  of  ourselves.  III.  Practical  bdles  foe  the 
BioHT  QOVEENMENT  OP  OCB  THOUGHTS.  1.  If  they  proceed  from  the  hearts,  then 
we  must  look  after  them.  2.  Consider  what  care  and  art  wicked  men  use  to  pre- 
vent good  thoughts,  and  let  us  use  the  same  diligence  and  endeavours  to  hinder 
evil  and  wicked  thoughts  and  motions.  3.  Avoid  idleness.  4.  Live  under  the  due 
awe  of  God's  continual  presence  with  us.  6.  Serious  devotion,  especially  humble 
and  hearty  prayer  to  God  Almighty.     {B.  Calamy.)        Evil  thoughts. — I.  Definb 

THE     CLASSES     OF    THODQHT   WHICH   MAT   BE   BEQABOED    AB     EVIL.      1.  Vain    thoUghtS. 

These  are  not  of  a  directly  noxious  quality  ;  yet,  light,  empty,  trifling,  and  in- 
significant, they  form  a  most  fearful  waste  of  the  noble  faculty  of  thought.  2. 
Thoughts  of  a  directly  irreligious  tendency.  Impious  and  unworthy  conceptions 
of  God,  sceptical  thoughts  in  relation  to  various  parts  of  revealed  religion  nourished 
as  a  Bubterfu^'e  for  sin,  rebellious  thoughts  formed  in  the  hardness  of  our  hearts 
against  the  allotments  of  His  providence,  &q.  3.  Intensely  selfish  and  worldly 
thoughts.  4.  Thoughts  of  deliberate  wickedness.  II.  Indicate  the  sDircrLKEss 
OF  EVIL  THOUGHTS.  1.  They  have  the  stamp  of  guilt  affixed  to  them  by  the  Divine 
law.  2.  They  lead  to  the  expressions  of  evil  actions.  3.  They  defraud  us  of  the 
supreme  end  of  thought.  III.  Enfobce  the  necessity  of  besistancx  of  btiXi 
THOUGHTS.  How  ncccssary  such  resistance  when  we  consider  the  advantages 
accruing,  e.g.,  the  influence — 1.  Upon  our  personal  character.  2.  Upon  society. 
8.  Upon  a  review  of  life  in  leaving  it  and  during  eternity.  (James  Fo$ter,  B.A.) 
The   heart  a   den  of  evil: — I.    The    humiliating    tbtjth    which    the    Satiouk 

ESBB    SETS   FOBTH.        II.    ThE   TBUTHS   WHICH    ARE    CONNECTED   WITH   THIS   HUMBUNS 

FACT.  1.  We  are  driven  to  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  the  fall.  2.  It  shows  the 
need  of  a  new  nature.  3.  Admire  the  grace  of  God.  4.  This  doctrine  illustrates 
the  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Sin  deeply  seated : — He  plainly 
tells  us  that  the  part  of  human  nature  which  yields  such  poisonous  fruit  is  not  a 
bough  which  may  be  sawn  off,  a  hmb  which  may  be  cut  away,  but  the  very  core 
and  substance  of  the  man — his  heart.  He  in  effect  tells  as  that  lust  doth  not  eome 
out  of  the  eye  merely,  but  from  the  inmost  nature  of  a  depraved  being.  Murder 
ecmes  not  in  the  first  place  from  the  hasty  hand,  but  from  a  wild  ungovernable 
heart.  (Ibid.)  Sin  natural : — You  never  need  educate  any  man  into  sin.  As 
soon  as  ever  the  young  crocodile  has  left  its  shell  it  begins  to  act  just  like  its 
parent,  and  to  bite  at  the  stick  which  broke  the  shell.  The  serpent  is  scarcely 
bom  before  it  rears  itself  and  begins  to  hiss.  The  young  tiger  may  be  nurtured 
in  your  parlour,  but  it  will  develop  ere  long  the  same  thirst  for  bluod  as  if  it  were 
in  the  forest.  So  is  it  with  man  ;  he  sins  as  naturally  as  the  young  lion  seeks  for 
blood,  or  the  young  serpent  stores  up  venom.  (Ibid.)  Sin  inward:— 11  you  oan 
drive  a  man  from  outward  vice,  how  far  have  you  improved  him  if  he  lives  in 
inward  sin  ?  You  have  benefited  him  as  far  as  the  sight  of  njan  is  concerned,  but 
not  before  God.  There  was  a  man  killed  on  Holborn  Hill  this  week,  and  I  have 
heard  that  there  was  little  or  no  external  appearance  of  injury  upon  his  body. 
He  bad  been  crushed  between  an  omnibus  and  a  cart,  and  all  the  wounds  were 
internal,  but  he  died  just  as  surely  as  if  he  had  been  beaten  black  and  blue,  or 
out  into  a  thousand  gashes.  So  a  man  may  die  of  internal  sin  ;  it  does  not  appear 
outwardly  for  certain  reasons,  but  he  will  die  of  it  just  the  same  if  it  be  within. 
Many  a  man  has  died  from  internal  bleeding,  and  yet  there  has  oeen  no  wound 
whatever  to  be  seen  by  the  eye.  You,  my  dear  hearer,  may  go  to  hell  as  well 
dressed  in  the  garnishings  of  morality  as  in  the  rags  of  immorahty.  (Ibid.)  Th« 
heart  the  home  of  sin: — The  Saviour  does  not  stop  to  prove  that  these  things  eome 
out  of  the  heart.     He  asserts  it,  and  asserts  it  because  it  is  self-evident.     When 

Jou  see  a  thing  coming  forth,  you  are  clear  it  was  there  first.     Last  summer 
noticed  hornets  continually  flying  from  a  number  of  decayed  logs  in  my  garden.   I 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [xhap.  «t. 

Baw  them congtantly  flying  In  and  out,  and  I  did  not  think  myself  at  all  nnreasonable 
in  concluding  that  there  was  a  hornet's  nest  there  ;  and  so,  if  we  see  the  hornets 
of  sin  flying  out  of  a  man,  we  suppose  at  once  there  is  sin  within  him.  {Ibid.j 
The  heart  needs  the  remedy  :  —  Some  malady  which  you  do  not  understand 
troubles  and  alarms  you.  The  physician  is  called.  Thinking  that  the  ilhiesa 
proceeds  from  a  certain  inflammatory  process  on  a  portion  of  your  skin,  yoa 
anxiously  direct  his  attention  to  the  spot.  Silently,  but  sympathizingly,  he  looks 
at  the  place  where  you  have  bidden  him  look,  and  because  you  have  bidden  hLm 
look  there,  but  soon  he  turns  away.  He  is  busy  with  an  instrument  on  another 
part  of  your  body.  He  presses  his  trumpet  tube  gently  to  your  breast,  and 
listens  for  the  pulsations  which  faintly  but  distinctly  pass  through.  He  looka 
and  listens  there,  and  saddens  as  he  looks.  You  again  direct  his  attention 
to  the  cutaneous  eruption  which  annoys  you.  He  sighs  and  sits  silent.  When 
you  reiterate  your  request  that  something  should  be  done  for  the  external 
eruption,  he  gently  shakes  his  head,  and  answers  not  a  word.  From  thii 
silence  you  would  learn  the  truth  at  last,  you  would  not  miss  its  meaning  long. 
{W.  Amot.)  The  heart  the  root  of  actual  evil: — Original  sin  is  the  womb  of  all 
actual  sin.  Every  sinful  act  in  us  derives  its  descent  from  this.  This  is  the 
spawn ;  actual  transgressions  are  the  offspring.  This  is  actual  sin  in  the  egg, 
more  than  the  cockatrice's.  Hatched  by  Satan,  it  yields  a  fearful  brood,  whose 
name  is  legion,  whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  grave  is  hell.  In  Eden  there  was 
a  tree  of  life,  so  will  there  be  in  the  Eden  above — a  tree  whose  leaves  are  for  the 
healing  of  the  nations.  But  since  man  was  thrust  oat  of  Paradise,  a  tree  of  death, 
a  root  of  bitterness,  has  grown  in  every  soul,  bearing  all  manner  of  cursed  fruits ; 
and  every  leaf,  every  bud,  tends  to  destroy  life  and  ruin  man.  Its  grapes  are  gall, 
its  clusters  are  bitter,  its  wine  is  the  poison  of  asps.  Bansaok  the  records  of 
human  crime,  dig  up  from  the  grave  of  forgetfulness  every  atrocity,  however  un- 
precedented,  however  abominable,  it  lay  in  germ  in  the  ordinary  corruption  of 
human  nature.  Ten  thousand  trees  spread  their  arms  over  the  earth  in  giant 
magnitude,  yet  all  spring  from  the  one  same  root.  (R.  B,  Niehol.)  Inward 
derangement  tlie  cause  of  outward  wickedness  : — The  heart  is  the  seat  and  source  of 
every  great  wickedness.  No  wonder  that  the  wickedness  of  man  is  great.  If  the 
pendulum  and  weights  and  machinery  of  a  clock  are  all  deranged,  it  is  quite  clear 
that  the  hands  will  not  point  with  correctness  to  the  hours.  If  the  fountain  is 
corrupt  and  impure,  the  streams  must  inevitably  be  so,  {J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 
Inward  sin: — If  a  man  covets,  he  steals.  If  a  man  has  murderous  hate,  he 
murders.  If  a  man  broods  dishonest  thoughts,  he  is  a  knave.  If  a  man  harbours 
sharp  and  bitter  jealousies,  envies,  hatreds,  though  he  never  express  them  by  his 
tongue,  or  shape  them  by  his  hand,  they  are  there.  There  are  many  good- 
seeming  men,  who,  if  all  their  day's  thoughts  and  feelings  were  to  be  suddenly 
developed  into  acts  visible  to  the  eye,  would  run  from  themselves,  as  men  in  earth- 
quakes run  from  the  fiery  gapiugs  of  the  ground,  and  sulphurous  cracks  that  open 
the  way  to  the  uncooled  centre  of  perdition.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Tlie  heart-mill: — 
Auselrn  says,  "  Our  heart  is  like  a  mill,  ever  grinding,  which  a  certain  lord  gave  in 
charge  to  his  servant,  enjoining  that  he  should  only  grind  in  it  his  master's  grain, 
whether  wheat,  barley,  or  oats,  and  telling  him  that  he  must  subsist  on  the  produce. 
But  that  servant  has  an  enemy,  who  is  always  playing  tricks  on  the  mill.  If,  any 
moment,  he  finds  it  unwatched,  he  throws  in  gravel  to  keep  the  stones  from 
acting,  or  pitch  to  clog  them,  or  dirt  and  chaff  to  mix  with  the  meal.  If  the 
servant  is  careful  in  tending  his  mill,  there  flows  forth  a  beautiful  flour,  which  is  at 
once  a  service  to  his  master,  and  a  subsistence  to  himself ;  but  if  he  plays  truant, 
and  allows  his  enemy  to  tamper  with  his  machinery,  the  bad  outcome  tells  the 
tale  ;  his  lord  is  angry  ;  and  he  himself  is  starved."  Tliis  mill,  ever  grinding,  is 
the  heart ;  thoughts  are  the  grain  ;  the  devil  is  the  watchful  enemy  :  he  tlirowi  in 
bad  thoughts,  which  can  only  be  prevented  by  watchfulness  and  prayer. 

Vers.  SI,  28.  Then  Jesus  irent  thence  and  departed  Into  the  coasts  of  Tyre 
and  Sldon. — Tlw  woman  of  Canaan : — I.  What  made  the  faith  or  tuis  wojian  so 
BEUARKABiiB  ?  1.  She  had  much  against  her  in  her  original  circumstances.  In  the 
eye  of  a  Jew  she  belonged  to  the  most  hated  of  all  the  Gentilo  races.  There  was 
a  frontier  line  of  dislike  to  cross,  far  wider  than  any  distance  between  Tyre  and 
Palestine.  Yet  it  did  not  keep  her  from  finding  her  way  to  the  great  Teacher  of  the 
Jewish  nation.  2.  She  got  little  countenance  from  Christ's  disciples.  Annoyed 
«t  her  importunity,  and  desiring  to  be  freed  from  the  trouble  of  her  presence,  they 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  821 

desired  Christ  to  send  her  away.  She  could  not  but  feel  they  would  gladly  be  rid 
of  her,  in  the  way  some  cast  an  alms  to  a  persistent  beggar.  Weaker  faith  would 
have  felt  the  chill,  and  would  have  desisted.  But  it  is  not  from  them  that  she  seeks 
an  answer.  She  will  take  her  dismissal  from  none  but  Christ  Himself.  3.  The 
woman's  faith  reaches  its  greatest  trial  in  the  conduct  of  Christ.  The  disciples, 
cold  as  they  are,  seem  merciful  compared  with  their  Master.  As  she  cries,  and 
pours  her  heart  into  her  prayer.  He  moves  away  with  silent  neglect.  That  dreadful 
silence  is  harder  to  bear  than  the  sorest  word  that  can  be  spoken.  Still  she  cried 
after  Him,  and  at  last  He  spoke.  But  His  words,  were  they  not  even  harder  than 
His  silence  ?  For  He  did  not  speak  to  her,  bat  only  of  her,  and  that  in  such  a 
slighting  manner  as  almost  to  quench  all  hope.  Still  she  persists,  and  at  1-engtb — 
as  Christ  all  along  intended  she  should — gains  her  heart's  desire.  II.  What 
HELPED  HER  FAITH  TO  Hoi^D  ON  AND  TRioMPH  f  We  do  Hot  Speak  of  the  flrst  cause 
of  all,  which  was  Christ's  eye  watching  her  steps,  and  His  hand  bearing  her  np  ; 
but  of  the  mediate  causes  by  which  her  faith  was  upheld.  1.  She  had  a  deep  home 
and  heart  sorrow,  spurring  her  on  to  make  every  exertion.  All  other  means  had 
failed,  but  something  told  her  there  was  hope  here,  and  to  this  she  clung.  The 
greater  the  feeling  of  the  trouble,  the  more  surely  will  it  carry  you  into  the  presence 
of  the  only  Saviour.  2.  She  had  learned  to  take  a  very  humble  view  of  herself.  As 
humility  goes  deep  down,  faith  rises  up  high  and  strong,  for  humility  furnishes  the 
roots  by  which  faith  holds  on.  3.  Her  faith  was  so  strong,  because  it  had  hold  of 
another  Christ,  greater  and  more  merciful  than  her  eyes  saw.  She  looked  beyond 
appearances,  and  fixed  her  gaze  on  things  unseen  and  eternal.  It  is  this  which 
keeps  men  right,  amid  adverse  surroundings.  Thick  thundercloada  of  Atheism  and 
Pessimism  sometimes  hang  lowering  over  the  earth,  and  threaten  to  quench  all 
the  higher  hope  ;  but  God  has  given  to  the  spirit  a  power  by  which  it  can  pass  up 
through  them  and  sing  like  the  lark  in  the  sunshine  and  the  blue  sky.  It  is  the  work 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  isducate  and  strengthen  it  by  drawing  it,  often  through 
much  tribulation,  to  Himself.  (J.  Ker,  D.D.)  Victorious  wrestling  in  prayer: — 
Of  all  the  expressions  of  Christian  life,  prayer  is  the  foremost.  It  precedes  and 
accompanies  every  other.  It  is  the  breathing  of  the  soul,  the  palpitation  of  the 
heart  of  the  new  inward  man.  I.  (1)  Prayer  is  a  necessity.  A  Christian  cannot 
live  without  inward  intercourse  with  his  God  and  Saviour.  Love  cannot  exist 
without  unbosoming  itself.  (2)  It  is  also  a  spiritual  power.  It  not  only  reacts 
npon  ourselves  and  our  temper,  it  also  acts  from  us  outwardly  on  the  course  of 
things ;  for  it  both  eases  our  heart,  and  overcomes  God's.  II.  Thk  sense  of  ocr 
WANT  URGES  VB  TO  PRAY.  Knowledge  of  our  sinftilness  drives  as  to  God.  As  the 
drowni^  man  attaches  himself  to  the  saving  hand,  and  does  not  let  go  his  hold, 
so  the  soul  attaches  itself  to  the  hand  of  Jesus,  and  refuses  to  be  shaken  off.  Then 
the  wrestlirg  prayer  for  salvation  begins,  for  it  is  begotten  of  the  feeling  of  the 
soul's  misery.  III.  What  helps  us  to  overcome  in  the  struggle  is  thk  perse- 
verance OF  humble  faith.  Jesus  is  the  conqueror ;  but  Jesus  we  seize  by  faith, 
and  with  Him  is  victory.  1.  We  must  seek  Jesus.  No  rest  till  we  come  to  Him. 
No  other  can  help  us,  or  rid  us  of  our  sin.  2.  We  must  not  let  Jesus  go.  If  He 
goes  away,  follow  Him  ;  if  He  seems  to  be  stern,  become  more  urgent ;  if  He  hides 
His  face,  cry  the  louder  ;  if  He  will  not  listen,  assail  His  heart.  Every  ^o  of  Jesus 
is  an  Aye  in  disguise.  It  is  true  we  deserve  noue  of  the  things  we  pray  for ;  but 
He  has  enough  and  to  spare  for  all ;  and  after  the  children  are  filled,  He  can  afford 
to  cast  the  crumbs  to  the  dogs.  If  we  have  but  the  crumbs  from  His  rich  table,  we 
shall  be  satisfied.  Even  if  we  are  the  last  in  His  kingdom,  it  is  eulficient,  so  that 
we  only  have  some  share  of  His  grace.  If  it  is  only  one  look  of  His  eye  ;  only  one 
glance  from  Him.  If  we  are  not  allowed  to  rest  on  His  breast  with  John,  we  shall 
be  satisfied  if  only  with  Thomas  we  are  permitted  to  behold  the  print  of  the  nails. 
And  when  we  have  become  quite  exhausted  in  wrestling  with  Him,  and  all  our 
strength  is  broken ;  when,  so  to  speak,  the  hollow  of  our  thigh  is  out  of  joint ;  when 
we  can  only  cling  to  Him  and  declare  we  will  not  let  Him  go  except  He  bless  us ; 
even  then  we  shall  overcome,  and  He  will  declare  Himself  to  be  vanquished.  IV. 
What  do  wk  win  in  the  victory?  The  blessing  of  Jesus  Christ — "Be  it  unto 
thee,  even  as  thou  wilt."  What  a  wonderful  word.  To  whom  does  it  apply  f  To 
him  who  first  has  sacrificed  his  self-will,  and  as  learnt  to  say,  from  the  bottom  of 
his  heart,  "  Lord,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  Then  God's  wiU  and  man's  are 
become  one.  Just  before,  almost  powerless :  now,  almost  almighty.  He  who  thus 
wins  God's  heart,  wins  everything.  A  child  of  God  is  lord  over  all  things, 
IC.  E.  Luthardt.)        The  woman  of  Canaan  : — This  story  is  the  simplest  of  dramaSi 

21 


823  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ry 

having  two  persons  and  a  chorus.  I.  The  fibst  peeson  is  the  heathen  wouan, 
AND  HERE  WE  NOTE :  (1)  Her  trouble ;  (2)  Her  faith,  which  is  neither  a  supersti' 
tious  credulity,  nor  a  hesitating  experiment;  (3)  Her  reward.  II.  The  othkb 
Pbesok  is  the  Lord  Jesus.  Looking  on  Him  as  the  model  of  human  duty,  and 
the  expression  of  the  Divine  nature,  we  find  in  this  story  things  amazing  and  per- 
plexing. What  are  we  to  learn  from  them  ?  1.  The  perplexities  in  the  life  ol 
Christ  are  like  the  perplexities  in  the  government  of  God.  2.  This  incident 
exhibits  Christ  gazing  inexorable,  for  a  time,  on  human  suffering.  3.  His  apparent 
unkindness  is  only  apparent.  4.  His  blessing  is  already  given,  while  yet  the  sup- 
plicant is  unaware  of  it.    (Leonard  W.  Bacon.)       I.  That  it  is  hiqhlt  gbatiftino 

10  MEET   with   devout  PERSONS  WHERE   WE    EXPECT    NOT   TO   FIND    THEM.      She  WaS  8 

heathen,  not  a  Jew.      II.  That  afflictions,  both  personal  and  domestic,  abh 

POWERFUL  INCENTIVES  TO  PBATEE.  III.  ThAT  IN  OUR  EXERCISES  OF  DEVOTION  WE  OUGHT 
TO  PRAT  FOR  OTHERS  AS  WELL  AS  FOR  OURSELVES.      IV.    ThAT  SINCERE  BUPPUCANTS   MAT 

MEET  WITH  GREAT  DISCOURAGEMENTS  IN  PBATEE.  Delays  are  DOt  denials.  We  are 
apt  to  value  highly  that  which  costs  us  eifort.     V.  That  sincere  supplicants  abk 

ALWAYS   persevering.       VI.    ThAT   THE   PRATER   OF   FAITH   MUST   ULTIMATELY   PREVAIL. 

(R.  Newton.)  Significant  silence : — The  Saviour's  silence  was  not  the  result  ol 
intellectual  poverty.  Was  not  that  of  one  taken  with  mere  self- considerations. 
Was  not  caused  by  indifference.  I.  The  Saviour's  silence  indicates  thoughtfulness. 
n.  Denotes  loving  estimates.  III.  Manifests  the  greatness  of  self-control.  Effeo 
live  speech  is  power  over  one's  fellows,  but  silence  is  power  over  one's  own  sell. 
rV.  ^d  yet  the  Saviour's  silence  may  have  been  sympathetic.  V.  Was  preparative. 
What  power  in  a  judicious  pause.  Delay  may  enhance  the  preciousness  of  the  gift. 
{W.  Burrows,  B.A .)  The  Woman  of  Canaan : — I.  What  wb  can  find  in  this  woman 
TO  COMMEND.  1.  Strong  and  wise  parental  love.  2.  Her  earnestness.  3.  Deephumi- 
lity.  II.  What  oue  Lord  Himself  actually  commended  in  her — •'  Great  is  thy 
faith."  This  virtue  singled  out  because  all  others  flow  from  it.  III.  The  gracious 
treatment  she  received  from  our  Lord.  1.  Christ  delayed  His  answer  to  her 
petition.  2.  He  gave  her  strength  to  persevere  in  prayer  for  it,  and  made  that 
prayer  more  humble  and  earnest.  3.  He  put  on  her  signal  honour.  4.  He  at  last 
gavp  her  all  that  she  desired,  5.  There  is  often  more  love  towards  us  in  the  heart 
of  Christ  than  we  can  see  in  His  dealings  with  us.  6.  The  prayer  of  faith  is  always 
crowned  with  success.  (C.  Bradley.)  I.  Who  this  woman  was.  She  was  not  an 
Israelite.  The  cause  of  her  sorrow  was  not  her  own.  Her  prayer.  II.  Heb 
Bavioub.  1.  His  silence  when  we  should  not  have  expected  it.  2.  He  seems  to 
plead  that  His  commission  had  been  exclusively  to  Israel.  3.  He  appears  to  add 
insult  to  cruelty.  4.  He  suffers  Himself  to  be  conquered  by  faith.  II.  What  does 
this  sat  to  you  7  1.  You  may  go  to  Christ  for  yourselves.  2.  Toa  rnay  go  to 
Christ  for  your  relatives.  3.  Jesus  can  and  will  do  helpless  sinners  good.  {T, 
Mortimer. )  God's  delays  in  answering  prayer : — 1.  To  try  our  faith.  2.  To 
foster  humility.  3.  To  intensify  desire  after  the  blessings  we  request.  4.  To 
enhance  the  joy  of  success  when  the  answer  is  vouchsafed.  5.  Blessed  are  they 
that  wait  for  Him.  (C.  M.  Merry.)  The  elements  of  prevailing  prayer: — I. 
Sincerity.  II.  Humility.  HI,  Importunity.  IV.  Faitli.  Conclude  with  a  few 
practical  remarks.  (J.  B.  Jeher,  D.D.)  Faith  triumphing  over  difficulties  : — Faith 
overcomes — I.  Obstacles  in  our  personal  circumstances.  II.  The  concealments  of 
Jesus.  III.  The  silence  of  Jesus.  IV.  The  refusals  of  Jesus.  V.  The  reproaches 
of  Jesus.  (Anon.)  The  woman  of  Canaan  : — This  is  an  instance  of  a  wrestling 
faith  ;  faith  wrestling  with  grievous  temptations,  but  at  length  obtaining  help  from 
God.  We  ought  to  consider  this  (1)  because  Clirist  pronounced  it  to  be  great  faith ; 
(2)  it  instructs  us  that  the  life  and  exercise  of  faith  is  not  easy,  but  will  meet  with 
great  discouragements;  (3)  because  of  the  success  attending  it.  I.  The  quality  of 
the  woman.  II.  She  was  a  believer.  III.  The  greatness  and  strength  of  her  faith ; 
seen  in  her  trials  and  temptations;  and  in  her  victory  over  them,  by  her  impor- 
tunity, humility,  and  resolved  confidence.  The  woman's  temptations  are  four. 
I.  Christ's  silence.  Though  a  sore  temptation,  this  should  not  yet  weaken  our 
faith  ;  for  God's  delay  is  for  His  own  glory  and  our  good  :  to  enlarge  our  desires, 
and  put  greater  fervency  into  them.  II.  The  small  assistance  she  had  from  the 
disciples.  III.  Christ's  seeming  to  exclude  her  from  His  commission.  IV, 
Christ's  answer  implying  a  contempt  of  her,  or  at  least  a  strong  reason  against 
her.  The  woman's  victory  over  her  temptaticms.  I.  By  her  importunity.  II. 
Her  humility.  III.  Her  resolved  confidence.  All  which  are  the  fruits  of  great 
faith.    (T.  Manton.)        The  woman  of  Canaan : — ^L  Thb  tbials  akl  DunouLTUCf 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  '  82? 

this  Bnpplicant's  faith  met  with.  1.  Christ  is  wholly  silent.  2.  Christ  intimates 
that  He  had  notl.ing  to  do  with  her.  3.  Christ  seems  to  answer  with  reproach  and 
contempt.  II.  How  the  faith  was  discovered  in  its  tbials,  and  worked 
IHBODOH  Aii.  1.  Though  Christ  was  silent  she  did  not  drop,  but  continued  her 
suit.  2.  She  passes  over  the  doubt  she  could  not  answer,  and  instead  of  disputing 
Bdores  Him,  and  prays  to  Hun  still,  3.  She  humbly  let  pass  the  (seeming) 
indignity,  and  turned  that  which  seemed  to  make  most  against  her  into  an  argu- 
nient  for  her  obtaining  the  mercy  she  came  to  Him  to  beg  for.  III.  The  happi 
FHsng  OF  THIS,  HOW  OLOKiousLT  IT  WAS  BEWABDED.  1.  Her  faith  was  owned, 
commended,  and  admired  by  the  Author  of  it.  2.  The  reward  of  her  faith  was 
ample.  {Dan.  Wilcox.)  Christ  and  the  woman : — In  judging  our  Lord's  treat- 
ment of  this  woman — 1.  Obs^erve  that  Christ,  while  He  was  upon  earth,  said 
notliing  and  did  nothing  of  Himself.  2.  Our  Lord,  who  laiew  the  hearts  of  men, 
both  saw  and  esteemed  the  good  disposition  of  this  petitioner,  but  for  a  time  con- 
cealed His  kind  intentions,  being  willing  to  exercise  her  faith  and  submission,  her 
patience  and  perseverance.  The  woman's  faith  was  great — 1.  With  relation  to  her 
religion,  and  to  her  country,  2.  In  comparison  with  the  unbelieving  Jews.  3. 
Con^ide^ed  in  itself.  4.  Because  it  stood  so  severe  a  trial.  {J.  Jortin.)  The 
Canaanite's  faith  : — The  position  of  this  woman  and  the  conduct  of  our  Saviour  to 
her.  1.  She  believed  in  Jesus  before  the  scene  related  in  this  gospel ;  we  distinguish 
in  her  conversion  that  strength  of  soul  which  is  sure  to  triumph  over  all  obstacles ; 
all  that  follows  is  explained  by  such  a  commencement.  She  was  a  heathen,  and 
only  received  God's  Word  indirectly,  through  the  prejudices  of  the  Jews.  The 
feeble  ray  which  reached  her  proved  sufficient  to  guide  her  feet.  2.  The  conduct 
of  our  Lord  corresponds  with  His  manner  of  acting  towards  the  heathen  generally, 
and  with  His  especial  designs  of  mercy  towards  her.  Our  Lord  did  not  so  treat 
this  woman  merely  because  she  was  a  heathen ;  but  to  make  His  mercy  more 
conspicuous.  While  He  proves  He  strengthens  her.  From  the  heroes  of  faith  He 
draws  back  to  exercise  their  courage.  3.  See  how  this  woman  wrestles  with  our 
Lord.  Jesus  sought  retirement.  She  anticipated  His  coming.  She  was  alone  in 
Becking  Him.  She  had  to  force  herself  into  His  presence.  But  Christ  could  not 
escape  from  the  faith  of  this  woman.  He  allows  us  to  conquer  Him.  She  triumphs 
over  the  preventives  which  our  Lord  opposed  to  her.  Once  in  the  presence  of  Jesus 
she  is  satisfied.  His  silence.  To  try  her  patience.  Only  for  a  time.  His  speech 
Ct^iis  cruel.  The  Word  of  God  does  seem  sometimes  against  the  child  of  God.  In 
the  love  of  Christ  she  finds  refuge  against  His  silence  and  words  ;  His  love  is  only 
hidden  for  a  moment  under  harshness.  She  could  not  be  defeated  because  she 
would  not  doubt.  She  triumphs.  {Adolphe  Wonod.)  A  tcord  to  parents  : — I.  On 
this  occasion  Christ  bad  left  His  own  country  and  people.  Perhaps  to  avoid 
the  hatred  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees ;  or  to  abate  His  populaiity.  We  find  Him 
coasting  to  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Her  need  was  her  plea.  II.  The  leading  principlbs 
OP  her  paith.     1.  In  this  prayer  she  recognizes  the  unity  of  the  Deity,  "Lord." 

3.  What  a  beautiful  trait  in  her  character  when  she  prays,  "  Have  mercy  on  me  ;  " 
but  we  know  the  chief  object  of  her  prayer  was  her  daughter.  She  identifies  her- 
self with  her  daughter's  misery.     3.  She   asks   for   mercy  and   help    (ver.  25). 

4.  Regard  Jesus  as  God  able  to  save  or  destroy.  (F.  F.  McGlynn,  M.A.)  I.  The 
OHARAUTER  OP  THE  INDIVIDUAL.     1.  A  Greek.     2.  A  believer  in   Christ.     IL  Thk 

OADSE   CP   HER   COMINQ.      III.    ThE   IMPEDIMENTS   8BB   MET   WITH.       1.    A   loDg    delay. 

2.  A  mortifying  rebuke.  3.  An  apparent  refusal.  4.  A  silent  denial.  Then  her 
conduct :  1.  An  humble  request.  2.  A  persevering  prayer.  3.  An  humble  con- 
fession. 4.  An  affecting  reply.  IV.  The  blessings  at  last  BpcEivED,  1.  The 
principle  our  Lord  commends  is  her  faith ;  from  faith  all  other  graces  spring. 
2.  He  granted  her  request.  Improvement :  1.  The  u*8e  we  should  make  of  afflic- 
tion, 2,  The  efficacy  of  prayer,  (The  Pulpit.)  The  triumph  of  faith  ■ — L 
Faith's  approach.  1.  She  came  to  the  right  person.  2.  In  a  right  spirit.  3. 
With  a  right  plea  II.  Faith's  trial.  1.  Christ  tried  her  faith  by  perfect 
silence.  2.  By  seeming  indifference.  3.  By  apparent  reproach.  III.  Faith's 
APPEAL.  1.  She  was  a  devout  suppliant.  2.  An  earnest  suppliant.  3.  An  ingenious 
suppliant.  IV.  Faith's  triumph.  1.  Christ  commends  her  faith.  2.  He  grants 
ber  request.      S.    He  healed  her  daughter.      {J.  T.   Woodhouse.)  The  second 

Sunday  in  Lent: — I.  The  discouragements  which  she  overcamb.  These  weie 
great,  numerous,  and  increased  as  she  proceeded.  1.  The  first  was  the  seeming 
unwillingness  of  the  Saviour  to  have  his  retirement  disturbed  by  any  one,  in  any  way 
(Mark  vii.  24).    2.  Her  case  was  itself  a  very  unpromising  one.     She  was  a  Gentile. 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xt. 

3.  The  colcluesi?  in  our  Lord's  behaviour,  which  seemed  to  disdain  the  least  atten- 
tion to  her — "He  answered  her  not  a  word."  4.  The  conduct  of  the  disciplea 
introduced  a  still  further  dissuasion,  well  calculated  to  dampen  her  hope  of  succesa. 
6.  To  this  was  added  the  still  further  disheartening  answer  of  the  Master,  "  I  am 
not  sent,"  &o.  6.  Children's  bread  was  not  to  be  given  to  the  dogs.  This  was  tha 
current  spirit  of  the  religion  of  the  times.  II.  Thb  means  of  her  victory.  1.  Sha 
felt  her  need,  and  the  true  character  of  her  affliction.  2.  She  credited  what  she  had 
heard  of  Christ.  3.  And  believing  as  she  did,  she  improved  her  opportunity.  Jesus 
was  in  the  neighbourhood.  4.  She  confessed  her  unworthiness.  5.  She  had  a  true 
and  powerful  faith.  6.  And  as  the  result  of  her  faith,  she  was  invincible  in  her 
prayers.  III.  The  lessons  which  this  case  teaches.  1.  It  impressively  reminds 
us  of  the  sorrowful  condition  of  human  Ufe.  2.  This  gospel  assures  us  where  our 
help  is.  3.  It  indicates  how  to  avail  ourselves  of  our  great  mercies.  4.  Precious 
encouragement  does  it  bring  to  us.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  A  woman  of  Canaan : — 
The  movements  of  mankind  are  best  studied  in  the  lives  of  individuals.  I.  Thb 
WOHAN  hebself.  All  we  know  of  her  origin  and  feeling  is  contained  in  the  three 
terms  that  are  applied  to  her — Canaanite,  Syro-Phoenician,  a  Greek.  The  first  two 
imply  her  race.  She  belonged  to  that  race  that  the  Hebrews  called  Canaauites — 
that  is,  Lowlanders,  for  the  great  Phoenician  people  had  settled  themselves  in  tha 
fertile  valleys,  and  on  the  maritime  plains  of  Palestine,  and  there  in  their  walled 
cities  had  developed  in  the  highest  degree  an  ancient  civilization.  To  this 
Phoenician  stock  she  belonged.  It  was  divided  into  two  parts — the  African  and  the 
Syrian  stock.  She  belonged  to  the  Syrian,  to  the  people  who  inhabited  the  narrow 
strip  of  land  between  Lebanon  and  the  sea.  The  last  term  *'  Greek,"  has  of  course 
nothing  to  do  with  race,  nor  does  it  say  anvthiug  of  her  language ;  but  religion. 
St.  Paul  divides  men  into  Jew  and  Greek ;  the  word  means  heathen.  She  was  one 
of  those  that  worship  Baal  and  Astarte.  II.  In  her  case  observe  the  workings  of 
BORROW.  That  from  the  outset  there  began  to  operate  compensating  results  which 
took  away  some  of  the  bitterness.  1.  This  sorrow  worked  out  in  a  greater  love — 
"  Have  mercy  on  me ;  my  daughter  is  vexed."  As  if  she  and  her  daughter  were  one. 
It  was  a  mitigation,  and  in  some  degree  a  compensation,  that  with  her  sorrow  grew 
such  love.  2,  The  love  and  the  sorrow  together  co-operated  to  produce  something 
higher  still.  They  enlarged  the  heart,  purified  her  feeling,  lifted  the  thought  to 
immortality  ;  Astarte  could  no  longer  fill  her  heart.  She  wanted  a  deity  that  could 
be  a  God  of  love,  not  of  passion ;  who  would  create  purity,  not  crush  it.  This  I 
gather  from  the  fact  that  slie  calls  Christ  "  Son  of  David,"  She  began  to  think  trust- 
fully of  Israel's  God.  Such  were  the  workings  of  sorrow  in  her  heart.  HI.  An  il- 
lustration OF  the  great  drawings  between  the  Saviour  and  the  soul  that  needs 
Him.  There  is  sometljing  mysterious  here.  It  is  not  by  accident  that  great  mercy 
and  misery  meet.  What  is  the  secret  of  that  journey  to  Tyre  and  Sidon.  I  suppose 
the  Saviour  felt  some  magnetic  need  piilling  upon  His  heart,  claiming  the  help  of 
His  pity  and  power.  She  was  fifty  miles  away ;  the  road  was  mountainous;  in  all 
the  journey  there  and  back  He  cures  no  other  affliction  and  preaches  no  sermon ; 
•  His  sole  purpose  was  to  minister  to  this  single  sufferer.  The  prophetic  soul  knows 
when  its  Lord  is  nigh.  IV.  The  serene  result  that  is  reached.  She  learned  tha 
power  of  prayer .  The  disciples  were  changed ;  educated  for  their  missionary  work ; 
they  see  how  rich  a  thing  a  human  heart  is.  She  came  asking  a  mercy  for  herself, 
and  went  away  carrying  it  to  others.  {R.  Glover.)  The  woman  of  Canaan: — I. 
The  great  faith  of  this  woman  is  to  be  traced  in  her  humble  confession.  1. 
She  confesses  her  misery  when  imploring  the  mercy  of  Christ.  2.  Sbe  confesses 
her  weakness  when  imploring  the  help  of  Chript.  3.  She  confesses  her  unworthi- 
ness by  admitting  the  mission  of  Christ.  II.  The  great  faith  of  this  woman  is  to 
BE  TRACED  IN  HER  FERVENT  PRAYER.  1.  Maik  her  recognition  of  the  character  of 
Christ.  2.  Her  confidence  in  the  power  of  Christ.  3.  Her  earnestness  in  seeking 
the  aid  of  Christ.  III.  The  great  faith  of  this  woman  is  to  be  discovbeed  in  hsb 
DETERMINED  PERSEVERANCE.  1.  Her  faith  overcame  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  a 
personal  interview  with  Christ.  2.  It  overcame  the  singularly  apparent  coldness  of 
Christ.  3.  It  overcame  the  limitation  of  the  usual  ministrations  of  Christ.  {J. 
Wonnacott.)  The  discipUs  sending  away  the  Canaanite  woman: — Amongst  tna 
causes  which  keep  souls  at  a  distance  from  Jesus,  we  must  count  the  attitude  of  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  as  one  of  the  most  powerful.  To  the  Master  we  must  go ;  not  to 
the  disciples.  Let  us  first  dispel  all  misunderstandings.  When  I  declare  that  we 
must  look  to  the  Master,  not  to  the  disciples,  I  do  not  forget  that  the  apostles  were 
enlightened  by  special  revelations  and  were  called  to  found  the  Church.    J  do  not 


CBAt.  XV.  ST.  MATTHEW.  32| 

oppose  their  teachiag  to  that  of  the  Master ;  there  is  no  contradiction  between  them. 
But  when  we  leave  the  apostolic  age  the  situation  changes.  The  Church  is  placed 
before  Christ.  But  now  let  us  descend  to  the  sphere  of  the  individual  conscience. 
To  lead  to  Jesus !  What  a  privilege  and  glory.  Fidelity  of  testimony  is  necessary 
to  this  mission.  Some  are  brought  to  Christ  by  words,  some  by  indirect  influences, 
others  by  a  love  that  nothing  wearies.  But  it  is  possible  to  put  souls  away  from 
Jesus  Christ.  Between  them  and  Christ  there  have  been  our  sins,  pride,  &c.  1. 
Let  us  remove  the  hypocrites ;  to  make  of  their  duplicity  an  arm  against  the  gospel 
ia  an  unworthy  proceeding.  You  see  their  inconsistencies  ;  are  you  sure  you  do  not 
exaggerate  them?  Have  yoa  weighed  all  that  Christian  faith  produces  of  excellent 
works  ?  Granting  that  your  complaints  are  well  founded ;  in  what  way  can  they 
justify  your  unbelief  ?  They  could  only  do  so  if  you  had  the  fairness  to  seek  theii 
cause  in  the  gospel  itself.  But  you  contrast  the  two.  Is  it  not  rather  the  fidelity 
that  offends  you,  rather  than  the  faults  of  Christians?  2.  A  word  to  you  who 
believe :  1.  Judge  yourself  as  you  are  seeking  what  is  lacking  in  others.  Saved  by 
grace,  shall  we  not  exercise  mercy  ?  2.  Let  us  learn  to  see  in  our  brethren  along  with 
the  evil  that  distresses  us,  the  good  that  we  have  misunderstood  until  now.  3. 
Eaise  your  look  to  the  Master,  there  you  will  find  peace  and  certainty.  (E.  Bersier, 
D.D.)  The  woman  of  Canaan  : — I.  This  poor  woman's  unkemitting  obstinacy,  if  I 
may  so  call  it,  in  prayers.  See  the  power  of  persevering  prayer.  They  may  seem 
for  a  while  unanswered ;  they  may  not  seem  to  work  any  alteration  in  our  secret 
hearts.  II.  The  power  of  intercession.  It  is  our  duty  to  pray  for  others.  III. 
That  this  poor  woman's  reiterated  prayers  are  by  our  Lord  called  faith.  Great  ia 
the  faith  that  prays  without  ceasing.  The  sphere  of  common  duty  is  the  sphere  also 
of  secret  spiritual  growth.  IV.  Eegard  again  this  poor  woman  thus  singled  out  in 
all  the  heathen  world  to  receive  the  only  cure,  as  a  type  of  the  Church  of  God.  The 
Church,  like  her,  has  many  sons  and  daughters  grievously  vexed  with  the  evil  spirit. 
They  are  brought  to  Christ  in  prayer.  (G.  Moberly,  D.C.L.)  Great  faith: — How 
singularly  and  beautifully  appreciative  Jesus  always  was  of  anything  that  was  good. 
His  words  show  accuracy  of  observation  and  calculation.  I.  There  are  many  striking 
features  in  the  character  of  this  woman.  Her  motherly  care,  energy,  humility, 
pleading;  but  Christ  selected  only  one.  Faith  the  root  of  all.  Some  think  we 
make  too  much  of  faith,  and  place  it  out  of  its  proper  proportion.  II.  The  elements 
which  went  to  make  the  "  great  faith."  Sorrow  seems  to  have  been,  if  not  the 
cradle,  yet  the  school  of  her  faith.  She  comes  and  makes  her  petition,  as  faith 
always  ought,  leaving  details  with  God.  The  test  to  which  she  was  put  was  exceed- 
ingly severe.  {J.  Vaughnn,  M.A.)  Help  from  heaven : — •*  Lord,  help  me."  This 
prayer  is  suitable — I.  For  those  who  are  seeking  salvation.  II.  For  a  soul  under 
spiritual  darkness.  III.  For  the  believer  amidst  worldly  perplexities.  IV.  For  the 
Christian  labourer.  V.  For  the  dying  saint.  (A.  0.)  The  faith  of  the  Syro- 
Phcenieian  woman : — I.  The  extraordinary  character  ot  her  faith.  1.  It  wai 
based  on  the  most  limited  knowledge.  2.  It  conquered  natural  prejudice  in  her. 
self,  and  the  fear  of  its  influence  in  others.  II.  Why  Christ  so  severely  tested 
IT.  1.  His  first  object  was  to  expose  and  rebuke  the  intense  bigotry  of  the  Jews 
around  Him.  2.  He  wished  to  draw  out  and  exhibit  the  full  strength  of  her  faith. 
Lessons :  1.  Christ's  mercy  and  mission  extend  to  all,  however  vile  and  outcast 
they  may  be.  2.  The  true  way  to  derive  good  from  Him  is  by  faith,  rather  than  by 
knowledge  or  acts  of  worship.  3.  An  encouragement  to  the  utmost  tenacity  and 
desperation  of  faith.  4.  An  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  appearances  may 
deceive  qb.  God  may  seem  to  repulse  us,  but  never  does  so  actually.  {Congregational 
Pulpit.)  This  woman  of  Caanan  teaches  us  to  pray  : — (1)  With  great  humility,  in 
that  she  acknowledges  herself  to  be  a  dog ;  (2)  with  faith,  in  that  she  calls  Christ 
the  Son  of  David,  i.e.,  the  Messiah  ;  (3)  with  modesty,  because  she  sets  before  Christ 
the  right  of  dogs  and  her  own  misery  ;  yet  does  not  dirawfrom  thence  the  conclusion 
that  Christ  should  heal  her  daughter,  but  leaves  that  to  Him ;  (4)  with  prudence,  in 
that  she  takes  hold  of  Christ  by  His  own  words,  and  gently  turns  His  reasoning 
against  Himself,  into  an  argument  for  obtaining  her  desire  ;  (5)  with  reverence,  with 
religion  and  devotion,  because  she  made  her  application  on  her  knees ;  (6)  with 
resignation,  in  that  she  did  not  say,  **  Heal  my  daughter,"  but  "  Help  me,"  in  the 
manner  that  shall  seem  to  Thee  best ;  (7)  with  confidence,  because,  although  a  Gen- 
tile, she  had  a  firm  hope  that  she  would  be  heard  by  Christ ;  (8)  with  ardour ;  (9) 
with  charity,  in  that  she  made  intercession  for  her  daughter,  as  if  she  were  anxious 
lor  herself,  saying,  "Help  me";  (10)  with  constancy  and  perseverance,  in  that  she 
persisted  wher  3he  was  twice  repulsed,  and  became  yet  more  earnest  in  prayeft 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xf 

{Lapide.)        A  double  miracle:  1.  Of  Faith.     2.  Of  Healing.     Thrice  did  Christ 
commend  "  great  faitk,"  and  in  each  case  outride  the  fold  of  Israel.     In  this  case 
the  wonder  is  not  that  the  woman  had  great  faith,  but  that  she  had  faith  at  all. 
Her  faith  vf&B  great  because — I.  (1)  it  would  stand  trial.   (2)  It  was  a  wrestling  faith. 
She  heard  the  repulse,  yet  is  neither  daunted  nor  disheartened.     She  will  not  take 
His  No.     She  will  even  resist  His  arguments.     (3)  It  was  victorious.    Just  now 
Jesus  seemed  to  deny  the  smallest  boon  ;  now  He  opens  His  treasures,  and  bids  her 
help  herself.     II.  Learn  from  this  that  when  God  delays  a  boon.  He  does  not 
necessarily  deny  it.     (/.  H.  Burn,  B.D.)        Under  this  story  there  is  the  touch  ol 
nature  which  binds  us  all  together.     Let  us  learn  from  it — 1.  Perseverance.     Few 
things  can  be  reached  by  a  single  stride.    All  success  is  the  outcome  of  previous 
patience ;  the  finest  pictures  result  from  multitudinous  touches  of  the  bru^u.     Let 
us  keep  our  faces  to  the  light,  and  the  perseveriug  desire  shall  at  length  be  gratified. 
2.  Faith.     This  is  a  far  larger  thing  than  can  be  clothed  in  any  form,  and  the  raoet 
tenacious  profession  does  not  imply  that  we  have  that  vivid  appiehension  of  the 
living  God  which  makes  us  really  trust  in  and  rest  on  Him.     Have  you  faith  as  well 
as  a  creed  f     Are  you  daily  trusting  in  the  living  God  amidst  all  your  wants,  aad 
sorrows,  and  sins  ?    3.  Toleration.     We  are  often  inclined  to  look  with  insular  ex- 
clusiveness  or  half-disdainful  curiosity  on  such  non-Christians  as  we  come  in  contact 
with.     Let  us  remember  that  Christ  took  the  children's  bread  and  cast  it  to  dogs. 
With  such  an  example  before  ns,  we  dare  not  disclaim  any  as  too  degraded  to  share 
with  us  the  "  one  flock  and  one  shepherd."     {Harry  Jones,  M.A.)        Truth,  Lord, 
yet  the  dogs  eat,  &c. — The  womau's  remark  is  admirable  and  delightful.     It  is  full 
indeed  ol  true  theology  and  real  philosophy.     Siie  apprehended  clearly  (1)  that  it 
was  right  that  our  Lord's  personal  ministry  should  be  devoted  to  the  Jews  ;  (2)  that 
He  bore  a  benignant  relation  to  the  Gentiles — that  He  was  not  a  sectarian  Saviour; 
(3)  that  it  would  not  in  the  least  interfere  with  His  ministry  in  relation  to  the  Jews, 
to  put  forth  by  the  way  His  blessed  energy  in  behalf  of  such  suppliant  Gentiles  aa 
herself.     She  was  not  asking  Him  to  forsake  Palestine,  or  the  Jews.     (J.  Morison^ 
D.D.)        A  woman's  master- stroke  : — Was  not  this  a  master-stroke  ?    She  snarea 
Christ  in  His  own  words.  (Lutlier.)      An  incident  like  this : — Dean  Plumptre  gives  the 
following  story  from  the  Talmud.     "  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land,  and  stores  of 
corn  were  placed  under  the  care  of  Rabbi  Jehudah  the  Holy,  to  be  distributei  i/iily 
to  those  who  were  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  law.     And,  behold,  a  man  came, 
Jonathan,  the  son  of  Amram,  and  clamorously  asked  for  his  portion.     The  Eabbi 
asked  him  whether  he  knew  the  condition,  and  had  fulfilled  it,  and  then  the  sup- 
phant  changed  his  tone  and  said,  '  Nay,  but  feed  me  as  a  dog  is  fed,  who  eats  of  the 
crumbs  of  the  feast,'  and  the  Rabbi  hearkened  to  his  words,  and  pave  him  of  the 
com."        Asking  for  crumbs  : — Laurence  Justinian,  first  Patriarch  of  Venice,  resem- 
bled this  woman  in  the  prayer  he  offered  when  at  the  point  of  death.     "I  dare  not 
ask  for  a  seat  among  the  happy  spirits  who  behold  the  Holy  Trinity.    Nevertheless, 
Thy  creature  asks  for  some  portion  of  the  crumbs  of  Thy  most  holy  table.     It  shall 
be  more  than  enough  for  me,  0,  how  much  more  than  enough  1     If  Thou  wilt  not 
refuse  some  little  place  to  this  Thy  poor  servant  beneath  the  feet  of  the  least  ol 
Thine  elect."         The  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidoii  : — This  narrative  records  a  visit  of 
Jesus  to  a  region  which  lay  beyond  the  borders  of  the  Jewish  land.     It  did  not  lie 
at  any  great  distance  ;  it  was  within  a  day's  ride  of  Capernaum,  and  it  could  be  seen 
from  hill-tops  just  behind  Nazareth ;  yet  it  was  an  alien  country,  and  that  notable 
strip  of  the  Mediterranean  shore  on  which  Tyre  and  Sidon  were  situated  had  never 
belonged  to  the  Jewish  people.     The  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  was  fringed  by  an 
almost  continuous  line  of  biuldings;  quays,  warehouses,  and  private  residences 
dotted  the  whole  shore-line,  and  it  was  tlierefore  no  retired  spot,  but  one  which 
swarmed  with  a  large  and  busy  population,  with  ships  sailing  on  the  fac^  of  the 
waters,  and  the  fishermen  plying  th^ir  trade  within  sight  of  the  shore.     The  scene 
was  very  unlike  those  which  were  most  associated  with  our  Lord's  presence.     He 
was  here  surrounded  by  abundant  tokens  of    vigorous    maritime  and  naval  life. 
Instead  of  shepherds,  sowers,  corufieUls,  scribes,  and  Pharisees,  there  were  ware- 
houses,  docks,  ship-building  yards,  and  sailors,  amongst  which  He  moved  -.hen 
He  departed  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.     (Harry  Jones,  M.A.)         Spread  of 
truth  to  foreign  lands  . — Captain  Cc'ok  found  in  the  South  Seas  some  uninhabited 
islands,  waving  with  the  fruits  and  flowers  peculiar  to  Europe.     No  human  hand 
had  planted  the  seeds  in  that  soil.     How,  then,  were  they  there?     A  boy  in  one  of 
our  valleys  is  amusing  himself  with  seeds.     A  few  of  them  fall  from  his  band  into 
the  tiny  stream  at  his  cottage  door :  they  are  carried  down  to  the  river,  which  floati 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  327 

them  out  to  sea.  They  are  drifted  about  for  thousands  of  mHeg,  and  at  last  oast 
npou  the  shore  of  a  South  Sea  island.  A  bird  picks  them  up,  and  flies  to  its  nest; 
but,  scared  by  a  hawk,  lets  them  drop.  They  are  covered  with  the  leaves  of  the 
forest  till  spring  calls  them  forth.  By  and  by  the  wind  shakes  out  the  ripe  seed, 
and  carries  it  abroad.  Again  it  falls  into  the  kindly  bosom  of  the  earth,  and  again 
spring  draws  it  forth.  Thus,  we  may  suppose,  the  deserted  island  is  soon  clothed 
with  an  European  harvest.  And  thus  the  seed  of  God's  Word  is  often  scattered,  we 
cannot  tell  how.     {J.  Wells.)  Grievously  vexed  zcith  a  devil  {demoms.ca,l  posses- 

sion) : — It  is  agreed  on  by  all  sober  interpreters  of  Scripture  that,  at  this  period  of 
the  world,  God  permitted  evil  spirits  to  take  possession  of,  and  to  alilict,  individuals 
to  an  extent  that  He  did  not  before  and  has  not  since  permitted  ;  (1)  to  show  to  all 
the  power  and  malignity  of  Satan ;  and  (2)  to  exhibit  the  compassionate  kindness 
of  the  Saviour,  and  His  power  to  reli'  ve  those  thus  oppressed.  .  .  .  Often  may  we, 
in  a  spiritual  sense,  see  such  a  thing  nowadays — a  believing,  godly  parent,  having 
an  unbelieving,  ungodly  child,  whose  heart  is  held  and  governed  by  a  wicked  spirit. 
Often,  when  there  is  life  in  the  parent's  soul,  there  is  death  in  the  child's ;  light  in 
the  parent's  understanding,  but  darkness  and  ignorance  in  the  child's ;  love  in  the 
parent's  heart,  but  hatred  and  enmity  in  the  child's.  What  a  painful  and  afflicting 
Bight  to  a  parent's  eyes.  And  the  case  may  be  often  reversed  1  {Bishop  Gregg.) 
Silence : — Silence  is  not  refusal.  The  reasons  for  Christ's  silence  at  this  time  were : 
1.  In  order  that  by  exercising  her  faith  He  might  strengthen  and  deepen  it.  2.  That 
He  might  manifest  it  to  others,  and  so  give  her  as  an  example  to  those  who  stood 
by,  as  well  as  to  future  generations.  3.  That  He  might  not  offer  an  additional 
Btumbling-block  to  the  Jews,  to  whom  the  calling-in  of  the  Gentiles  was  an  abomina- 
tion. (JV.  Denton.)  Not  because  He  was  unwilling  to  speak,  but  because  there 
are  occasions  on  which  silence  is  more  eloquent  and  stirring  to  the  thought  than 
speech.  Not  infrequently  silence  is  golden,  while  speech  is  "  silvern  ;  "  and  this  wa« 
one  such  occasion.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.)  The  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  :— 
It  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  some  limits  to  our  Lord's  personal  ministry; 
and  it  was  wise  that  these  limits  should  be  fixed  at  the  circumference  of  the  circle 
of  Israel.  To  have  spread  out  His  ministry  farther,  during  the  brief  period  of  His 
terrestrial  career,  would  simply  have  been  to  have  thinned  out  and  weakened 
His  influence.  What  might  have  been  gained  extensively  would  have  been  lost 
intensively.  It  was  of  primary  moment  that  He  should  make  sure  of  a  foothold, 
on  which  He  might  plant  His  moral  machinery  for  moving  the  world.  That  foot- 
hold He  did  secure  in  the  house  of  Israel,  the  household  of  Israel,  the  family  of 
Israel ;  for  the  whole  nation  was  but  a  developed  family  circle.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
Moral  persistence  : — To  sink  under  the  burden  argueth  weakness,  but  it  is  strength 
of  faith  to  wrestle  through  it.  We  read  of  Pherecides,  a  Grecian,  in  a  naval  fight 
between  his  nation  and  Xerxes,  that  he  held  a  boat  in  which  the  Persians  were 
fighting,  first  with  his  right  arm ;  when  that  was  cut  off,  with  his  left ;  when  that 
was  cut  off,  with  his  teeth ;  and  would  not  let  go  his  holdfast  but  with  his  life.  (T. 
Manton.)  The  use  of  delay  : — Some  old  writer  thus  quaintly  explains  the  case. 
"Christ's  love  is  wise.  There  is  an  art  in  His  strange  delays,  which  pake  us 
love-sick.  We  cheapen  what  is  easily  got,  and  under-rate  anything  that  is  at  our 
elbow ;  but  delays  heighten  and  raise  the  market  value  of  Christ's  blessings.  He 
wishes  to  make  our  faith  stronger,  and  His  trials  are  for  the  triumph  of  our  faith. 
He  did  as  we  do  when  we  hold  toys  danghng  before  our  children,  that  we  may 
make  them  desire  and  enjoy  them  more.  He  acts  as  we  do  with  musicians  at  the 
door ;  for  when  they  please  us,  we  do  not  give  them  their  penny  at  once,  that  we 
may  hear  their  music  longer."  {J.  Wells.)  The  kindness  of  refusals : — Monica, 
the  mother  of  Augnstine,  prayed  that  her  godless  boy  might  not  go  to  Home,  for 
ehe  feared  that  Rome  would  be  his  ruin.  God  did  not  grant  that  request,  because 
He  had  something  better  in  store  for  her.  Augustine  went  to  Rome,  and  was  con- 
verted there.  (Ibid.)  Stern  truths : — This  was  the  most  cutting  of  all — telling 
her  in  plain  terms  that  she  had  no  more  right  to  get  what  she  asked,  than  the 
dogs  have  to  get  the  children's  bread ;  and  also  intimating  very  plainly  that  she 
was  no  better  than  a  dog.  Still  she  was  not  discouraged :  even  this  did  not  put 
her  off.  If  she  had  not  possessed  great  faith,  how  would  she  have  acted  ?  Just  as 
many  at  the  present  day  do  when  they  hear  a  plain  sermon  (as  they  call  IS) ;  when 
they  hear  in  plain  words  what  the  Bible  says  of  human  nature ;  they  don't  like 
that;  they  can't  be  so  very  bad  as  all  that;  they  don't  approve  of  what  that 
preacher  says  at  all,  and  so  they  go  to  some  other  place  where  they  will  hear  more 
palatable  language  about  the  kindness  of  man — his  good  nature,  generodty,  noble- 


828  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbu».  rr. 

tnindedness,  and  bo  forth  ;  but  they  who  are  of  the  truth  will  not  listen  to  this,  fof 
they  know  it  to  be  a  lie,  and  the  children  of  the  truth  can  take  no  pleasure  in  a  lie. 
People  think  it  is  very  bad  to  hear  themselves  called  "  great  sinners  ;  "  they  think 
very  strangely  of  a  man  if  he  tells  them  they  are  poor,  wretched,  miserable,  blind, 
and  naked ;  but,  I  suppose,  if  they  heard  the  term  "  dog  "  applied  to  them  as  Christ 
applied  it  to  this  woman  here,  they  would  be  up  in  arms  at  once,  openly  scout  at  so 
unwarrantable  an  affront,  and  take  good  care  never  to  go  near  that  preacher  again. 
So  did  not  this  woman ;  she  had  faith — strong  faith ;  she  acknowledges  the  aptness 
of  the  illustration,  and  humbly  acc<>ptB  Christ's  estimate  of  her  as  the  right  one. 
{Bishop  Orcgg.)  The  doga  : — There  was  some  reason  lying  at  the  base  of  the 
designation.  The  heathens  around  were,  in  the  mass,  exceedingly  unclean  and  fero- 
cious ;  barking  too,  incessantly,  at  the  true  God  and  true  godliness.  But  our  Lord, 
in  this  case,  refers  not  to  the  wild,  fierce,  filthy  dogs,  belonging  to  nobody,  that 
prowl  about  Oriental  cities ;  but  to  little  pet  dogs,  in  which  children  are  interested, 
and  with  which  they  play.  Most  probably  there  might  be  one  or  more  of  them, 
within  eight,  in  the  company  of   some  children.     (/.  Morison,  D.D.)  Oreat 

thovghts  of  Christ : — The  Syro-Phoenician  woman  gained  comfort  in  her  misery  by 
thinking  great  thoughts  of  Christ.  The  Master  had  talked  about  the  children's 
bread.  "  Now,"  argued  she,  "  since  Thou  art  the  Master  of  the  table  of  grace,  I 
know  that  Thou  art  a  generous  housekeeper,  and  there  is  sure  to  be  abundance  of 
bread  on  Thy  table.  There  will  be  such  an  abundance  for  the  children  that  there 
will  be  cmmbs  to  throw  on  the  floor  for  the  dogs,  arid  the  children  will  fare  none 
the  worse  because  the  dogs  are  fed."  She  thought  Him  one  who  kept  so  good  a 
table  that  all  she  needed  would  only  be  a  crumb  in  comparison.  Yet  remember 
what  she  wanted  was  to  have  the  devil  cast  out  of  her  daughter.  It  was  a  very 
great  thing  to  her,  but  she  had  such  a  high  esteem  of  Christ,  that  she  said,  *•  It 
is  nothing  for  him,  it  is  but  a  crumb  for  Christ  to  give."  This  is  the  royal  road 
to  comfort.  Great  thoughts  of  your  sin  alone  will  drive  you  to  despair  ;  but  great 
thoughts  of  Christ  will  pilot  you  into  the  haven  of  peace.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Perseverar.ee  of  faith: — An  unbelieving  heart  may  have  some  flash  of  spirit  and 
resolution,  but  it  wants  free  mettle,  and  will  be  sure  to  jade  in  a  long  journey'.  Faith 
will  throw  in  the  net  of  prayer  again  and  again,  as  long  as  God  commands  and  the 
promise  encourageth.  The  greyhound  hunts  by  sight,  and  when  he  cannot  see 
his  game  he  gives  over  running ;  but  the  true  hound  by  scent,  he  hunts  over 
hedge  and  ditch ;  though  he  stes  not  the  hare,  he  pursues  all  the  day  long.  Thua 
an  unbelieving  heart  may  be  drawn  out  upon  some  visible  probabilities  and  sensible 
hopes  of  a  coming  mercy  to  pray  and  ex<-rcise  a  little  faith,  but  when  these  are  ont 
of  sight,  his  heart  fails  him ;  but  faith  keeps  the  scent  of  the  promise,  and  givea 
not  over  the  chase.  (Salter.)  Faith  gives  prevalency  to  prayer.  In  the  several 
precedents  of  praying  saints  upon  Scripture  record  you  may  see  how  the  spirit  of 
prayer  ebbed  and  flowed,  fell  and  rose,  as  their  faith  was  up  and  down.  .  .  .  This 
made  the  woman  of  Canaan  so  invincibly  importunate;  let  Christ  frown  and  chide, 
deny  and  rebuke  her,  she  yet  makes  her  approaches  nearer  and  nearer,  gathering 
arguments  from  His  very  denials,  as  if  a  soldier  should  shoot  his  enemy's  bnlleta 
back  upon  him  asjain  ;  and  Christ  tells  us  what  kept  up  her  spirit  undaunted — "  O 
woman,  great  is  thy  faith."  {Gumall.)  Children's  bread  given  to  dogs : — 1.  Wlien 
her  case  was  come  to  such  a  point,  she  heard  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  what  she 
heard  she  acted  upon.  They  told  her  that  He  was  a  great  Healer  of  the  sick,  and 
able  to  cast  out  devils.  She  was  not  content  with  that  information,  but  she  set  to 
■work  at  once  to  try  its  value,  2.  This  woman  was  most  desperately  resolved.  She 
had  made  up  her  mind,  I  believe,  that  she  would  never  go  back  to  the  place  from 
whence  she  came  till  she  had  received  the  blessing.  3.  1  may  not  leave  this  picture 
without  observing  that  this  woman  triumphantly  endured  a  trial  very  common 
among  seeking  souls.  Here  is  a  woman  who  conquered  Christ ;  let  ns  go  by  her  rule 
and  we  will  conquer  Christ  too  by  His  own  grace.  I.  In  the  first  place,  observe 
that  SHE  ADMITS  THE  ACctiSATiON  BRoroHT  AGAINST  HEE.  JfBUS  Called  her  a  dog,  and 
ehe  meekly  said,  "  Truth,  Lord."  Never  play  into  the  devil's  hands  by  excusing 
einners  in  their  sins.  The  woman  in  this  case,  if  it  had  been  a  sound  way  of 
getting  comfort,  would  have  argued,  "  No,  Lord,  I  am  not  a  dog ;  I  may  not  be  all 
I  ought  to  be,  but  I  am  not  a  dog  at  any  rate ;  I  am  a  human  being.  Thou  speakeet 
too  sharply;  good  Master,  do  not  be  unjust,"  Inntead  of  that  she  admits  the 
whole.  This  showed  that  she  was  in  a  right  state  of  mind,  since  she  admitted  in 
ita  blackest,  heaviest  meaning  whatever  the  Saviour  might  choose  to  say  against 
hei.    By  night,  the  glow-worm  is  bright  like  a  star,  and  rotten  touchwood  glisteni 


ctus.  XV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  829 


like  molten  gold ;  by  the  light  of  day  the  glow-worm  is  a  miserable  inpect,  and  the 
rotten  wood  is  decay,  and  nothing  more.  So  with  us ;  until  the  light  comes  into  ns 
we  count  ourselves  good,  but  when  heaven's  hght  shines  our  heart  is  discovered  to 
be  rottenness,  corruption,  and  decay.  Do  not  whisper  in  the  mourner's  ear  that  it 
18  not  60,  and  do  not  delude  yourself  into  the  belief  that  it  is  not  so.  IL  But 
notice,  in  the  second  place,  she  adheres  to  Christ  notwithstanding.  Did  j  ou 
notice  the  force  of  what  she  said  ?  "  Truth,  Lord,  yet  the  dogs  eat  the  cruiabs  that 
faUfrom" — where?  "  From  their  Master's  table."  III.  Furthermore,  the  woman's 
great  master  weapon,  tlie  needle  gun  which  she  nsed  in  her  battle,  was  this,  bhk 

HAD  LEARNED  THE  ART  OF  GETTING  COMFORT   OUT    OF    HER    MISERIES,      JcSUS  Called    hci 

B  dog.     "  Yes,"  said  she,  "  but  then  dogs  get  the  crumbs."     She  could  see  a  silver 
lining  to  the  black  cloud.     If  I  deserved  anything  there  would  be  the  less  room  for 
mercy,  for  something  would  be  due  to  me  as  a  matter  of  justice,  but  as  I  am  a  sheer 
mass  of  uudeservingness,  there  is  room  for  the  Lord  to  reveal  the  aboundings  of 
His  grace.    There  is  no  room  for  a  man  to  be  generous  amongst  yonder  splendid 
mansions  in  'Belgravia.     Suppose  a  man  had  thousands  of  pounds  in  his  pocket, 
and  desired  to  give  it  away  in  charity,  he  would  be  terribly  hampered  amid  princely 
palaces.    If  he  were  to  knock  at  the  doors  of  those  great  houses,  and  say  he  wanted 
an  opportunity  of  being  charitable,  powdered  footmen  would  slam  the  door  in  his 
face,  and  tell  him  to  be  gone  with  his  impudence.  But  come  along  with  me  ;  let  us 
wander  down  the  mews,  all  among  the  dunghills,  and  get  away  into  back  alleys, 
where  crowds  of  ragged  children  are  playing  amid  filth  and  squalor,  where  aU  the 
people  are  miserably  poor,  and  where  cholera  is  festering.     Now,  sir,  down  with 
your  money-bags ;  here  is  plenty  of  room  for  your  charity ;  now  you  may  put  both 
your  hands  into  your  pocket,  and  not  fear  that  anybody  will  refuse  you.    You  may 
Bpend  your  money  right  and  left  now  with  ease  and  satisfaction.     When  the  God 
of  mercy  comes  down  to  distribute  mercy,  He  caunot  give  it  to  those  who  do  not 
want  it ;  but  you  need  forgiveness,  for  you  are  full  of  sin,  and  you  are  just  the 
person  likely  to  receive  it.     "  Ah  !  "  saith  one,  "  I  am  so  sick  at  heart ;  I  cannot 
believe,  I  cannot  pray."    If  I  saw  the  doctor's  brougham  driving  along  at  a  great 
rate  through  the  streets,  I  should  be  sure  that  he  was  not  coming  to  my  house,  for 
I  do  not  require  him  ;  but  it  I  had  to  guess  where  he  was  going,  I  should  conclude 
that  he  was  hastening  to  some  sick  or  djing  person.     The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Phy- 
sician of  souls.     Do  try  now,  thus  to  find  hope  in  the  very  hopelessness  of  thy 
condition,  in  whatever  aspect  that  hopelessness  may  come  to  thee.    The  Bible  says 
that  thou  art  dead  in  sin,  conclude  then  that  there  is  space  for  Jesus  to  come,  since 
He  is  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.     Your  ruin  is  your  argument  for  mercy  ;  your 
poverty  is  your  plea  for  heavenly  alms  ;  and  your  need  is  your  motive  for  heavenly 
goodness.     Go  as  you  are,  and  let  your  miseries  plead  for  you.     IV.  Let  me,  in  the 
fourth  place,  notice  the  way  in  which  the  woman  gained  comfort.     She  thought 
GREAT  THOUGHTS  OF  Christ.     It  was  a  vcTy  great  thing  to  her — but  she  had  a  high 
esteem  of  Christ.     She  said,  •'  It  is  nothing  to  Him — it  is  but  a  crumb  for  Christ 
to  give."    V.  And  so  you  see,  in  the  last  place,  she  won  the  victory.     She  had, 
first  of  all,  overcome  herself.     She  had  conquered  in  another  fight  before  she 
wrestled    with   the   Saviour — and   that  with   her  own    soul.     {C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
The  little  dogs  : — I.  The  mouth  of  faith  can  never  be  closed.     1.  It  cannot  be 
closed  on  account  of  the  closed  ear  and  mouth  of  Christ.     2.  Not  by  the  conduct 
of  the  disciples.     3.  Not  by  exclusive  doctrine  which  appeared  to  confine  the 
blessing  to  a  favoured  few.     4.  Not  by  a  sense  of  admitted  unworthiness.     5.  Not 
by  the  darkest  and  most  depressing  influences.     II.  Faith  never  disputes  with 
THE  Lord.   1.  Faith  assents  to  all  the  Lord  says — "  Truth,  Lord."    2.  It  worships. 
8.  She  did  not  suggest  that  any  alteration  should  be  madw  for  her.     III.  Faith 
ABQUEB.     1.  She  argued  from  her  hopeful  poeition — "I  am  a  dog,  but  Thou  haet 
come  all  the  way  to  Sidon, — I  am  under  Thy  table."    2.  Her  next  plea  was  her 
encouraging  relationship — "  Master's  table,"   3,  She  pleads  her  association  with 
the  children.     4.  She  pleads  the  abundance  of  the  provision.     5.  She  looked  at 
things  from  Christ's  point  of  view.     IV.  Faith  wins  her  suit,        1,  Her  faith 
won   a  commendation   for  itself,     2.  She  gained  her  desire.     This  woman  is  a 
lesson  to  all  who  imagine  themselves  outside  the  pale  of  salvation;  an  example  to 
all  whose  efforts  after  salvation  have  been  apparently  repulsed  ;  a  lesson  to  every 
intercessor.      (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        Our  Lord  Imd  a  very  quick  eye  for  spying 
faith : — If  the  jewel  was  Ijing  in  the  mire  His  eye  caught  its  glitter,  if  there  was  a 
choice  ear  of  wheat  among  the  thorns  He  failed  not  to  perceive  it.     Faith  has  a 
■trong  attraction  for  the  Lord  Jesus ;   at  the  sight  of  it  "  the  king  is  held  in  th« 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOIi.  [chaf.  t%> 

galleries  "and  cries  "  thon  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  one  of  thine  eyes,  with 
one  chain  of  thy  neck."  The  Lord  Jesus  was  charmed  with  the  fair  jewel  of  this 
woman's  faith,  and  watching  it  and  delighting  in  it  He  resolved  to  turn  it  round 
and  set  it  in  other  li>'hts,  that  the  various  facets  of  this  priceless  diamond  might 
each  one  flash  its  brilliance  and  delight  His  soul.  Therefore  He  tried  her  faitn  oy 
His  silence,  and  by  His  discouraging  replies  that  He  might  see  its  stiengih  ;  but 
He  was  all  the  while  delighting  in  it,  and  secretly  sustaining  it,  and  when  He  had 
sufficiently  tried  it.  He  brought  it  forth  as  gold,  and  set  His  own  royal  mark  upon  it 
in  these  memorable  words,  "0  woman,  great  is  thy  faith ;  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou 
wilt."  (Ibid).  The  elemenU  of  prevailing  prayer : — I.  Sincerity.  2.  Humility. 
8.  Importunity.  4.  Faith.  (J.  B.  Jeter,  D.D.)  The  greatness  of  a  woman't 
faith : — 1.  It  was  exercised  by  a  woman.  2.  It  was  a  mother's  faith.  3.  It  had 
an  aim.  4.  It  disregarded  apparent  partiality.  5.  It  was  not  discouraged  by 
apparent  delay.  6.  It  was  devoid  of  selfishness.  7.  It  gathered  strength  from 
its   exercise.       8.  It   won.         {B.  J.  Hoad!-')/).  The    trial   and    triumph   of 

faith  : — The  parts  of  the  miracle  are — I.  The  place  where  it  was  wrought. 
II.  The  parties  on  whom.  III.  The  impclsivk  caosb.  IV.  The  miracle 
itself,  wrought  by  the  woman's  faith  :  in  wiiich  we  have — 1.  Christ's  heighten- 
ing of  her  faith.  2.  The  granting  of  her  desire.  3.  The  measure  of  Christ's 
bounty — "  As  thou  wilt."  4.  The  healing  of  her  daughter.  {S.  Rutherford.) 
"She  crieth  after  tis  "  .• — 1.  Christ's  love  is  liberal,  but  yet  it  must  be  sued.  2.  Christ's 
love  is  wise.  He  holdeth  ns  knocking  till  our  desire  be  love-sick  for  Him.  3.  His 
love  must  not  only  lead  the  heart,  but  also  draw.  Violence  in  love  is  most  taking. 
Christ  looking  beyond  His  temporary  limits : — Christ  doth  but  draw  aside  a  lap  of 
the  curtain  of  separation,  and  look  through  to  one  beheving  heathen :  the  King 
openeth  one  little  window,  and  holdeth  out  His  face,  in  one  glimpse,  to  the  woman 
of  Canaan.  (Ibid.)  Grace  working  on  unpromising  material: — Christ,  then, 
can  make  and  frame  a  fair  heaven  out  of  an  ugly  hell,  and  out  of  the  knottiest 
timber  He  can  make  vessels  of  mercy,  for  service  in  the  high  palace  of  gloiy.  (Ibid.) 
Prayer  strengthened  by  adversity : — Also,  the  prayers  of  the  saints  in  prosperity 
are  but  summer  prayers,  slow,  lazy,  and  alas  !  too  formal.  In  trouble,  they  rain 
out  prayers,  or  cast  them  out  in  co-nataral  violence,  as  a  fountain  doth  cast  avA 
waters.  (Ilnd.)  Determination  in  prayer : — Grace,  grace  now  is  the  only  oil 
to  our  wheels.  Christ  hath  taken  the  castle,  both  in-works  and  out-works,  when 
He  hath  taken  the  will,  the  proudest  enemy  that  Christ  hath  out  of  hell.  {Ibid.) 
A  right  knowledge  of  satanic  torments  will  lead  to  Christ  for  relief: — It  were  good 
we  knew  our  own  misery  :  the  man  resolveth  a  prisoner  has  a  sweet  life,  who 
loveth  his  own  chains,  because  made  of  gold,  and  hateth  them  not  because  chaing  ; 
and  falleth  to  paint  the  walls  of  his  dungeon,  and  to  put  up  hangings  in  hia 
prison,  and  will  but  over-gild  with  gold  his  iron  fetters.  Oh  !  are  we  not  in  love 
with  our  own  dungeon  of  sin  ?  And  do  we  not  bear  a  kind  love  to  our  father,  the 
devil  ?  We  briug  in  pro^^8ion  for  the  flesh,  and  nourish  the  old  man,  as  old  aa 
since  Adam  first  sinned.  Alas  1  we  never  saw  our  father  in  the  face :  we  love  the 
devil,  as  the  devil  fallen  in  sin  ;  but  we  see  him  not  as  a  devil,  but  only 
under  the  embroideries  of  golden  and  silken  temptations ;  we  sow  to  the  flesh ;  we 
bring  in  our  crop  to  the  devil,  but  we  know  not  our  landlord;  and  because  Sonse 
and  flesh  are  nearer  to  us  than  God,  we  desire  more  the  liberties  of  state,  free 
commerce,  and  peace  with  the  king,  than  Christ's  liberties,  the  power  and  purity 
of  the  gospel,  that  we  may  negotiate  with  Heaven  and  have  peace  with  God.  {Ibid.) 
Good  to  be  near  Christ : — The  other  thing  ob.-ervable  is,  that  it  is  good  to  be  near 
the  place  where  Christ  is.  It  was  an  advantage,  that  the  woman  dwelt  upon  the 
borders  of  the  land  where  Christ  was.  It  is  good  for  the  poor  to  be  a  neigh- 
bour beside  the  rich  ;  and  for  the  thirsty  to  take  up  house,  and  dwell  at  the  foun- 
tain ;  and  for  the  sick  to  border  with  the  physician.  Oh  I  love  the  ground  that 
Christ  wftlketh  on.  To  be  born  in  Sion  is  an  honour,  "  Because  there  the 
Lord  dwelleth  "  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  6.)  It  is  a  blessing  to  hear  and  see  Christ  (Matt, 
xiii.  16).  Christ  knoweth  them  well  whom  He  chooselh  :  grace  is  a  rare  piece 
of  the  choice  and  the  flower  of  the  love  of  heaven  :  there  be  many  common  stones ; 
not  many  pearls,  not  many  diamonds  and  sapphires.  (Ibid.)  Christ  htarf 
prayer  even  if  He  does  not  answer: — It  is  said.  He  answered  her  not  a  word  :  but  it 
IS  not  said.  He  heard  not  one  word  :  these  two  differ  much.  Christ  often 
heareth  when  He  doth  not  answer ;  His  not  answering  is  an  answer,  and  speak* 
thus.  Pray  on,  go  on,  and  cry  ;  for  the  Lord  holdeth  His  door  fast  bolted,  not  to 
keep  out,  bat  that  you  may  knock  and  knock.    Prayer  is  to  God,  worship;  tc 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  iSl 

ns,  often,  it  is  but  a  servant  npon  mere  necessity  sent  on  a  business.  The  father 
will  cause  his  child  say  over  agaio,  what  he  once  heard  him  say,  because  he  de- 
lightelh   to    hear    him   speak.      (Ibid.)  Faith    strengthened    by    importunate 

prayer: — Wrestling  addeth  strength  to  arms  and  body;  praying,  and  praying 
again,  strengtheneth  faith ;  customary  running  lengtheneth  the  breath.  (IbidA 
Tears  have  a  tongue  (Psalm  vi.  8) : — Tears  have  a  tongue,  and  grammar,  and 
language,  that  our  Father  knoweth.  Babes  have  no  prayers  for  the  breast,  but 
weeping;  the  mother  can  read  hunger  in  weeping.  (Ibid.)  Prayer  deeper  than 
tcordti  (2  Peter  iii.  10) : — Love  and  longing  for  Christ  have  eagle's  wings ;  and  love 
flieth,  when  words  do  but  creep  as  a  snail.  Fervotir  in  prayer : — Though 
God  hear  prayer,  cnly  as  prayer  offered  in  Christ,  not  because  very  fervent ;  yet 
fervour  is  a  heavenly  ingredient  in  prayer.  An  arrow  drawn  with  full  strength 
hath  a  speedier  issue ;  therefore,  the  prayers  of  the  saints  are  expressed  by 
crying  in  Scripture  (Psa.  xxii,  2).  {Ibid).  Utilizing  rich  npiritual  influences : — 
It  shall  be  useful  then  for  the  saints,  when  the  Spirit  cometh  in  his  stirrings 
and  impetuous  acts,  to  co-operate  with  him,  and  to  answer  his  wind-blowing. 
It  is  good  to  hoist  up  sail,  and  make  out,  when  a  fair  wind  and  a  strong  tide 
calleth.  Sometimes  grace  maketh  the  heart  as  a  hot  iron ;  it  is  good  then  to 
Bmite  with  the  hammer.  When  your  spirit  is  docile,  and  there  cometh  a  gale 
of  Christ's  sweet  west  wind,  and  rusheth  in  with  a  warmness  of  heart,  in  a 
praying  disposition  to  retire  to  a  corner,  and  pour  out  the  soul  before  the  Lord ; 
as  we  are  to  take  Christ  at  His  word,  so  are  we  to  take  Christ's  Spirit  at  His  work. 
{Ibid.)  "  My  daur/hter:  " — Children.  1.  So  to  hold,  as  we  are  wiilingly  to  let  go ; 
love  them  as  creatures  only:  often  the  child  is  the  mother's  daughter,  and  the 
mother's  god.  2.  We  are  to  strive  to  have  them  freed  from  under  the  power  of  the 
devil,  as  this  woman  doth  ;  for  they  come  into  the  world  fuel  for  hell.  Parents 
make  more  account,  all  their  life,  to  make  gold,  rather  than  grace,  their  children's 
patrimony  and  legacy.  3.  Look  at  them  as  May  flowers ;  as  bom  to  come  and 
appear  for  a  space  in  the  element  of  death :  so  they  sport,  laugh,  run,  eat,  drink,  and 
glisten  like  comets  in  the  air,  or  flying  meteors  in  the  sphere  of  the  clouds,  and 
often  go  down  to  the  grave  before  their  parents.  4.  Beware  of  selfishness,  for 
children  are  ourself,  and  their  sins  white  and  innocent  sins  to  us.  Eli  honoured 
his  sons  more  than  God  and  God  put  a  mark  of  wrath  on  his  house.  (Ibid.) 
Th^  mutual  attractions  between  Jesus  and  the  soul: — These  drawings,  brethren,  o* 
Jesus  and  the  souls  of  men  bo  mutual,  so  strong,  how  wonderful  are  they  1  Men  are 
drawn  to  Him  not  because  preachers  beguile  them,  not  because  one  generation  mis- 
leads another,  they  are  drawn  by  lawa  of  gravitation  ;  and  Kepler's  laws  hold  good 
of  souls  as  well  as  they  do  of  planets.  Christ  simply  attracts  in  the  proportion  to 
His  mass,  and  it  is  His  massive  being,  His  wealth  of  help,  His  power  of  pity,  Hia 
infinite  wisdom,  His  store  of  tenderness,  that  has  in  all  apes,  and  will  in  all  ages, 
attract  the  hearts  of  men.  And  the  hearts  of  men  attract  Him.  {R..  Glover.)  AU 
things  posdble  to  Jaith: — As  we  '*  will,"  so  faith  obtains  the  good.  "It  can  be 
done  I  "says  faith.  "It  shall  be  done  1"  says  the  will.  And  it  is  done  I  The 
whole  history  of  the  world,  in  all  its  divisions,  may  be  quoted  in  proof  of  this  axiom. 
Space  can  be  travelled  by  steam,  says  faith.  Man  has  a  will  tbat  it  should  be  so. 
Space  says,  "  Be  it  unto  thee  as  thou  wiit ;  "  and  it  is  doue.  The  Atlantic  Ocean 
can  be  crossed  in  seven  days,  says  faith.  The  will  of  man  says,  It  shall  be  so ;  and 
it  is  BO.  Thought  can  be  conveyed  as  quickly  a  thousand  miles  as  one.  It  is  willed 
to  be  BO,  and  it  is  done.  The  Alps  can  be  tunnelled  for  a  railway,  says  faith.  I 
will  it  to  be  done,  says  the  engineer  ;  and  the  Alps  say,  "  Be  it  unto  thee  even  as 
thou  wilt."  Thus  all  things  apparently  impossible  to  reason  become  palpable  facts 
to  faith  in  its  persistent  exercises.  (J.  Bate.)  Christ  cannot  be  hid : — 1.  In  His 
cause  and  truth.  2.  Behevers  cannot  hide  a  good  or  bad  e^ndition  in  the  soul.  3. 
The  joy  of  Christ's  presence  car-ot  be  hid.  4.  Grace  iL  a  sincere  professor,  and 
Christ,  cannot  be  hid.  (S.  Butherford.)  "Hearing  of  Him."  What  had  she 
heard?  I.  That  Jesus  was  the  Sun  of  God,  the  Messiah  of  Isiael,  and  could  and 
was  willing  to  heal.  1.  Hearing  of  Christ  drew  her  to  Him.  2.  It  is  good  to  border 
with  Christ,  and  to  be  near  hand  to  Him.  II.  None  can  come  to  Christ  except  they 
hear  a  good  report  of  Him.  IH.  Many  open  their  ears  to  Chri,jt,  but  they  hear  not ; 
they  want  a  spiritual  faculty  of  observing.     IV.  Many  put  Christ  in  an  ear  without 

a  bottom,  as  leaking  and  running  out  vessels.      (Ibid.)         H^r prayer: 1    ^Tia 

manner  of  it — "  She  cried."  2.  The  party  to  whom  she  prayeth— "  O  Lord,  Thoa 
Bon  of  David."  3.  The  petition — "  Have  mercy  upon  me."  4.  The  reason— "For 
my  daughter,"  (fco.     (lUd.)        The  woman  of  Canaan  •— 1.  The  naturahiess  ol 


832  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

faith  (trust).  2.  The  connection  of  faith  and  works.  Sha  believed  (trusted)  to 
have  help  from  Christ,  and  this  led  her  to  use  the  means.  So  faith  in  everything 
must  move  to  works  to  realize  its  end.  3.  The  wisdom  of  using  an  opportunity. 
Jesus  went  into  the  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  The  woman  knew  of  it,  and  she  used 
the  opportunity  for  the  good  of  her  daughter.  4.  The  force  of  sympathy.  As  a 
mother,  she  felt  for  her  daughter.  Hence  her  action.  If  we  feel  for  others — sinnerg, 
heathens,  afflicted  ones,  &c., — we  are  moved  to  help  them,  or  seek  help  for  them, 
according  to  our  feelings.  5.  The  dignity  of  humiliation.  How  grand  this  woman 
appears  as  she  says,  •'  Truth,  Lord,"  <fec.  6.  The  power  of  persibtence  in  a  good 
cause  and  with  a  good  object.  The  woman  would  have  no  denial.  7.  The  nature 
of  fervent,  powerful  prayer.  She  came  to  Him  and  worshipped  Him,  and  said, 
"  Lord,  help  me."  8.  The  victory  of  faith—"  O  woman,"  &e.  It  was  no  grief, but 
a  joy,  to  Christ  to  yield  the  victory  to  this  woman's  faith.    (<7.  Bate.) 

Vera.  82,  39. — And  jMns  Bald  unto  them.  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ? The 

miracle  of  the  haves  and  jiahes ;  or,  continuity  and  economy  : — Want  in  men  moves 
Christ's  whole  nature.  His  help  leaves  no  injury.  Here  generosity  and  frugality 
meet.  Observe  in  this  miracle  two  principles.  I.  Continuitt.  That  which  ia 
comes  out  of  that  which  has  been.  II.  Frugality.  There  is  no  waste.  1.  These 
two  principles  are  exhibited  in  nature.  Mere  spontaneity  nature  disowns.  The 
field  says,  "  Give  me  seed,  and  I  will  give  you  back  harvest."  Nature  disowns  waste, 
all  things  are  utilized.  2.  These  principles  are  found  in  history.  God  does  not 
fling  loaves  from  the  sky  ;  they  are  growths.  Not  one  life  is  lost.  3.  These  princi- 
ples are  seen  in  the  moral  world.  There  is  no  dropping  of  truths  than  of  great  men 
from  heaven.  Hence  out  of  the  few  loaves  grow  the  feast.  He  who  holds  in  sin- 
cerity a  little  truth  has  the  promise  of  all.  In  applying  the  truth  of  the  text  we 
learn— 1.  To  hope.  The  less  will  become  more.  2.  The  effect  of  this  law  upon 
character.  Your  future  must  come  out  of  your  past.  3.  A  lesson  in  helping  others. 
We  help  by  bringing  the  better  out  of  some  good  in  men.  How  many  loaves  have  you  ? 
One  has  a  feeble  resolution  ;  that,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  may  be  sufficient. 
{P.  Brooks,  D.D.)  The  miraculom  feeding  of  four  thousand : — I.  The  featubbb 
BY  WHICH  THIS  MIRACLE  WAS  nisTiNGUisHED.  1.  It  was  a  miracle  of  mercy.  2.  Its 
pubHcity  is  another  feature  worthy  of  notice.  3.  The  scale  on  which  it  was  wrought 
was  most  extensive.  4.  It  was  the  result  of  no  previous  arrangement,  but  was  done 
in  order  to  meet  a  pressing  emergency.  5.  The  consciousness  He  evinced  that  Hia 
resources  were  adequate  to  the  occasion.  II.  The  IiEssons  which  this  miracle 
ENFORCES.  1.  Reliance.  2.  Gratitude.  3.  Charity.  4.  Economy.  {Expository 
Outlines.)  The  necessities  of  man  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  Christ : — I.   That 

CIRCUMSTANCES     ARE     CONTINUALLY     REMINDING    MAN    OF     HIS     NECESSITOUS    CONDITION. 

Man  can  go  but  a  short  way  into  Ufe's  wilderness  without  feeling  that  his  is  a 
craving  nature.     Life-long  dependence  should  teach  hfe-long  humility.     II.  Thai 

man's   NECESSITOUS    CONDITION     IB     FULLY     MET     BY    ChRIST'S    SUFFICIENCY.        Christ 

knows  the  necessities  of  our  human  constitution.  In  Christ  dwells  all  fulness. 
Man   needs   pardon,  purity,  freedom,  peace.      III.    That  if  man  will  not  avail 

HIMSELF   OF   ChRIST's   SUFFICIENCY   HE   WILL   BE   CHARGEABLE   WITH   THE   BUtN   OF   HIS 

OWN  SOUL.  These  men  did  not  refuse  to  eat  because  they  could  not  undeistand 
the  mystery  by  whiab  the  bread  was  multiplied.  Refuse  to  eat  and  they  die. 
(/.  Farkcr.)  ' 


CHAPTER  XVL 


Vbbs.  1-5.  0  y«  hypocrites,  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  the  »lsy.—8{yn$  cf  tk$ 

times : — The  proper  observing  of  these  signs.  They  are  heavenly,  and  therefore 
must  be  seen  in  a  heart  which  is  seeking  those  things  which  are  spiritual.  1.  The 
Bign  of  the  day.  Another  day  is  gone.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  nearer.  Am  I 
better  prepared  for  it  7  2.  The  sign  of  the  cross  of  his  Saviour.  Has  he  crucified 
every  evil  affection  T  8.  The  sign  of  the  example  of  his  Saviour.  4.  The  signs  of 
the  times  in  which  he  is  living,  and  he  considers  how  they  are  the  harbingers  of  the 
last  day,  and  how  he  must  conduct  himself  accordingly.  6.  And  the  question  with 
the  man  of  God  is,  what  do  these  signs  foreshadow?  Do  they  prove  that  he  has 
Advanced  in  the  Christian  course  1    Then  the  heavfins  are  red  with  joyful  signs  tot 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  989 

the  morrow.  6.  The  redness  of  the  evening  sky  may  deceive,  as  we  all  know  ;  these 
ngns  never  can.  7.  Whatsoever  the  signs  of  the  sky  foreshadow,  we  cannot  alter ; 
bat  we  may  alter  that  which  is  threatened  by  the  signs  of  the  spiritual  world.  8. 
The  true  Christian  will  observe  the  signs  of  the  morning  as  he  rises  as  it  were  from 
death  unto  Ufe  again,  and  he  will  prepare  himself  for  the  coming  day.  Is  it 
red  and  lowering  with  the  coming  storms  of  trial  and  temptation  ;  then  he  will  pre- 
pare to  meet  it.  9.  The  Christian  does  not  desire  any  more  signs  from  heaven. 
The  more  watchful  he  is  the  more  he  finds  that  he  has  already,  and  the  more 
evident  and  certain  they  are.  The  very  last  has  been  given,  the  Son  of  man  bae 
risen  from  the  dead.  10.  Scripture  is  full  of  exhortations  to  Christian  watchful- 
ness 11.  The  rebuke  which  our  Lord  administered  to  these  worldly-minded  sign- 
Betkers — "  And  He  left  them  and  departed."  {E.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  Signs: — The 
things  that  happen  to  nations  and  men  are,  in  the  most  proper  sense  of  the  word, 
"signs  from  heaven  "  of  the  Divine  government  and  its  counsel.  I.  Pebbonal  sionb 
for  every  man's  instruction,  teach  every  man,  at  his  peril,  not  to  despise  prophesy- 
inga.  We  read  in  the  diUgenoe,  the  moral  goodness  of  the  boy,  the  nature  and 
history  of  the  coming  man.  We  say,  "  It  will  be  fair  weather."  These  are  signs 
from  heaven.  In  familiar,  when  the  evening  glows  the  morning  is  fine;  where 
there  is  affection  and  piety,  we  prognosticate  '*  fine  weather."  You  are  a  sign  from 
heaven,  if  unforgiven,  a  sign  of  coming  storm.  II.  Popdiab  signs  are  always  of 
number  and  force  sufficient  to  give  us  an  understanding  of  the  character  of  the 
future.  The  life,  the  preaching  of  the  Baptist,  was  a  sign  of  approaching  changfe. 
The  character  of  our  Lord  was  a  sign  of  God's  care  of  His  children.  (B,  Kent.) 
Unfaimesi  in  the  treatment  of  relic/ion : — It  is  a  humiliating  fact  that  thoughtful 
men  deal  with  the  great  facts  of  religion  after  a  fashion  which,  in  any  other  depart- 
ment of  human  inquiry,  would  be  recognized  as  illogical  or  absurd.  I.  Take  an 
example  from  recorded  history.  Men  treat  Jeaus  Christ  with  a  scepticism  they 
do  not  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  II.  Take  science.  Christianity  is  a  science  as  truly 
as  chemistry.  Its  fundamental  facts  are  determined  by  thousands  of  experiments. 
But  how  many  accept  the  testimony  of  scientists  and  reject  that  of  religionists. 
True  religion  has  its  difficulties,  but  has  science  any  fewer  T  III.  As  regards  the 
Bible.  In  temporal  matters  men  investigate  that  which  relates  to  their  safety ; 
but  when  eternal  safety  is  at  stake  men  do  not  give  time  to  its  consideration.  IV. 
As  with  God's  Book,  eo  with  God's  witnesses.  In  a  court  of  justice  men  accept 
evidence  :  but  fight  against  it  in  religion.  Men  do  not  reject  bank  notes  because 
some  are  forged ;  but  they  reject  Christianity  because  of  one  false  professor.  7. 
In  nothing  but  pure  mathematics  do  men  insist  upon  mathematical  certamity. 
The  whole  conduct  of  life  is  predicated  upon  i  preponderance  of  pbobabiliteb. 
Upon  this  principle  they  plough  and  plant,  buy  and  build,  work  and  wait.  Is  it 
probable  that  all  the  generous  and  noble  fruits  are  based  on  superstition.  VL 
When  of  two  ways  of  proceddee  one  is  known  to  be  absolutely  safe  ahd  ths 

OTHER    fraught   WITH    PERILS,    ALL    MEN    CHOOSE    THE    PATH    OF    SAFETY.       It  iS  Bkfe    tO 

be  a  Christian ;  yet  safety  is  rejycted.  Let  a  man  be  honest,  do  himself  jastioe, 
and  give  Christianity  fair  play.  (P.  S.  Henson,  D.D.)  The  demand  of  unbelief : — 
This  demand  of  the  Jews  was — I.  Prompted  by  wrong  motives — "  and  tempting." 
This  was  a  two-edged  temptation.  1.  Suppose  He  should  not  give  the  sign,  either 
by  refusal  or  failure.  Then  they  hoped  to  destroy  His  influence  and  to  impress  the 
people  that  he  was  a  false  Messiah.  2.  But  if  He  worked  a  miracle  He  would  have 
yielded  to  their  low  ideas  of  His  Messiahship  and  of  its  evidence.  The  scribes  and 
Pharisees  were  bitter  enemies  of  each  other,  yet  combined  to  overthrow  Christ : 
and  how  large  a  part  of  modern  religious  investigation  is  due  to  the  enmity  and  sel 
fishness  of  human  hearts.  Discussion  is  frequently  designed  not  to  fix  but  to  nnsettle 
faith.  There  are  men  who  talk  plausibly  and  with  seeming  sincerity  about  these 
matters,  who  in  their  hearts  would  be  pleased  at  the  destruction  of  Christianity. 
Again,  their  are  men  who  use  gospel  themes  as  the  theatre  upon  which  to  display 
their  intellectual  power.  They  demand  evidence  neither  possible  or  reasonable. 
This  is  different  from  the  humble  inquirer  who,  walking  in  darkness,  asks  the  way 
of  light  and  life.  II.  This  demand  was  presumptuous — *'  From  heaven."  They 
limited  Christ  as  to  the  method  in  which  He  should  display  His  divinity.  There 
are  people  who  determine  in  their  own  minds  the  way  in  which  God  shall  reveal 
Himself ;  the  truth  must  flow  through  channels  they  have  dog,  or  they  will  reject 
it.  III.  This  demand  was  due  to  their  blind  unbelief.  They  refused  tc 
recognize  the  force  of  the  evidence  already  given  them  (Matt,  xi  6).  Men  inveigh 
•gainst  the  Bible  who  never  read  it.     They  cry  out  for  water  and  refuse  to  draw 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvt, 

from  the  abundant  wells  of  salvation  around  them.  IV.  This  bequest  led  to 
THEIR  DESERTION  BY  Chbist.  The  Spirit  manifested  by  these  Jews  showed  that  it  waa 
nseless  to  remain  longer  with  them.  1.  He  denied  them  fmther  manifestation  of 
Hifl  power — "  There  shall  no  sign  be  given."  2.  Clirist  withdrew  Himself  from 
them.  This  He  did  (1)  Sadly ;  (2)  Promptly  ;  (3)  Finally.  This  incident  seemo  to 
have  closed  His  ministry  in  Galilee.  {TF.  H.  Williatns.)  Ttie  signs  of  the 
times : — I.  Some  o»  the  signs  or  the  times.  Every  age  hag  its  peculiar  de- 
velopments — signs.  We  live  in  an  age  that  is  replete  with  these  moral  indica- 
tors, and  to  some  of  them  we  call  attention.  1.  The  almost  universal  diSusion 
of  knowledge  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  times.  2.  The  extent  of  its  new 
discoveries  and  inventions.  3.  The  increasing  power  and  commanding  position  oi 
the  Anglo-Saxon  race.  4.  The  decay  and  approaching  dissolution  of  heathen 
governments.  II.  What  do  these  signs  indicate  ?  These  signs  clearly  indicate 
the  rapid  progress  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  III.  What  is  oub  duty  in  view  ?» 
THESE  SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES?  1.  Rightly  to  discem  them.  2.  To  seek  an  entrance 
into  the  kingdom  of  Christ  without  delay,  3.  Labour  and  pray  for  its  incoming  in 
greater  power  and  glory.  (P.  M.  Brett,  D.D.)  Too  many  signs  of  the  times 
surround  us  on  every  side  to  make  it  either  riglit,  or  wise,  or  safe,  or  happy  to  p&gg 
them  by  unnoticed.  I.  Let  us  seek  to  understand  distinctly  what  is  intended 
BY  A  sign.  May  be  miraculous  or  moral.  II.  What  particularly  were  those 
BioNs  which  odb  Lobd  eebdked  the  Pharisees  and  Saduucees  fob  not  havino 
observed?  IIL  Inquire  whetheb  the  order  of  things  in  prophecy  compared 
with  the  aspect  of  oub  own  times  may  not  afford  us  some  instruction.  It  is  a 
Christian  duty  to  discern  the  signs,  to  watch  the  moral  aspect  of  the  times  in  which 
■we  hve.  We  shall  thus  learn  more  of  the  intentions  and  character  of  the  Divine 
Being.  (J.  P.  Dtmn.)  Human  and  Divine  ideas  of  revelation  : — I.  The  humak. 
From  earliest  times  men  have  demanded  a  "  sign  from  heaven."  II.  The  Divinb 
IDEA  of  a  revelation.  1.  The  atheist  says,  "  If  there  be  a  God  let  Him  manifest 
Himself."  How  silently,  but  mrtjestically,  on  earth  and  in  sky  is  God  revealing 
Himself.  2.  The  Jews  demanded  of  Jesus  a  sign.  Yet  He  wrought  "  wonders  and 
signs"  amongst  them.  3.  God  reveals  Himself  in  the  words  of  prophets  and 
evangelists.  III.  The  contrast  in  the  two  ideas  of  bevelation.  1.  Man'g 
revelation  must  be  addressed  to  his  senses,  to  his  imagination,  and  the  marvellous 

gome  fitful,  awful  display;  God  reveals  Himself  alone  to  what  is  spiritual,  i.e., 

to  what  is  deepest  in  man.  2.  God's  revelations  come  to  men's  experience.  ^Dr. 
Chase.)  The  hindrances  to  the  work  of  the  Church : — It  is  necessary  to  take  into 
account  the  character  of  the  mind  to  which  it  has  to  address  itself  ag  well  as  the 
nature  of  the  truth  which  it  has  to  speak.  How  rapid  and  widespread  and  radical 
the  change  during  the  last  half-century  I  How  far  is  this  new  spirit  checking  the 
progress  of  truth,  and  in  what  way  can  we  deal  with  it  ?  I.  Some  of  the  intel- 
lectual tendencies  WORKING  AGAINST  FAITH.  The  science  of  the  day.  The  restless 
spirit  which  it  begets.  Uncertainty  respecting  the  great  truths  of  Christianity  is 
regarded  as  a  justification  for  neutrality.  The  influence  of  this  widespread  ten- 
dency is  distinctly  hostile  to  the  acceptance  of  the  gospel  and  the  culture  of  vital 
godliness.  Scepticism  is  in  the  air,  and  there  are  those  who  must  be  in  the  fashion 
of  the  hour.  Our  congregations  are  honeycombed  with  this  sentiment.  God 
forbid  that  we  should  despair  or  even  look  doubtfully  to  the  future  1  But  it  behoves 
us  to  take  care  that  our  work  be  wisely  and  well  and  truly  done.  The  gospel  hat 
still  a  power  wliich  will  assert  itself.  II.  Some  hints  as  to  the  mode  in  which 
Christians  should  meet  these  difficulties.  1.  Not  for  us  to  sit  down  and  mourn 
over  evils,  as  though  they  were  irreparable.  2.  A  policy  of  suppression  never  hae 
succeeded,  least  of  all  is  it  likely  to  succeed  in  an  age  thrilled  with  all  the  energy 
of  life,  and  strong  to  vehemence  in  the  assertion  of  its  own  independence  and 
freedom.  It  ought  not  to  succeed.  Protestants,  of  all  men,  can  have  no  satis- 
faction in  the  contemplation  of  what  would  be  a  mere  make-belief  for  a  living  faith. 
Liberty  must  have  its  perfect  work,  and  a  true  faith  will  have  no  fear  as  to  the 
consequences.  3.  The  true  mode  of  dealing  with  the  sceptical  mind  of  the  time  is 
to  dwell  on  points  of  agreement  rather  than  of  difference.  Science  has  not  yet 
stilled  the  longing  of  the  heart  for  God,  and  it  has  been  unable  to  meet  it.  (J.  O. 
Bogers,  B.A.)  The  signs  of  the  times  .-—The  most  striking  peculiarities  of  the 
present  age.  I.  The  great  increase  of  mental  exertion.  Some  periods  have 
been  marked  by  intellectual  inaction  and  even  retrogression.  Such  was  that  period 
in  which,  after  the  decline  of  the  Platonic  philosophy,  Aristotle  reigned  in  all  the 
Bchooli  and  was  idolized  as  "the  secretary  of  nature  who  dipt  his  pen  in  intellect.'^ 


•HAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  3S5 

Since  that  era  the  greatest  advances  have  been  made  in  every  department  of 
science,  more  especially  during  the  last  century,  &c.     II.  An  increased  attention 

10  THE  IN8TEUCTI0N  OF  THB  LOWER  CLASSES.  III.  ThE  IMFBOVED  STATE  OF  PBEACHING, 
AND  THE   MORE  ABUNDANT  SUPPLT  OF  THE    POBLIO  MEANS   OF  GRACE.       In   OUT  Own   and 

other  countries.     IV.  The  advancement  of  the  Bible  as  the  great  and  only 

««TANDAia)  OF  ChEISTIAN  FAITH  AND  PRACTICE.  V.  ThB  INCEKASINQ  HARMONy  WHICH 
HtJSVAILS  AMONG  THE   GENUINE   DISCIPLES    OF    JeSTJS  ChRIST.       VI.    ThB    EXTENSION    OF 

CIVIL  AND  BELiGiODS  LiBERTT.     (Robert  Hall,  A.M.)        The  signs  of  tJie  times  : — I. 

The  NATURE  OF  THESE  SIGNS  WHICH  faHOULD  BE  REGARDED  AS  APPOINTED  INDICATIONS 
OF  THE  FUTURE.      II.  ThE  SIGNS  PRESENTED  BT  THB  PRESENT  TIMES,  WITH  THE  DUTIES 

THEV  SUGGEST.  1.  A  Spirit  of  inquiry.  2.  A  spirit  of  active  enterprize.  3.  Let  na 
beware  lest  in  the  excitement  of  passing  events  our  attention  should  be  diverted 
from  our  own  spiritual  prosperity.  (./.  West.)  The  wicked's  craft  to  ensnare 
God's  people  described: — I.  The  demand  oka  sign.  1.  Observe  the  efficients  or 
causes  of  it — Pharisees  and  Sadducees.  2.  The  end  for  which  they  did  desire  it, 
and  that  was  to  tempt  Him.  II.  Our  Savioub'b  rejection  of  this  demand.  1. 
The  reproof  He  gives  them  and  their  persons.  2.  The  ground  of  His  reproof  of 
them,  and  that  is  a  conviction  of  their  readiness  to  beheve  more  uncertain  things 
upon  less  credible  ground  than  they  would  believe  Him  to  be  the  Messiah  sent  of 
God  upon  most  certain  and  evident  grounds.  {John  Cotton.)  Fair  weather — for 
the  skij  is  red : — A  Palestinian  prognostication,  which  may  or  may  not  be  applicable 
to  other  countries.  The  Saviour,  in  referring  to  it,  does  not  intend  to  affix  to  it  a 
(Beal  of  scientific  approbation.  It  was  enough  for  His  purpose  that  the  forecast 
was  accepted  by  the  weather-wise  in  Palestine,  Doubtless  it  would,  as  a  general 
rule  at  least,  be  a  true  forecast;  for  it  indicated,  we  presume,  that  in  the  contiguous 
region  of  the  atmosphere  inw  which  the  sun  on  setting  was  descending,  or  bad 
descended,  there  was  no  dense  accumulation  of  clouds  threatening  a  coming  storm 
of  rain.  If  there  had  been  such  clouds  the  sun's  golden  radiance  would  have  been 
dronk  up  and  intercepted,  and  thus  there  would  have  been  no  redness  o£  the 
evening  sky.  {J.  Morison,  D.D.)  Signs : — The  children  of  this  world  are  in 
tlisir  generation  wiser  than  the  children  of  light  1  To  all  things  that  concern  their 
temporal  interests  how  keenly  are  men  alive  1  They  will  meditate,  observe,  infer, 
»nd  act  upon  their  inferences.  The  agriculturist  notes  carefully  the  approaching 
alterations  in  the  weather;  the  politician  watches  the  current  of  popular  feehng  and 
the  moods  of  men;  the  scientific  inquirer  devotes  all  his  energies  to  the  observation 
of  facts  that  will  enable  him  to  wrest  from  nature  her  secrets ;  the  speculator  is 
constantly  on  the  outlook  for  the  first  symptoms  of  an  alteration  in  prices.  Tet 
how  often  do  these  very  same  men  decline  to  take  any  interest  in  the  highest  of  all 
subjects — the  relationship  of  God  to  man— on  the  plea  that  it  is  too  vague  and  too 
uncertain  for  practical  consideration  !  They  demand  that  this  shall  be  put  before 
them  by  some  outward  visible  proof  which  it  shall  be  impossible  to  dispute  before 
they  will  acknowledge  its  claims  upon  them.  They  are  blind  to  the  signs  which 
are  ever  around  them  and  within  them,  and  which  demand  at  least  as  much 
interest  and  inquiry  as  do  the  signs  in  the  outward  world  which  engross  their 
attention.  (F.  W.  Hutton,  M.A.)  The  signs  of  tht  times: — I.  The  difficulty  of 
satisfyiiDg  impracticable  people.  II.  The  "dangers  of  a  half-educated  sagacity. 
III.  The  demand  of  Christianity  to  be  judged  by  a  wide  induction  of  facts.  (Pulpit 
Oerms.)  Changes  in  theological  opinion  a  sign  of  tlie  times  ;  not  to  be  feared: — 
Why  did  my  multitudinous  trees  throw  off  their  leaves  last  autumn  ?  Was  their 
throwing  them  off  a  sign  that  they  were  dying  t  They  did  not  throw  off  one  single 
leaf  until  they  had  a  baby  leaf  wiapped  up  and  lying  along  the  branch.  Thoy 
threw  off  the  garments  of  last  year,  and  to-day  they  are  putting  on  the  garments 
of  this  year.  So,  with  respect  to  them,  change  was  growth,  and  preparation  for 
growth.  Why  does  the  kernel  of  wheat  die  t  Should  a  modern  sceptic,  af 'er  the 
seed  had  been  in  the  ground  for  a  few  warm  days,  go  through  the  field  set-king  for 
it,  raking  it  up,  and  finding  it  rotten  in  his  hand,  he  would  eay,  "  Don't  yon 
perceive  that  agriculture  is  all  a  myth  t  The  thing  is  dead."  But  it  must  die  if  it 
would  Uve.  The  reason  of  its  decay  is  that  its  sustenance  may  be  sucked  up  into 
Che  root  and  stem,  and  give  new  life  to  them ;  and  when  a  single  kernel  seems  to 
die,  it  is  but  a  pang  of  birth  for  a  hundred  keruLls  that  come  into  life.  Thus  thei« 
are  changes  going  on  in  the  Church.  There  are  many  things  in  it  that  must 
decay,  in  order  that  other  things  may  grow.  The  spirit  of  Christianity  is  not 
ehanging,  but  its  surroundings  will  more  or  less  change  or  be  thrown  off,  in  order 
that  it  may  unfold.    Christianity  is  hke  a  lighthouse  over  whose  glass  the  keepe* 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

has  permitted  spiders  to  spin  their  webs,  or  on  which  insects  have  gathered  until 
the  glass  is  so  dim  that  the  light,  though  it  shines  brightly  on  the  inside,  is 
Boarcely  seen  on  the  outside.  These  obstructions  must  be  scoured  off,  the  rubbish 
must  be  taken  out  of  the  way,  in  ordnr  that  the  light  may  shine  out.  There  are 
thousands  of  things  in  the  interpretations  of  religion  that  are  obscurations.  (H, 
W.  Beecher.)  Signs  from  heaven: — A  hypocritical  request.  II.  A  withering 
rebake.    III.  An  indignant  denial.     {Expository  Outlijies.) 

Vert.  6,  12.  Take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pbarlseea  and  of  the  SaA* 
dnces. — The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees: — I.  The  lbavbn  o»  thb 
Phabisebs.  The  most  numerous  and  popular  sect  among  the  Jews.  Their  corrup- 
tions may,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  be  summed  up  under  three  heads. — 1.  They 
were  rigid  predestinarians,  or  believers  in  what  modern  language  calls  philosophical 
necessity.  Take  heed  !  2.  They  rejected  the  written  Word  of  God  as  the  only  and 
BufiQcient  standard  of  reUgious  truth,  and  the  guide  of  religions  practice  ;  and  they 
observed  the  tradition  of  the  elders,  which  often  made  this  written  law  of  none 
effect.  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  the  very  same  leaven  I  3.  Their  righteousness, 
though  strict  in  its  kind,  was  merely  external ;  consisting  chiefly  in  a  multitude  of 
ceremonious  practices.  How  many  are  there  like  them  !  Beware  1  II.  The  leaven 
OF  the  Sadddcees.  Their  heresy  likewise  may  be  described  under  three  heads. — 
1.  They  denied  the  fallen  and  depraved  state  of  mankind  ;  disputed  the  doctrine  of 
hereditary  cornxption ;  and  maintained  that  the  wiQ  of  man  is,  by  nature,  and 
without  any  special  grace  of  God,  as  free  to  good  as  to  evil.  2  Tljey  not  only  re- 
jected the  traditions  of  the  elders,  but  explained  away  much  of  the  Old  Testament, 
and  thus  rendered  its  teaching  of  none  eSect.  3.  They  denied  the  existence  of 
angels  and  spirits,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  a  future  state  of  rewards  and 
punishments.  Take  heed,  and  beware  !  {J.  Bunting,  D.D.)  Erroneous  doctriiu$ 
are  like  leaven  in  the  following  respects  : — 1.  They  are,  at  first,  slight  and  unim> 
portant  in  appearance.  2.  They  are  insinuated  into  the  soul  unawares  and  silently, 
and  are  difficult  of  detection.  3.  They  act  gradually.  4.  They  act  most  certainly. 
5.  They  will  pervade  all  the  soul,  and  bring  all  the  faculties  undei  their  controL 
{A.  Barnes.)  The  influence  of  evil  doctrine  unperceived,  yet  injurious  to  our  future 
welfare: — Archbiishop  Whately  has  made  reference  to  the  remarkable  fact  that  the 
caterpillars  of  moths  and  butterflies  are  often  attacked  by  ichneumon  flies,  which 
pierce  their  skins  and  deposit  their  eggs  in  the  caterpillar's  body.  No  immediate 
result  follows,  and  no  injury  seems  to  have  been  done  until  the  period  when  the 
caterpillar  becomes  a  chrysalis.  Instead  of  a  beautiful  moth  or  butterfly  emerging 
from  the  latter,  only  the  parasitic  insects  appear.  The  hidden  butterfly  has  been 
silently  destroyed.  The  Archbishop's  suggestive  comment  is — "  May  not  a  man 
have  a  kind  of  secret  enemy  within — destroying  his  soul  without  interfering  with  his 
well-being  during  the  present  stage  of  his  existence,  and  whose  presence  may  never 
be  detected  till  the  time  arrives  when  the  last  great  change  should  take  place." 
Ttie  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  : — I.  In  this  warning,  it  will  be  observed, 
Pharisaic  and  Sadducaic  tendencies  are  identified.  Jesus  speaks  not  of  the  leavens, 
but  of  one  common  to  both  sects,  as  if  they  were  two  species  of  one  genus,  two 
branches  from  one  strm.  Superficially,  the  two  parties  were  diverse — the  one 
strict,  the  other  easy,  in  morals.  But  here  extremes  meet.  They  were  all  hostile 
to  the  Divine  kingdom.  Thus  to  be  a  Christian  it  is  not  enough  to  diSer  snper- 
fieially  from  either  Pharisees  or  Sadducees,  but  to  differ  radically  from  both.  A 
weighty  truth  not  vet  understood.  To  avoid  Pharisaic  strictness  and  superstition 
men  run  into  Sadducaic  scepticism,  both  equally  far  fiom  the  truth.  The  spirit 
of  nnbelief  which  ruled  in  Jewish  society  Jesus  described  as  leaven,  with  special 
reference  to  its  diffusiveness.  II.  Jesus  next  found  new  matter  for  annoyance  in 
the  stupidity  of  friends.  The  disciples  misunderstood  the  warning  word.  "  It  is 
because  we  have  no  bread."  Had  they  possessed  more  faith  and  spirituality  they 
would  not  have  put  the  earthly  meaning  into  the  words.  How  vain  it  is  to  discourae 
coneeming  Divine  things  to  men  whose  minds  are  preoccupied  with  earthly  cares! 
LeaTen  makes  then  think  of  loaves.    {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 

Yers.  13, 17.  Whom  do  men  say  that  I,  the  Son  of  man.  am  T — Confetsion  and 
eroBs-bearing : — I.  Tiir  confession.  1.  The  substance  of  the  confession.  2.  The 
source  of  the  confession  (ver.  17).  8.  The  power  of  the  confession  (vers.  18,  19). 
4.  The  limitations  of  the  confession  (ver.  20j.  II.  The  covenant  or  the  Chkistiab 
Chubob.    1.  The  dignity  of  cross-bearing  (vers.  21,  23).     2.  The  necessity  of  croa»> 


CHP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  887 

bearing  (vers.  24-2fi).  3.  The  rewards  of  cross-bearing' (vers.  27,  28).  {Monday 
Club  Semums. )  The  Son  of  man — the  Son  of  God  ;-^^The  question  op  Jestjb 
Christ — "  Whom  do  men,"  &c.  1.  The  first  word  we  snail  emphasize  is  the  word 
*•  men."  His  mind  soars  above  all  national  distinctions.  2.  The  other  word  we 
■hall  emphasize  is  the  word  "  Son  of  man."  He  is  humanity  condensed.  3.  We  ehail 
next  emphasize  the  two  words  together — men  and  "  Son  of  man."  The  Saviour 
presents  Elimself  on  the  level  of  our  common  huamnitv^  and  appeals  to  our  commou 
sense,  our  common  nature,  to  say  who  He  Is.^I.IThe  answer  of  thb  world^^^J^^ 
The  answer  of  the  Chorch.  {J.  C.  Jones.)  ^^"Vhrist  the  universal  man: — He  is 
not  an  excrescence  of  our  nature.  No  poet  He,  no  philosopher  He,  no  man  of 
science  He.  He  was  all  these  in  one.  He  was  man,  thorough  man,  growing  out  of 
the  depths  of  our  nature.  The  sea  on  the  surlalPETis  "divided  Into  wavei-^go  down* 
and  you  wHl  Huou  cum«  to  a  region  where  there  are  no  waves,  where  there  is  nothing 
but  water.  And  humanity  on  the  surface  is  broken  into  nationalities  and  individua- 
lities. But  go  down  a  little  way,  and  you  will  soon  come  to  a  region  where 
differences  give  place  to  resemblances  :  force  your  way  down  and  you  will  soon  arrive 
at  the  region  of  human  unities,  where  every  man  is  like  every  other  man.  Now  JesuE 
Christ  emerges  from  the  profoundest  depths  of  our  nature,  from  the  region  of 
nnities.  No  Jew  He — no  Greek  He — no  Boman  He — but  Man.  He  touches  you 
and  me  not  in  our  branches  but  in  our  roots.  Show  me  an  oak  and  show  me  an 
ash  tree  :  it  is  easy  to  tell  the  difference  between  them  in  the  branches,  but  not  so 
easy  in  the  roots.  Show  me  a  rose  and  show  me  a  tulip :  any  one  can  tell  the 
difference  between  them  in  the  leaf,  but  only  a  very  few  can  tell  the  difference  be. 
tween  them  in  their  seeds.  And  Jesus  Christ  is  the  "  Root  of  Jesse,"  "  the  Seed  of 
Abraham  and  of  David ;  "  and  all  nations  and  all  men  in  their  roots  and  seeds  are 
very  much  alike.  [Ibid.)  The  true  idea  of  Christ  to  be  obtained  from  the  New 
Testament  rather  than  from  creeds : — Creeds  embody  the  ripest  and  most  advanced 
thoughts  of  the  ages  they  represent.  It  is  not  against  the  use  of  creeds  that  I  speak — 
we  cannot  very  conveniently  do  without  them — but  against  their  abuse,  against 
setting  them  up  in  every  jot  and  tittle  as  infallible  standards  for  all  subsequent  ages. 
If  you  look  at  a  picture  of  the  sky  in  our  picture  galleries,  you  will  find  that  with 
rare  exceptions  it  has  been  rendered  too  hard  and  too  material.  The  sky  on  canvas 
is  a  ceiling  beyond  which  the  eye  cannot  wander.  But  if  you  go  out  of  the  gallery 
a  very  different  sky  will  open  itself  before  you — a  sky  which  seems  to  recede  for  ever 
before  your  vision.  The  sky  of  painters  is  too  often  a  thing  to  be  looked  at ;  the 
sky  of  nature  is  not  a  thing  to  be  looked  at,  but  a  thing  to  be  looked  through.  In 
like  manner,  the  truth  concerning  Christ  as  rendered  in  creeds  and  systems  is  hard 
and  dry — it  is  the  sky  of  the  picture.  The  truth  concerning  Christ  as  presented  in 
the  Gospels  is  deep,  hving,  infinite — it  is  the  sky  of  nature.  And  I  greatly  rejoice 
that  men  try  to  understand  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels  and  not  the  Christ  of  the 
creeds,  the  Christ  of  the  evangelists  and  not  the  Christ  of  the  schools.  "Thou  art 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Uving  Grod."  (Ibid.)  \  '^(Jhrist  the  centre  of  theology  : — 
An  American  writer  says  :  ••  We  have  in  our  congregation  a  little  deaf  and  dumb 
boy.  On  Sunday  he  loves  to  have  his  mother  find  for  him  the  words  that  we  are  all 
singing,  though  the  music  never  thnUs^his^Jiuiet  ejg^^jior^touches  his  heart.    He" 


looks  at  the  hym'Uj  glides  hisTiftre^Hnger^over  every  word  to  The  ehd^;  TrTie  finds 
•Jesus'  there,  he  is  satisfied  and  absorbed  to  the  close  of  the  singing;  but  if  the 
word  '  Jesus  '  is  not  there,  he  closes  the  book,  and  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with 
it."  So  should  we  test  the  religions  of  the  day — if  we  find  Jesus  the  centra) 
thought  of  any  system  of  theology,  it  is  good,  it  will  do  for  us  ;  if  not,  turn  away 
and  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Christ  mentally  conceived : — He  was  conceived 
over  thirty  years  ago  in  the  nature  of  man,  but  in  the  text  for  the  first  time  is  He 
conceived  in  the  mind  of  man ;  and  the  conception  in  the  mind  was  as  necessary  to 
our  salvation  as  the  conception  in  the  nature.  {Ibid.)  Opinion  sought  by  a  que$- 
tion : — Benjamin  Franklin  made  an  experiment,  one  of  the  most  daring  ever  made 
by  mortal  man.  Seeing  a  cluster  of  thunder-clouds  hanging  overhead,  he  let  fly 
into  their  midst  a  paper  kite,  to  which  was  attached  a  metallic  chain.  As  th:  hite 
was  flying  among  the  clouds,  anxiety  weighed  heavily  on  his  heart.  At  last  he  pre- 
sumptuously applied  his  knuckles  to  the  chain  and  called  forth  sparks  of  wil<^ 
lightning  ;  and  had  the  stream  of  electricity  been  a  little  stronger  at  the  time,  the 
philosopher  would  have  met  with  instantaneous  death.  He  has  left  on  record,  that 
BO  surprising  was  the  discovery  to  him,  that  in  the  ecstasy  of  the  moment  he  e^ 
pressed  his  wilhngness  to  die  there  and  then.  In  like  manner  there  were  clouds  oi 
opinion  afloat  in  society  respecting  Jesns  Christ,  indeed  the  thonder-doads 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xn. 

gathering  fast.  '*  Whom  do  men  say  that  I,  the  Son  of  man,  am  t "  "  SonoB 
Bay  that  Thou  art  John  the  Baptist " — that  is  one  cloud.  *'  Others,  Ellas  '* — that  is 
another  cloud.  "  Others,  Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  prophets" — that  is  a  cluster  of 
clouds.  Everything  seemed  mist  and  haze,  vagueness  and  uncertainty.  Jesus 
Christ  prayerfully  and  anxiously  flies  a  question  into  the  midst  of  these  dark  clouds. 
What  will  the  result  be?  His  heart  trembles,  therefore  He  prays.  See  the  question 
fly — ''But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am?"  What  answer  will  be  called  forth f 
"Simon  Pater  answered  and  Baid,<IJiou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God." 

ilbid.)  phe  Christ  of  <Jo(Cf^^^/lME  question — "Whom  say  ye  that  I  amt" 
t  is  a  gr^l  Hiercy  Ihiit  Jama  calls  out  the  faith  that  is  in  His  disciples.  By 
what  various  means  of  questioning  does  He  speak?  Sometimes  by  conscious  afflic- 
tions ;  by  our  very  falls.  This  is  the  miestion  of  questions;  not  what  we  think 
of  Churches,  disciples,  but  of  Christ.  (H/  The  answer — "_Thon  art  the  Christ," 
&c.  There  was  little  comparative  light  m  the  apostles  before  ihe  Day  oi  Peatecost ; 
the  Holy  Spirit  must  teach  to  saving  profit.  But  they  were  still  His  disciples, 
though  their  faith  was  small.  It  is  humbling  that,  having  so  much  more  light  than 
they,  we  should  have  less  love.  All  the  glory  of  Christ  as  the  Mediator  hangs  upon 
^Jtfi  glory  of  His  Person.  If  a  mere  creature,  His  work  is  comparatively  nothing, 
ni}  The  vast  encouragement — "  Blessed  art  thou."  The  infinite  condescension 
oiJesus.  He  takes  notice  and  encourages  the  weakest  faith.  1.  How  blessed  the 
condition  of  those  who  have  been  taught  this  lesson.  "  Flesh  and  blood  hath  not 
revealed  it."  jl^aturp.  education,  miracles.,  never  tapght  jt.  What  a  foundation  for 
strong  confidence.  He.  the  Son  of  God^  2.  How  great  the  sin  nf  the  man  who  rejects 
-f^rm  nt  thft  living  God.   (J.  H^^ans.  M.A.)    (Jeter's  faithJ—1.  Peter's  gA^gg- 

Chr  so7;7^cic  of  Peter's  faith.QIy  What  Petkr^'eaith  qualified  him  to  BE^rv) 

The  special  reward  of  Peter's  fSitn.  Conclusio  ■  :  now  can  we  bec^ime  stoneSm 
Christ's  Church?  Xot  naturally.  Only  by  having  Peter's  faith.  In  Jesus  as  "  the 
Christ."  IiuJesus  as"  the  iSon  ol  God^"  .aow  may  we  get  tms  taith  t  God  alone  can 
give  it — ask  Him.  TE.  SltiPJt.)  j^'efer's  confeskonSj — How  hearty  and  distinct  is 
this  utterance  1  This  is  the  first  "Confession  of  J^'aith."  This  is  the  true  Apostles' 
Creed.  These  are  the  prime  and  essential  articles  of  catholic  verity,  upon  which 
rest  all  sound  theology  and  all  saving  faith.  In  this  short  but  illustrious  statement, 
says  a  great  theologian,  yon  have  the  whole  truth  with  respect  to  the  Person  and  the 
work  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  It  is  plainly  implied  that  Jesus  Christ  possesses  human 
nature,  a  tnie  body  and  a  reasonable  soul.  He  put  the  question  as  the  Son  of 
man.  He  was  a  real  man.  2.  The  confession  of  Peter  asserts  the  divinity  as 
well  as  the  humanity  of  our  Lord.  He  calls  Him  the  "  Son  of  the  living  God." 
This  expression  denotes  Divine  nature.  He  is  set  forth  as  a  Divine  Person  in  the 
Old  Testament.  He  manifested  Himself  in  this  charanter  in  the  days  of  His  flesh, 
&o.  Had  He  been  less  than  Divine,  He  could  not  have  been  the  Saviour.  3.  The 
confession  of  Peter  asserts  the  truth  with  regard  to  t)ie  oifice  or  work  as  well  as 
the  Person  of  the  Son  of  God,  He  declares  that  He  is  the  Christ,  that  is  the 
Messiah,  &o.  And  for  what  end?  It  is  to  save  sinners.  This  is  the  great  work 
given  Him  to  do.  He  is  the  only,  the  all-suffi.'ient,  Saviour  of  sinners.  To  Him 
alone  belongs  all  the  gl»ry.  Believest  thou  these  things?  Is  this  thy  heartfelt 
creed  and  confession  ?  {A.  Thompson.)  [ChrhrTappe'il  to  our  individual  Jaithiy— 
This  is  a  most  pertuient  question  now.  lleHauhs  why  ^V6  Should  ask  it  ot  ourselves. 
I.  W^  n.ra.in  dttji^ftf.  as  the  disciples  were,  of  being  affected  by  the  crude  opinions. 
of  men  about,-aur  Lord.  and.Bia  religion,  and  HlB  Chm eh.  ii.  lue  question  Is 
TiTai;'lor  it  asserts  the  great  truth  that  only  a  deep,  stroiiji  fnith  will  ever  inspire 
confidence  in  others.  III.  It  shows  us  how  dear  to  Christ  is  the  personal  faith  of 
the  soul.  (FAlison  Caperg.)  Right  apprehensions  of  the  character  of  Christ  «- 
tential  to  talvatitm: — I.  That  there  abe  many  opinions  about  Christ.  1.  As 
regards  His  Person.  2.  As  regards  the  nature  of  the  work  which  He  came  to  ao« 
oomplish.     8.  As  regards  His  religion,  His  acquirements,  and  His  claims.     II.  Ix 

IB   or  THE   UTMOST   IMPORTANCE   THAT   WE   FORM    CORRECT     AND   DECIDED    OPINIONS   OS 

THIS  SUBJECT.     OuT  opportunjUes  of  doing  so  are  very  great.      {Dr.  T.  Rafflts.) 
jl^VJ}om  do  men  say  that  I  amjy-l.  That  when  Christ  became  a  mah  He   could 

MOT    seem   brVINB    ACCORPINQ  1^  THE    PBE-OONCEPTIONB   OF    MEN,  who    lookcd    for   thfl 

exhibition  of  that  which  appeals  to  the  sense,  and  who  did  not  look  for  inward 
harmony.  Christ  did  bring  with  Him  the  Divine  nature,  but  not  the  attributes  of 
Jehovah  disclosed  in  their  amplitude.  Ho  humbled  Himself.  II.  Every  pkrsoh 
OAHH  TO  Christ  throuqh  somk  elements  that  were  in  himselt.  Some  came 
to  Him  through  the  door  of  sympathy ;  some  from  lower  motives.     What  is  Christ 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  8S9 


to  you?  Is  He  part  of  your  life?  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  personal  affirmationa 
of  Christ: — What  did  Christ  teach  concerning  Himself?  1.  He  affirmed  the 
divinity  of  His  redemptive  mission.  2.  His  independence  of,  and  separation  from, 
the  world.  8.  His  pre-existence.  4.  Some  of  the  affirmations  of  Christ  contain 
most  impressive  representations  of  His  character  and  work — '*  I  am  the  Bread  of 
Life,"  ••  I  am  the  Light  of  the  World,"  ••  I  am  the  Door,"  "  I  am  the  True  Vine." 
6.  Some  of  the  affirmations  of  our  Lord  contain  wondrous  glimpses  of  His  grace 
and  glory.  6.  His  second  coming  in  great  glory.  (G.  W.  McCree.)  Public 
opinion  concerning  Jetus  Christ : — 1.  Was  not  Christ  superior  to  what  men  thought 
about  him  ?  He  did  not  stoop  to  public  opinion,  but  was  anxious  to  know  that  men 
had  clear  and  right  conceptions  concerning  Him ;  that  He  did  not  live  and  teach 
in  vain.  What  are  men  saying  in  yonder  workshop  of  you  ?  2.  We  must  try  and 
find  out  what  is  the  public  opinion  to-day  about  Christ,  and  instruct,  correct  it, 
gently.  {W,  Cxiff.)  Christ's  divinity  incidentally  indicated  in  the  New  Testa- 
tmnt,  not  logically  proved : — It  is  in  these  incidental  ways  that  we  see  Jesus  Christ 
best.  Yes,  and  I  will  venture  to  say  that  it  is  in  these  incidental  ways  we  see  all 
men  best.  We  do  not  understand  men  best  because  we  see  them  in  their  great 
efforts.  Please  do  not  take  me  to  the  poet,  if  you  want  me  to  understand  him 
thoroughly,  when  he  has  got  his  pen,  ink,  and  paper  ready  to  write  his  great  poem. 
I  should  see  him  then  in  a  great  mood,  but  I  should  not  see  him  in  an  incidental 
way,  and  in  all  the  little  things  that  make  up  the  man's  character.  I  do  not  want 
to  see  Mr.  Gladstone  when  he  is  braced  up  to  chop  down  an  ash-tree ;  nor  do  I  want 
to  see  him  as  he  has  braced  himself  to  make  a  great  speech  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. I  should  want  to  see  him  as  his  wife  sees  him ;  and  I  venture  to  say  that 
we  should  understand  him  better  in  that  than  in  any  other  way.  Your  wife  knows 
you  better  than  anybody  else;  she  sees  you  in  the  little  things  of  every-day  life, 
and  it  is  in  these  incidental  ways  that  the  great  things  and  the  great  truths  come 
np  all  through  the  life  and  teachings  of  Jssns  Christ.  You  do  not  value  that  clock 
yonder  for  its  striking  capacity.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  strikes  at  all  ;  however, 
it  has  a  very  fine  musical  bell  in  it  that  knocks  off  twelve,  when  it  is  twelve,  in  a 
quick  or  slow  manner,  but  you  would  not  value  it  for  that.  You  value  the  clock 
for  its  capacity  to  tell  you  every  minute  of  the  time  and  every  hour  of  the  day. 
And  just  as  you  look  at  the  little  things  on  the  face,  and  get  the  minutes  as  well  as 
the  hour,  you  value  the  clock  for  its  correctness.  {Ibid.)  .Varied  vie^s  pf  Christ.' — 
We  find  Christ  so  differently, because  we  seek  Him  in  such  very  different  ways. 
We  cannot  have  a  uniform  Christ  any  more  than  we  can  have  a  uniform  experience. 
In  essence,  in  character,  in  love,  in  pity,  Jesus  Christ  will  ever  be  the  same  to  every 
sinner  who  comes  to  Him,  but  as  we  come  to  Him  we  shall  seem  to  have  a  very  dif- 
ferent Christ,  because  we  use  our  own  glasses,  and,  therefore,  see  Him  from  different 
points  of  view,  and  have  different  convictions  about  Him.  Here  is  a  person  who 
eomes  to  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  been  educated  and  brought  up  in  a  manner  of 
refinement  and  beauty,  whose  home  has  been  the  centre  of  everything  that  was 
charming ;  his  mother  was  gentle,  and  sweet  as  an  angel,  his  education  from 
boarding-school  days  until  he  settled  himself  in  hfe  was  all  that  could  be  desired 
to  train  the  taste,  to  balance  the  jutlgment,  and  to  make  the  character  round,  unique, 
•nd  beautiful.  By-and-by  he  comes  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  comes  along  such  a 
different  path  to  that  man  over  there,  for  he  was  born  down  a  back  street,  where 
hardly  a  gleam  of  sunshine  ever  burst  through  his  mother's  window,  and  he  hardly 
ever  raw  a  beautiful  flower;  certainly  his  boyish  feet  never  tripped  along  a  green 
field  ;  he  never  heard  the  birds  sing  in  the  wood,  nor  saw  the  light  and  charm  of 
nature  as  others  have  seen  it ;  rough,  rude,  uneducated,  unable  to  read  one  word  of 
the  New  Testament.  By-and-by  that  man  comes  to  Christ,  and  he  sits  in  the  church 
at  the  Lord's  table  by  the  side  of  that  other  educated  and  refined  Christian.  If 
tijey  compare  notes  they  will  seem  to  have  a  very  different  Christ,  because  they 
eame  along  snch  very  different  roads  up  to  the  cross.  I  believe,  brethren,  that  that 
first  view  of  Jesus  in  the  soul's  experience  makes  a  vast  deal  of  difference  to  hia 
whole  thinking  and  to  his  whole  Ufe  about  the  Saviour  whom  he  first  saw.  Oh, 
what  passion  bums  in  one  man,  and  what  calm,  strong,  intellectual,  and  dignified 
faith  vrrestlea  and  grapples  in  the  other,  as  he  comes  np  first  to  look  a4  Jenu 

Obmi.    John  Mewton  saw  Him  like  this  : — 

« 
**  I  saw  One  hanging  on  a  tree 
In  agonies  and  blood, 
Who  fixed  His  languid  eyes  on  me^ 
As  near  His  cross  I  stood ; 


940  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRAIOR.  [chap.  XTfc 

And  never  till  my  latest  breath 

Shall  I  forget  that  look, 
it  seemed  to  charge  me  with  His  death 

Though  not  a  word  He  spoke." 

7amM  ADen  law  Him  like  this  >— 

**  Sweet  the  naoments,  rich  in  blessing, 

Which  before  the  cross  1  spend, 
Love  and  health  and  peace  possessing^ 

From  the  sinner's  dying  fiiend. 
Here  it  is  I  find  my  heaven 

While  upon  His  cross  I  gaze. 
Love  I  much  ?  I've  more  forgiven, 

I  am  a  miracle  ot  grace." 

So  the  poets  and  hymn-writers  came  to  Him  differently,  and  eeemed  to  take  • 
different  view  of  Him.  {Ibid.)  The  revelation  of  Christ  often  misinterpreted: — 
Payson,  when  he  lay  on  his  bed  dying,  said  :  "  All  my  life  Christ  baa  seemed 
to  me  as  a  star  afar  off ;  but  little  by  little  He  has  been  advancing  and 
growing  larger  and  larger,  till  now  His  beams  seem  to  fill  the  whole  hemi- 
sphere, and  I  am  floating  in  the  glory  of  God,  wondering  with  nnutterable 
wonder  how  such  a  mote  as  I  should  be  glorified  in  His  light;"  but  he  came 
to  that  after  a  long  life.     (H.   W.  Beecher.)  The  revelation  of   Christ  an 

inward  potcer,  rather  than  a  icientijic  belief: — But  how  many  people  there  are 
whose  God  is  no  bigger  than  a  confession  of  faith  1  rfow  many  persons  have  a  God 
that  is  like  a  dried  specimen  of  a  flower  in  a  herbarium,  which  is  good  for  science, 
and  for  nothing  else?  Bat  Christ  is  a  power — a  glory — a  life;  and  he  that  has 
come  to  Christ,  and  accepted  Him  even  in  the  smallest  degree,  to  him  it  is  given  to 
become,  and  to  know  that  he  is  becoming,  a  s  )n  of  God.  To  all  of  yon  I  say, 
stand  fast  in  the  faith,  in  the  inward  sense,  ot  a  living  Savieur.  Love  Him 
and  trust  Him.     (Thid).  The  revelation  of  Christ  perfected  in  heaven: — And 

remember  that  what  you  see  now  is  full  of  mixture — that,  like  ill-blown  glass,  it  ia 
full  of  crinckles — that  it  is  full  of  elements  that  are  drawn  from  the  peculiarities  of 
your  own  nature.  Look  upon  Christ  as  one  that,  all  after,  much  as  He  is  to  you,  is 
to  be  revealed  in  you — that  is  to  say,  when  you  have  grown,  when  yon  have  been 
cleansed,  when  you  leave  this  body  behind,  and  when  you  rise  to  stand  face  to  face 
with  God,  the  little  that  you  knew  before  will  be  as  what  a  man  has  seen  who  has 
never  been  out  of  his  garden  here  compared  with  what  he  would  see  if  he  were,  by 
some  power,  translated  into  a  tropical  forest.  He  has  seen  growths  in  a  northern 
clime  largely  developed  under  glass,  but  oh,  to  see  the  growths  that  have  been  de- 
veloped by  the  tropical  powers  of  nature  1  And  when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is — 
in  magnitude — in  wonderful  disposition — in  profound,  and  sweet,  and  life-giving 
influences — then,  with  an  ecstasy  of  joy,  we  shall  cast  our  crowns  at  His  feet  and 
say:  "Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name  be  the  praide."  {Ibid). 
Perverse  views  of  Christ: — Well,  now  I  must  gather  up  the  fragments  and  close; 
and  I  will  do  so  by  saying  that  there  will  be,  as  there  have  been,  very  different 
answers  given  as  to  who  the  Son  of  man  is.  There  alwayp  were  different  answers ; 
there  always  must  be ;  because  men  look  at  Christ  as  they  look  at  other  men  and 
other  things.  We  do  not  all  look  at  the  New  Testament  through  the  same  mental 
laws ;  and  that  makt^s  all  the  difference  in  the  answer  we  shall  give  to  the  ques^ 
tion,  '•  \Vhom  do  you  say  I,  the  Son  of  God,  am  f  "  You  know  if  you  go  to  the  photo- 
grapher's shop  and  ask  the  artist  to  be  kind  enough  to  let  you  look  through  the  lens 
covered  by  that  little  black  piece  of  cloth,  and  if  yoa  look  at  the  chair  on  which  yon 
have  to  sit  for  your  portrait,  it  is  reversed,  and  the  opposite  of  what  yon  expected 
it  to  be.  That  is  how  some  men  look  at  other  men.  They  always  see  thsm  reversed 
— very  different  to  what  they  are.  That  is  precisely  the  kind  of  lens  that  I'lmy 
bring  to  the  New  Testament  to  look  at  Christ.  (IF.  Cuff.)  Religious  a(feetton$ 
produce  a  conviction  of  reality : — Spiritual  things  have  the  influence  of  reality  npon 
renewed  persons.  Their  eyes  are«opened  to  see  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  ars 
really  true.  Not  all  religious  affections  are  attended  with  this  conviction,  becanas 
not  produced  by  the  spiritual  illumination  of  the  mind.  Where  the  nnderstanding 
Is  Bpiritoally  enlightened,  the  affeotions  do  not  spring  from  so-called  disooveries, 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST,  MATTHEW.  8*1 

from  a  strong  confidence  of  their  good  estate,  from  a  strong  peiKuasion  that  tha 
Christian  religion  is  true  as  the  result  of  education,  or  from  mere  reasons  and  argo- 
ments.  Spiritual  affections  spring  from  the  beauty  of  Divine  things  ;  their  beauty 
is  discerned  through  the^umination  of  the  mind ;  and  this  view  produces  Ihe  con- 
%iction  of  their  reality.  ^^  Dikectlt.  The  judgment  is  directly  convinced  of  the 
divinity  of  the  gospel  b^^e  clear  view  of  its  inherent  glory  and  excellence.  Many 
things  in  the  gospel  are  hid  from  the  eyes  of  natural  men  which  are  manifest  to 
those  who  have  a  spiritual  sense  and  taste,  and  to  whom  the  beauty  and  glory  of 
the  gospel  are  revealed.  To  them  alone  religion  becomes  experimental.  Were  it 
otherwise,  the  illiterate  and  the  heathen  could  not  have  so  thorough  a  conviction 
as  to  embrace  the  gospel  and  hazard  every  earthly  thing  for  its  possession.  God 
gives  to  these  some  sort  of  evidence  that  His  covenant  is  true  beyond  all  mere 
probability  or  historical  evidence,  which  the  illiterate  are  capalile  of,  and  which 
produces  the  "fuU  assurance  of  faith."  They  become  witnesses  to  the  truth 
through  being  spiritually  enlightened.  "  Infidelity  never  prevailed  so  much  in  any 
age  as  in  this,  wherein  these  arguments  (from  ancient  traditions,  histories  and 
monunigBts)  are  handled  to  the  greatest  advantage."  To  be  a  witness  is  to  see  the 
truth.  >Jft  Indirectlt.  1.  This  view  of  Divine  glory  removes  enmities  and  pre- 
judices Vw  the  heart,  so  that  the  mind  is  more  open  to  the  force  of  the  reasons 
which  are  presented.  2.  And,  by  thus  removing  hindrances,  it  positively  helps 
reason.  "  It  makes  even  the  speculative  notions  more  lively."  In  this  way  truly 
gracious  affections  are  distinguished  from  others,  "  for  graeimns.  affections  are  ever, 
more  attended  with  such  a  conviction  of  the  judgment."  /^III.^ome  conclusions. 
1.  There  is  a  degree  of  conviction  which  arises  from  the  cSftrtm^n  enlightenings  of 
the  Spirit  of  God.  This  may  lead  to  behef ,  but  not  to  the  spiritual  conviction  ol 
truth,  and  the  apprehension  of  its  Divine  beauty  and  glory.  2.  There  are  extra* 
ordinary  impressions  on  the  imagination,  which  are  delusive,  and  produce  only  a 
counterfeit  faith.  3.  Those  beliefs  of  truth,  which  rest  merely  upon  our  supposed 
interest  in  what  the  gospel  reveals  and  promises,  are  also  vain.  (J.  Edwards.) 
St.  Peter  here  confesses  that  our  Lord  is — I.  (1)  TJie  Christ — not  merely  an 
anointed  one,  as  priests  and  prophets  of  old  might  have  been  anointed,  bat  that  He 
is  the  One  anointed  of  Gbd,  having  received  this  gift  in  a  super-eminent  manner. 
(2)  The  Son — not  one  son  merely  out  of  many,  but  that  He  was  so  beyond  all  others, 
and  in  a  way  which  singled  Him  out  from  them.  Son  and  only-begotten,  not  by 
grace,  but  of  the  substance  of  the  Father.  (3)  The  Son  of  the  living  God — not  ol 
the  gods  of  the  heathen  world,  the  object  of  Gentile  idolatry,  but  the  Son  of  the 
One  living,  and  true  God,  who  has  life  in  Himself,  who  is  uncreated  life — the  living 
life-giving  principle  to  all  mankind.  (4)  That  He  is  Christ  and  at  the  same  time  Son 
of  the  living  God — in  contradistinction  to  the  crowd,  who  believed  Him  to  be  the 
Baptist,  Elias,  or  one  of  the  prophets ;  Peter  acknowledged  Him  to  be  Christ,  and 
the  Son  oj  the  living  God.  II.  In  this  confession  there  abe  included  thksb 
TRUTHS — (1)  The  nature  which  Christ  took ;  the  human  nature,  that  is,  which  was 
anointed  or  consecrated.  (2)  The  anointing  which  He  received,  the  fulness  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  imparted  without  measure  to  Christ  at  His  conception.  (3)  The  object 
of  this  anointing — that  He  might  be  the  Christ,  the  King,  the  Priest,  the  Prophet 
of  His  people.  {W.  Denton,  M.A.).  This  truth  was  not  revealed  to  Peter — (1) 
By  carnal  men,  nor  indeed  by  men  at  all,  since  man  cannot  of  himself  make  known 
the  things  of  the  Spirit ;  (2)  Through  mere  carnal  reasoning  (1  Cor.  ii.  11.)  ;  (3) 
Nor  was  it  the  revelation  of  Christ's  flesh.  It  was  not  merely  that  Peter  had  been 
able  to  pierce  beyond  the  veil  of  Chiist's  human  nature,  and  through  that,  and  by 
means  of  that,  to  understand  the  Divinity.  No.  It  was  the  direct  act  of  the 
Father,  by  which  he  was  enlightened.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  Id.  That  tbon  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  Uy  Church.  The 
true  Christian  Church: — I.  Let  us  dwell  on  Peter's  profession  of  faith.  It  ii 
not  a  learned,  complicated,  or  even  detailed  exposition.  Full  of  depth.  It  was  a  rich 
Bouroe  of  happiness  for  Peter — "  Blessed  art  thou."  What  is  the  Church  of  which 
the  Saviour  speaks  ?  IL  The  Church  exercises  its  power  through  faith.  The 
power  of  the  Church,  as  regards  its  essential  features,  ii^  expressed  in  the  wordg, 
"  I  will  give  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  This  power  not  conferred 
on  Peter  exclusively.  Our  Lord  did  not  connect  the  exercise  of  this  power  with  one 
condition,  one  external  and  human  position ;  but  with  the  quality  of  disciple  of  the 
Son  of  God.  When  any  faithful  voice  proclaims  to  you  the  design  of  Gc/d  in  regard 
to  year  salvation,  he  has  the  authority  of  the  voice  of  God  Himself ;  8  DiTine  aen- 


343  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  itJi 

tence  is  uttered  respecting  you  ;  if  you  abhor  your  sins  they  will  he  forgiven  ;  if  not 
they  are  retained.  III.  By  faith  the  CHnscH  tkiumphs  over  its  enehies.  "  The 
gates  of  hell,"  &c.  1.  What  is  this  hell  whose  power  shall  not  prevail  against  the 
Church?  Its  enemies — external,  internal.  2.  How  shall  it  resist  these  enemies f 
Not  by  violence,  carnal  display ;  by  faith.  (The  late  Paxtor  Vemy.)  The  Church 
which  Chriitt  builds  : — I.  A  building — "  My  Church."  Not  s  material  building  ; 
made  up  of  all  true  believers.  II.  The  buiIiDER — "I  will  build,"  <ftc.  The  tru« 
Church  is  cared  for  by  all  the  three  Persons  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  Christ  uses 
subordinate  agencies  in  this  building.  1,  His  wisdom.  Each  in  right  place.  2. 
His  mercy.  He  despises  no  stone.  3.  His  power.  In  face  of  opposition.  4,  Tha 
children  of  this  world  take  little  or  no  interest  in  the  building  of  this  Church.  III. 
Thb  foundation.  1.  It  was  laid  at  a  mighty  cost.  2.  It  is  very  strong.  IV.  Im- 
plied TRIALS.  1.  Marvel  not  at  the  enmity  of  hell.  2.  Be  prepared  for  it.  8.  B« 
patient  under  it.  4.  Be  not  cast  down  by  it,  V.  The  secukitt.  {Bishop  Ryle.) 
The  foundation  and  perpetuity  of  the  Church: — I.  The  foundation  on  which  thi 
Church  rests,  1.  How  ancient.  2.  How  firm.  3.  How  enduring.  II.  Thh 
AGENCY  BY  WHICH  THB  Church  IS  REARED.  1.  Christ  appoints  the  means.  2.  Christ 
provides  the  instruments.  3,  Christ  communicates  the  blessing.  Ill,  The  per- 
petuity WITH  which  the  Church  shall  bh  honoured  and  blest.  1.  Notwith- 
etandin-g  the  ravages  of  death.  2.  Notwithstanuing  the  power  and  policy  of  Satan, 
(G,  Brook.^.)  The  perpetuity  and  safety  of  the  Cliurch  of  Christ : — 1,  Presump- 
tive evidence  of  the  safety  of  the  Church,  It  is  dear  to  God ;  purchased  by  Christ. 
2.  Positive  declaration  of  the  safety  of  the  Church.  3.  Actual  facts  and  experience. 
The  Church  in  Egypt  under  Joseph.  1.  This  ministers  comfort  to  believers.  2.  II 
God  does  prepare  affliction  for  His  Church,  it  is  for  her  good.  (/.  G.  Lorimer.) 
Christ's  Church : — I*  The  edifice  of  which  the  Piedeemer  speaks.  Not  any  ma- 
terial building.  It  rises  through  successive  generations.  H.  The  relation  in 
which  Jesus  Christ  stands  to  this  edifice.  1.  Its  foundation.  2.  Its  Architect. 
(1)  As  Architect  He  selected  its  site.  He  fixed  it  on  earth.  (2)  He  drew  the  plan.  (3) 
He  prepares  the  materials.  (4)  He  employs  the  workmen.  3.  Its  Proprietor.  It 
is  His  Church.  4.  He  is  the  guarantee  of  its  stability.  (T.  Ra£le»,  D.D.)  Tht 
ultimate  dfifeat  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church: — I.  God's  Church — "My  Church." 
1.  The  foundation — "rock."  2.  The  superstructure.  3.  The  Builder — "I."  XL 
The  church's  foe.  Paganism  led  the  van.  Fanaticism.  (T.  Mortimer,  B.D.) 
The  promise  to  Peter : — I.  Peter's  confession  of  his  own  faith  in  contrast  to  the 
report  of  the  other  disciples  as  to  who  the  people  said  Christ  was.  U.  Peter's  con- 
fession, contrasted  with  the  delayed  speech  of  the  other  disciples.  III.  Peter'i 
confession  as  contrasted  with  the  less  explicit  confessions  of  others  that  had  pre- 
ceded it.  IV.  How  the  promise  to  this  man  of  rock  was  fulfilled.  What  is  there 
in  your  character  and  conduct  on  which  the  Lord  can  build  His  Church  f  (John 
Foster).  The  permanence  of  Christ's  Church: — Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  Hia 
Divine  character  as  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  and  the  foundation  of 
the  Christian  Church.     I.  The  Christian  Church  is,  for  everything  that  dis« 

TIHGniSnES   IT   A3   SUCH,  DIRECTLY   DEPENDENT   UPON  ChRIST  AS  GOD.       The  Church  iS 

distinguished  from  all  other  forms  of  organized  society — 1.  By  its  peculiar  origin 
and  history.  It  comes  up  out  of  the  past  as  no  other  form  of  organized  society  ever 
has  or  can.  It  takes  root  in  the  garden  of  man's  innocency,  immediately  after  the 
first  sin.  2.  By  the  character  of  its  members.  No  other  organization  has  ever 
been  found  thus  constituted.  3.  By  its  system  of  government  and  law.  Govema 
from  within,  II,  The  Church  of  Christ,  being  thus  builded  upon  Him,  xa 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  is  assured  op  security  and  PERPETumr. 
1.  The  yawning  gates  of  death,  open  to  receive  the  Church ;  the  gates  into  which 
all  human  travellers  pass.  The  disciples  were  dying  men ;  enemies  might  say  that 
the  Church  would  pass  away  with  the  few  fanatics  who  had  been  deceived  by  it. 
Believers  have  died,  but  the  Church  lives.  2.  The  Church's  security  and  perpetuity 
beyond  this  earthly  life.  The  heavenly  Church.  (A.  J.  Kynett,  B.D.)  Tht 
visibility  of  the  true  Church: — I.  What  the  Church  of  Christ  is.  U.  As  to 
THB  poundation  OP  THB  Chcbch.  1.  Negatively.  Not  Peter.  (1)  He  was  but  a 
man.  (2)  Peter  was  a  frail  mortal  man.  (3)  Peter  was  a  sinful  man.  (4)  Peter 
determmes  the  point  himself,  and  expounds  the  prophecy  in  Isaiah  of  Christ  (1  Petof 
ii.  4).  (5)  Peter,  as  mere  Peter,  could  never  victoriously  grapple  with  the  assaults  of 
Batan.  Some  assert  that  Peter  was  the  foundation  in  a  secondary  sense.  (1)  Thig 
■econdary  foundation  is  an  absurd  distinction,  and  contrary  to  the  very  nature  of  • 
fonndation.     (2)  It  would  have  to  be  extended  to  all  the  apostles.    2.  Positively— 


CHAP.  x\x]  -ST.  MATTEET.  84S 

that  Christ  is  the  only  true  foundation  of  tb3  Church.  (1)  God  the  Father  Belected 
no  other.  (2)  Christ  asserts  no  other.  (3)  The  Holy  Spirit  fits  no  other.  (4) 
Only  Christ  can  withstand  the  gates  of  hell.     III.  The  duration  op  the  Chtjbch, 

IK   BOMB   STATE   OF   VISIBILITY   THRODGHOUT   ALL  AGES.        1.    The  Church's  Opposites — 

"  the  gates  of  hell."  2.  Their  great  undertakings.  IV.  Comfort  for  all  tbuf 
MEMBBR3  OF  THE  Chuech  OF  Chbist.  1.  Let  holy  souls  be  comforted  in  this — that 
no  weapon  formed  against  Mount  Zion  shall  finally  prosper.  2.  The  Church,  after 
all  assaults  and  conflicts,  shall  be  completely  victorious,  she  shall  joyfully  survive 
her  enemies,  and  behold  their  funerals.  (S.  Lee,  M.A.)  The  Church  unproved  by 
trial: — "  Satan  hath  emptied  his  quiver,  but  hath  not  hurt  the  Church."  By  how 
much  the  more  the  enemies  rage  against  her,  by  so  much  the  more  the  true  pro- 
fessors of  piety  and  faith  increase  :  not  unlike  the  vine,  that  grows  the  more  fertile 
by  pruning  ;  or  as  the  palm,  that  rises  the  more  erect  after  weights  and  pressures  ; 
and  although  in  time  of  trouble  like  some  plants  that  shut  up  their  flowers  upon  a 
storm,  yet  afterward  display  their  lively  and  lovely  colours  more  oriently  to  the  face 
4^1  the  shining  sun.  (Ibid.)  The  Church  upon  the  Rock: — I.  To  what  the 
Saviour  refers  as  to  the  foundation  of  His  Church.  II.  That  the  fodndation  of 
THE  Chdkch  is  a  TRUTH — "  Jesus  Is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God."  1.  A  truth  in 
itself  indestructible.  2.  A  truth  never  to  be  invalidated.  3.  A  living  truth.  4. 
A  uniting  truth — "  My  Church."  (G.  S.  Green,  D.D.)  The  Church's  security: — 
Christ  assures  us  here  of  the  constancy  of  the  assaults  which  Satan  will  make  upon 
the  Church  and  its  members.  He  does  not  promise  the  removal  of  trial  and  tribu- 
lation,  assault  and  temptation,  but  Divine  strength  by  which  to  overcome  evil.  1. 
That  the  truth  which  Peter  has  here  confessed  shall  never  be  lost  to  the  great  body 
of  His  faithful  ones  ;  that  the  Church  shall  never,  as  a  whole,  fall  from  the  faith,  or 
lose  its  hold  of  the  truth.  2.  That  however  corrupt  many  of  the  members  of  the 
Church  shall  be,  it  shall  never  be  wholly  depraved,  or  fall  utterly  from  that  sanctity 
which  it  has  through  union  with  Him.  3.  That  human  councils,  and  man's  devices, 
and  Satan's  assaults  upon  the  Church,  shall  never  prevail ;  for,  since  it  is  of  God, 
it  cannot  come  to  naught.  {W.  Denton,  M.A.)  My  Church  .-—Christ's  Church  is 
(1)  A  community  of  free  men.  There  are  no  slaves  in  it,  and  no  criminals ;  no 
strangers  and  foreigners.  (2)  A  community  gathered  together  for  a  public  purpose. 
(8)  Gathered  together  by  a  call.  It  is  divinely  called  out  from  among  the  mass  of 
those  who  are  determined  to  be  slaves  or  criminals,  or  who  are  wilfully  willing  to 
remain  foreigners  and  strangers  to  Christ  and  Christianity.  (J.  Morison,  D.D.) 
"1  will  build  my  Church  "  ; — Here  Christ  represents  the  Church  as  an  edifice,  of  which 
He  is  the  Architect  and  the  Builder.  The  kind  of  edifice  is  not  specified.  And 
indeed  it  could  not  well  be,  at  least  exhaustively.  It  is  a  house.  It  is  a  temple. 
But  it  is  a  city  too,  gathered  around  the  ceutral  temple,  and  into  which,  indeed,  the 
temple  has  expanded.  It  is  Zion.  It  is  Jerusalem.  It  is  the  New  Jerusalem,  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem.  It  is  a  place  of  perfect  security.  It  is  a  fortress,  standing 
high  upon  a  rock.  It  is  a  safe  city  of  refuge.  Its  "  defence  is  the  munition  of 
rocks,"  or  of  what  is  far  better  and  stronger  than  rocks.  (Ibid.)  The  Church  of 
Christ :— 1.  The  Architect.  2.  The  Building.  3.  The  Foundation.  4.  The  ma- 
terials. 6.  Its  permanence.  (Anon.)'  Castle  of  Banias  suggesting  the  "rock" 
figure ; — A  little  way  to  the  left  of  the  village  there  stands  the  majestic  ruin  of  the 
Castle  of  Banias,  built  on  the  rocky  crest  of  a  projecting  spur  of  Hermon,  which 
rises  a  thousand  feet  above  the  village,  and  it  is  itself  several  hundred  feet  higher. 
Is  it  possible  to  doubt  that  the  eye  of  the  Great  Master  and  His  disciples  was  turned, 
while  He  spoke,  to  that  castle  upon  its  rocky  base,  filling  up  the  whole  view  east- 
ward, and  that  he  doubled  the  impression  of  His  sayings,  as  He  so  often  did,  by 
•urrounding  them  with  the  framework  and  casting  on  them  the  colouring  of  a 
natural    picture?      (A.    Thomson.)  The   Church   a  building: — The  Church 

of  Christ  is  not  a  material  building,  a  temple  made  with  hands,  of  brick,  or 
wood,  or  stone,  or  marble.  It  is  no  particular  visible  church  on  earth ;  it  is 
made  up  of  all  true  believers  in  Christ,  of  every  name  and  rank  and  people 
and  tongue.  All  visible  churches  on  earth  are  its  servants  and  handmaidens; 
they  are  the  scaffolding  behind  which  the  grand  building  is  going  on,  the  husk 
under  which  the  living  kernel  grows.  The  Temple  of  Solomon  in  all  its  glory 
was  mean  and  contemptible  in  comparison  with  this  Church,  which  is  built  upon 
a  Rock  ;  small  and  despicable  though  it  may  be  in  this  world,  it  is  precious  and 
honourable  in  the  sight  of  God.  Statesmen,  rulers,  kings,  and  all  the  powers  of 
hell,  may  scheme  and  plan  against  it ;  they  are  only  the  axes  and  saws  in  God's 
hands,  in  the  erection  of  Christ's  spiritual  temple,  the  (rathering  in  of  livint 


844  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt» 

etoneg  into  the  one  true  Church.  {Biahop  J.  G.  Ryle)  The  foundation  of  the 
Church: — I.  The  Chukch  is  bdilt  on  Cheist.  It  is  built  on  Jesus  Christ,  and  not 
npon  any  idea  or  representation  of  Him.  2.  It  is  built  upon  the  historical  Christ. 
r,  But  if  it  is  built  on  the  historical  Christ,  then  it  must  be  built  upon  the  theo- 
logical Christ — the  Christ  as  represented  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Church.  II.  Thk 
Chdkch  is  built  upon  Christ  as  the  God-man.  1.  It  is  built  upon  the  God-man. 
2.  It  is  built  upon  the  God-man,  and  not  upon  the  man-God.  3.  It  is  built  upon 
the  God-man,  and  not  upon  any  theory.  III.  The  Church  is  built  upon  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  God-man  slain,  1.  To  be  the  foundation  of  the  Church  it  was  neces- 
sary that  He  should  be  slain.  2.  The  idea  of  the  God-man  slain  seems  to  be  the 
foundation  of  all  the  thoughts  of  God.  3.  And  as  the  •'  Lamb  slain  "  was  the 
centre  of  the  Divine  thoughts  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  so  will  He  become 
the  centre  of  the  myriad  thoughts  of  redeemed  humanity  after  the  creation  shall 
have  been  destroyed.  4.  Make  sure  of  your  foundation.  Build  a  Church  (1)  not 
on  creeds ;  (2)  but  on  the  Bible.  {J.  C.  Jones.)  Christianity  indestructible  : — 
There  is  a  picture  frontispiece  in  Wycliffe's  Bible  which,  to  my  mind,  is  very  sig- 
nificant, very  prophetic.  There  is  a  fire  burning  anu  spreading  rather  rapidly, 
representing  Christianity ;  and  around  the  spreading  fire  are  congregated  a  con- 
siderable number  of  significant  and  most  important  individuals,  all  endeavouring 
to  devise  methods  whereby  they  can  put  the  fire  out.  Among  the  number,  I  sea 
there  one  gentleman  with  horns  and  a  tail,  I  suppose  rei^resenting  his  satanio 
majesty ;  and  another  is  the  Pope  of  Rome,  with  a  few  red-coated  cardinals ; 
Mahomet,  I  believe,  has  a  representative  there  too,  and  there  is  another  represen- 
tative of  infidelity;  and  they  are  all  devising  some  means,  suggesting  some  method 
whereby  to  extinguish  the  fire,  and  after  considerable  cogitation  one  of  them  suggests 
that  they  should  all  make  a  desperate  effort  to  blow  on  the  fire  till  they  blow  it  out. 
The  resolution  is  adopted,  and  there  they  are  with  swollen  cheeks  and  extended 
lips,  blowing  upon  the  fire  with  all  their  might,  but  instead  of  blowing  it  out,  they 
are  blowing  it  up,  and  they  blow  themselves  out  of  breath  before  they  blow  the  fire 
out.  It  is  an  unquenchable  flame,  and  no  human  power  can  extinguish  it.  (Richard 
Roberts.) 

Ver.  19.  And  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.    The 

keys : — 1.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  does  not  mean  heaven.  2.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  does  not  mean  the  Church.  It  indicates  power  :  I.  Administkativb.  II. 
Didactic.  (D.  Eraser,  D.D.)  "7  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys": — The  Saviour 
had  spoken  of  an  edifice  in  which  Peter  was  to  be  a  conspicuous  foundation-stone. 
The  edifice  was  a  temple.  The  scene  was  then  varied  a  little ;  and  the  edifice  was 
a  city.  The  scene  was  varied  again  ;  the  city  is  a  kingdom.  It  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  All  the  representations  are  signi6cant.  They  are  all  appropriate  aspects, 
though  varied,  of  the  grand  reality.  Oar  Lord  promises  to  Peter  the  keys  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  As  the  kingdom  is  a  city,  keys  are  needed  for  the  gates.  The 
city  is  a  fortified  place,  a  captle,  the  palatial  residence  of  the  Great  King.  A  steward 
of  the  house  is  required,  a  major-domo,  one  who  may  take  charge  not  only  of  the 
keys  of  the  gates,  but  of  the  keys  of  the  treasure-house  too,  and  of  all  the  store- 
rooms of  the  establishment.  Our  Saviour  intimates  to  Peter  that  he  would  be 
constituted  such  a  steward  of  the  house  of  God.  He  was  to  have  great  power  and 
authority  as  the  prime  minister  of  the  King.  Acting  according  to  the  commands  of 
his  Sovereign,  he  would  Lave  authority  to  open  the  gates  or  to  shut  them ;  to  open 
the  storehouses  or  to  close  them.  His  power  would  be,  relatively  to  the  King, 
administrative  only.  And  in  discharge  of  the  functions  of  his  high  office  he  would 
at  once  be  instructed  from  above  ly  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  be  assisted  from  around 
by  other  high  officials — the  other  apostles.  He  and  they  unitedly  would  constitute 
the  King's  ministry.  He  would  be  premier.  Hence  it  was  that  on  the  Day  of 
Pentecost  he  took  the  lead  and  opened  the  gates  of  the  kingdom  to  the  Jews. 
Hence  too,  when  he  was  in  Joppa,  he  was  instructed  by  his  Lord  to  open  the  gates 
of  th«  kingdom  to  the  Geutiles  ;  and  he  did  it.  Hence  also,  in  all  the  lists  of  the 
apostles,  Peter  is  invariably  mentioned  ;ir,st.  He  has,  however,  no  successor  in  hia 
premiership,  just  as  he  had  no  successor  as  a  Foundation-Stone.  The  Found* 
tion-Stone  lasts  for  ever.  So  do  all  the  living  stones.  They  live  for  ever. 
And  so  the  ministry  of  the  api  sties  continues  for  ever.  The  laws  of  the  King  are 
communicated  to  us  for  ever  through  the  ministry  of  his  apostolic  ministers.  (J. 
Morison,  D.D.)  The  keys  of  the  kingdom: — Every  Jewish  scribe,  when  fully 
trained  and  authorized  to  teach  his  brethren,  received  from  his  tutors  and  superioii 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  8tf 

a  key,  to  symbolize  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will  which  he  possessed,  and  waa 
about  to  dedicate  to  the  service  of  his  brethren ;  many  of  them  either  carried  a  key 
at  their  girdle,  or  had  it  woven  into  their  robe,  as  an  open  sign  of  the  profession  to 
which  they  had  been  set  apart.  When,  therefore,  Christ  put  "  the  keys  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  "  into  the  hands  of  His  disciples,  they  would  understand  that 
they  were  to  become  scribes  in  His  kingdom  ;  teachers  of  the  truth,  expounders  of 
tbs  law  they  had  learned  from  Him ;  witnesses  and  exemplars  of  the  life  they  had 
seen  Him  live.  These  keys  we  have  authority  to  use  too — keys  of  righteousness 
and  charity,  i.e.,  keys  of  kindness  and  good  living,  as  well  as  keys  of  wisdom  and 
knowlerlge.  By  our  daily  conduct,  and  by  the  spirit  of  our  whole  conduct,  no  less 
than  by  our  words,  we  are  saying  to  our  fellows,  •'  This,  so  far  as  we  understand 
Him,  is  how  Christ  would  have  men  live ;  you  have  only  to  live  so,  and  you  will  be 
in  His  kingdom,  under  His  rule  and  benediction."  By  our  good  words,  and  our 
good  works,  we  are  to  constitute  ourselves  door-keepers  in  the  House  of  the  Lord, 
and  to  open  the  doors  to  all  who  would  enter  in.  It  is,  then,  no  merely  personal 
salvation,  no  merely  future  and  distant  heaven,  no  merely  selfish  and  ignoble  task, 
for  which  we  look  and  to  which  we  are  summoned.  We  are  looking  for  the  heaven 
of  being  now  and  always  in  tune  with  the  will  of  God,  and  for  a  salvation  which 
embraces  the  whole  nature  of  man,  and  extends  to  every  race  and  kindred  and  tribe. 
{S.  Cox,  D.D)  Binding  and  loosing : — In  the  language  of  the  Jewish  schools,  to 
*'  bind  "  and  to  *♦  loose,"  meant  to  prohibit  and  to  permit,  to  determine  what  was 
wrong  and  must  not  be  done,  and  what  was  right  and  ought  to  be  done.  Kabbi  Sham- 
mai,  for  instance,  fcowwd  all  heathen  learning,  i.e.,  he  forbade  his  disciples  to  acquire 
it — declared  what  we  should  call  "classical  studies"  to  be  wrong;  while Eabbi  Hillel 
loosed  these  studies — declared  them  to  be  right,  that  is,  and  encouraged  his  disciples 
to  take  them  up.  In  addressing  this  promise  to  His  first  disciples,  therefore,  Christ 
meant  to  say  that,  humble  and  unlearned  as  they  were,  yet,  in  virtue  of  the  new 
spiritual  life  and  insight  which  He  had  conferred  upon  them,  they  should  become 
"masters  of  sentences,"  and  their  decisions  as  to  what  was  right  and  what  wrong, 
should  carry  no  less  authority  than  they  had  once  attached  to  the  decisions  of  their 
rabbis  and  scribes.  This  promise  also  extends  to  us.  We  are  authorized  to  make 
those  practical  applications  of  truth  to  the  conditions  and  needs  of  the  hour,  by 
which  the  moral  life  and  tone  of  men  will  be  raised  and  purified.  And  we  have 
made  use  of  this  power  in  the  following,  among  other  ways  :  1.  Abolishing  slavery. 
2.  Raising  the  status  of  woman.  3.  Securing  the  education  of  children.  4. 
Advancing  the  cause  of  temperance,  thrift,  industry.  5.  Promoting  the  growth  of 
freedom,  and  the  fraternity  of  men  and  nations.  In  these  and  similar  ways,  the 
general  teaching  of  Christ  has  been  applied  to  the  social  and  moral  conditions  of 
men,  bringing  out  new  bearings  of  familiar  principles  on  human  conduct  and 
duty.  (Ibid.)  Church  discipline : — Once  from  the  pulpit,  at  an  ordination  o£ 
elders,  the  late  Rev.  M.  M'Chejne  made  the  following  declaration.  *'  When  I  first 
entered  upon  the  work  of  the  ministry  among  you,  I  was  exceedingly  ignorant  of 
the  vast  importance  of  church  discipline.  I  thought  that  my  great,  and  almost 
only,  work  was  to  pray  and  preach.  I  saw  your  souls  to  be.  so  precious,  and  the 
time  80  short,  that  I  devoted  all  my  time  and  care  and  strength  to  labour  in  word 
and  doctrine.  When  cases  of  disciphne  were  brought  before  me  and  the  elders, 
I  regarded  them  with  something  like  abhorrence.  It  was  a  duty  I  shrank  from ; 
and  I  may  truly  say  it  nearly  drove  me  from  the  work  of  the  ministry  among  you 
altogether.  But  it  pleased  God,  who  teaches  His  servants  in  another  way  than  man 
teaches,  to  bless  some  of  the  cases  of  discipline  to  the  manifest  and  ondeniable 
conversion  of  the  souls  of  those  under  our  care  ;  and  from  that  hour  a  new  light 
broke  in  upon  my  mind,  and  I  saw  that  if  preaching  be  an  ordinance  of  Christ,  so 
is  church  discipline.  I  now  feel  very  deeply  persuaded  that  both  are  of  God  ;  that 
two  keys  are  committed  to  us  by  Christ — the  one  the  key  of  doctrine,  by  means  of 
which  we  unlock  the  treasures  of  the  Bible :  the  other  the  key  of  discipline,  by 
which  we  open  or  shut  the  way  to  the  sealing  ordinances  of  the  faith.  Both  are 
Christ's  gift,  and  neither  is  to  be  resigned  without  sin."  The  opening  and 
shutting  power  of  the  Christian  life  : — Every  praying  man  and  every  praying 
woman  on  the  globe  that  lives  in  the  intelligent  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  employs 
the  spirit  and  truth  of  Christ  intelligently,  just  as  much  as  councils,  and  synods, 
and  conventions,  and  churches,  has  this  power  of  the  keys.  God  gives  it  to 
every  one  that  desires  to  have  the  living  nature  of  Christ  in  him.  Ah  I  do  you 
not  suppose  there  have  been  thousands  of  men,  who  have  gone  down  through  life 
arrogating  this  claim,  that  never  opened  the  door  of  heaven  to  one  single  soul  t  And 


846  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

yet  there  have  been  hundreds  of  poor  bed-ridden  Christians  whose  key  was  bright 
with  perpetual  using,  and  who,  by  faith,  and  example,  and  testimony,  and  clarity 
of  teaching,  did  bind  iniquity  in  the  world,  by  the  golden  cords  of  truth,  and  did 
Bet  loose,  by  the  same  truth,  those  that  were  bound,  giving  them  power  of  spiritual 
insight,  giving  them  emancipation,  and  bringing  them  into  the  large  light  and 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  Emancipators  of  the  soul  they  were — hnmble,  un- 
crowned, oncanonical,  unordained,  God-sanctified  souls.  They  knew  Christ,  and 
loved  Him,  and  poured  out  His  spirit  upon  men.  And  every  man  that  has  that 
spirit  has  God's  keys  in  his  hands,  and  has  authority  to  bind  and  loose — to  bind  lies 
and  all  iniquity,  and  to  set  loose  all  those  that  suffer  oppression  by  reason  of  spiri- 
tual despotism.  They  go  forth  effulgent  messengers  of  God's  light  and  the  emanci- 
pation that  goes  with  it.  (if.  W.  Beecher.)  The  re^-ponsihility  of  the  key-power: — 
It  is  no  mean  prerogative ;  it  is  past  all  estimation,  indeed,  for  honour  and  for 
dignity,  to  have  the  power  to  open  heaven  to  any  soul.  If  God  were  to  give  you  the 
power  to  go  forth,  and,  touching  the  earth,  to  open  its  fruitful  bosom,  so  that  where- 
ever  you  pressed  your  hand  or  your  foot,  out  there  shoiild  pour  treasures  of  grain 
and  treasures  of  fruit ;  if  God  were  to  give  you  that  power  which  in  ages  gone  by  was 
attributed  to  Ceres,  when  it  was  supposed  that  she  came  to  earth  and  taught  men 
the  arts  of  agriculture — what  a  power  that  would  be.  If  God  had  given  you  power 
to  touch  the  hidden  treasures  of  metal ;  to  know  where  iron  lies  buried ;  to  know 
where  all  the  veins  of  gold  and  silver  are ;  to  open  up  all  the  treasures  beneath  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  men  would  have  supposed  that  that  was  a  great  and  sovereign 
endowment — and  it  would  have  been  great  and  sovereign  in  a  lower  sphere.  But 
how  much  more  noble  is  it  that  God  has  given  men  the  power  to  develop,  not  gold 
and  silver  that  perish,  but  riches  that  never  fade,  that  moth  and  rust  never  corrupt, 
and  that  thieves  do  not  break  through  to  steal — eternal  treasures— the  immortal 
spirits  of  men.  But  this  is  the  case.  God  has  given  authority  to  every  man  that 
lives  in  the  higher  realm  of  truth,  to  open  the  eternal  realm  to  those  around  about  him, 
as  an  inspired  apostle.  For  you  are  a  lineal  successor  of  the  apostle,  every  one  of 
you  that  does  the  apostle's  work.  And  God  sends  every  man  that  goes  forth  to 
carry  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bis  fellow-men.  And  it  is  no  small  prerogative,  no  small 
honour,  but  a  most  responsible  trust,  to  have  committed  to  you  the  keys  o£  life  and 
death ;  to  carry  in  yourself  those  influences  that  shall  be  a  savour  of  life  to  some, 
and  a  savour  of  death  to  others — that  shall  be  a  buttress  and  a  wall  of  defence  to 
some,  and  a  stumbling-stone  and  rock  of  offence  and  destruction  to  others.  How 
solemn  it  is  that  God  gives  men  to  be  parents  in  this  life,  to  rear  up  congregations 
out  of  their  own  loins,  to  sit  in  the  church  of  the  family,  and  makes  fathers  and 
mothers  to  be  apostles,  and  gives  to  them  keys,  saying,  "  What  you  bind  on  earth 
shall  be  bound  in  heaven,  and  what  you  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven," 
It  is  even  so.  You  cannot  free  yourself  from  the  obligation.  You  cannot  help  it. 
You  are  the  key-keeper  for  your  children.  You  are  the  door-keeper  for  your  own 
offspring.  Take  heed,  then,  how  you  carry  yourselves  as  parents  in  your  own 
household — how  you  administer  God's  Word.  It  depends  much  upon  you  whether, 
at  last,  your  children  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  or  whether 
they  shall  rise  to  everlasting  shame  and  contempt.  (Ibid.)  Impiration  carries  the 
keys  : — When  you  are  inspired  you  have  the  keys.  In  your  sublimest  moods,  when 
earth  fades  into  a  fleck  hardly  to  be  seen,  and  heaven  crowds  itself  in  noble  fellow- 
ship upon  your  soul,  the  whole  man  is  lifted  up  in  an  ecstasy  Divine.  In  that  hour 
the  church  holds  the  keys.  You  do  not  hold  the  keys  because  of  hereditary  descent, 
or  ecclesiastical  relationship,  or  mechanical  contrivance,  or  superior  patronage — you 
hold  the  keys  only  so  long  as  you  realize  the  inspiration.  And  no  man  can  take 
those  keys  from  you  ;  everywhere  the  inspired  man  keeps  the  keys — in  merchandise, 
in  statesmanship,  in  philosophy,  in  adventure,  in  religious  thinking,  in  Christian 
civilization,  you  cannot  keep  down  the  inspired  man.     {Dr.  Parker.) 

Vers.  21,  23. — From  that  time  forth  began  Jesus  to  show  nnto  His  disciples, 
l»0"«r  that  He  must  goto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer. — Christ  jorteUing  His  death: — 
I.  Let  us  observe  the  state  of  mind  with  which  Christ  looked  forwabd  to  Hib 
APPROACHING  SUFFERINGS.  Jesus  was  uot  iguoraut  of  the  serious  sufferings  which  were 
coming  upon  Him.  It  is  no  small  part  of  our  happiness  that  future  calamity  is 
partly  hidden.  1.  A  state  of  unshaken  constancy.  We  must  be  firm  in  the  way  of 
duty,  having  counted  the  cost.  2.  The  principle  by  which  He  was  supported — faith. 
"For  we  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which  are 
not  seen."    II.  What  was  His  oonddot,  in  tbbsb  cibcuhstamoes,  towabos  Hn 


OTAF.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  S4t 

DISCIPLES  ?  1.  His  conduct  towards  tl  em  showed  great  compassion  for  their  infirmi- 
ties. 2.  His  displeasure  on  account  of  the  earthly  mind  which  the  apostles  betrayed. 
Learn :  1.  How  insufficient  is  our  own  wisdom  or  strength  to  preserve  us  in  the  wayB 
of  godliness.  2.  How  secure  are  they  who  trust  entirely  in  the  power  and  grace  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  {J.  Jowett.)  A  recommendation  of  readiness  for  suffering  : — 
I.  Pkter'8  unwillingness  to  meet  God's  will  in  k  course  of  suffering,  evinced 
BT  HiB  REBUKE  OF  Chbist.  1.  There  was  intimacy — ••  Then  Peter  took  him."  2, 
There  was  disappointment.  Peter  was  disappointed  that  his  Lord  should  not  have 
the  glory  he  expected.  3.  There  was  ignorance.  Peter  ought  to  have  known  the 
Scriptures  were  full  of  Christ's  sufferings.  4.  There  was  presumption.  11.  Christ's 
whj-ingness  to  fulfil  all  God's  pleasure,  evinced  in  his  rebuke  of  Pkteb 
1.  The  indignation  of  our  Lord.  2.  He  exposed  the  carnality  of  his  views.  3. 
Christ's  love  for  sinners  was  persevering.  {A.  T.  Burroughs.)  The  suffering 
Saviour: — L  A  suffering  Savioub.  1.  The  suffering  was  not  only  great,  but  pecu- 
liar. 2.  And  all  this  the  text  says  was  necessary.  T.he  word  "  must  "  is  prefixed  to 
all  these  clauses.  We  may  interpret  the  word  in  three  ways.  (1)  There  is  the 
"  must  "  of  dtstiny — what  is  to  be  shall  be,  it  is  vain  to  fight  against  it.  (2)  There 
is  the  '*  must "  of  prediction.  (3)  There  is  the  "  must "  of  propriety  and  suitable- 
ness— moral  fitness,  for  atonement  trembles  in  the  balance — *'  Without  shedding 
of  blood,"  &c.  3.  It  is  a  very  peculiar  feature  of  the  Saviour's  suffering  that  He 
had  the  foreknowledge  of  it  in  every  detail.  In  this  respect  He  stands  alone  among 
the  heroes  of  faith.  They  had  no  foresight  of  the  time,  place,  or  circumstances  of 
their  sufferings.  Our  Lord  alone  lived  His  life  under  the  shadow  of  the  cross.  The 
majesty  of  the  character  which  could  endnre  the  weight  of  so  terrible  a  prospect,  re- 
main calm,  self -forgetting,  &c.,  and  even  say  in  the  fore- view  of  death  by  crucifixion : 
♦'  I  have  a  baptism,"  &c.  II.  The  repugnance  of  human  nature  to  pain  and  death. 
Human  nature  shrinks  for  itself  from  the  touch  of  pain,  and  doubly  for  its  loved 
ones.  The  words  do  not  imply  any  want  of  love  or  reverence — it  was  their  very 
motive.  Love  and  reverence  spoke ;  but  ignorance  and  presumption  spoke  too. 
Human  nature  shrinks  with  special  sensitiveness,  till  it  is  taught  of  God,  from  the 
idea  of  a  suffering  Saviour.  The  revelation  of  atonement  by  sacrifice  was  kept 
veiled  from  Peter.  A  veil  is  upon  the  heart  still  of  multitudes — they  see  not  why  a 
Father  should  not  forgive  without  the  intervention  of  a  Mediator,  &c.  III.  Thb 
REPLY  OF  Jesus  to  the  rebuke  of  His  servant.  This  shows  the  Saviour  feeling 
this  repugnance  to  suffenng  as  a  severe  temptation,  repelling  the  sugpestion  of  the 
self -sparing  as  a  cruel  aggravation  of  His  great  life  trial,  and  makhig  the  acceptance 
of  suffering  the  very  point  of  difference  between  the  carnal  mind  and  the  spiritual. 
We  have  to  accept  Christ's  suffering,  and  we  have  to  accept  our  own.  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
St.  Peter's  rebuke  of  Christ: — I.  How  serious  was  the  apostle's  offence.  In 
reference  to  religion  the  seeming  generosity  of  an  error  is  no  excuse  for  it.  II. 
The  causes  which  led  to  the  apostle's  error  and  sin.  1.  He  had  mis- 
understood some  part,  of  what  he  had  heard.  St.  Peter  should  have  looked  at 
the  fact  of  Christ's  suffering  in  the  light  of  His  previous  communications.  2. 
There  was  a  second  part  of  what  Jesus  had  said  which  the  apostle  ignored  alto- 
gether. He  had  said  that  He  would  rise  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day.  3.  The 
third  cause  of  St.  Peter's  error  was  his  assuming  that  his  own  ideas  of  what  wai 
best  must  needs  be  true,  or  at  least  were  actually  true.  St.  Peter  was  in  reality 
desiring  the  worst  thing  possible  ;  our  redemption  could  not  have  been  accom- 
plished without  the  cross.  III.  Simelab  mistakes  occue  with  oubselves.  1. 
In  reference  to  the  dispensations  belonging  to  our  personal  history  and  fortunes. 
How  often  a  part  is  misunderstood  and  left  out.  In  the  gloom  of  trial  we  overlook 
the  lesujrection.  2.  In  reference  to  the  government  of  the  world  and  the  course 
of  providence  generally.  3.  In  reference  to  the  claims  of  Divine  revelation 
generally,  and  especially  the  claims  of  Jesus  the  Christ  as  the  sum  and  centre  of  it. 
Learn :  1.  Be  resolute  in  all  humbleness  when  you  think  of  God's  ways.  2. 
Loyalty  to  the  personal  Christ.  3.  Accept  Christ's  word  as  He  gives  it.  (W.  8. 
Chapman,  M. A.)  The  temptation  arising  from  human  love: — How  are  we  to  ex- 
plain the  severity  of  our  Lord's  rebuke  ?  I.  When  it  was  this  rebuke  was  oiten. 
Our  Lord  had  just  entered  upon  the  delicate  task  of  Teacher,  the  bringing  of  the 
minds  of  His  disciples  into  familiarity  vrith  the  deeper  things  in  His  life  and  work. 
In  passing  from  ignorance  to  knowledge  there  must  be  a  little  contention.  Ihis 
the  crucial  time — "  I  must  speak  of  My  sufferings."  He  enters  upon  the  process. 
St,  Peter  spoils  it.  His  rashness  would  not  let  him  learn.  Christian  progreag 
meets  hindrances  from  two  sources :  (1)  From  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked ;  (2) 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

from  the  immature  goodness  of  the  good.  II.  The  kingdom  of  God  la  very  oftkh 
HIND3BED  BY  THAT  WHICH  IT  HAS  IT6ELF  PRODUCED.  In  socicty  to-day  there  is  a 
Boftness,  a  consideration  for  ease  of  life,  which  has  grown  up  under  Christianity, 
and  which  is  its  product.  In  old  days  life  was  hard,  there  was  endurance  and 
great  o^ort.  Passive  duties  have  their  opportunity  in  these  days.  We  talk  of  "  Peace 
on  earth."  Our  idea  of  peace  is  quietude.  But  war  is  often  essential  to  peace  ; 
peftce  means  labour — the  sword  turned  into  the  ploughshare — that  is  God's  idea  of 
peace.  Religious  life  may  become  sentimental.  Our  Lord's  rebuke  of  Peter  was 
severe  because  Peter's  plea  was  affection  throwing  itself  across  the  path  of  duty. 
Have  you  never  felt  how  terrible  it  is  to  have  pleading  affection  try  to  hinder  soma 
great  sacrifice?  How  much  harder  that  form  of  opposition  than  any  other. 
Satan  now  tries  to  hinder  Christ  through  the  blind  love  of  Peter.  Is  not  the  Church 
of  Christ  often  hindered  now  by  pleadings  of  love,  by  those  who  say  :  "  This  be  far 
from  thee.  Save  thyself."  It  exhibits  a  fxiendly  consideration  for  our  happiness  ;  save 
thy  money,  health,  effects.  (R.  Thomas.)  The  temptations  of  love  to  be  rejected  : — 
If  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  had  yielded  to  home  sickness  and  not  let  that  vessel  return 
empty,  though  she  lay  so  long  in  the  offing,  tempting  their  return,  there  might 
have  been  an  America,  but  it  would  not  have  been  this  America.  If  Livingstone 
had  listened  to  the  voices  of  those  who  thought  him  mad,  Africa  to-day  would  have 
been  still  a  terra  incognita.  If  prudence  had  prevailed  over  zeal  seventy  years  ago, 
there  would  have  been  no  foreign  missions  afoot  to-day.  But  all  these  men  who 
went  to  do  the  pioneer  work  had  mothers  and  sisters  and  brothers  tugging  at  their 
heart-strings,  and  tempting  them  not  to  go.  And  it  is  ever  so.  It  is  not  always 
as  in  the  case  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Norman  M'Leod,  whom  I  once  heard  relate  how  his 
Bon  had  just  gone  into  the  ministry,  and  had  accepted  a  very  poor  church  in  the 
highlands  of  Scotland,  refusing  several  splendid  offers  which  would  have  made  him 
wealthy.  "  But,"  said  Dr.  M'Leod,  "  I  thank  God  for  the  lad ;  I  would  rather  see 
him  where  he  is  with  his  £150  a  year,  than  in  the  palace  with  £10,000  a  year."  It 
is  very  hard  to  say  it ;  but,  oh,  it  is  necessary— be  on  your  guard  against  the 
temptations  of  your  friends,  of  your  relatives,  of  your  lovers,  whose  affection  is 
precious  to  you.  Remember  that  "Satan  now  is  wiser  than  of  yore,  and  tempts 
by  making  rich — not  making  poor."  Remember,  specially,  our  Redeemer's  own 
irords,  "  He  that  saveth  his  hfe  shall  lose  it,  and  he  that  loseth  his  Ufe  for  My  sake, 
the  same  shall  save  it."  (Ibid.)  Different  Effects  of  Afflictions ;— Afflictions  are 
unavoidable.  To  be  a  man,  as  a  man  to  live  upon  earth,  to  stand  in  connection 
with  other  men,  and  yet  to  be  out  of  reach  of  afflictions,  that  is  absolutely  im- 
possible. How  differently  did  our  Lord  think  of  them  from  his  weak,  still  worldly- 
minded  disciple,  Peter !  1.  The  dissipated  and  thoughtless  man  looks  upon  the 
afflictions  that  befall  him  and  others  as  the  effects  of  chance,  as  inevitable  mis- 
fortunes. 2.  The  proud  man  entertains  such  an  opinion  of  himself,  that  he  thinks 
no  afflictions  ought  to  befall  him.  3.  The  superstitious  man  looks  on  all  afflic- 
tions as  punishments  of  sin.  4.  The  moralist  regards  them  as  necessary  results 
of  the  original  constitution  of  things.  6.  The  Christian  sees  them  as  the  visita- 
tions of  a  wise  and  benign  providence.  (ZolUkofer.)  "  Peter  took  Him." — 
Peter's  heart  indeed  was  agitated.  Strange  surgings  swelled  within  him  at  the 
mention  of  the  gloomy  ideas  which  had  been  mooted.  The  spray  of  these  surgings 
lashed  upon  the  picture  which  his  imagination  had  been  busily  drawing.  That 
picture  was  still  fresh  and  madid.  It  was  overlaid  with  brilliant  coloiniug,  which 
exhibited  to  the  good  man's  fancy  a  bewitching  minglement  of  glories,  material 
and  spiritual.  As  the  broken  surgings  dashed  upon  it,  there  was  anguish  in  the 
painter's  spirit.  There  was  ajiper  too.  He  was  displeased.  He  was  chagrined. 
Be  said  impetuously,  and  unrehectingly,  within  himself:  What  1  This  will  never 
do.     It  must   not   bel      (J.  Mornson,  D.D.)  "Began  to  rebuke  Him:"— 

He  began  impulsively,  vehemently,  inconsiderately,  as  was  too  often  his  wont. 
He  began,  but  the  gracious  Lord  rose  up  in  majesty  and  interrupted  him,  not 
allowing  him  to  proceed  far  in  the  improper  freedom  he  was  usmg,  and  the  im- 
proper feeling  he  was  nursing.  (Ibid.)  "  Sataif,:  "—Christ  looked  for  the 
moment  through  Peter,  and  saw  behind  him  His  oldenemy,  cunningly  making  use 
ot  the  prejudices  and  impulsive  honesty  of  the  undeveloped  apostle.  It  was  the  old 
temptation  back  again,  that  was  now  presented  through  Peter— the  temptation  to 
avoid  suffering,  persecution,  bitter  hate,  scorn  and  murder;  and  instead,  to  erect  a 
■ecular  throne  that  would  in  pomp  surmount  all  other  thrones  upon  the  earth. 
The  Saviour  8  spirit  was  roused  when  He  met  His  old  foe  in  such  circumstances,  look- 
fag  from  behindt  he  battlements  of  the  loving  bpt  disconcerted  heart  of  the  chief  ol 


rsiP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  iU 

the  apostles.  Hence  He  spoke  decidedly  and  strongly.  {Ihid. )  "  Satan  :  " — Good 
men  often  do  the  devil's  work,  though  they  know  it  not.  (JR.  Baxter.)  I. 
Peteb's  conduct.  Characterized  by.  1.  Arrogant  presumption.  2.  Ignorance  oi 
the  end  of  Christ's  sufferings.  3.  Mistimed  sympathy.  II.  Christ's  bebd^b. 
Prompt,  severe,  instructive.  {W.  H.  Booth.)  The  savour  of  earthlinesg  : — 1. 
Some  make  reason  the  standard.  2.  The  life  and  conversation  of  too  many 
nominal  disciples,  as  well  as  their  errors  in  belief,  show  their  savoor  of  eartbli- 
ness.  (J.  Gaston.)  Noble  purposes  to  be  encouraged : — When  your  boy  says  to 
yon  suddenly  some  day,  "  Father,  I  think  I  shall  be  a  missionary  and  go  abroad, 
and  preach  to  the  heathen,"  don't  you  put  your  hand  upon  the  lad's  ambition,  and 
put  it  down ;  don't  throw  any  impediment  in  his  way.  Hear  him  on  another 
occasion,  encourage  him  to  thiuk  still  further  of  the  scheme  ;  and  though  the  an- 
nouncement of  the  lad's  idea  tear  your  very  heart-stnnga,  because  you  have  said, 
This  eon  shall  comfort  me  in  my  old  age  and  feebleness,  yet  give  him  time  to  think 
about  it,  and  show  him  the  whole  case  as  far  as  it  reveals  itself  to  your  own 
mind,  and  rather  stimulate  than  discourage  him  when  hia  mind  is  set  in  a  philan- 
thropic and  noble  direction.  And  so  when  your  husband  proposes  to  give  soma 
large  sum  to  this  good  institution  or  that,  don't  tell  him  that  the  half  of  it  will  do, 
because  he  will  probably  believe  you, — it  is  so  easy  to  go  down,  and  so  difficult  to 
get  up.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  failure  of  high  spiritual  mood  : — What  a  dif- 
ferent figure  is  Peter  now  from  that  which  he  presented  a  few  verses  before.  **  Jesus 
said  to  him,"  we  read  in  the  seventeenth  verse,  '•  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-jona." 
At  that  moment  Simon  was  lifted  above  the  sons  of  men.  He  was  the  mountain 
peak  that  caught  the  first  glance  of  the  morning.  And  there  he  stood,  king  of  men, 
first  of  disciples,  most  honoured  of  the  sons  of  earth ;  for  through  him  the  Father 
had  revealed  the  Son.  What  a  figure  does  he  present  in  the  twenty-third  verse  f 
"Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan."  The  same  man,  but  not  the  same  character.  The 
mountain  is  crushed,  the  great  mountain  become  a  plain,  become  a  valley ;  the 
chief  of  the  sons  of  men  called  a  devil  and  ordered  off  behind.  These  are  the 
experience^  of  some  of  us.  We  are  to-day  the  most  blessed  among  men,  we  seem 
to  see  almost  into  heaven.  To-morrow  we  shall  go  and  say  some  blundering  thing, 
and  we  shall  be  found  among  the  lowest  and  the  vulgarest  of  our  kind.  One  hoar 
we  shall  speak  music,  and  another  hour  our  voice  shall  be  hoarse,  because  we  are 
Baying  offensive  things  against  God  and  against  man.  Do  not  let  us  condemn  one 
another  because  of  these  changes  in  our  experience.  The  longer  I  live  the  more  I 
feel  this,  how  difficult  it  is  to  keep  np  a  continuity  of  the  highest  spiritual  life. 
{Ibid.) 

Ver.  24.  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  hlmselC. — Self-denial : — 
I,  What  is  the  pbinciple  of  seu-denial  ?  It  may  be  said  to  be  in  renouncing 
whatever  comes  in  competition  with  the  love  and  service  of  Christ,  your  turning 
from  things  lawful  when  they  become  occasions  of  spiritual  injury  either  to  oar- 
eel  ves  or  others.  Self-denial  proceeds  on  high  consideration.  1.  Love  to  Christ, 
which  involves  obedience  to  His  word.  2.  Living  not  unto  ourselves  but  unto  God 
and  for  the  welfare  of  others.  These  two  must  be  combined.  It  is  not  self-denial  ^ 
to  give  our  goods  to  feed  the  poor ;  but  apart  from  the  principle  of  love  it  is  not 
self-denial.  Nor  is  it  self-denial  for  a  man  to  refuse  temporal  honours  for  which 
Gk)d  has  qualified  him,  and  which  are  given  in  a  providential  way.  No  self-denial 
in  Joseph  refusing  to  be  governor  over  Egypt.  Nor  is  it  self-denial  to  reject  a  lawful 
nse  of  God's  creatures,  or  to  deprive  himself  of  that  necessary  to  health.  II.  How 
BEU-DENiAL  IS  EXHIBITED.  It  is  the  offspring  of  faith  in  Christ.  1.  It  shows  itself 
in  the  lowest  forms ;  first,  in  denying  sin,  things  which  the  world  allows,  but  which 
the  Word  of  God  condemns.  2.  In  denying  what  may  be  called  righteous  self. 
"  Count  all  loss  for  Christ."  3.  In  things  lawful  but  not  expedient  on  account  of  *'^ 
their  influence  on  others.  4.  In  being  true  to  the  Word  of  God.  6.  In  things 
agreeable  but  questionable.  {J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  The  Cross  and  the  Crown  : — 
It  is  a  proof  of  the  truth  and  Divine  origin  of  our  religion  that  it  gives  such  a  dis- 
tinct notice  of  the  difficulties  which  its  followers  will  have  to  encounter.  What 
other  religion  could  afford  to  speak  thus.  1.  It  is  no  wonder  that  Christ  laid  down 
self-denial  as  requisite  in  His  followers,  as  He  emptied  Himself,  and  we  cannot  in  r^ 
His  whole  life  detect  a  point  where  we  can  see  self.  2.  The  selfishness  of  one  man 
is  not  the  selfishness  of  another ;  every  one  knows  the  individualities  of  his  own 
character.  There  is  one  man  whose  self  lies  in  his  intellect.  Another  man's  self 
is  pleasure.    Another  man's  self  takes  the  aspect  of  religion,  he  wants  to  be  saved 


850  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

in  a  way  he  has  marked  out.     3.  The  believer  takes  up  his  cross,  not  anothef 

^  person's.  4.  He  is  to  take  it  up,  not  to  go  out  of  his  way  to  seek  it.  5.  This  he  ia 
to  do  by  cheerful  act,  not  waiting  for  compulsion.  "  Dragged  crosses  are  very  heavy, 
but  carried  crosses  are  very  light."  6.  What  is  the  cross?  not  some  great  thing  to 
come  by-and-by.  There  is  some  cross  to-day,  another  to-morrow — •♦  daily."  The 
cross  is  a  trial  which  has  something  humiliating  in  it,  and  which  is  painful  to  the 
old  nature.  6.  We  must  follow  Christ,  for  what  is  it  worth  to  "  deny  one's  self,' 
or  to  take  up  a  "  cross,"  if  it  be  not  done  with  an  express  intention  towards  Christ  ? 

•Nj  [J.  Fauflhan,  M.A.)  Self-denial : — Christianity  can  never  be  made  popul.ir.  It 
always  calls  for  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice  {Gal.  v.  24).  I.  There  are  thinqs 
KAH-j  IN  RELIGION — thoso  in  which  the  recipients  are  pas-^ive.  1.  Eedemption  has 
been  fully  accomplished  for  us  by  the  Saviour.  2.  Christ  is  oSsred  to  all  as  the 
Saviour  from  sin.  3.  The  acceptance  of  Christ  is  made  a  matter  of  choice, 
11.  Things  that  are  hard.  1.  The  renunciation  of  the  world  and  worldly  delights. 
2.  Self-denial.  We  must  renounce  our  own  wisdom,  will,  mind,  pleasure,  &o.  3. 
Self-sacritice.  Even  life  itself  when  duty  demands.  III.  Bdt  hard  things  abb 
made  east.  1.  When  we  look  at  their  nalm-e  and  duration  (2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18).  2. 
When  we  rely  upon  God's  promise  and  accept  His  strengthening  grace  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  25;  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10;  Phil.  iv.  13).  3.  When  we  fully  accept  self-denial  and 
cross-bearing  as  the  rule  of  our  life  (Matt.  xi.  23-30).  4.  When  we  obtain  Divine 
comfort  and  Christian  consolation  (2  Cor.  i.  4,  5).  IV.  Infebbnces  :  1.  Let  us,  in 
the  active  duties  of  religion,  •'  Work  out,"  &0.  2.  Let  us  seok  out  the  things  which 
require  of  ua  self-denial.  This  will  help  us  in  advance  to  give  them  up  cheerfully 
and  readily.  3.  Let  ua  always  look  to  Jesus  and  consider  His  example  (Heb. 
xii.  1-3).  (L.  O.  Thompson.)  Self-denial  .—That  it  is  the  duty  of  all  that  would 
be  Christ's  disciples  to  deny  themselves.  I.  This  doctrine  in  general.  _  The 
extent  of  this  duty.  1.  For  the  object — a  man's  own  self ;  it  is  a  bundle  of  idols. 
It  seems  contrary  to  reason  to  deny  self,  since  nature  teaches  man  to  love  himself ; 
grace  doth  not  disallow  it.     Therefore  (1)  you  must  know  wlien  respects  to  self  are 

^W  culpable.  There  is  a  lawful  self-love.  The  self  we  are  to  deny  stands  in  opposition 
to  God.  Self  is  sinfully  respected  when  dues  are  paid  to  the  creature  which  only 
belong  to  God.  These  are  four :— I.  As  God  is  the  First  Cause  He  would  keep  up 
the  respect  of  the  world  toBQs  majesty  by  dependence  and  trust.  2.  As  God  is  the 
chiefest  good,  so  He  must  have  the  highest  esteem.  3.  As  God  ia  the  highest  Lord, 
it  is  His  peouhar  prerogative  to  give  laws  to  the  creature.  Self  is  not  to  intei-pose 
a  ad  give  laws  to  us.  4.  As  God  is  the  last  end  of  our  beings  and  actions,  the 
supreme  cause  is  to  be  the  utmost  end  (Prov.  xvi.  4).  2.  The  subject.  See  the  extent 
of  the  duty  ;  it  reaches  all  sorts  of  men—"  If  any  man,"  &c.  No  calling,  sex,  age, 
duty,  condition  of  life,  is  excluded.  All  men  are  to  practise  it  ;  in  all  thuigs ; 
always ;  with  all  our  heart.  (1)  We  cannot  else  be  conformed  to  our  great  Master ; 
Jesus  Christ  came  from  heaven  on  purpose  to  teach  us  the  lesson  of  self-deniaL 
(2)  It  is  practised  by  all  the  fellows  in  the  same  school.     Christ  set  the  copy,  and 

^,,^  all  the  saints  have  written  after  it.  (3)  Jesus  Christ  may  justly  require  it ;  all  the 
idols  of  the  world  expect  it  from  their  votaries.  (4)  Because  self  is  the  greatest 
enemy  both  to  God  and  man.  (5)  Because  those  that  are  Clirist's  disciples  are  not 
their  own  men  (B^^.  ^iv.  6).  (6)  Because  it  is  the  most  gainful  project  in  the 
world.  Self -denial  is  theTrue  way  of  self-advancing.  (7)  Because  otherwise  a  nian 
can  be  nothing  in  religion,  neither  do,  nor  sulier,  therefore  we  must  resolve  either 
to  deny  self  or  Christ.  (8)  Self-denial  is  a  special  part  of  faith.  3.  The  signs  ol 
Belf-denial.  (1)  Exelu.-<ive.  It  is  a  sign  that  self  is  exalted.  (1)  When  a  man  did 
never  set  himself  to  thwart  his  own  desires.  (2)  By  an  impatiency  in  our  natures 
when  we  are  crossed  by  others.  (3)  When  a  man  is  loth  to  be  a  loser  by  religion. 
(4)  When  the  heart  is  grieved  at  the  good  of  others.  (5)  When  men  care  not 
how  it  goeth  with  the  public  so  they  may  promote  their  private  inter£«t. 
2.  Inclusive  signs  ol  self-deniaL  (1)  When  a  man  is  swayed  by  reasons  of  con- 
science  rather  than  by  reasons  of  interest,  when  he  is  content  to  be  anything  so 
lie  may  be  sensible  to  God's  glory.  (2)  By  an  humble  submission  to  God's  will. 
It  is  a  great  conquest  over  ourselves  when  we  conquer  our  will.  (3)  When  a  man 
is  vile  in  his  own  eyes,  and  reflects  with  indignation  upon  his  own  sins.  4.  The 
means  of  self-denial,  whereby  it  may  be  made  more  easy.  (1)  Lessen  your  esteem 
for  earthly  things.  (2)  Seek  self  in  God,  this  is  an  innocent  diversion.  When  w« 
cannot  weaken  the  affection  let  us  change  the  object.  (3)  Resolve  upon  the  worst 
to  please  God,  though  it  be  with  the  displeasure  of  self  and  the  world.  (4)  Tak« 
heed  ol  confining  thy  welfare  to  outward  means,  as  if  thou  couldeat  not  be  happy 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  Ml 

without  the  creature.  (5)  Often  act  faith,  and  look  within  the  veil.  Send  thy 
thoughts  as  messengers  into  the  Land  of  Promise.  (6)  In  all  debates  between  con- 
science  and  interest  observe  God's  special  providence  to  thyself.  (7)  Consider  the  »-'' 
right  God  has  in  all  that  is  thine.  If  you  would  deny  self  : — (1)  Every  one  must 
observe  the  temper  and  particular  constitution  of  his  own  soul.  (2)  Many  may 
deny  themselves  in  purpose  that  yet  fail  when  they  come  to  act.  (3)  There  ia 
nothing  in  religion  that  cannot  deny  pleasure  and  delicacy  of  life.  (4)  We  must 
deny  ourselves  in  desire  as  well  as  in  enjoyments.  (5)  Vainglory  is  as  sordid  a 
piece  of  self,  and  as  much  to  be  denied,  as  riches  and  worldly  greatness.  (6)  We 
must  deny  ourselves,  not  only  in  case  of  temptation  to  direct  sin,  but  also  for  the 
general  advantage  of  a  holy  life.  (7)  In  self-denial  regard  muRt  be  had  to  the 
seasons  wherein  we  live — (1)  Times  of  judgment  ;  (2)  not  to  put  stumbling-blocks 
in  the  wa"  5f  new  converts;  (3)  in  prosperous  times.  II.  The  kinds  of  beu- 
PENiAL.  Self  must  be  denied  so  far,  as  'tis  opposite  to  God,  or  put  in  the  place  of 
God.  And  therefore  we  may  judge  of  the  kinds  of  self-denial,  according  to  the  dis- 
tinct  privileges  of  the  Godhead.  1.  As  God  is  the  First  Cause,  upon  whom  all  things 
depend  in  their  being  and  operation,  and  so  we  are  to  deny  self,  that  is,  self-depend- 
ence. 2.  God  is  the  chiefest  good,  and  therefore  to  be  valued  above  all  beings, 
interests,  and  concernments  in  the  world,  and  so  we  are  to  deny  self,  that  is,  self- 
love.  3.  God  is  (and  He  alone)  the  highest  Lord,  and  most  absolute  Sovereign, 
\?ho  swayeth  all  things  by  His  laws  and  providence,  and  so  we  are  to  deny  self, 
that  is,  self-will,  by  a  willing  and  full  obedience  to  His  laws,  and  by  an  absolute 
subjection  to  the  domininn  of  His  providence ;  the  one  is  holiness,  and  the  other  is 
patience.  The  one  relateth  to  His  governing,  the  other  to  His  dis-posing,  will. 
4.  God  is  the  last  end,  in  which  all  things  do  at  length  terminate,  and  so  we  are  to 
deny  self,  that  is,  self-seeking.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Christian  discipleship  : — 
L  In  religion,  Christ  is  the  Supreme  Leader  of  men.  II.  What  is  impued  in 
FOLLOWING  Christ?  It  is  to — 1.  Think  the  thoughts  of  Christ.  2.  To  feel  the 
feeling  of  Christ.  3.  To  work  out  the  will  of  Christ.  III.  The  conditions  of 
perfect  discipleship.  1.  Voluntariness.  2.  Eenunciation  of  the  old  life  of  sin 
and  self.  3.  Entire  submission  to  Christ  in  all  things.  4.  Perseverance.  {John 
Millar.)  The  call  to  follow  Christ : — I.  How  does  Christ  call  vb  ?  1.  By  the 
voice  of  conscience.  2.  By  sickness.  8.  By  the  death  of  friends.  4.  By  Hia 
Word.  5.  By  His  ordinances,  ministers,  &c.  And  thus  He  is  now  speaking  to  ns. 
Be  not  deaf  to  these  calls.  III.  The  character  required  op  those  who  have  madb 
UP  their  minds  to  follow  Christ.  They  must  be  self-denying,  and,  if  need  be,  a 
suffering  people  (Titus  ii.  11,  12).  Here  we  have  an  unerring  standard  to  try  our- 
selves by.  (J.  D.  Graves.)  Self-denial  not  expected  hy  carnal  fancy : — Carnal  fancy 
imagineth  a  path  strewed  with  lilies  and  roses;  we  are  tooten<1er-footed  to  think  of 
briars  and  thorns.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  wide  meaning  of  the  word  "  »elf"  : — A  ^-^ 
capacious  word,  that  doth  not  only  involve  our  persons,  but  whatever  is  ours,  so  far 
as  it  standeth  in  opposition  to  God,  or  cometh  in  competition  with  Him.  A  man  and 
all  his  lusts,  a  man  and  all  his  relations ;  a  man  and  all  his  interests;  life,  and  all  the 
appendages  of  life,  is  one  aggregate  thing  which  in  Scripture  is  called  self.  In  short, 
whatsoever  is  of  himself,  in  himsrlf,  belonging  to  himself,  as  a  corrupt,  or  carnal, 
man ;  all  that  is  to  be  denied.  And  indeed,  every  man  hath  many  a  self  within  him- 
self ;  his  lusts  are  himself;  his  life  is  Limself  ;  his  name  is  himself;  his  wealth, 
liberty,  ease,  favour,  lands,  father,  mother,  and  all  relations,  they  are  comprised 
within  the  term  of  self  (Luke  xiv.  26).  (Ibid.)  Self-denial  not  partial : — As  Saul 
slew  some  of  the  cattle,  but  spared  the  fat,  and  Agag.  Many  can  deny  themselves 
in  many  things,  but  they  are  loth  to  give  up  all  to  God,  without  bounds  and  reserva- 
tions. {Tbid.)  Self-denial  to  be  expected  on  the  road  to  heaven: — If  a  man  were  told 
that  his  way  to  such  a  place  is  encumbered  with  briars  and  thorns,  and  that  he  must 
ride  through  many  dirty  lanes,  and  must  look  for  scratching  brambles,  and  manymiry 
places ;  now  when  he  seeth  nothing  but  a  green  and  pleasant  path,  he  would  think  he 
had  mistaken  and  lost  his  way:  so,  when  you  are  told  your  way  to  heaven  is  a  strait 
way,  and  that  religion  will  put  you  upon  self-denial  of  your  pleasure,  profit,  and 
carnal  desires;  and  yet  you  never  wrestled  with  your  lusts,  nor  quitted  anything  for 
Christ;  and  meet  with  nothing  but  pleasure,  profit,  and  delight  in  the  profession  of 
religion,  you  may  well  think  that  you  are  mistaken  in  the  way ;  and  it  is  a  great 
sign  you  are  yet  to  seek  in  the  duty,  which  Christ's  scholars  must  practise.  (Ibid.) 
Self-denial  the  A  B  C  of  religion  : — We  shall  never  digest  the  inconveniences  of  a 
spiritual  life,  till  we  resolve  upon  it.  We  must  make  over  our  interests  in  our  lives, 
and  whatevel  is  dear  to  us,  reckon  the  charges  (Luke  ziv.  26).     A  builder  spends 


S52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

cheerf  ally,  as  long  as  liis  charges  are  witliiu  liis  allowance,  but  when  that's  exceeded, 
and  he  goes  beyond  what  he  hath  reckoned  upon,  then  every  penny  is  disbursed 
with  grudging.  Moat  resolve  upon  little  or  no  trouble  in  religion,  and  from  thence 
it  oomes  to  pass,  that  when  they  are  crossed,  they  prove  faint-hearted.  Therefore, 
put  your  life  in  your  hand,  and  resolve  to  follow  Christ,  wheresoever  He  goeth. 
(Ibid.)  Seek  glory  in  God  : — Seek  honour  in  God.  Do  but  change  vainglory  for 
eternal  glory.     That's  a  lawful  seeking  of  self,  when  we  seek  it  in  God  (John  t.  44). 

ilhid.)  Self-denial  not  temporary: — We  may  hang  the  head  for  a  day  like  a 
(ulruah.  (Ibid.)  Self-denial  regulated  by  service  rather  than  by  pleasure  : — 
As  a  traveller,  when  two  ways  are  proposed  to  him,  one  pleasant,  the  other  very 
craggy  and  dangerous,  he  doth  not  look  which  way  is  most  pleasant,  but  which  way 
conduceth  to  his  journey's  end  :  so  a  child  of  God  doth  not  look  to  what's  most 
grateful  to  the  flesh,  but  how  he  may  do  most  work  and  service,  and  glorify  God 
upon  earth.  (Ibid.)  Self-denial  must  not  be  conttrained  by  providence  : — Not  as 
a  marmer,  in  a  storm,  casts  away  his  goods  by  force,  bat  as  a  bride  leaves  her 
father's  house  (P^a.  xlv.  10).  It  must  be  out  of  a  principle  of  grace,  and  out  of 
love  to  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Self-denial  must  not  be  ieltlsh  : — The  devil  disguiseth 
himself  into  all  forms  and  shapes.  As  Jacob  put  on  Esau's  clothes,  that  he  might 
appear  rough  and  hairy,  and  so  get  the  blessing ;  so,  many  seem  to  deuy  themselves 
of  the  comforts  of  life,  but  it  is  but  for  their  own  praise.  (Ibid.)  Self-denial 
more  possible  in  Christ  tlian  in  Christians : — They  that  caress  themselves  in  all  the 
deliglits  of  the  world,  seem  to  profess  another  master  than  Christ.  We  are  of  a 
base  condition,  but  two  or  three  degrees  distant  from  dust  and  nothing.  The  sun 
can  go  back  ten  degrees.  Christ,  the  Lord  of  Glory,  might  go  back  ten  degrees,  but 
we  have  not  so  much  to  lose.  (Ibid.)  Self-denial  seen  vwst  in  the  best 
Christians: — They  that  are  the  best  scholars  in  this  school,  most  abhor  self-conceit 
and  seif-seeking.  As  the  loaden  boaghs  hang  the  head,  and  bend  downward,  so  do 
the  ohildien  of  God,  that  have  been  most  fruitful  in  tbe  Christian  course;  as  the 
eun,  the  higher  it  is,  doth  cast  the  least  shadows.  So  for  self-seeking.  (Ibid.) 
Self-denial  riclier  for  love  than  for  lust : — Many  a  covetous  man  doth  shame  many  a 
godly  man.  Eeligion  is  a  better  thing.  Shall  lust  do  more  with  them,  than  the 
love  of  Christ  with  thee  ?  (Ibid.)  Selj -denial  consistent  in  a  follower  of  Christ : — 
When  men  can  remit  nothing  of  their  vanity  and  luxury,  they  make  Christianity  to 
be  but  a  notion,  and  an  empty  pretence ;  they  are  men  and  women  of  pleasure, 
when  Jesus  Christ  was  a  man  of  sorrows.  (Ibid. )  Self-denial  aided  by  a  moderate 
esteem  of  worldly  things : — When  an  earthem  pitcher  is  broken,  a  man  is  not 
troubled  at  it,  because  he  hath  not  set  his  esteem  and  heart  upon  it,  being  but  a 
trifle.  (Ibid.)  SeeJung  God  in  Himself,  not  in  His  creatures,  aids  self-denial : — 
The  men  of  the  world  have  only  a  candle,  which  is  soon  blown  out,  an  estate  that 
may  easily  be  blasted  ;  but  the  children  of  God  have  the  sun,  which  can  stead  them 
without  a  candle  (Hos.  ii.  11,  12).  All  the  wicked  man's  happiness  is  bound  up 
with  the  vine,  and  fig-tree,  with  his  estate.  Consider,  your  happiness  doth  not  lie 
within  yourselves,  nor  in  any  other  creature,  but  in  God  alone.  God  in  Himself  is 
much  better  than  God  in  the  creature.  Now,  carnal  men  they  prize  God  in  the 
creature,  but  not  God  in  Himself.  And  therefore,  the  first  thing  we  must  depend 
upon,  is,  that  God  is  an  all-sufiioient  God  in  Himself;  not  God  in  friends,  not  God 
in  wealth,  but  God  in  Himself.  We  cannot  see  how  it  can  be  well  without  friends, 
and  wealth,  and  hberty;  therefore  our  hearts  are  glued  to  them.  Oh,  take  heed  of 
this.  All  these  things  are  but  several  pipes,  to  dehver,  and  convey  to  us,  the 
influence  of  the  Supreme  cause ;  therefore  still  prize  God  in  Himself,  befcre  God 
in  the  creature.  (Ibid.)  Contentment  a  great  part  of  self-denial : — To  desire  more, 
it  is  but  to  desire  more  snares.  If  I  had  more,  I  should  have  more  trouble,  more 
snares,  more  duty.  Greater  gates  do  but  open  to  more  care.  I  should  have  more  to 
account  for,  more  time,  and  more  opportunity  ;  and  alas,  I  cannot  answer  for  what 
I  have  already.  If  a  plant  be  starved  in  the  valleys,  it  will  never  thrive  on  the 
mountains.  So,  if,  in  a  low  condition,  we  are  not  able  to  conquer  the  temptation  of 
it,  what  ahall  we  do,  if  we  had  more,  if  we  cannot  be  responsible  to  God  for  what 
we  havef  (Ibid.)  Expectations  in  heaven: — A  man  will  better  quit  that  he 
hath  upon  earth,  when  he  hath  strong  expectations  of  heaven  (Bom.  viii.  18). 
(Ibid.)  Self-abnegation  in  the  prosecution  of  Christ's  work: — I.  In  the  way  oi" 
sEU-iNDtJi/JKNOK.  This  appears  when  in  the  promotion  of  God's  work  we  choose  to 
do  what  is  easy  and  pleasant  and  leave  others  to  do  what  is  not  in  accordance  with 
our  tastes  or  which  requires  sacrifice  of  any  kind.  1.  The  moral  unseemliness  of  it 
dOBt  strike  oi  at  onoo ;  when  we  refuse  self-indolgencd  in  ordinary  puieuita     i. 


•HIP.  xn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  S5i 

This  self-indulgence  shows  that  we  lack  a  genuine  interest  in  God  and  in  His  work. 
8.  It  hinders  our  own  progress  and  success  in  the  Christiau  service.  IL  Seu- 
DEPENDENCE  18  ANOTHER  FOBM  OF  THE  Evn,.  In  the  former  case  too  little  was  made 
of  human  agency;  in  this,  too  much.  We  do  God's  work  without  His  help.  1.  The 
aggravated  ungodliness  which  this  self-dependence  involves.  In  worldly  affairs 
our  agency  is  little  compared  with  God's  agency.  2.  It  hinders  the  action  within  ua 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  Self-seekinu  is  another  fobm  of  the  evil,  1.  Look 
at  the  shocking  incongruity  which  self-seeking  in  connection  with  God's  work 
involves.  Never  more  out  of  place  than  in  working  for  God's  glory.  2.  Look  at 
what  the  self-seeking  man  suffers  who  indulges  it.  The  pain  of  envy  as  he  looks  a' 
those  working  on  a  higher  plane  ;  failure.  3.  How  much  the  cause  of  Chnst  buffers 
for  his  self-seeking  ;  because  of  it  he  cannot  see  what  is  right  and  best  for  the  cause. 
4.  Then  the  loss  which  the  self-seeker  sustains  should  be  considered.  He  loses 
in^nence,  honour,  praise.  It  is  when  we  seek  the  things  of  others  that  we  find  our 
own.  On  these  grounds  self-abnegation  should  be  exercised  in  God's  work.  {David 
Thomas,  B.A.)  God  co-operates  with  the  self-sacrificing  effort  of  man: — He  co- 
operates with  the  husbandman,  and  gives  him  the  precious  fruit  of  harvest  time,  bat 
notwith  the  husbandmanwhooonsults  only  his  own  repose  and  quiet  and  convenience, 
and  will  do  nothing  toilsome  and  irksome  in  obedience  to  the  ordinances  of  nature. 
No ;  God  does  not  reward  anywhere,  that  we  can  see,  sloth,  and  indolence,  and 
pleasure-loving,  and  disregard  to  His  own  ordinances,  with  His  co-operation  and 
with  His  success;  and  He  will  do  it  least  of  all  where  the  work  is  greatest,  and  where 
the  service  is  most  glorious.  (Ibid.)  Self-denial  one  aspect  of  religion: — This  is 
only  one  meaning  of  religion.  If  I  should  say  of  a  garden,  "  It  is  a  place  fenced  in," 
what  idea  would  you  have  of  its  clusters  of  roses,  and  pyramids  of  honeysuckles, 
and  beds  of  odorous  flowers,  and  rows  of  blossomiDg  shrubs  and  fruit-bearing  trees  T 
If  I  should  say  of  a  cathedral,  "  It  is  built  of  stone,  cold  stone,"  what  idea  would  yon 
have  of  its  wondrous  carvings,  and  its  gorgeous  openings  for  door  and  window,  and 
its  evanescing  spire  ?  Now,  if  yon  regard  religion  merely  as  self-denial,  you  stop  at 
the  fence,  and  see  nothing  of  the  beauty  of  the  garden;  you  think  only  of  the  stone, 
and  not  of  the  marvellous  beauty  into  which  it  is  fashioned.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Victory  through  self-denial : — If  you  would  acquire  sliill  in  the  handling  oi  tools 
yon  can  only  get  it  by  earning  it.  Nobody  can  acquire  it  for  you.  Nor  can  you 
acquire  it  by  seeing  others  handle  tools.  Though  you  know  how  skilled  workmen 
bring  results  to  pass,  you  cannot  bring  the  same  results  to  pass  unless  you  have 
yourself  had  experience  in  handling  tools.  I  know  precisely  how  an  adept  musician 
rolls  out  magnificent  harmonies  on  the  organ  ;  but  when  I  take  his  seat  I  cannot 
roll  ont  those  harmonies.  If  I  choose  to  go  through  suffering  enough,  it  I  am 
willing  to  give  the  necessary  time  that  I  might  more  pleasantly  spend  in  soma 
other  way,  I  may  accomplish  it,  but  not  otherwise.      {U.  W.  Beecher.)  Utility 

through  restraint : — You  may  take  the  finest  messenger  colt  that  ever  lived,  and  ha 
never  will  be  valuable  unless  he  goes  into  the  trainer's  hands.  Pass  by  the  yard. 
See  him  with  the  surcingle  tight  about  him.  See  him  with  martingales  on, 
and  with  his  head  brought  down  by  them.  See  him  with  bit  in  mouth,  and  guiding, 
reins  behind.  See  how  fractious  he  is.  He  has  lost  his  liberty  ;  but  he  is  on  the 
way  to  find  it.  He  never  would  know  what  he  is  if  it  were  not  for  that  harness — 
for  a  harness  is  not  an  instrument  for  hindering  an  animal's  strength,  but  an 
instrument  for  developing  his  strength.  And  as  by  breaking  you  keep  a  colt  whole, 
and  have  every  part  of  him  unwasted,  not  lost,  so  it  is  being  broken  in,  by  having 
their  wildness  of  nature  restrained,  that  men  come  to  their  real  selves  in  skill  and 
power.  (Ibid.)  The  future  good  an  argument  for  self-restraint : — Then  Chris* 
tianity  did  more,  it  carried  up  the  whole  ideal  life.  It  net  only  gave  a  higher 
conception  of  character,  and  a  higher  conception  of  the  qualities  that  con- 
stitute a  true  character ;  but  it  introduced  another  world  lying  over  against 
this,  and  bearing  a  relation  to  this,  just  as  childhood  bears  a  relation  to 
manhood,  making  this  a  prelude  and  instrument  of  the  other.  As  we 
begin  in  childhood  to  deny  the  body  for  the  sake  of  attaining  •  higher 
nature  in  manhood,  so  the  whole  life  on  earth  is  a  childhood  in  which  we  deny 
ourselves,  not  for  the  sake  of  lacking  pleasure,  but  for  the  sake  of  reaping 
glory  and  immortality  in  the  heavenly  land.       (Ibid.)  Self-denial  really 

acquisition  : — Men  think,  "  Oh  I  to  be  a  Christian  I  have  got  to  give  up  everything." 
Good  heavens !  Give  up  everything  7  Suppose  that  Newton,  talking  with  a 
blubber-eating  Nootka  Sound  Indian,  should  say,  "  Come  with  me  to  England  as 
my  «ervant,  and  I  will  educate  you,   and  make  an  astronomer  of  yoo  ■ "  and 

23 


Z5i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvu 

suppose  the  Indian  should  say,  •*  No,  I  will  not ;  I  am  not  going  to  give  up  this 
delicious  blubber  and  this  comfortable  wigwam  of  mine."  But  what  would  he  give 
np  compared  with  that  which  he  would  inherit  ?  And  at  every  step  in  the  Chriatiau 
life  we  have  treasures  that  are  infinitely  greater  than  those  which  we  lose .  We 
lose  only  such  things  aa  we  are  a  great  deal  better  without  than  with,  (Ibid.) 
Thf  self-denial  Christ  requires : — I.  The  belt-denial  which  Christ  eequiekb 
FBOM  His  followers.  1.  Negatively,  (a)  It  cannot  mean,  to  renounce  our  senses 
and  our  reason ;  (b)  nor  to  renounce  our  desire  and  hope  of  salvation,  to  be  per- 
fectly disinterested,  resigned,  and  annihilated,  as  the  mystical  writers  call  it ;  (c) 
nor  to  renounce  our  free  agency  and  our  acts  of  obedience ;  (d)  nor  to  reject  the 
comforts  and  conveniences  of  life,  and  to  afflict  and  torment  ourselves  when  nothing 
requires  such  a  sacrifice.  2.  Positively,  (a)  To  deny  ourselves  is  to  renounce  every 
evil  affection  and  every  evil  work,  and  to  put  off  the  corrupted  man,  in  order  to 
follow  Christ ;  (b)  to  deny  or  renounce  our  own  good  works,  our  own  righteousness, 
to  renounce  them  so  far  as  not  to  be  proud  of  them,  not  to  rely  upon  them  ai 
perfect  and  meritorious ;  (c)  to  renounce  all  those  things  which  concern  our  worldly 
interests  and  our  present  situation,  such  as  ease  and  quiet,  popularity,  riches, 
inheritances,  preferments,  dignities,  which  we  possess  or  pursue.  There  is  a  way 
of  renouncing  or  denying  these  things,  in  a  moral  sense,  without  forsaking  them  ; 
and  that  is,  to  entertain  moderate  affections  for  them,  to  possess  them,  according 
to  the  apostle's  expression,  as  though  we  possessed  them  not ;  never  to  prefer  them 
to  our  Imown  duty  in  any  instance,  and  to  be  ready  actually  to  part  with  them,  if 
God  should  require  it.  {J.  Jortin.)  The  duty  and  difficulty  of  self-denial : — 
To  row  agaiust  the  tide  of  one's  inclinations,  to  stem  the  rapid  current  of  one's 
appetites  and  affections,  to  struggle  against  the  violent  motions  of  our  will,  and 
to  wrestle  with  the  opposition  of  our  contending  faculties ;  this  is  an  employment  that 
is  laborious  and  uneasy,  this  is  a  performance  that  we  pay  dearly  for;  and  the 
reward  of  such  a  warfare  will  certainly  be  proportionable  to  the  hardships  and 
difficulties  with  which  we  have  encountered.  I.  Explain  and  state  riohtlt  the 
QBEAT  DDTY  OF  SELF-DENIAL,  and  show  whereiu  the  exercise  of  it  does  properly 
consist.  1.  It  does  not  consist  in  utterly  refusing,  without  distinction,  all  such 
things  as  we  are  inclined  to.  2.  Neither  does  the  exercise  of  self-denial  at  pre$ent 
consist  in  such  a  constant  and  entire  withdrawiog  from  worldly  enjoyments,  as 
was  necessarily  practised  by  the  first  converts  of  Christianity.  3.  The  exercise  of 
self-denial  does  indispensably  consist  in  a  total  forbearance  of  unlawful  enjoyments, 
however  fondly  we  may  be  inclined  or  addicted  to  them.  4.  The  exercise  of  self- 
denial  does  further  consist  in  weaning  ourselves  from  all  such  entertainments,  as 
may  withhold  or  divert  us  from  the  service  of  God.  6.  Also  in  avoiding  such 
things  as  are  neither  unlawful  nor  inconvenient  for  us,  if  by  using  them  we  give 
just  offence  to  our  brethren.  6.  Also  in  being  habitually  prepared  to  renounce  all 
things,  even  our  most  dear  and  most  lawful  enjoyments,  whenever  God  or  religion 
shall  require  it  at  our  hands.  II.  Lay  down  bomb  powerful  MOTrvES  which 
may  forcibly  persuade  us  to  the  practice  of  this  duty.  1.  The  example  of 
our  blessed  Saviour.  2.  The  immediate  happy  consequences  of  such  a  per- 
formance, and  the  advantages  that  will  attend  it  in  this  present  life.  8. 
The  vast  reward  which  is  annexed  to  this  performance,  and  the  benefit 
which  will  redound  to  us  from  it  in  another  world.  (Nicholas  Brady.)  Fol- 
lowing Christ :  —  I.  A  privilege  to  be  desired  and  aspired  to.  II.  Thbeb 
GREAT  duties  OB  QUALIFICATIONS  ANNEXED  TO  IT.  1.  Let  him  deny  himself,  (a) 
Deny  our  natural  selves,  that  is,  our  leason,  will,  and  affections,  when  they  oppose 
the  revealed  truths  and  will  of  God.  (b)  Deny  our  sinful  and  sensual  selves  (Titus 
ii.  12).  (c)  Deny  our  worldly  selves,  that  is,  all  earthly  possessions,  relations,  and 
even  life  itself,  at  His  call  and  in  His  cause,  (d)  Deny  our  righteous  selves,  that 
is,  we  must  renounce  all  righteousness  of  our  own,  and  desire  to  be  found  only  in 
Christ's  righteousness.  2.  Let  him  take  up  his  cross.  3.  Let  him  follow  Christ, 
which  includes  (a)  to  follow  His  doctrine;  (b)  to  follow  His  example.  (Matthew 
EaU.)  Honour  put  on  the  self-denying  ; — He  whom  we  love,  whose  honour  we 
most  eovet,  is  he  who  has  most  denied  and  subdued  himself ;  who  has  made  the 
moat  entire  sacrifice  of  appetites  and  passions  and  piivate  interest  to  God,  and 
virtue  and  mankind ;  who  has  walked  in  a  rugged  path,  and  clung  to  good  and 
great  ends  in  persecution  and  pain  ;  who,  amidst  the  solicitations  of  ambition,  ease, 
and  private  fiiendship,  and  the  menaces  of  tyranny  and  malice,  has  listened  to  the 
Toice  of  conscience,  and  found  a  recompense  for  bliRhted  hopes  and  protracted 
Kofiering,  in  conscious  aprightuess  and  the  favour  of  God.    Who  is  it  that  is  moat 


flHAP.  XTi.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  868 

lovely  in  domestic  life?  It  is  the  martyr  to  domestic  affection,  the  mother  for- 
getting herself,  and  ready  to  toil,  suffer,  and  die  for  the  happiness  and  virtue  of 
her  children.  Who  is  it  that  we  honour  in  pubhc  life  ?  It  is  the  martyr  to  hia 
country  ;  he  who  serves  her,  not  when  she  has  honours  for  his  brow  and  wealth  for 
his  coffers,  but  who  clings  to  her  in  her  danger  and  falUng  glories,  and  thinks  life 
a  cheap  sacrifice  to  her  safety  and  freedom.  (fF.  E.  Charming.)  What  "self" 
is  to  be  denied  f — Man  has  various  appetites,  passions,  desires,  resting  on  present 
gre  ification,  and  on  outward  objects ;  some  of  which  we  possess  in  common  with 
inferior  animals,  such  as  sensual  appetites  and  anger;  and  others  belong  more  to 
the  mind,  such  as  love  of  power,  love  of  honour,  love  of  property,  love  of  amuse- 
ment, or  a  taste  for  literature  and  elegant  arts ;  but  all  referring  to  our  present 
being,  and  terminating  chiefly  on  ourselves,  or  on  a  few  beings  who  are  identified 
with  ourselves.  These  are  to  be  denied  or  renounced  ;  by  which  I  mean  not  exter- 
minated, but  renounced  as  masters,  guides,  lords,  and  brought  into  strict  and  entire 
subordination  to  our  moral  and  intellectual  powers.  It  is  a  false  idea  that  religion 
requires  the  extermination  of  any  principle,  desire,  appetite,  or  passion,  which  our 
Creator  has  implanted.  Our  nature  is  a  whole,  a  beautiful  whole,  and  no  part  can 
be  spared.  You  might  as  properly  and  innocently  lop  off  a  limb  from  a  body  as 
eradicate  any  natural  desire  from  the  mind.  All  our  appetites  are  in  themselves 
innucent  and  useful,  ministering  to  the  general  weal  of  the  soul.  They  are  like  the 
elements  of  the  natural  world,  parts  of  a  wise  and  beneficent  system ;  but,  like 
those   elements,   are   beneficent  only  when  restrained.        (Ibid.)  Growth  of 

appftites: — Our  appetites  and  desires  carry  with  them  a  principle  of  growth  or 
tendency  to  enlargement.  They  expand  by  indulgence  and,  if  not  restrained,  they 
fill  and  exhaust  the  soul,  and  hence  are  to  be  strictly  watched  over  and  denied. 
Nature  has  set  bounds  to  the  desires  of  the  brute,  but  not  to  human  desire,  which 
partakes  of  the  illimitableness  of  the  soul  to  which  it  belongs.  In  brutes,  for 
example,  the  animal  appetites  impel  to  a  certain  round  of  simple  gratifications, 
beyou<*  which  they  never  pass.  But  man,  having  imagination  and  invention,  is 
able  jy  these  noble  faculties  to  whet  his  sensual  desires  indefinitely.  (Ibid.) 
Duty  of  self-denial : — The  Divine  wisdom  nowhere  shines  forth  more  clearly  than 
in  this  precept.  I.  Human  natcbe  is  in  a  state  of  depbavity  and  coeruption. 
Man  is  not  upright.  His  passions  and  affections  are  disposed  to  rebel,  instead  of 
remaining  subordinate  to  the  higher  principle.  Consequently,  self-denial  is  neces- 
sary, and  so  far  as  we  practise  it  wa  advance  in  virtue.  We  are  so  far  humble,  e.g.^ 
as  we  deny  ourselves  in  the  matter  of  pride  ;  so  far  heavenly-minded,  as  we  deny 
our  earthly  inclinations  ;  so  far  charitable,  as  we  deny  our  tempers  of  self-love  and 
envy  ;  so  far  temperate  and  pure,  as  we  restrain  our  lower  passions  and  lusts.  IL 
Ths  design  of  eeligion  is  to  heal  and  restore  our  corrupt  nature.  If  the 
disease  is  to  be  cured,  we  must  abstain  from  everything  that  tends  to  feed  or 
aggravate  it.  Even  in  things  lawful,  we  may  have  to  practise  self-denial ;  as  he 
who  wishes  to  avoid  a  fall  from  a  precipice,  if  he  be  prudent,  will  not  venture  too 
near  its  edge.  The  Christian  soldier,  like  all  others,  must  submit  to  the  discipline  ' 
of  war  in  the  time  of  peace ;  otherwise,  when  the  hour  of  actual  service  arrives, 
he  will  be  found  wanting.  He  who  has  accustomed  himself  to  govern  his  thoughts 
and  words,  will  easily  govern  his  actions ;  and  he  who  has  learned  at  proper 
seasons  to  abstain,  will  find  no  difficulty  in  being  temperate  at  all  times.  IIL 
Another  reason  for  self-denial  is,  the  influence  which  the  body  exerts  upon  ths 
souu  The  fall  of  man  seems  to  have  consisted  greatly  in  the  subjection  of  the 
Boul  to  the  power  and  dominion  of  the  body.  It  is  Christ's  work  to  reverse 
this,  and  subordinate  the  body  to  the  soul.  The  body  presses  down  the  soul : 
it  is  the  business  of  religion,  by  means  of  self-denial,  to  remove  this  weight.  IV. 
Take  exampjje  bt  the  worldly.  There  is  not  a  votary  of  wealth,  pleasure,  power,  , 
or  fame,  who  cannot,  and  does  not,  when  necessary,  practise  self-denial, — though 
in  so  much  less  worthy  a  cause.  And  shall  ice  be  out-done  by  such  as  these  f  V. 
Think  of  the  rewards  annexed  to  the  practice  of  self-dexlal.  1.  In  the 
pref  jnt  life.  Lightness  of  spirits,  cheerfulness  of  heart,  serenity  of  temper,  alacrity 
of  mind,  vigour  of  understanding,  freedom  from  bad  desires,  &c.  2.  Heaven,  for 
ever.  (Bishop  Home.)  Instances  of  self-denial  apart  from  religious  motives: — 
For  the  sake  of  collecting  what  is  never  to  be  used,  and  adding  to  his  beloved  heap, 
the  miser  will  forego  the  comforts,  the  conveniences,  and  almost  the  necessaries  of 
existence,  and  voluntarily  submit,  all  his  days,  to  the  peuauces  and  austerities  of 
a  mendicant.  The  discipline  of  a  life  of  fashion  is  by  no  means  of  the  mildest 
kind :  and  it  is  common  to  meet  with  those  who  complain  of  being  worn  down, 


856  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvi 

and  ready  to  sink  nnder  it.  At  the  call  of  honour,  a  youi/g  man  of  family  and 
fortune,  accustomed  to  a  life  of  ease  and  luxury,  breaks  off  all  honi«  ties,  and 
submits  at  once  to  all  the  painful  duties  and  hard  fare  of  a  camp  in  an  enemy's 
country.  He  travels  through  dreary  swamps  and  inhospitable  forests,  guided  only 
by  the  track  of  savages.  He  traverses  mountains,  he  crosses  riveiB,  he  marohea 
hundreds  of  miles,  with  scarcely  bread  to  eat,  or  change  of  raiment  to  put  on. 
When  night  comes,  he  sleeps  on  the  ground,  or  perhaps  sleeps  not  at  all ;  and  at 
the  dawn  of  day,  resumes  his  labour.  At  length  he  is  so  fortunate  as  to  find  hii 
enemy.  He  braves  death,  amid  all  the  horrors  of  the  field.  He  sees  his  companiona 
fall  around  him, — he  is  wounded,  and  carried  into  a  tent,  or  laid  in  a  waggon, 
where  he  is  left  to  suffer  pain  and  anguish,  with  the  noise  of  battle  Bounding  in  his 
ears.  After  some  weeks  he  recovers,  and  enters  afresh  upon  duty.  And  does  the 
Captain  of  thy  salvation,  O  thou  who  stylest  thyself  the  soldier  and  servant  of 
Jesus  Christ — does  He  require  anything  like  this  at  thy  hands?  Or  canst  thou 
deem  Him  an  austere  Master,  because  thou  art  enjoined  to  live  in  sobriety  and 
purity,  to  subdue  a  turbulent  passion,  to  watch  an  hour  sometimes  unto  prayer, 
or  to  miss  a  meal  now  and  then,  during  the  season  of  repentance  and  humiliation  f 
Blush  for  shame,  and  hide  thy  face  in  the  dust.  (Ibid.)  Eeligion,  in  one  sense, 
is  a  life  of  self-denial ;  just  as  husbandry,  in  one  sense,  is  a  work  of  death.  You 
go  and  bury  a  seed,  and  that  is  husbandry  ;  but  you  bury  one,  that  you  may  reap 
a  hundredfold.  Self-denial  does  not  belong  to  religion  as  characteristic  of  it :  it 
belongs  to  human  life.  The  lower  nature  must  always  be  denied,  when  you  are 
trying  to  rise  to  a  higher  sphere.  It  is  no  more  necessary  to  be  self-denying  to  be 
a  Christian,  than  it  is  to  be  an  artist,  or  to  be  an  honest  man,  or  to  be  a  man  at  all 
in  distinction  from  a  brute.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Self-denial  in  things  necessary  : — 
A  great  many  persons  deny  themselvee  with  the  most  superfluous  self-denial.  They 
seek  for  things  of  which  they  can  deny  themselves.  But  you  need  not  do  that. 
Let  your  opportunities  for  self-denial  come  to  you ;  but  when  they  do  come,  do  not 
flinch.  God  will  send  you  occasions  enough  for  denying  yourself.  There  is  wood 
enough  in  every  man's  forest  to  build  all  the  crosses  he  will  need  to  cany.  (Ibid.) 
' '  His  cross. " — Every  one  has  his  peculiar  cross :  one  has  it  from  his  wife,  or 
children,  or  relations ;  another  from  character ;  a  third  from  rivals ;  a  fourth  from 
misfortunes ;  a  fifth  from  poverty ;  a  sixth  from  exile,  bonds,  and  so  on.     (Lapide.) 

Ver.  25.  For  whosoever  wlU  save  his  life. — Losing  the  soul  to  save  it : — One  of 
the  moral  paradoxes  of  Scripture — the  most  decided,  the  most  contradictory,  the 
most  reckless  (if  we  may  so  say)  of  them  all.  A  complete  inversion  of  language. 
And  it  is  no  isolated  expression.  It  is  forced  on  our  attention  again  and  again. 
We  cannot  wander  far  in  any  direction  without  eucountering  this  startling  sign- 
post, announcing  the  path  of  destruction  as  the  only  high-road  to  salvation.  The 
context,  moreover,  enhances  the  paradox.  We  are  told  that  a  man's  life  (or  soul, 
for  it  is  the  same  word  in  the  original)  is  absolutely  priceless  to  him ;  that  no 
I  exchange  can  be  an  equivalent ;  that  no  compensation  will  requite  him  for  the  loss: 
yet  in  the  same  breath  we  are  bidden  to  despise  it,  to  abandon  it,  to  fling  it  away 
like  a  broken  potsherd  or  a  rank  weed.  The  contradiction  is  direct  and  positive  ; 
and  in  this  contradiction  the  lesson  is  to  be  sought.  I.  What  is  meant  bt  thh 
BODii  OB  LIFE  OF  MAN  f  It  is  the  living  principle  ;  the  centre  of  man's  capacities, 
passions,  energies ;  the  very  seat  of  his  personality.  A  man's  soul  is  everything  to 
him.  Obviously,  then,  the  health  or  sickness,  the  saving  or  the  losing,  the  hfe  or 
death  of  this  soul,  must  be  a  matter  of  infinite  moment,  both  in  time  and  eternity; 
for  it  guides  his  actions,  regulates  his  affections,  influences  his  feelings.  It  is  to 
his  whole  being  what  the  mainspring  is  to  a  watch.  II.  What  abe  thb  FAOCLTna 
AND  DURATION  OF  THE  soTTL?  This  questiou  cauuot  be  evaded;  it  must  be  faced. 
Its  practical  consequences  are  too  momentous  to  admit  of  delay.  If  this  life  which 
we  call  *•  life  "  is  only  a  pa'^sing  moment  of  an  infinite  future,  only  the  seed-time 
of  a  heavenly  harvest,  the  infancy  of  an  eternal  manhood, — then  treat  it  as  such, 
educate  and  discipline  it  as  such.  You  cannot  go  on  drifting  through  life,  till  yon 
find  yourself  at  the  edge  of  a  cataract.  No  man  going  on  a  journey  neglects  so  to 
arrange  his  route  that  at  nightfall  he  shall  halt  at  some  place  where  food  and  shelter 
will  be  obtained.  Darkness  will  overtake  him,  perhaps,  in  any  case,  for  even  the 
grateful  interposition  and  warning  of  the  twihgbt  may  not  be  sufficient ;  but  what 
Bane  man  would  not  shrink  from  finding  himself  in  the  darkness  in  a  barren,  track- 
less desert,  exposed  to  the  pitiless  storm?  III.  How  is  the  boul  to  be  saved? 
By  losing  it.     The  meaning  of  these  words  in  their  primary  application  is  simple. 


OBAS.  XTi.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  867 

To  Chrifit's  disciples  and  their  immediate  followers,  no  comment  was  necessary,  v^ 
In  an  age  of  persecution,  the  willingness  to  lose  the  lower  life  for  the  salvation  of 
the  higher  would  be  only  too  often  tested  in  a  literal  sense.  And  the  corresponding 
apphcation  now  need  create  no  difficulty.  "Whoever  purchases  ease  by  dishonesty, 
or  comfort  by  neglect  of  duty,  or  popularity  by  concession  of  principle —preferring 
self  where  truth,  honour,  love,  purity,  or  reverence  demands  self-negation,  sell- 
abandonment — that  man  loses  his  soul,  loses  his  life,  by  saving  it.       IV.    Bct 

THOUGH  THB   MAN   WHO   SAVES   HIS   80DL  IS  8UBE   TO  LOSE  IT,  THE   CONVERSE   DOES   NOT 

NECE88ARILT  FOLLOW.  Here  an  important  proviso  comes  in — "for  My  sake."  * 
There  are  many  ways  of  losing  the  soul ;  but  only  one  way  of  losing  it  so  &8  to 
save.  The  profligate  libertine  squanders  his  means,  and  neglects  his  health,  and 
flings  himself  away;  but  he  does  it  selfishly,  and  to  him  the  promise  does  not 
apply.  V.  Loss  fob  Christ's  sake  is  gain.  This  does  not  merely  apply  to 
sacrifices  made  consciously  and  directly  in  the  cause  of  Christianity.  If  Christ  be 
(as  we  believe)  the  very  and  eternal  Word  of  God ;  the  very  expression  of  the  Father's 
truth,  righteousness,  purity,  love ;  then  the  sacrifice  of  self  to  any  one  of  these 
things  is  a  saving  of  the  soul  by  losing  it ;  then  the  martyr  to  truth,  to  holiness, 
to  purity,  to  love,  may  claim  his  portion  along  with  the  martyr  to  religion,  for  he 
has  thrown  himself  away,  has  lost  his  soul  for  Christ's  sake.  VI.  The  same  con- 
trast   AND    THE    SAilE    ALTERNATIVE    MAY    EXIST    WITHIN    THB    BPHEBE    OF    BELIGION 

ITSELF.  It  is  possible  to  be  anxious  about  saving  the  soul,  to  be  extremely 
religious  in  a  certain  sense,  but  yet  to  risk  the  losing  of  it  in  the  veiy  desire  of 
saving  it.  The  soul  must  brace  itself  hy  vigorous  exercise — spend  and  be  spent. 
The  true  method  of  salvation  is  a  great  venture  of  self,  a  forgetfulness  of  self, 
a  going  out  of  self.  Lose  your  soul  in  energy  ;  spend  yourself  in  alleviating  some 
misery,  instructing  some  ignorance,  or  reforming  some  vice.  Fling  your  soul  away, 
that,  after  many  days,  you  may  recover  it  again,  purified,  strengthened,  renewed, 
living  once  more.  {Bishop  J.  B.  Lightfoot.)  Temporal  gain  eternal  loss : — It  hath 
cost  many  a  man  his  hie,  when  his  house  has  been  on  fire,  to  attempt  through 
covetousness  to  save  some  of  his  stuff;  venturing  among  the  flames  to  preserve 
this,  he  has  perished  himself.  Many  more  have  lost  their  souls,  by  attempting  to 
carry  some  of  their  own  stuff — their  own  self-righteousness — with  them  to  heaven. 
O  sirs  1  come  out,  come  out ;  leave  what  is  your  own  in  the  fire  ;  flee  to  Christ  naked  I 
{Gurnall.)  Life  lost  in  the  effort  to  save  it : — It  is  reported,  in  connection  with  | 
a  railway  accident  that  happened  a  few  years  ago,  that  the  only  person  who  lost  his  | 
life  was  a  gentleman  who  jumped  out  of  the  train  with  a  view  to  save  it ;  all  the  • 
other  passengers  who  kept  their  seats  were  preserved.  Temporal  loss  eternal  gain : — 
God  can  infinitely  more  than  counterbalance  all  temporal  losses  by  the  larger  and 
richer  outpouring  of  His  Spuit  on  the  soul.  He  may  demand  our  worldly  wealth  ; 
but  if  He  increase  our  spiritual  riches,  are  we  not  therein  great  gainers  ?  Can  Ha 
not,  by  the  consolations  of  His  Spirit,  raise  us  far  above  all  temporal  distresses ; 
and,  by  opening  up  a  prospect  beyond  the  grave,  make  us  to  glory  in  all  tribulations 
(Romans  v.  3-5).  It  was  thus  that  St.  Paul  took,  as  he  strongly  phrases  it,  pleasure 
in  infirmities,  and  persecutions,  and  distresses,  for  Christ's  sake.  It  was  thus  that, 
in  ancient  days,  they  took  cheeif  uUy  the  spoiling  of  their  goods,  knowing  that  they 
had  in  heaven  a  better  and  an  enduring  substance.  Even  so  may  we  expect  it  to  ba 
with  US  in  this  world.  If  our  afflictions  abound,  even  so  shall  also  our  consolations 
abound  by  Christ.  And  the  consciousness,  the  comfortable  reflection,  that  with 
a  single  eye  we  have  sought  God's  glory,  wUl  make  every  pain  a  pleasure,  every 
loss  a  gain.     {E.  B.  Nichol.)        Losses  and  gains  connected  with  religion.     I.  Thb 

TEtNGS  OF  THIS  LIFE  MEN  MAY  OBTAIN  BY  REJECTING   THB   RELIGION   OF   ChBIST.      They 

may  obtain  a  considerable  portion  of  earthly  riches ;  the  sensual  gratifications  ol 
life ;  the  distinctions  of  worldly  honour  and  praise.  IL  In  what  bebpect  thesb 
ABVANTAGE8  SHALL  BE  LOST  TO  THEM.  They  shall  oftcn  be  interrupted  in  their 
enjoyment  of  them.  Sometimes  they  are  overtaken  with  overwhelming  calamities. 
They  must  aii  necessarily  be  forfeited  at  death.  They  produce  the  most  appalling 
consequences  in  the  eternal  world.  IIL  What  we  may  be  called  to  sacrifice  m 
BECOMiNO  THE  DISCIPLES  OF  Jesus.  Christ  Called  His  disciples  to  lose  ail  will  and 
choice  with  respect  to  this  world's  good.  We  may  be  called  to  lose  the  approbation 
of  friends ;    to  endure  the  frowns  of  the  world ;   lose  life  itself.      IV.  I»  whai 

BESFECTS    WE    SHALL   FIND  AGAIN    THE   THINGS   WS    SACRIFICE.      In  the  midst   Of  theSA 

sacrifices — we  have  what  is  better  than  life  ;  we  are  attaining  a  greater  assimilation 
to  the  hfe  of  Christ ;  all  our  sacrifices  terminate  at  death ;  we  shall  he  gaper* 
abundantly  rewarded  at  the  last  day.     (J.  Bums,  D.D.) 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtc 

Yer.  26.  For  what  Is  a  man  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  loM 
his  own  soul? — The  great  exchamje: — 1.  The  text  assumes  a  certain  inherent 
dignity  in  the  human  soul  itFelf.  2.  The  folly  of  those  competing  rivalries, 
on  account  of  which  men  seem  willing  that  this  inestimably  precious  soul 
should  be  lost.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  value  of  the  soul: — 1.  In  its  origin, 
2.  In  its  operations,  3.  In  its  redemption.  (J.  Sherman.)  Lo$t: — What 
volumes  of  meaning  there  are  in  that  one  word  lost,  A  ship  lost — a  traveller 
loit — a  brother  lost — a  parent  lost — and,  notwithstanding  every  effort  to  save, 
all  as  nothing  to  a  lost  soul,  (C.  T.  Pizey,  B.A.)  An  appeal  to  the  young: 
— I.  Thk  nature  or  the  boul.  1.  The  soul  is  the  seat  of  thought.  2.  The 
Boul  is  the  subject  of  moral  government.  3.  The  soul  is  the  heir  of  inanor- 
tality.  II.  The  worth  of  the  soul.  1.  Eefer  to  the  great  atonement  as  the 
most  magnificent  proof  of  the  soul's  worth.  2.  To  the  triumphant  joy  awakened 
in  heaven  bj  the  conversion  of  one  sinner  from  the  error  of  hia  ways.  3.  To 
the  certain  anticipntions  of  misery  or  bli?8  which  await  each  soul  as  it  passes 
into  eternity.  {J.  Mori  son,  D  D.)  The  foolish  bargain  : — The  man  who,  for  the 
sake  of  worldly  happiness,  shall  lose  his  soul,  makes  a  foolish  bargain.  I.  Ex- 
plain AND  PROVE  THIS.  In  Order  to  judge  of  a  bargain  we  must  take  into  account 
the  thing  bought,  and  the  price  paid  for  it.  Worldly  happiness  is  considerable, 
but  it  must  come  to  an  end.  II.  The  worth  of  the  soul.  It  is  the  most  excel- 
lent part  of  man.  It  will  never  die.  The  value  of  a  thing  is  often  best  known 
when  it  is  lost.  How  greatly  you  are  concerned  in  this.  {E.  Cooper.)  The 
worth  of  the  soul : — In  order  to  elucidate  the  meaning  of  the  text-4.  Institute  a 

COMPARISON    between    THE    THINGS   WHICH    ARE    HERE    SET    IN    COMPETITION    with   each 

other.  1.  By  "  the  world,"  we  are  to  understand  pleasure,  riches,  and  honour.  This, 
if  considered  in  itself,  is  vile.  It  is  earthly  m  its  nature.  It  is  unsatisfying  in  its 
use.  It  is  transitory  in  its  continuance.  If  it  be  considered  as  it  has  been  esti- 
mated by  the  best  judges,  it  is  worthless  (Heb.  ii.  8,  9 ;  24-26  ;  Eccles.  i.  14 ;  Phil. 
iii.  8 ;  John  vi.  15  ;  xvii.  16).  2.  The  "  soul,"  on  the  contrary,  if  considered  in 
itself,  is  noble.  It  is  exalted  in  its  origin  (Heb.  xii.  9).  Capacious  in  its  powers. 
Eternal  in  its  duration.  Doomed  to  everlasting  happiness  or  misery.  As  estimated 
by  the  best  judges,  it  is  invaluable  (Acts  xx.  21).  The  gift  of  God's  Son  to  die  for 
it — of  infinite  value  in  His  sight.  Such  being  the  disparity  between  the  va'ue  of 
the  world  and  that  of  the  soul,  we  are  prepared  to— II.  See  the  result  of  thb 
COMPARISON.  We  suppose,  for  argument  sake,  that  a  man  may  possess  the  wLole 
world.  We  sni  pose  also  that,  after  having  possessed  it  for  awhile,  he  loses  hia 
own  soul.  What,  in  the  issue,  "  would  be  be  profited"?  1.  Enquire  concf  ming 
this  in  general.  Woirld  carnal  enjovmeuts  compensate  for  the  lf)ss  of  heaven? 
Would  transient  pleasures  couuterbalance  an  eternity  of  glory?  Would  he  have 
anything  to  mitigate  his  pain  (Luke  xvi.  24)?  2.  Enquire  more  particularly. 
These  questions  are  strong  appeals  to  our  hearts  and  consciences.  They  bid  defi- 
ance to  all  the  arts  of  sophistry.  Let  the  "lover  of  pleasure,"  &o.,  &o.,  ask, 
♦•  What  shall  it  profit  me,"  &o.  ?  Conclusion  :  Which  have  I  more  regarded 
hitherto,  the  world,  or  my  own  soul?  Which  do  I  intend  in  futnre  to  prefer,  Ac^l/ 
(C.  Simeon.)  Caring  more  for  the  body  than  for  the  soul : — "  Two  thingSii 
master  commits  to  his  servant's  care,"  saith  one  :  "  the  child  and  the  child's 
clothes."  It  will  be  a  poor  excuse  for  the  servant  to  say,  at  his  master's  return, 
*'  Sir,  here  are  all  the  child's  clothes,  neat  and  clean,  but  the  child  is  lost  1 "  Much 
so  with  the  account  that  many  will  give  to  God  of  their  souls  and  bodies  at  the 
great  day.  "Lord,  here  is  my  body;  I  was  very  grateful  for  it;  I  neglected 
nothiog  tliat  belonged  to  its  content  and  welfare;  but  as  for  my  soul,  that  is  lost 
and  cast  away  for  ever.  I  took  little  care  and  thought  about  it.  (Flavel.)  The 
value  and  loss  of  the  soul : — 1.  Every  man  has  a  soul  of  his  own.  2.  It  is  possible 
for  the  soul  to  be  lost ;  and  there  is  danger  of  it.  3.  If  the  soul  is  lost,  it  is  the 
sinner's  own  losing;  and  his  blood  is  on  his  own  bead.  4.  One  soul  is  worth  mora 
than  all  the  world.  6.  The  winning  cf  the  world  is  often  the  losing  of  the  soul. 
6  The  loss  of  the  soul  cannot  be  made  up  by  the  gain  of  the  whole  world.  7.  If 
the  soul  be  once  lost,  it  is  lost  for  ever ;  and  the  loss  can  never  be  repaired  or 
retrieved.     {Matthew  Henry.)  What  is  a  man  profited  .  .  .  f  —  1.  The  good 

in  the  gain  is  imaginary  and  fantastical ;  the  evil  in  t-he  loss  is  real  and  substan- 
tial. 2.  The  good  in  the  gain  is  convertible  into  evil ;  the  evil  in  the  loss  is  never 
to  be  improved  into  good.  3.  Tlie  good  in  the  gain  is  narrow  and  particular ;  the 
evil  in  the  loss  is  large  and  universal.  4.  The  good  in  the  g  tin  is  mixed  and 
•ophistioated ;  the  evil  in  the  loss  is  pure  and  unxningled.    5.  The  good  in  th« 


BHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTUEW.  86t 


gain  is  full  of  intermissions ;  the  evil  in  the  loss  is  continual.  6.  The  good  in 
the  gain  is  short  and  transitory;  the  evil  in  the  loss  is  eternal.  {Dr.  J.  Scott.) 
Profit  and  loss : — I.  The  soul's  woeth  :  (1)  nature ;  (2)  capacities ;  (3)  immortality ; 
(4)  purchase-price.  II.  The  soul's  loss,  is  loss  of  (1)  holiness  ;  (2)  happiness ;  (3) 
heaven  ;  (4)  hope.  III.  Enforce  the  question  :  (1)  gain  uncertain,  loss  inevitable ; 
(2)  gain  imaginary,  loss  posilive;  (3)  gain  temporary,  loss  irretrievable.  {Pulpit 
Genns.)  Value  of  souls  : — A  converted  Jew,   pleading   for  the  cause   of   the 

society  through  whose  instrumentality  ho  had  been  brought  to  a  knowledge 
of  Christianity,  was  opposed  by  a  learned  gentleman,  who  spoke  very  lightly 
of  the  objects  of  the  society  and  its  efforts,  and  said  "  he  did  not  suppose 
they  would  convert  more  than  a  hundred  altogetlier."  "  Be  it  so,"  rtsplied 
the  Jew ;  you  are  a  skilful  calculator ;  take  your  pen  now,  and  calculate  the 
worth  of  one  hundred  immortal  souls  1 "  Inestimable  vabie  of  tfie  soul : — Are 
there  not  things  more  precious  than  gold  and  bank  stocks?  When  the  Central 
America  was  foundering  at  sea,  bags  and  purses  of  g.dd  were  strewn  about  the  deck 
as  worthless — as  merest  rubbish.  "  Life,  life,"  was  the  prayer.  To  some  of  the 
wretched  survivors,  "Water,  water;  bread,  bread;"  it  was  worth  its  weisht  in 
gold,  if  it  could  have  been  bought.  And  oh  I  above  all — far  above  all,  the  salvation 
of  your  soul  is  precious.  Is  it  not  yet  lost?  Is  it  saved?  (Christian  Treasury.) 
Insurance  of  the  soul: — A  little  boy  on  his  father's  knee  said,  "  Pa,  is  your  soul  in- 
sured? "  "  Why  do  you  ask,  my  son  ?  "  "I  heard  Uncle  George  say  that  you  had 
your  house  insured,  and  your  life  insured ;  but  he  did  not  believe  you  had  thought 
about  your  soul,  and  he  was  afraid  you  would  lose  it.  Won't  you  get  it  insured 
right  away  ?  "  It  was  all  too  true ;  and  the  question  led  the  lather  to  seek  the 
Divine  guarantee  of  his  soul's  well-bfing.  Care  for  the  soul : — It  is  recorded 
concerning  one  of  the  martyrs,  that  when  he  was  going  to  the  stake,  a  nobleman 
besought  him,  in  a  compassionate  manner,  to  take  care  of  his  soul.  "  So  I  will," 
he  replied ;  "  for  I  give  my  body  to  be  bmned,  rather  than  have  my  soul  defiled. 
{Archbishop  Seeker.)  The  value  of  the  soul: — I.  We  possess  immortal  souls  oi 
inoaijCdi.abl£  value.  The  incomparable  worth  of  the  soul  appears  from  (1)  the 
nature  of  its  powers;  (2)  the  price  of  its  redemption;  (3)  the  efforts  for  its  posses- 
sion ;  (4)  the  duration  of  its  existence.  II.  Oca  sou  lb  are  in  imminent  danobb 
OF  BEiNo  LOST.  1.  The  loss  of  the  soul  is  certainly  possible.  2.  The  loss  of  the 
Boul  is  highly  probable.  3.  The  loss  cf  the  soul  is  deplurable.  4.  The  loss  of 
the  soul  is  utterly  irreparable.  III.  Nothing  can  compensate  fob  the  loss  of  thk 
60DL.  1.  The  case  supposed — "If  he  gain  the  whole  world."  2.  The  inquiry 
instituted  —  "What  is  a  man  profited?"  3.  The  exchange  proposed — "What 
shall  a  man  give?"  (Sketches.)  The  incomparable  worth  of  tlie  soul  will  also 
appear  fxom  the  followiDg  considerations  : — I.  From  its  essence  and  capacities.  The 
body  is  composed  of  dust,  like  the  bodies  of  other  animals,  but  the  soul  was  infused 
by  the  breath  of  God.  It  is  capable  of  the  heavenly  extrcises  of  love,  pity,  and  mercy. 
The  extent  of  its  capacities  is  amazing.  It  is  capable  of  exerting  itself  like  an  angel  in 
the  employments  of  the  heavenly  w^orld.  Vast  capacities  has  the  soul  for  happiness 
and  misery.  The  happiness  which  appertains  to  the  soul  is  far  the  most  noble  in  its 
kind.  If  to  contemplate  the  sun  and  moon  produces  a  dehght  full  of  dignity,  what 
does  the  contemplation  of  Him  who  spoke  these  orbs  into  being  ?  The  eoul  alone 
is  capable  of  enjoying  God.  What  is  the  world  to  this?  II.  From  the  amazing 
respect  that  has  been  paid  to  it.  God  has  discovered  His  high  regard  for  the  soul 
by  the  pains  He  has  taken  to  give  a  written  revelation  to  the  world.  Angels  also 
discover  their  high  regard  for  the  soul  by  leaving  the  realms  of  glory  to  consume 
their  time  upon  this  distant  planet  by  daily  minisiratiuns  to  its  salvation.  II. 
What  corri.letes  the  value  of  the  eoul  is  its  immortality  and  perhaps  eternal 
progression.  How  may  we  best  know  the  worth  of  the  soul?  By  consideriug — 
I.  What  is  meant  by  the  soul.  1.  •♦  Soul,"  or  ^l;x^/,  the  word  here  used,  is  put  for 
life,  by  a  metonymy  of  the  efficient  for  the  effect,  because  our  life  depends  upon  the 
boqI.  Thus:  "Take  no  thought  for  your  l^ie"—^^vxn  (Matt.  vi.  26).  2.  The 
word  "  soul  "  is  put  for  the  whole  man  frequently  in  Scripture.  Thus,  the  number 
of  persons  "that  came  with  Jacob  into  Egypt  "  is  reckoued  by  so  many  "  souls  " 
(Gen.  xlvi.  26).  3.  This  word  "  soul "  is  taken  most  properly  and  strictly  for  the 
form,  constituent,  and  better  part  of  man  ;  that  breath  that  is  breathed  into  him 
from  God,  when  man  becomes  a  Uving  soul  (Gen.  ii.  7).  In  this  acceptation  we 
proceed  to  inquire — II.  Wfiat  thit  "  amd  "  is.  (a)  The  soul  is  a  distinct  substance 
from  the  body.  This  will  appear  if  we  consider  (1)  that  such  things  as  are  proper 
to  distinct  substances — as,  to  "  dwell  in  the  body,"  whilst  a  man  lives  ;  to  "  leav« 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rrt, 

the  body  "  when  he  dies— are  attributed  to  the  soul ;  (2)  that  it  does  "  subst»re,*' 
i.f.,  is  the  subject  of  accidents — such  as  are  virtue  and  vice,  arts  and  sciences ; 
which  cannot  inhere  in  bare  matter  ;  (3)  that  it  was  made  after  the  body ;  (4)  that 
it  exists  separately  from  the  body — "  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  to-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  Me  in  Paradise"  (Luke  xxiii.  43).  It  is  certain  his  body  was  not  with  cur 
Saviour's.  (/3)  The  soul  is  a  spiritual  substance.  1.  Were  it  only  that  the  soul  is 
so  often  called  "  a  spirit  "  by  God  Himself  in  His  Word,  it  were  a  very  considerable 
argument  to  prove  that  it  is  a  spirit  (Eccles,  xii.  7 ;  Zech.  xii.  1 ;  Acts  vii.  59).  2. 
That  the  soul  is  a  spiritual  sub.-^tance,  is  evident  in  that  it  is  not  produced  out  of 
matter  (Gen.  ii.  7 ;  Eccles.  xii.  7).  3.  A  third  argument  to  prove  that  the  soul  is  a 
spirit,  is,  because  in  it  man  bears  the  image  of  God — '♦  God  is  a  Spirit  "  (John  iv.  24), 
4.  The  actions  or  operations  of  the  soul  are  such  as  cannot  proceed  from  any  bodily 
being.  5.  The  soul  is  a  spirit,  in  that  it  is  in  the  body,  and  one  body  cannot  be  in 
another.  The  soul  takes  up  no  place,  as  bodies  do  ;  it  is  tola  in  toto.  (y)  In  what 
the  soul's  excellency  does  appear.  I.  The  first  thing  that  speaks  the  soul's 
prerogative  is  its  original.  It  is  accounted  no  small  privilege  to  be  nobly 
bom.  II.  Then  again  in  the  end  it  is  designed  for.  1.  The  soul  of  man  ig 
made  for  to  bring  glory  to  God.  2.  The  soul  of  man  is  made  capable  of 
enjoying  God.  The  endeavours  that  are  used  for  to  gain  souls.  I.  God's  endea- 
vours. 1.  His  parting  with  His  Son,  and  Christ  with  His  heart  blood  and  life,  for 
them.  2.  I  might  add  unto  God's  giving  of  His  Son  for  our  souls,  His  giving  of 
His  Spirit  to  the  soul.  3.  God's  valuing  of  our  soul  appears  in  the  care  and  pains 
which  He  takes  for  our  souls  daily,  (a)  In  that  He  hath  instituted  means  whereby 
He  might  come  to  obtain  our  souls,  nay,  to  strengthen  and  comfort  them,  and  have 
communion  with  them.  (6)  He  bears  with  us,  and  exercises  a  great  deal  of  patience 
towards  us,  if  so  He  might  at  length  gain  our  souls  ;  and  says,  "  when  shall  it  once 
be  ?  "  (c)  His  bearing  with  the  whole  world  of  wiclicd  men,  notwithstanding  their 
blasphemies  and  open  defiances  of  Him,  is  only  out  of  love  to  some  few  souls  who 
serve  and  fear  Him.  (d)  All  the  providences  of  God,  in  which  He  worketh  hitherto, 
are  intended  by  Him  for  the  good  of  our  souls,  and  done  by  God  out  of  respect  unto 
them.  n.  Endeavours  used  by  Satan  for  our  souls,  (e)  The  duration  of  our  souls. 
Application  :  1.  If  the  soul  be  so  precious,  we  have  heard  enough  to  make  us  abhor 
sin  for  ever.  2.  This  does  recommend  and  endear  our  blessed  Saviour  to  us.  3. 
This  commends  holiness  in  all  its  parts  to  us.  4,  Have  a  care  that  ye  do  not  lose 
these  souls  that  are  so  valuable.  Consider  that — (1)  the  danger  your  souls  are  in 
is  very  great ;  (2)  the  loss  of  your  souls  is  very  great ;  (3)  the  loss  is  never  to  be 
repaired.  (4)  Shall  I  add,  that  this  soul  is  thine  own,  and  that  thou  hast  not,  nor 
ever  shalt  have,  another,  and  therefore  it  behoves  thee  to  keep  it  safe.  (5)  Thou 
must  answer  for  the  loss  of  thy  soul :  God  hath  entrusted  it  with  thee.  (P.  Vinke, 
D.D.)  Tlu  souls  inestimahle  value : — A  problem  that  deserves  the  study  of  the 
longest  life.  The  best  medium  through  which  to  view  this  all  important  question 
is  the  following  verse.  In  this  light  I  view  this  great  question,  and  what  do  I  see  ? 
I.  That  we  have  in  odb  possession   a   jewel   called  the  sool,  astonishing  in 

ITS    PltOPERTIES,    AND    INESTIMABLE     IN     ITS    VALUE.        The    SOUl    is (1)    DiviuO   in   itS 

origin;  (2)  astonishing  in  its  properties — vitaUty,  rationality,  accountability ;  (3) 
an  immortal  principle ;  (4)  has  fallen  from  its  glory ;  (5)  has  been  redeemed  by 
Christ ;  (6)  angels  rejoice  over  its  salvation.      II.  The  possibility  of  that  bodl 

BEING   LOST,    THE    LOSS    WILL   BE    INEXPRESSIBLY   GREAT.       1.    What  is  the  lOSS  of  a  lost 

soul  ?    The  loss  of  grace  in  time.     Glory  in  eternity.    III.  The   chabacteks  who 

IF   they   die  as   they  are,    will   suffer   AND     ENDURE    THIS    FEARFUL   LOSS.      "  Is   it 

If  "  If  you  are  living  in  open  sin,  &o.,  it  is  you.  Have  you  repented,  believed  in 
Christ,  &o.  1  Look  at  this  matter  in  the  light  of  the  judgment  day,  and  read 
Mattliew  XXV.  IV.  The  indesirable,  inexpressible,  inconceivable  foll^  of  tfm 
HAN  that  barters  AWAY  HIS  soDL — get  what  he  will  in  exchange,  riches,  honours, 
pleasures,  &c.    V.  The  wisdom   of  that   man   who  is  determined  to  havs  his 

BOUL  SAVED — COST  WHAT  IT  WILL.  VI.  ThAT  NEXT  TO  THE  SALVATION  OF  OUB  OWN 
BOULS,    IT   IS   OUR   HIGHEST   DUTY  AND   BEST   INTEREST  TO   PROMOTE   THE   SALVATION   OF 

OTHERS.  {W.  Daicson).  The  world  an  impossible  enjoyment: — He  that  hath  all 
the  world  (if  we  can  suppose  such  a  man),  cannot  have  a  dish  of  fresh  summer 
fruits  in  the  midst  of  winter,  not  so  much  as  a  green  fig :  and  very  much  of  its 
possessions  is  so  hid,  so  fugacious,  and  of  so  uncertain  purchase,  that  it  is  like  tha 
riobes  of  the  sea  to  the  lord  of  the  shore ;  all  the  fish  and  wealth  within  all  iti 
hoUownesses  are  his,  but  he  is  never  the  better  for  what  he  cannot  get;  all  the  shell- 
fishes that  produce  pearl,  produce  them  nut  for  him ;  and  the  bowels  of  the  earth 


rHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  861 

shall  hide  her  treasures  in  undiscovered  retirements :  so  that  it  will  signify  m 
much  to  this  great  purchaser  to  be  entitled  to  an  inheritance  in  the  upper  region  of 
the  air ;  he  is  so  far  from  possessing  all  its  riches,  that  he  does  not  so  much  as 
know  of  them,  nor  understand  the  philosophy  of  her  minerals.  {Jeremy  Taylor). 
The  world-gainer  more  a  delight  to  others  than  to  himself: — Nay,  those  things  which 
he  esteems  his  ornament,  and  the  singularity  of  his  possessions,  are  they  not  of 
more  use  to  others  than  to  himself  ?  For  suppose  his  garments  splf^ndid  and 
shining,  hke  the  robe  of  a  cherub,  or  the  clotlnng  of  the  fields,  all  that  he  that 
wears  them  enjoys,  is,  that  they  keep  him  warm,  and  clean,  and  modest;  and  all 
this  is  done  by  clean  and  less  pompous  vestments;  and  the  beauty  of  them,  which 
distinguishes  him  from  others,  is  made  to  please  the  eyes  of  the  beholders  ;  and  he 
is  like  a  fair  bird,  or  the  meretricious  painting  of  a  wanton  woman,  made  wholly  to 
be  looked  on,  that  is,  to  be  enjoyed  by  every  one  but  himself :  and  the  fairest  face 
and  most  sparkhng  eye  cannot  perceive  or  enjoy  their  own  beauties  but  by  reflec- 
tion. It  is  I  that  am  pleased  with  beholding  his  gaiety ;  and  the  gay  man,  in  hia 
greatest  bravery,  is  only  pleased  because  I  am  pleased  with  the  sight ;  so  borrowing 
his  little  and  imaginary  complacency  from  the  dehgbt  that  I  have,  not  from  any 
inherency  of  his  own  popsession.  (Ibid.)  The  world  enjoyed  by  men  w1u>  do  not  ^' 
iell  their  souls  for  it : — The  poorest  artizan  of  Eome  walking  in  Cte-ar'i  gardens, 
had  the  same  pleasures  which  they  ministered  to  their  lord :  and  although,  it  may 
be,  he  was  put  to  gather  fruits  to  eat  from  another  place,  yet  his  other  senses  were 
delighted  equally  with  Caesar's :  the  birds  made  him  as  good  music,  the  flowers  gave 
him  as  sweet  smells;  he  there  sucked  as  good  air,  and  delighted  in  the  beauty  and 
order  of  the  place,  for  the  same  reason  and  upon  the  same  perception  as  the  prince 
himself ;  save  only  that  Csesar  paid,  for  all  that  pleasure,  vast  sums  of  money,  the 
blood  and  treasure  of  a  province,  which  the  poor  man  had  for  nothing.  (Ibid) 
The  gain  of  the  whole  world  no  benefit : — Cannot  a  man  quench  his  thirst  as  well 
out  of  an  urn  or  chalice,  as  out  of  a  whole  river?  It  is  an  ambitious  thirst,  and  a 
pride  of  draught,  that  had  rather  lay  his  mouth  to  the  Euphrates  than  to  a  petty 
goblet ;  but  if  he  had  rather,  it  adds  not  so  much  to  his  content  as  to  his  danger 
and  his  vanity.  (Ibid.)  Enjoyment  of  the.world  limited  by  lack  of  capacity : — 
If  any  man  should  give  to  a  lion  a  fair  meadow  full  of  hay,  or  a  thousand  quince 
trees ;  or  should  give  to  the  goodly  bull,  the  master  and  the  fairest  of  the  whole 
herd,  a  thousand  fair  stags;  if  a  man  should  present  to  a  child  a  ship  laden  with 
Persian  carpets,  and  the  ingredients  of  the  rich  scarlet :  all  these,  being  dis2)ropor- 
tionate  either  to  the  appetite  or  to  the  understanding,  could  add  nothing  of  content, 
and  might  declare  the  freeness  of  the  presenter,  but  they  upbraid  the  incapacity  of 
the  receiver.  And  so  it  does  if  God  should  give  the  whole  world  to  any  man.  He 
knows  not  what  to  do  with  it ;  he  can  use  no  more  but  according  to  the  capacities 
of  a  man;  he  can  use  nothing  but  meat,  and  drink,  and  clothes;  and  infinite 
riches,  that  can  give  him  changes  of  raiment  everyday,  and  a  full  table,  do  but  give 
him  a  clean  trencher  every  bit  he  eats ;  it  signifies  no  more  hut  wantonness  and 
variety,  to  the  same,  not  to  any  new  purposes.  He  to  whom  the  world  can  be  given 
to  any  purpose  greater  than  a  private  estate  can  minister,  must  have  new  capacities 
created  in  him  :  he  needs  the  understanding  of  an  angel,  to  take  the  accounts  of  hia 
estate ;  he  had  need  have  a  stomach  like  fire  or  the  grave,  for  else  he  can  eat  no 
more  than  one  of  his  healthful  subjects  ;  and  unless  he  hath  an  eye  like  the  sun, 
and  a  motion  hke  that  of  a  thought,  and  a  bulk  as  big  as  one  of  the  orb«!  of  heaven, 
the  pleasures  of  his  eye  can  be  no  greater  than  to  behold  the  beauty  of  a  little 
prospect  from  a  hill,  or  to  look  upon  the  heap  of  gold  packed  up  in  a  little 
room,  or  to  dote  upon  a  cabinet  of  jewels,  better  than  which  there  is  no  man, 
that  sees  at  all,  hut  sees  every  day.  (Ibid.)  Knowledge  has  a  greater  rn- 
ioyment  of  tlie  world  than  mere  pof^session : — But  then,  although  they  only  have 
power  to  relish  any  pleasure  rightly,  who  rightly  understand  the  nature,  and 
degrees  and  essences,  and  ends  of  things ;  yet  they  that  do  so,  understand  also 
the  vanity  and  the  unsatisfyingness  of  the  things  of  this  world,  so  that  the 
relish,  which  could  not  be  great  but  in  a  great  understanding,  appears  contemptible, 
because  its  vanity  appears  at  the  same  time ;  the  understanding  sees  all,  and 
sees  through  it.  (Ibid.)  The  gain  of  the  world  outweighed  by  a  sharp  pain: — 
The  greatest  vanity  of  this  world  is  remarkable  in  this,  that  all  its  joys  summed 
up  together  are  not  big  enough  to  counterpoise  the  evil  of  one  sharp  disease,  or  to 
allay  a  sorrow.  (Ibid.)  The  world  a  poor  reward  for  the  pain  of  getting  it :—  t 
But  in  the  supposition  it  is, "  If  a  man  could  gain  the  whole  world,"  which  supposea 
labour  and  sorrow,  trouble  and  expense,  venture  and  hazard,  and  so  much  time  ex- 


869  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  sti. 

pired  in  its  acqiiist  and  purchase,  that,  besides  the  possession  is  not  secured  to  ni 
for  the  term  of  hfe,  so  our  lives  are  almost  expired  before  we  become  estated  in  our 
purchases.  And,  indeed,  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  see  an  ambitious  or  a  covetous  person 
make  his  life  unpleasant,  troublesome,  and  vexations,  to  grasp  a  power  bigger  than 
Lim-elf,  to  fight  for  it  with  infinite  hazards  of  his  life,  so  that  it  is  a  thousand  to 
one  but  he  perishes  in  the  attempt,  and  gets  nothing  at  all  but  an  untimely  grave, 

a  reproachful  memory,  and  an  early  damnation.     (Ibid.)         The  mad  exchange  : 

And  this  I  observe  to  be  intimated  in  the  word,  lose.  For  he  that  gives  gold  for 
cloth,  or  precious  stones  for  bread,  serves  his  needs  of  nature,  and  loses  nothing  by 
it ;  and  the  merchant  that  found  a  pearl  of  great  price,  and  sold  all  that  he  had  to 
make  the  purchase  of  it,  made  a  good  venture  ;  he  was  no  loser  :  but  here  the  case 
is  otlieivvise  ;  when  a  man  gains  the  whole  world,  and  his  soul  goes  in  the  exchange, 
he  hath  not  done  like  a  merchant,  but  like  a  child  or  a  pi-odigal ;  he  hath  given 
himself  away,  he  hath  lost  all  that  can  distinguish  him  from  a  slave  or  a  miserable 
person,  he  loses  his  soul  in  the  exchange.  For  the  soul  of  a  man  all  the  world  can- 
not be  a  just  price;  a  man  may  lose  it,  or  throw  it  away,  but  he  can  never  make  a 
good  exchange  when  he  parts  with  this  jewel ;  and  therefore  our  blessed  Saviour 
rarely  well  expresses  it  by  Irjixiovv,  which  is  fully  opposed  to  KtpSoc,  "  gain  ;  "  it  ia 
such  an  ill  market  a  man  makes,  as  il  he  should  proclaim  his  riches  and  goods 
venriible  for  a  garland  of  thistles  decked  and  trimmed  up  with  the  stinking  poppy. 
(Ibid.)  The  soul  exchanged  for  a  paltry  convenience : — But  we  must  come  far 
lower  yet.  Thousands  there  are  that  damn  themselves ;  and  yet  their  purchase, 
at  long-running,  and  after  a  base  and  weary  life  spent,  is  but  five  hundred  pounds 
a-year :  nay,  it  may  be,  they  only  cozen  an  easy  person  out  of  a  good  estate,  and 
pay  for  it  at  an  easy  rate,  which  they  obtain  by  lying,  by  drinking,  by  flattery,  by 
force  ;  and  the  gain  is  nothing  but  a  thousand  pounds  in  the  whole,  or,  it  may  be, 
^hJ  nothing  but  a  convenience.  (Ibid.)  The  soul  now  ignorant  of  its  capability : — 
J  If  the  elephant  knew  his  strength,  or  the  horse  the  vigorousness  of  his  own  spirit, 
;  they  would  be  as  rebellious  against  their  rulers  as  unreasonable  men  against  govem- 
•  ment ;  nay,  the  angels  themselves,  because  their  light  reflected  home  to  their  orbs, 
and  they  understood  all  the  secrets  of  their  own  perfection,  they  grew  vertiginous, 
and  fell  from  the  battlements  of  heaven.  But  the  excellency  of  a  human  soul  shall 
then  be  truly  understood,  when  the  reflection  will  make  no  distraction  of  our  facul- 
ties,  nor  enkmdle  any  irregular  fires  ;  when  we  may  understand  ourselves  without 
danger.  (Ibid.)  The  lofs  of  the  soul  an  insupportable  calamity  : — But  yet  from 
these  considerations  it  would  follow,  that  to  lose  a  soul,  which  is  designed  to  be  an 
immense  sea  of  pleasures,  even  in  its  natural  capacities,  is  to  lose  all  that  whereby 
a  man  can  possibly  be,  or  be  supposed,  happy.  And  so  much  the  rather  is  this 
understood  to  be  an  insupportable  calamity,  because  losing  a  soul  in  this  senre  is 
not  a  mere  privation  of  those  felicities,  of  which  a  soul  is  naturally  designed  tc  be  a 
partaker,  but  it  is  an  investing  it  with  contrary  objects  and  cross  effects,  and 
dolorous  perceptions :  for  the  will,  if  it  misses  its  desires,  ia  afflicted ;  and  the 
understanding,  when  it  ceases  to  be  ennobled  with  excellent  things,  is  made  igno- 
rant as  a  swine,  dull  as  the  foot  of  a  rock  ;  and  the  affections  are  in  the  destitution 
of  their  perfective  actions  made  tumultuous,  vexed  and  discomposed  to  the  height 
I  of  rage  and  violence.  (Ibid.)  A  foolish  choice : — The  old  rabbins,  those  poets 
j  of  religi<m,  report  of  Moses,  that  when  the  courtiers  of  Pharaoh  were  sporting  with 
:  the  child  Moses,  in  the  chamber  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  they  presented  to  his  choice 
,  an  ingot  of  gold  in  one  hand  and  a  coal  of  fire  in  the  other,  and  that  the  child 
snatched  at  the  coal,  thrust  it  into  his  mouth,  and  so  singed  and  parched  his 
tongue,  that  he  stammered  ever  after.  And  certainly  it  is  infinitely  more  childish 
in  us,  for  the  glittering  of  the  small  glow-worms  and  the  charcoal  of  worldly  pos- 
sessions, to  swallow  the  flames  of  hell  greedily  in  our  choice :  such  a  lit  will  produce 
a  worse  stammering  than  Moses  had :  for  so  the  accursed  and  lost  soula  have  their 
ugly  and  horrid  dialect,  they  roar  and  blaspheme,  blaspheme  and  roar,  for  ever. 
(Ibid.)  A  wicked  barter  : — You  wonder  at  the  folly  of  that  rude  and  naked  savage 
who  would  barter  a  coronet  of  gold  for  small  worthless  trinkets,  and  buy  the  wonders 
of  a  mirror,  the  tinkling  of  a  bell,  or  the  string  of  colomed  beads,  with  a  handful 
of  pearls,  fit  ornaments  of  a  crown.  Yet  what  is  that  compared  with  the  folly  of 
^him  who,  in  exchange  for  the  toys  of  earth,  gives  his  soul?  (Dr.  Guthrie).  The 
folly  of  hazarding  t-ternal  life  for  temporal  enjoyment:  —  !.  How  inconsidkbabui 
THE  PURCHASE.  1.  If  We  had  it  all,  yet  the  great  uncertainty  of  holding  it,  or  any 
part  of  it.  2.  The  impossibility  of  using  and  enjoying  it  all.  3.  If  we  had  it,  and 
oonli  use  it  all,  the  improbability  of  being  contented  with  it.     II.  How  tbxat  a 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  36S 

PBicE  18  PAID  FOR  IT.  1.  The  loss  18  great.  2.  Irreparable.  3.  The  severe  re- 
flection men  will  make  upon  themselves  for  their  folly.  {J.  TiUotson,  D.D.)  The 
world- gainer  destitute  of  the  joy  of  hope: — God  hath  so  contrived  things  that, 
ordinarily,  the  pleasures  of  human  life  do  consist  more  in  hope  than  enjoyment ; 
80  that  if  a  man  had  gained  all  the  world,  one  of  the  chief  pleasures  of  life  ^^ould 
be  gone,  because  there  would  be  nothing  more  left  for  him  to  hope  for  in  this  world. 
(Ibid.)  Prcrperity  an  aggravation  of  subsequent  misery : — If  the  happiness  were 
true  and  real,  u  were  an  imprudent  method.  As  if  a  man  should  choose  to  enjoy 
a  great  estate  for  a  few  days,  and  to  be  extremely  poor  the  remaining  part  of  hi« 
life.  If  there  were  any  necessity  of  making  so  unequal  a  bargain,  Kurely  a  man 
would  reserve  the  best  condition  to  the  last ;  for  precedent  sufleriugs  and  trouble 
do  mightily  recommend  the  pleasures  that  are  to  ensue,  and  render  them  more 
tasteful  than  they  would  otherwise  have  been ;  whereas  the  greatest  ht'ie,litening  of 
miseiy,  the  saddest  aggravation  of  an  unhappy  condition,  is  to  fall  into  it  from  the 
height  of  a  prosperous  fortune.  It  is  comfortable  for  a  man  to  come  out  of  the 
cold  to  a  warm  fire  ;  but  if  a  man  in  a  great  heat  shall  leap  into  the  cold  water,  it 
will  strike  him  to  the  heart.  Such  is  the  fond  choice  of  every  sinner,  to  pass  im- 
mediately out  of  a  state  of  the  greatest  sensual  pleasure,  into  the  most  quick  and 
eensible  torments.  (Ibid.)  The  after  reflection  of  a  lost  soul: — With  what  in- 
dignation will  he  look  upon  himself,  and  censure  his  own  folly !  Like  a  man  who, 
in  a  drunken  fit,  hath  passed  away  his  estate  for  a  trifling  consideration  ;  the  next 
morning,  when  he  is  sober  and  come  to  hims-  If,  and  finds  himself  a  begcrar,  how 
does  he  rate  himself  for  being  such  a  beast  and  a  fool,  as  to  do  that  in  a  blind  and 
rash  heat  which  he  will  have  cause  to  repent  as  long  as  he  hath  a  day  to  hve. 
(Ibid.)  Is  life  worth  living  i — "  What  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his 
life  t "    This  question  has  been  largely  on  the  lips  of  the  world  of  late.     I.  Lite, 

IK  ITS   OBIGIN   AND   DESTINT,   IS   A   DEEP    MYSTERY.        ItS   Only   SOlution,    aS    itS    Only 

worth,  is  found  in  faith  and  religion.  Life  is  growth  under  a  force  and  principle, 
guided  by  intelligence.    To  be,  to  act,  and  to  suffer  or  enjoy,  is  to  live.     II.  Its 

UNFOLDINO    MAY   TAKE    PLACE   AROUND    EITHER   OF  TWO    CENTRES — SELF   OE  GoD.      Lifo 

offers  US,  in  this  direction,  either  bondage  or  freedom.  It  is  determined  by  choice. 
He  who  decides  to  live  to  himself,  becomes  the  slave  of  sin,  passion,  and  lust.  He 
who  chooses  God,  attains  to  freedom,  &c.  III.  Whether  life  will  secure  worth 
WILL  depend  upon  WHAT  WE  BELIEVE.  1.  In  natural  science.  2.  In  mental  philo- 
sophy,   3.  In  morals.     4.  In  religion.     IV.  Belief  and  knowledge  will  hayb 

their   effect  upon    CHARACTER   AND   CONDUCT,  AND    WILL   MANIFEST   THEMSELVES.       In 

what  we  become  ourselves,  and  in  what  we  help  others  to  become.     V.  Reasons 

WHY  WB   SHOULD  MAKE   THE  MOST  OF   LIFE  AND  FILL  IT  WriH   WORTH.       1.    God    gave  It 

and  upholds  it.  2.  God  has  redeemed  it  in  order  to  give  it  worth.  3.  God  has  a 
plan  for  each  life,  which,  if  followed,  will  lead  from  grace  to  glory,  and  from  the 
utilities  of  time  to  the  rewards  and  inheritance  of  eternity.  Unless  we  do  so,  most 
assuredly,  in  the  light  of  our  text,  life  will  not  be  worth  the  hving,  and  iudeed  it 
were  far  better  never  to  have  been  born.  (L.  O.  Tiiompson).  The  loss  of  the  soul 
irreparable : — If  the  soul  perish,  it  is,  once  more,  an  irreparable  loss — a  loss  that 
cannot  be  retrieved.  A  man  may  lose  health,  and  yet,  by  the  blessing  of  Providence 
upon  medical  aid,  he  may  become  more  healiJiy  than  before ;  a  man  may  lose 
property — his  aU  in  the  world,  and  yet,  by  industry  and  the  smile  of  Providence, 
he  may  become  richer  than  before  ;  a  man  may  lose  friends — God  may  raise  up 
others  in  their  room ;  but,  Oh,  if  the  soul  is  lost,  it  is  lost  not  for  a  day,  a  month, 
or  a  year,  but  for  eternity ;  and  it  is  that  word  *•  eternity  "  which  gives  emphasis 
to  bliss  or  woe,  to  ease  or  pain,  to  hell  or  heaven.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  loss 
of  the  soul  eternal : — There  is  no  proportion  between  the  one  and  the  other.  There 
is  some  proportion  between  a  particle  of  matter  and  the  globe — there  is  some  pro- 
portion between  a  drop  of  water  and  the  ocean  ;  but  there  can  be  none  between  the 
little  drop  of  time  and  the  shoreless,  fathomless  ocean  of  eternity.  The  man,  then, 
that  gains  the  whole  world  for  time  and  loses  hia  soul  for  eternity,  can  gain  no 
profit.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  27,  28.  For  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  In  the  glory  of  Hla  Father.— r/i« 

coming  of  the  Son  of  Man ; — 1.  The  judgment  of  the  world  has  been  committed  to 
the  Son  as  Mediator,  as  an  appropriate  honour  to  One  who  had  humbled  Iiimself 
for  the  redemption  of  the  world.  2.  Christ  is  qualified  to  be  Judge,  as  the  Son  of 
God,  of  the  same  essence  as  the  Father ;  the  perfections  of  the  Godhead  will  appear 
glorious  in  Him.    3.  The  saints  in  judgment  will  be  manifested  as  the  doers  of  tht 


e04  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

\7ill  of  God  upon  earth.  4.  The  work  of  the  Judge  will  be,  not  to  justify,  or  to 
make  righteous,  but  to  prove  the  saints  by  their  works,  that  they  are  righteous 
already.  6.  Men  will  be  judged  by  their  works,  to  show  that  God  in  the  work  of 
man's  salvation  supports  the  cause  of  infinite  holiness.  6.  Judgment  will  not  bo 
according  to  the  works  visible  to  men,  but  to  all  done  in  secret.  7.  Judgment 
according  to  works  will  condemn  the  ungodly,  and  make  them  dumb  before  God. 
(D.  Charles. )  I.  The  Son  ov  Man  as  the  pkomised,  manifested,  ascended  One. 
II.  His  keappeabance  on  earth.  Predicted,  possible,  necessary.  III.  His  supeb- 
HUMAN  OLORT.  His  herald,  person,  retinue  is  glorious.  IV.  His  important  work. 
To  raise  the  dead,  change  the  living,  judge  all,  reward  each,  resign  the  reins  of 
government  into  His  Father's  hand.  {A.  Macfarlane.)  I.  That  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  shall  return  to  this  earth  as  a  man  in  the  glory  of  God  with  His  angels.  II. 
That  all  Christ's  believing  people  shall  appear  with  Him.  III.  The  Lord  at  His 
coming  in  His  glory  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works.  (H.  McNeile.) 
An  awful  premonition : — Compared  with  the  doom  which  will  be  inflicted  upon  the 
ungodly  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  death  of  nature  is  nothing.  I.  The  binneb's 
death  is  but  a  faint  presage  of  the  sinner's  doom  at  the  coming  of  thk  Son  of 
Man  in  His  glory.  1.  We  can  make  but  little  comparison  between  the  two  in  the 
point  of  time.  Physical  dying  is  but  the  work  of  a  moment;  the  doom  of  the 
wicked  when  Christ  comes  will  never  die.  2.  In  point  of  loss  there  is  no  com- 
parison.  3.  Neither  does  death  bear  any  comparison  with  the  last  judgment  in 
point  of  terror.  4.  The  pains  of  death  are  not  comparable  to  the  pains  of  the 
judgment  at  the  second  advent.  II.  In  the  state  op  separate  spirits  they  hatk 
not  fdlly  tasted  of  death,  nor  wiLii  they  do  80  until  Christ  comes.  Till  after 
the  second  advent  their  bodies  do  not  suffer;  they  know  that  this  present  state  will 
end,  after  judgment  no  end;  they  have  not  been  put  to  the  shame  of  a  public 
sentence.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Waiting  for  Christ's  coming: — I  saw  a  picture  the 
other  day  in  a  shop  window,  with  which  I  was  greatly  pleased ;  it  represented  a 
room  in  which  was  a  window  looking  out  upon  the  sea ;  a  lady  with  a  grave, 
anxious  face  sat  by  the  window,  and  two  little  children  were  playing  on  the  carpet. 
On  the  table  lay  a  letter,  which  seemed  just  to  have  been  opened,  and  against  the 
wall  was  hanging  the  portrait  of  a  gentleman.  There  was  very  little  writing  under- 
neath the  picture,  and  very  little  was  wanted ;  for  I  could  understand  the  story 
which  the  picture  was  intended  to  tell,  as  plainly  as  if  the  painter  Jiad  told  me  him- 
seLf.  The  father  of  these  little  children  was  evidently  absent  from  them  beyond  the 
sea.  There  was  his  portrait,  but  he  was  far  away.  But  he  had  sent  them  a  letter 
containing  the  joyful  news  that  he  was  coming  home  again  I  And  so  there  was  the 
mother  sitting  at  that  window,  day  after  day,  and  looking  across  the  wide  waters, 
in  the  hope  of  at  last  seeing  the  white  sails  of  the  ship  which  should  bring  the 
long-expected  one  home.  Now  this  picture,  I  think,  may  remind  us  of  what  the 
Lord  JesuB  used  to  tell  His  disciples  about  His  "coining  again."  (Ready  for 
Work.) 


CHAPTER  XVIL 


Tebb.  1-13.  And  waa  tranoflgured  before  them. — The  mount  of  vision:— 1.  Takft 
what  is  taught  in  the  passage  as  to  Christ's  hdmanitt  and  its  aspects.  Among 
all  the  aspects  in  which  the  Saviour  is  presented  to  us,  this  one  assuredly  is  plain, 
the  Saviour  as  man.  And  the  story  of  the  Transfiguration  shows  Christ  as  the 
man  in  three  ways.  1.  It  speaks  of  a  human  need,  the  need,  namely,  of  encou- 
ragement and  strength.  Indeed,  it  seems  that  the  Transfiguration  was  a  turning- 
point  in  the  mission  He  had  come  to  accomplish,  when  His  work  as  a  Prophet 
passed  into  the  background  and  His  work  as  a  Priest  came  to  the  front.  Not  for 
the  disciples  only,  but  for  Himself,  the  establishing  of  His  courage  and  the  reas- 
Buring  of  His  hope,  was  the  vision  on  the  mount,  with  the  voice  that  accom- 
panied it.  So  low  does  a  Saviour  stoop  in  His  humility,  that  He  touches  our  sin- 
less infirmities  at  their  lowest,  and  is  not  ashamed  to  be  our  companion  and  our 
example  in  all.  2.  And  this  brings  me  to  the  next  point,  and  to  pass  from  eon- 
sidering  the  human  need  to  consider  the  human  exercise.  That  exercise  was 
prayer.     *•  He  went  up,"  says  St.  Luke,  "  to  a  mountain  tc  pray."    He  was  asking 


CHAP.  XVII.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  MS 

lor  the  wisdom  that  discerned  the  Father's  will,  for  the  submission  that  embraaed 
it,  for  the  perseverance  that  adhered  to  it,  for  the  joy  that  illumined  it.  If  you  can 
dispense  with  prayer,  Christ  could  not.  3.  Again,  we  have  here  a  human  ezpe- 
rience.  Was  not  the  Transfiguration  rather  a  token  that  associated  itself  with  the 
Saviour's  divinity,  an  honour  that  pertaiued  to  Him,  not  as  the  man,  but  as  God  T 
There  is  truth  in  this ;  but  two  things  must  be  noticed  at  the  same  time.  Firat, 
that  even  if  it  was  the  Godhead  that  lent  the  radiance,  it  was  the  manhood  that 
vas  actually  irradiated;  and  secondly,  that  what  the  Godhead  effected  in  Christ, 
what  is  Godlike  effects  in  His  followers.  Do  not  put  the  Transfiguration  of  Christ 
aside  as  a  privilege  that  is  purely  supernatural ;  it  is,  in  one  sense,  only  the  tran- 
ecendent  exhibition  as  it  is  the  ethcacious  pledge  of  the  changes  which  grace  nuty 
work  in  ourselves.  Such  transtigurations  as  these  are  both  symptomatic  and 
prophetic.  They  are  symptomatic  of  what  has  already  begun,  and  prophetic  of 
what  shall  yet  be  revealed,  when  the  temporary  gives  place  to  the  permanent,  »nd 
the  partial  is  drowned  in  the  perfect,  and  a  glorified  soul  shall  create  a  glorified 
vesture,  from  which  the  last  stain  of  sin  shall  be  purged,  and  the  last  line  of  pain 
be  smoothed  out.  Oh,  our  Kinsman-Redeemer,  we  have  found  Thee  our  companion 
in  manhood's  weakness,  we  hail  Thee  as  the  type  of  manhood's  coming  glory  i 
As  Thou  has  borne  the  image  of  the  earthly  with  us,  so  shall  we  bear  the  image  of 
the  heavenly  with  Thee.  II.  But  again,  wb  have  herb  Christ's  death  and  itb 
MEANING.  1.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  glory  of  the  Old  Dispensation  ;  its  gloiy, 
because  its  fulfilment  and  crown.  That  is  why  Moses  and  EUas  were  there.  Moses 
was  there  to  bear  witness  that  in  the  decease  of  a  Saviour  at  Jerusalem  a  nobler 
Bock  would  be  smitten  than  the  rock  he  had  struck  in  the  wilderness,  and  that  a 
richer  fountain  would  flow  forth  than  the  water  that  gushed  from  its  flinty  cleftm 
Elijah  was  there  to  bear  witness  that  in  this  same  decease  at  Jerusalem  a  greater 
sacrifice  would  be  offered  than  the  sacrifice  he  had  laid  upon  Carmel's  altar,  even  a 
Saviour'*  precious  blood,  and  a  more  wondrous  confirmation  be  granted  than  the 
fire  that  gave  testimony  before  Carmel's  hosts,  even  a  Saviour's  glorious  Resurrec- 
tion. 2.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  glory  of  the  New  Dispensation.  For  as  il 
was  the  glory  of  the  Old  Dispensation  as  its  fulfilment,  it  is  the  glory  of  the  New 
as  its  foundation.  That  is  why  the  disciples  were  there.  They  were  there  as  the 
sponsors  of  a  Church  to  be,  just  as  Moses  and  Ehjah  were  there  as  the  sponsors  of 
a  Church  and  a  ritual  that  had  vanished.  If  Moses  and  Elias  were  the  flower  of 
the  Old  Dispensation,  Peter  and  James  and  John  were  the  germs  of  the  New. 
8.  The  death  of  the  cross  is  the  glory  of  Jesus  Himself.  For  those  that  had  eyM 
to  see,  there  was  triumph  in  the  very  shame,  and  the  crucifixion  was  itself  a  coro- 
nation— it  was  His  glory  in  the  very  endurance,  as  well  as  in  the  ultimate  resulta. 
III.  But  again,  we  have  here  something  taught  vs  as  to  Christ's  Church  ani> 
its  fellowship.  Let  us  now  look  at  Christ  as  the  living  Bond  of  eternal  union. 
The  relation  of  the  Church  beneath  to  the  Church  above  is  a  question  that  throbs 
with  a  lasting  interest.  That  there  is  some  relation  we  know  ;  though  divided,  the 
companies  are  in  some  fashion  one.  But  what  is  that  relation  ?  Certainly  not  • 
visible  one  any  longer.  There  is  a  knowledge  of  our  friends  after  the  flesh  no 
more.  It  was,  after  all,  a  knowledge  of  the  flesh  that  Peter  was  thinking  of  when 
he  said,  in  his  rashness  and  witlessness,  '•  Lord,  let  us  make  three  tabernacles." 
And  that  is  Christ's  answer  to  Peter.  It  is  as  if  He  had  said,  "  Not  as  you  think, 
will  the  relation  between  us  be  perpetuated — by  fellowship  such  as  you  would  main- 
tain,  in  tabernacles  such  as  you  would  build.  There  is  but  one  tabernacle  prepared 
for  us  all,  and  behold,  it  is  now  coming  down — the  tabernacle  and  pavilion  of  Him 
who  is  as  a  wall  of  fire  round  His  people,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  them.** 
Stand  in  the  fear  and  the  presence  of  God,  as  the  disciples  stood  under  the  olond, 
and  that  will  be  the  sphere  of  communion ;  found  your  interests  and  your  hopes 
on  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  that  will  be  the  means  of  communion ;  press  near  Uy 
the  person  of  the  Crucified,  and  that  will  be  the  centre  of  communion.  There  ia 
interojurse  in  no  other  way.  IV.  But  again,  we  have  something  taught  us  aa  t» 
Christ's  message  and  its  authokitt.  Was  it  not  as  if  God  meant  to  say,  *'  Hear 
the  Son,  not  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Dispensation  merely?  Hear  the  Son,  not 
messengers  from  heaven,  though  august  as  the  deputies  you  have  seen."  And  what 
God  said  to  the  disciples  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  He  says  this  day  to  our- 
Belves,  reminding  us  once  more  of  the  whole  duty  of  man — the  reception  of  the 
message,  and  the  submission  to  the  purpose  of  His  well-beloved  Son.  Listen  to 
Eim,  and  not  to  the  world.  The  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof.  Listen 
to  Him,  and  not  to  the  flesh.     The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  deepen 


866  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xth 

rately  wicked ;  who  can  know  it  ?  Listen  to  Him,  not  to  ministera.  They  are 
frcil,  earthly  vessels  at  the  best.  '*  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  Hear  that. 
"  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
Hear  that.  V.  And  once  more,  in  this  passage,  we  have  here  the  presence  of 
Christ  and  its  all-sufficiency.  He  who  has  come  before  us  in  this  iucident  as 
Man,  as  Redeemer,  as  Uniter,  and  as  Prophet,  is  brought  before  us  in  the  last  place 
as  a  Friend.  For  the  time  came  when  Transfiguration  experiences  ended — the 
disciples  looked  up  and  saw  no  man  save  Jesus  only.  Ah  yes,  there  is  a  something 
in  our  reUgious  life  that  is  transitory,  and  there  is  a  something  that  always  abides. 
What  is  transitory  is  an  experience  such  as  that  which  the  disciples  had  when  they 
were  wrapped  with  the  glory  ;  what  is  abiding  is  the  Person  and  Presence  of  Christ, 
which  form  the  centre  of  attraction  while  Transfiguration  experiences  last,  and 
which  remain  to  make  up  for  their  absence  when  Transfiguration  experiences 
cease.  Happy  are  they  who,  when  the  glamour  dies  from  their  sky,  and  the  com- 
pany vanishes  from  their  path,  and  life  looks  bare  and  common,  like  the  path  down 
Hermon  for  the  descending  disciples,  have  a  faith  that  will  strengthen  them  whea 
feelings  pass,  and  a  guidance  that  will  cheer  them  when  friendships  are  dissolved, 
and  who,  lifting  up  their  eyes,  see  Jesus — Jesus  alone,  it  may  be,  but  a  Jesus  who 
is  all-sufficient.  {William  A.  Gray.)  Tabor  fiighti : — First,  let  me  remark  that 
it  was  only  once  in  Christ's  life  on  this  earth,  and  that  that  once  was  only  given  to 
a  chosen  few.  Some  Christians  seem  to  think  that  they  must  be  always  going  up  to 
mounts  of  extraordinary  joy  and  revelation :  this  is  not  after  God's  method.  Those 
spiritual  visits  to  high  places,  and  that  wonderful  intercourse  with  the  unseen 
world,  are  not  in  the  promises  ;  the  daily  life  of  invisible  communion  is.  And  it  is 
enough !  We  shall  have  the  exceptional  revelation  if  it  be  right  for  us.  When  the 
Master  was  there,  three  disciples  had  it,  and  nine  had  it  not  I  And  why  it  was 
when  it  was,  and  why  those  three  were  selected,  we  can  see  but  few  reasons.  They 
were  the  three  who  walked  the  closest  and  dwelt  the  nearest  to  the  heart  of  Jesus. 
They  were  also  the  three  who  were  about  to  have  their  faith  and  their  feehngg 
strained  to  the  uttermost  by  witnessing,  most  closely,  the  deepest  agonies  of  their 
dear  Lord.  Peter  was  to  found  the  Church  ;  James  was  to  be  the  first  martyr  of 
the  ApostoUc  College ;  John,  the  writer  of  the  Revelation.  For  these  reasons,  and 
perhaps  also  because  their  characters  specially  required  the  encouragements  that 
were  the  most  adapted  to  the  occasion,  they  were  selected.  Do  not  envy 
others  their  higher  joys  or  greater  privileges.  These  things  are  talents.  They  do 
not  seem  to  have  been  either  the  wiser,  or  the  happier,  or  the  better — at  least  at 
the  time — for  the  marvellous  vision.  If  we  had  to  select  the  most  dreadful  position 
in  which  ever  men  were  placed,  we  should  fix  directly  on  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and 
Abednego  in  the  **  burning  fiery  furnace."  And  if  we  had  to  choose  the  most 
favoured — Peter,  James  and  John.  Yet  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  were 
calm  and  entirely  happy  in  the  fire ;  Peter,  James,  and  John  were  fearful  and 
troubled  on  the  Mount.  Those  on  Tabor  represented  the  three  great  states  of 
Qod's  Universal  Church — this  earth,  the  intermediate  state,  and  glory  ;  Christ,  in 
heaven;  Moses,  upon  this  earth  ;  Elijah,  in  paradise.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The 
doctrine  taught  and  shadowed  forth  by  the  Transfiguration  is  probably  greater^ 
fuller,  richer  than  is  taught  in  any  other  episode  in  our  Lord's  life.  It  teaches — 
(1^  The  perfect  union  of  the  human  and  the  Divine  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
(2)  that  the  future  life  of  the  children  of  God  is  not  a  mere  pietistio,  sentimental 
dream,  but  a  glorious  reality ;  (3)  that  the  good,  when  they  depart  hence,  do  not  go 
down  into  the  darkness,  but  up  into  the  light,  and  live  unto  God  in  a  fuller,  grander 
life ;  (4)  that  heaven  is  vitally,  closely  connected  with  earth  by  sympathy  and 
ministry ;  (6)  that  the  denizens  are  deeply  and  profoundly  interested  in  the  inha- 
bitants of  this  sin-stricken  world ;  (G)  that  Christ's  death  on  the  cross  was  not  a 
surprise,  not  an  accident,  but  a  work  which  He  came  to  accompUsh ;  (7)  that  good 
men  cannot  for  ever  dwell  in  ease  and  rapture  on  the  mount,  but  must  toil  and 
Buffer  in  the  great  world  below ;  (8)  that  mortal  man  cannot  have  unveiled  audience 
with  God ;  (9)  that  Jesus  Christ  will  not  abandon  His  disciples  when  they  are  sore 
Afraid,  but  will  draw  nigh  and  comfort  them  ;  (10)  that  the  mission  of  the  servant! 
of  God  'j  to  lead  men  to  Christ  and  to  leave  them  with  Him.  {E.  D,  Solomon.) 
Creed,  v>or$hip,  and  work : — I.  The  Church  is  led  to  a  OBEsn.  The  time  has  now 
eome  for  estimating  the  effects  of  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  "  Whom  do  men  say  that 
I,  the  Son  of  Man,  am  ?  "  U.  In  the  Trausfiguration  itself  the  Church  is  led  on  to 
ft  foretaste  of  glorious  woBsnip  and  high  commonion — the  meeting  for  awhile  of  the 
Ohoroh  militant  with  the  Church  triumphant.    1.  As  to  the  reality  of  the  Trans- 


CHAP.  XVII.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  367 

fignration.  We  have  the  calmness  of  history  in  the  narratives  of  the  synoptics ; 
we  have  dates  and  circumstances.  The  glory  above  is  as  historical  as  the  epUeptio 
writhing  below.  2.  As  to  the  purposes  of  the  Transfiguration.  It  had  a  purpose  in 
relation  to  the  human  nature  of  Jesus.  A  sense  of  suffering  came  upon  His  soul, 
and  He  wanted  rest.  The  instinct  which  draws  so  many  of  the  highest  human 
spirits  to  the  quiet  and  elevation  of  the  hills,  led  Hint  up  into  the  higher  mountaiu- 
range  of  Paneas  or  Hermon.  If  one  might  refer  to  a  long- forgotten  controversy, 
tlie  Transfiguration  was  not  a  miracle.  For  such  splendour  was  natural  to  a  body 
like  His,  with  the  perfect  soul  and  its  union  with  Divinity.  The  repression  was 
miraculous ;  the  Transfiguration  was  the  temporary  cessation  of  that  miraculotij 
repression.  HI.  But  further,  in  the  transfiguration  Jesus  leads  His  Church  to  a 
woBE — a  work  which,  indeed,  they  could  not  at  first  perform.  What  a  contrast  for 
Him  and  for  them  l  For  them  :  •*  Lord,  it  is  beautiful  for  us  to  be  here."  A 
contrast  for  Him  also.  A  contrast  between  the  spirits  of  "just  men  made  perfect," 
and  the  faithless  and  crooked  generation,  of  whom  even  His  patience  cried,  "  How 
long  shall  I  be  with  you  7  How  long  shall  I  suffer  you  7  "  They  find  a  sufferer 
below.  Strange  contrast,  as  we  have  said.  Above  :  the  pure  heaven ;  the  words  of 
Divine  attestation  ;  the  forms  of  saints  floating  in  light ;  the  glory  and  honour  and 
majesty  given  to  Jesus.  Below  :  the  reproach  ;  the  well-meant  but  baffled  effort ; 
the  foam  on  the  cut  lip ;  the  withered  body  ;  the  sullen  muteness  broken  by 
epileptic  cries.  Yet  there  is  a  fresh,  unselfish  joy  in  the  energy  which  Jesus  throws 
into  that  victorious  work.  Thus,  on  the  whole,  in  this  section  of  the  Transfiguration, 
Jesus  leads  His  Church  in  the  person  of  His  disciples  on  to  a  world  of  tlwught,  up  to 
a  world  of  worship,  down  to  a  world  of  work.  1.  The  three  words,  creed,  worship, 
work,  surely  indicate,  as  far  as  single  words  can,  the  leading  purpose  of  the  three 
great  periods  which  the  Church  has  already  traversed.  The  primitive  centuries  were 
occupied  mainly,  but  not  exclusively,  in  moulding  Christological  dogma:  the  Middle 
Ages  (over  and  above  the  scholastic  philosophy)  were  busy  in  elaborating  worship  : 
before  the  eye  of  the  modern  Church  social  problems  have  come  out  with  a  tremen- 
dor>3  significance.  2.  Again,  we  have  here  a  summary  of  elements  which  must 
always,  more  or  less,  co-exist  in  a  hviug  Church.  Confession,  devotion,  effort,  mast 
be  found  in  her.  Without  the  confession,  devotion  becomes  fanaticism  ;  without 
the  devoti'^n,  confession  becomes  a  cou{,'elation  of  dogma  ;  without  the  confession 
and  the  devotion,  the  effort  is  soon  left  to  pohce  magistrates  and  poor-law 
guardians.  3.  It  may,  I  think,  further  be  observed  that  the  Transfiguration  stands 
in  our  New  Testament  as  one  recognition  of  "  the  sense  of  beauty,"  of  which  it  has 
been  cynically  said  that  "  it  naver  furthered  a  single  duty."  Nay,  more ;  it  is  a 
refutation  of  him  who  has  told  ns  that  beauty  is  inconsistent  with  the  gospel.  It 
shows  Jesus  not  doing  something  definite  for  us ;  but  showing  earth  for  a  moment 
what  He  is  in  His  beauty.  I  conclude  by  drawing  two  lessons  for  the  spiritual  life 
of  each  of  us  :  I.  Our  individual  hfe  must  follow  and  summarize  the  section  of  the 
Transfiguration.  1.  We  must  lay  the  foundation  strong  and  deep  in  the  confession 
of  Peter.  2.  This  must  be  accompanied  by  a  second  condition.  There  must  be 
the  love  of  prayer,  of  communion  with  the  world  unseen.  II.  Let  us  think  for  a  few 
moments  of  our  transfiguration  as  the  result  of  His.  Even  our  faUen  humanity 
affords  hints  of  this.  (JUshop  Alexander,  D.D.)  The  Epiphany  upon  the 
Mount : — Some  have  questioned  whether  tlxis  is  to  be  received  as  real  history 
Bationalism  calls  it  "  The  dream  of  Peter."  Some  talk  of  it  as  a  mere  scenic  di» 
play,  tc  awaken  the  dull  and  sleepy  disciples,  but  of  no  further  moment  or 
lignificance.  Even  some  comparatively  sound  theologians  have  satisfied  themselves 
with  assigning  it  a  basis  of  historic  truth,  but  much  exaggerated  by  the  dreamy  im- 
aginations of  the  witnesses.  A  dream  1  It  is  not  Ukely  that  three  men  would 
each  dream  precisely  the  same  thing,  at  the  same  time  ;  or  that  they  would  all  be  so 

Sjrfectly  deceived  as  to  tell  it  for  fact  in  their  most  serious  dibcourses  and  writings. 
or  do  I  know  by  what  authority  we  are  to  regard  that  as  a  dream,  wliich  the  record 
Bays  the  witnesses  beheld  when  they  were  wide  awake.  We  will  notice — I.  Tub  plaob. 
This  is  specifically  described  as  "  up  in  an  high  mountain."  There  is  much  said 
in  the  Scriptures  about  mountains,  and  many  of  the  most  memorable  events  of 
sacred  history  transpired  apon  mountains.  The  Law  was  given  upon  a  mountain  : 
the  last  decisive  conflict  with  the  prophets  of  Baal,  and  the  last  of  the  three  great 
conflicts  of  our  Saviour  with  Satan,  occurred  on  mountains.  The  offering  up  of 
Isaac,  the  great  type,  and  the  subsequent  offering  up  of  Christ,  the  antitype,  were 
accomplished  upon  mountains.  All  this  is  not  mere  aocident.  Mountainona 
elevations  are  particularly  fitted  to  the  sacred  and  the  Divine.    They  are  Natoie'f 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

Bjmbols  of  the  Majesty  of  God.  They  have  a  natural  harmony  with  His  everlasting 
parity,  power,  and  Godhead.  II.  The  witnesses.  "  Peter,  James,  and  John  his 
brother."  There  were  different  circles,  even  within  the  little  circle  of  the  twelve,  to 
which  different  degrees  of  privilege  and  trust  were  given.  Not  all  the  members  of 
om  natural  bodies  have  the  same  functions,  or  the  same  honour  ;  and  so  the 
members  of  Christ  "  have  not  ail  the  same  office."  And  yet  we  are  to  "covet 
earnestly  the  best  gifts."  III.  The  Transformation — "  He  was  transfigured 
before  them."  IV.  The  time,  particularly  as  related  to  the  act  in  which  the 
Saviour  was  occupied — prayer.  Prayer  is  a  transiiguring  power.  It  is  the  opening 
of  the  earthly  nature  to  the  inflowing  of  the  heavenly.  Prayer  is  the  drawing  near 
of  the  soul  to  the  light  and  majesty  of  heaven,  and  always  gathers  to  itself  the 
gilding  of  that  light.  It  not  only  ascends  to  heaven,  but  it  calls  heaven  into  itself, 
and  illuniines  with  the  grace  of  heaven,  and  makes,  not  only  the  face,  but  the  whols 
man,  more  heavenly.  V.  The  accompanying  apparitions — "  And,  behold,  ths»  ap- 
peared unto  them  Moses  and  Elias  talking  with  Him."  However  alone  we  may  seem 
to  be  in  our  devotions,  we  are  never  alone.  Though  effectually  withdrawn  from  this 
world,  beings  of  another  then  join  us.  VI.  But,  finally,  notice  the  PAETiooiiAB 
MEANiNa  OF  tCLL  THIS.  It  had,  first  of  all,  an  important  relation  to  the  fore 
announcements  which  the  Saviour  had  just  been  making  of  His  approaching 
sufferings  and  death  (Matt.  xvi.  21 ;  Mark  ix.  31 ;  Luke  ix.  22).  These  sad  things 
had  greatly  disturbed,  perplexed,  and  disheartened  the  disciples.  And  it  was 
necessary  that  they  should  be  strongly  certified  of  the  Saviour's  Divine  glory  before 
He  went  down  into  those  dreadful  depths,  lest  their  faith  should  utterly  fail  them 
when  the  facts  should  occur.  We  are  also  fully  authorized  to  take  the  Transfiguration 
as  a  picture  and  earnest  of  His  future  coming  and  kingdom,  which  is  to  embody  the 
oonsummated  results  of  His  obedience  unto  death.  If  it  was  a  foretaste  and  pledge 
of  "the  glory  that  should  follow  "  from  His  sufferings,  it  must  needs  be  of  the  same 
kind  and  nature  with  that  of  which  it  was  a  section  given  in  advance.  Brethren, 
"  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  TranS' 
Hguration: — I.  The  place.  II.  Let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the  persons  assembled 
on  the  Mount.  We  learn,  I  think,  that  saints,  after  death,  know  each  other.  Moses 
and  Elias  did  so ;  and  even  the  disciples,  in  a  way  not  explained,  were  enabled  to 
identify  their  celestial  associates.  Are  we  to  say,  then,  that  an  earthly  mountain 
was  more  than  the  heavenly  Zion  ?  It  further  appears,  fiom  what  has  been  said, 
that  the  recompense  of  saints  after  death  has  some  proportion  to  their  prior  disciple- 
ship.  Jesus  on  this  occasion  had  special  honour  to  confer  on  some  members  of  the 
heavenly  Church,  and  whom  did  He  select  to  be  the  subject!^  of  distinction  ?  In 
short,  we  learn  here  that  saints  may  see  more  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world  after 
death  than  before  it.  Moses  desired,  prayed  for  admission  to  Canaan.  The  request 
waa  denied,  and  yet  here  he  is — all  as  you  wished,  and  as  he  wished — within  Pales- 
tine, and  surveying  from  no  foreign  Pisgah,  biat  from  one  of  its  own  mountain?,  the 
inheritance  of  his  people.  III.  Let  us  consider  the  condition  in  which  thesb 
PERSONS  APPEARED  ON  THE  MouNT.  It  is  Unnecessary  that  I  should  expatiate  ou  the 
aspect  of  the  disciples.  No  intimation  is  given  of  any  change  in  their  state.  They 
xemained  as  they  had  been,  and  their  bodies  displayed  all  the  frailties  common  to  our 
frame.  The  most  interesting  fact  in  their  case  is  that  they  were  not  changed;  and 
we  hence  see  the  folly  of  looking  for  transformation  of  our  natures  from  any  juncture 
of  circumstances.  It  was  otlierwise  with  Moses  and  Ehas.  We  are  told  by  St.  Luke 
that  they  appeared  in  glory.  That  glorj'  is  manifest  when  we  compare  what  they 
onee  were  with  what  they  have  now  become.  Moses  has  no  more  need  of  Aaron  and 
Hur  to  sustain  his  arm  for  the  discomfiture  of  Amalek.  Though  fifteen  hundred  years 
have  passed  over  him  they  have  brought  no  frailties  of  age,  but  the  inextinguishable 
fires  of  an  immortal  }'onth.  Mark  the  disparity  between  them  and  the  apostles. 
Both  parties  were  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain,  but  how  different  their  manner  of 
reaching  it  I  On  the  one  hand  the  approach  was  from  beneath,  by  slow,  tedions, 
arduous  steps.  On  the  other  hand  the  approach  was  from  above,  from  the  holieJst  of 
all  in  the  third  heavens,  and  was  effected  by  a  descent  which  no  barrier  could 
obstract  and  no  distance  protract.  When  a  bright  cloud  came  and  overshadowed 
them,  the  disciples,  as  we  learn  from  St.  Luke,  feared  to  enter  into  the  cloud  ;  its 
Instre  dazzled  or  appalled  them.  There  was  no  such  apprehension  on  the  part  of 
Moses  and  EUas ;  the  wide  universe  contained  not  that  which  could  frighten  them ; 
and  as  to  the  glory  of  God,  its  light,  so  inaccessible  to  mortals,  was  their  element  of 
joy.  The  disciples  fell  asleep,  overcome  by  consternation  and  fatigue.  But  while 
they  slept  Moses  and  Elias  talked  with  Jesus,  and  freely  discussed  the  deep  thingf 


OHAP.  xvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  3B9 


of  God.  But  I  am  restricting  your  attention  to  mere  men,  when  one  and  another 
and  many  are  saying,  "We  would  see  Jesus."  "His  face  did  shine  as  the  aun." 
Usually  it  was  darkened  by  grief  ;  but  now  gloom  is  gone.  IV.  Let  us  now  direct 
our  attention  to  their  discourse.  The  subject  discussed  by  such  an  assembly  must 
surely  have  been  important :  it  was  important  to  all  there  assembled.  You  require 
no  proof  that  the  event  spoken  of  was  important  to  Jesus,  for  He  was  to  be  the  euf- 
ferer.  The  subject  was  also  important  to  Moses  and  Elias.  No  doubt  they  were 
glorified  saints,  but  all  this  blessing  they  had  acquired  in  virtue  of  the  Messiah's  anti- 
cipated sufferings;  and  not  a  plant  bloomed  in  their  paradise,  not  a  note  thrilled  in 
their  songs,  not  a  gem  gleamed  in  their  crowns,  but  was  due  to  the  decease  which 
Christ  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem.  The  three  disciples  had  a  like  stake  in  the 
event,  which  was  not  the  less  precious  to  them  that  they  were  insensible  to  its  con- 
Bequeuoe.  But  these  disciples  were  representatives  of  the  New  Testament  Church, 
and  if  so,  what  was  important  to  them  is  important  to  us.  Christ  died,  not  for  their 
ains  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  {David  King,  LL.D.)  Lessons 
of  the  Transfiguration : — I.  It  was  designed  to  make  thb  things  o»  thb  fotubb 
woBLD  more  a  reality,  A  DISTINCT  CONCEPTION.  The  Veil  between  ns  and  the  world 
of  spiritual  glory  is,  as  it  were,  drawn  aside,  and  we  are  permitted  to  view  the 
unseen.  Humanity,  our  humanity,  is  capable  of  a  refinement  of  feature  and  ex- 
pression united  to  a  higher  spiritual  development  in  a  purer  state  than  the  present. 
II.  We  are  tadqht  that  Christ's  kingdom  is  not  or  this  world,  its  glories 

BEING  as  much  ABOVE  IT  AS  ITS  PRINCIPLES.  III.  ThE  KINGDOM  OP  GoD  IB  NOT  CON- 
FINED  TO,  AND  DOES  NOT  CONSIST  IN  A  PABTICDLAR  PLACE,  BUT  IN  AN  INWARD  CONDITION 

o»  THE  PERSON  *,  that  inward  condition  will  inevitably  make  itself  visible,  shining 
through  the  restraints  of  adverse- and  even  fleshly  circamstances.  (W.  I,  Keay.} 
The  Transfiguration  of  Christ : — On  this  stupendous  and  yet  delightful  manifestfttion 
we  offer  a  few  general  remarks.    I.  The  transfiguration  is  to  be  considered  aa  onb 

OF   THOSE   SOLEMN   ACTS   BY   WHIf  H    ChEIST    WAS   INDUCTED   INTO    HiS    OFFICE   AS   THB 

Teacher  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  This  is  the  principal  truth  taught  by  it. 
All  the  old  prophets  were  appointed  by  some  special  designation  and  call  of  G&d. 
But  Christ  being  at  once  the  greatest  of  all  Prophets,  it  was  to  be  expected  that 
His  designation  should  be  accompanied  by  circumstances  which  should  mark  iM* 
distinction  and  superiority.  1.  There  was  their  frequency.  The  prophets  we,ie 
generally  designated  by  one  glorious  appearance  of  Him  who  called  ther!i.  But 
Christ,  by  a  series  of  wondrrs.  Then  there  was  the  manner.  The  prophets  had  a 
glory  conferred  upon  them,  but  to  the  Master  belonged  the  greater  glory.  "  Hear 
ye  Him."  The  command  still  applies  to  you.  II.  From  the  subject  of  the  dis- 
course held  with  Christ  by  Moses  and  Elias  wb  learn  that  there  was  in  His 
death  something  special  and  emphatic.  The  mode  of  expression,  indeed,  shows 
this.  It  was  a  departure  from  life  which  He  had  to  fulfil,  &c.  His  was  a  sacri- 
ficial death.  The  Old  Testament  saints  were  saved  in  anticipation  of  this.  Let 
that  be  the  subject  of  our  thought  and  converse  here,  which  shall  be  the  theme  of 
heaven  itself.  III.  Thb  confirmation  which  this  event  gave  to  thb  ancient 
PBOPHETic  dispensation  (2  Peter  i.  17-19).  The  transfiguration  thus  confirms 
"  the  word  of  prophecy,"  in  several  remaikable  particulars.  1.  The  ancient  pro- 
phets speak  of  the  Messias  in  terms  indicating  a,  strange  union  of  the  extremes  of 
debasement  and  glory.  Very  strikingly  was  this  illustrated  here.  2.  The  ancient 
dispensation  was  marked  with  special  care  as  to  the  quaUty  of  the  sacrifices  to  bf 
offered  to  God.  Here  we  see  the  shadow  giving  place  to  the  substance.  The  victiiL 
is  distinctly  marked — "  This  is  My  beloved  Son."  3.  The  doctrine  of  the  prophets 
was  that  the  Me,-siah  should  die  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  Here  the  doctrine  is 
both  illustrated  and  confirmed,  4.  The  law  and  the  prophets  were  continually 
holding  forth  some  "  better  thing  "  than  themselves.  Now  both  Mcsea  and  Eliai 
converse  with  Him,  to  show  the  harmony  of  the  whole  ;  and  He  being  declared  by 
the  voice  from  heaven  to  be  the  supreme  Teacher,  they  surrender,  as  it  were,  their 
commission  into  His  hands,  and  then  depart,  leaving  Him  the  sole  object  on  which 
the  eye  of  the  world  should  rest  for  ever.  6.  The  ancient  dispensation  was  founded 
on  the  doctrine  of  the  soul's  immortality,  and  of  rewards  and  punishments  in  a 
future  life.  Here  it  is  confirmed  and  made  clear.  In  these  scenes  life  and  immor- 
tality burst  upon  us.  6.  The  ancieut  prophets  speak  of  an  advent  of  Christ  in 
glory.  Behold  it  confirmed.  Conclusion :  The  prophetic  word  being  thus  confirmed, 
there  are  two  important  lessons  to  be  learnt.  1.  Take  heed  to  it.  It  is  intended 
to  usher  in  Christ,  and  the  day  of  salvation.  All  other  light  is  delusive.  2.  The 
whole  history  is  most  encouraging  to  those  who  t  aly  believe  in  Christ.    See  how 

u 


870  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvii. 

He  shares  His  glory  with  His  disciples.    And  if  you  suffer  with  Him,  yoa  shall  also 
reign  with  Him.     {Richard  Watson.)        The  Transfiguration  : — I.  Took  place  amid 
the  grandeurs  of  natiure.    II.  Was  witnessed  by  three  of  Christ's  most  favoured 
disciples.     III.  Consisted  in  an  outshining  of  the  enshrined  Divinity.     IV.  Was 
heightened  by  the  presence  of  two  of  the  greatest  men  of  past  history.     V.  Was 
accompanied  by  a  voice  of  approval  from  heaven.     VI.  Did  not  destroy  the  human 
eympathies  of  the  Saviour.     He  did  not  rebuke  the  ecstatic  idea  of  St.  Peter.     He 
calmed  their  fears.     (Anon.)        The  Transfiguration: — I.   Tna  circumstances  and 
XANNSB  OF  IT.     II.   Its  chiej'  DE-iioN.      1.    The  inauguration  of   Christ  as  the 
Lord's   anointed.      3.   A   direct  confirmation  of  former   dispensations.     3.    The 
law  in  the  fulness  of    the  time  to    be  done  away — "  they   saw  no   man   save 
Jesus  only."     III.   A  few  subsidiary  moral  uses,      1.    It  assui-ed  the  disciples 
in   sensuous  manner  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of   God.     2.    The  immortality  of 
the   soul.      3.    An  evidence  of    the  nature  of    our  glorified  humanity,   and  of 
our  mutual  recognition  in  the  world  to  come.      4.   Christ  is   one  with   us  in 
earthly  shame  and  heavenly  glory.     (D.  Moore,  M.A.)        The  disciples  beholding 
their  tranxfigured  Lord : — 1.  We  must  no  longer  expect  any  visible  or   external 
manifestati«ms  of  Christ  to  be  made  to  us.     2.  All  Christ's  true  disciples  have 
eome  manifestations  or  discoveries  of  Christ  made  to  them.     3.  All  Christ's  true 
disciples  have  not  the  same  manifestations  or  discoveries  made  to  them;  some 
not  taken  to  the  mount.     Now  turn  to  the  text: — I.  Peter's  proposal.     1.  The 
principal  thing  right  in  it  is  the  delight  it  manifests  in  the  Eedeemer's  glory.    2. 
The  wrong  thing  in  it  is  a  forgetfulness  of  the  main  business  of  life.     H.  Thr 
ANSWER  GIVEN  to  Pcter's  proposal.     1  Our  highest  enjoyments  are  sometimes  put 
an  end  to  by  God.    A  cloud  came  between  them  and  the  vision.    2.  When  God 
interrupts  our  enjoyments.  He  has  a  Iways  some  other  blessing  ready  for  us,  and 
generally  better.     The  voice  which   came  out  of  the  cloud  was  something  better. 
3.  We  must  not  judge  ourselves  by  religious  ecstasy.     (G.  Bradley.)        The  Trans- 
figuration : — The  necessity  of  having  a  few  intimate  friends  upon  whom  one  can 
rest  in  all  the  confidence  of  fraternal  sympathy  and  love  seems  inexorable.     Even 
our  Lord  sought  such  friends  in  Peter,  and  James,  and  John.     2.  There  was  only 
«ne  Transfiguration  in  the  life  of  Jesus.    Nor  were  all  tb.e  disciples  permitted  to  be- 
hold even  that.     This  shows  that  the  business  of  the  Chrif^tian  is  hard  work,  and 
not  the  nursing  of  visions.    Visions  are  rare,  and  sent  only  for  the  refreshment, 
not  for  the  daily  food  of  the  soul.    3.  Our  nearness  to  the  spiritual  world  and  its 
euperual  glories.     Moses  and  Elias  and  the  rest  still  continue  to  be  interested  in  the 

?lan  of  redemption,  and  in  our  personal  relation  to  it.  4.  Happy  for  us  if,  like 
'eter,  we  recognize  the  value  of  good  company,  and  are  ready  to  say  when  in  it, 
"Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here."  6.  Glory  and  suffering  are  yoked  together  in 
this  life.  The  Transfiguration  is  only  a  preparation  for  Calvary.  6.  "Moses, 
Elijah,  Jesus,  the  law,  the  prophets,  the  gospel;  but  the  personal  Christ  is  the 
centre,  and  the  theme  of  all  is  the  cross."  And  this  will  be  the  theme  of  the 
redeemed  lor  ever.  (T.  S.  Doolittle,  D.D.)  The  Transfiguration  of  Christ — 
its  di'sigru: — I.  To  confirm  the  faith  of  the  disciples  in  their  Lord  aa 
the  Son  of  God  and  the  promised  Eedeemer.  To  His  enemies  He  would  give 
no  sign;  to  the  disciples  He  gave  this.  II.  To  inauouratb  the  Lord  Jeso* 
Christ  as  the  suprkme  Head  and  Lawgiver  of  the  Church.     III.  To  appris« 

THE  disciples  of  THB  DEEP  AND  INTENSE  INTEREST  FELT  BY  HEAVEN  IN  THB 
SBDBMPTION  ABOUT  TO  BE  EFFECTED  BY  THE  DEATH  OF  JeSUS.  IV,  To  SUSTAIN 
THE  HUMAN  NATURE  OF  OUR  LOP.D  IN  THE  IMMEDIATE  PROSPECT  AND  THB  ACTUAL 
KNDUBANCE  OF  Hl8  UNEQUALI-ED  SUFFERINGS.  V.  To  DEEPEN  THE  CONVICTION  OF  THB 
DISCIPLES  AND  CUB  OWN  OF  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE    SOUL   AND   OF  THE   BLESSEDNBSg 

OF  DEPARTED  SAINTS  eveu  in  a  disembodied  state.  (G.  Brooks.)  Let  us  contem- 
plate— I.  The  Lord  transfigured  before  us.  Can  we  not  truly  say,  in  viewing  Him, 
"It  ia  good  for  ns  to  be  here"?  II.  Saints  holding  communion  round  about 
as.  III.  The  world  and  its  misery  beneath  us.  (C.  Gerok,  D.D.)  "  Lord,  it  it 
good  for  w  to  be  here " : — It  was  good  for  the  disciples  now,  for  the  following 
reasons.  I.  It  confirmed  their  belief  in  a  future  state.  If.  It  taught  them  that 
there  was  a  spiritua'  body.  III.  It  revealed  to  them  Christ's  Divine  character  and 
mission.  IV.  It  piepared  them  for  coming  trials.  Sorrow  often  folio wi»  closely 
npon  joy.  The  joy  prepares  us  for  the  sorrow.  1.  It  was  good  to  be  there;  it 
would  not  have  been  good  to  remain  there.  There  was  work  to  be  done,  sorrow  to 
be  lightened,  sin  to  be  grappled  with  and  overcome.  (F.  J.  A.)  Peter's  ecstasy 
^f  the  mount ; — I.  Thb  placb.     The  mountain  emblematical  of  God's  sanctaazy. 


eHAP.  XTii.]  8T.  MATTHEW,  871 

As  distinctly  separate  from  the  world.  As  the  place  of  happy  intercourse  with 
kindred  minds.  As  a  place  of  hallowed  instruction.  As  a  place  of  glorious  mani- 
festation. II.  The  advantages.  It  is  good — ^As  it  is  acceptable  to  God,  as  it  ia 
elevating  to  the  mind,  as  it  is  joyous  to  the  heart,  as  it  is  truly  profitable  to  the 
soul,  as  it  prepares  us  for  the  services  of  heaven.  III.  The  spibit  which  it  should 
PEODUCB.  A  spirit  of  dilit^ence  in  rightly  using  the  means  of  grace,  of  love  and 
zeal  for  the  prosperity  of  Ziou,  of  ardent  longing  for  the  perfected  scenes  of  heaven. 
Application  :  Can  you  experimentally  employ  the  language  of  the  text  f  Seek  the 
end  of  these  Christian  ordinances.  {J.  Bums,  LL.D.)  L  This  is  mt  beloved 
Son.  1.  The  Father  here  comes  forth  from  His  concealment,  and  audibly  addresses 
the  disciples.  2.  The  momentous  truth  to  wnich  He  bears  witness  is — the  Sonship 
of  Christ.  This  showed  Divine  love  to  man.  This  constituted  Christ's  fitness 
for  the  work  of  redemption.  This  forms  the  basis  of  our  confidence  in  the  atone- 
ment. 3.  He  characterizes  Christ  as  His  beloved  Son.  4.  For  such  a  declaration 
there  was  the  most  urgent  caU.  It  had  a  reference  to  Christ,  as  about  to  have  Hia 
Father's  face  hid,  &c.  It  had  a  reference  to  His  disciplts,  as  about  to  be  tried.  XL 
In  whom  I  AU  WELL  PLEASED.  1.  The  Father  having  declared  His  paternal  love, 
next  declares  His  satisfaction  and  complacency  in  Christ  as  the  Surety  of  man. 
This  regarded  His  Person,  offices,  work,  people.  2.  This  testimony  was  repeated 
at  His  resurrection,  exaltati"n,  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  every  instance  of  a  sinn'^r'a 
being  saved.  III.  Heab  ye  Him.  As  a  Lawgiver  and  King,  as  a  Prophet.  The 
manner  in  which  He  is  heard.  (J.  Steioart.)  Prayer  is  the  transfiguration  of  the 
$oul: — 1.  Because  in  it  the  soul  receives  light  from  God,  that  she  may  know  Him 
and  herself  and  all  things  more  clearly.  2.  By  it  the  soul  seeks  and  obtains  grace 
to  blot  out  the  stains  and  vices  by  which  she  is  deformed.  In  it  she  receives  con- 
solation for  desolation ;  out  of  weakness  she  is  made  strong ;  from  slothful  she 
becomes  fervent;  for  perplexity  she  hath  understanding;  for  sadness,  gladness; 
«id  for  cowardice,  courage.  3.  She  is  raised  above  herself,  and  is  lifted  up  to  God 
in  heaven,  where  she  learns  and  sees  that  all  the  things  of  earth  are  fragile  and 
worthless,  so  that  from  her  lofty  height  she  looks  down  upon  them  as  fit  only  for 
children.  She  perceives  that  the  true  riches,  honours,  aud  pleasures  are  nowhere 
but  in  heaven.  4.  In  prayer  she  unites  herself  to  God.  (Lapide.)  Spiritual 
$uggextions  of  the  Tramfiguration  : — I.  This  incident  is  valuable  as  bringing  promi- 
nently forward  the  objective  element  in  Christianitv,  II.  As  bringing  prominently 
forward  the  devotional  element  in  Christianity.  III.  The  pbopitiatosy  element. 
rV.  The  Divine  element.  The  eternal  Sonship  of  Christ.  V.  The  practical  ele- 
ment. {A.  L.  R.  Foote.)  Tlie  Transfiijuration : — "Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be 
here."  I.  This  event  had  a  special  evidential  value  ;  it  proved  to  St.  Peter  and 
to  the  other  apostles  with  him  that  their  Master's  claims  were  not  exaggerated; 
that  in  giving  up  all  to  follow  Him,  they  were  not  making  a  mistake ;  that  the 
religion  He  had  taught  them,  and  of  which  He  was  Himself  the  centre,  had  come 
from  heaven.  These  Jews  see  their  Master  in  the  correspondence  with  the  great 
lawgiver  and  the  prophets.  Also  they  were  assured  by  the  voice  out  of  the  cloud. 
Then  our  Lord's  glorious  appearance  at  the  Transfiguration  was  exactly  fitted  to 
remove  a  prevalent  objection  to  the  second  advent.  That  objection  was  due  to 
sluggish  imagination  rather  than  to  oSended  reason.  The  picture  of  the  Son  ol 
Man  joming  in  "  the  clouds  of  heaven  "  seemed  to  a  certain  order  of  minds  too 
remote  from  all  experience  to  be  conceivable,  and  St.  Peter's  answer  in  effect  ia 
this :  *•  We  have  been  witnesses  of  an  event  which  has  prepared  us  for  the  second 
advent;  we  saw  in  the  Transfiguration  a  rehearsal  of  the  glories  beyond."  II. 
Besides  contributing  an  evidence  of  the  truth,  the  Transfiguration  marked  thb 
character  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  It  enabled  the  apostles  to  diotinguisii 
the  inner  and  real  value  of  their  Master  and  His  religion  from  the  public  estimate 
of  Him.  We  are  all  of  us  affected  by  the  spirit  of  the  men  around  us.  When  they 
Baw  their  Master  transfigured,  they  saw  that  the  vulgar  estimate  was  not  the  true 
one;  He  was  not  to  be  measured  by  that  which  ordinarily  met  the  eye.  "The 
form  of  a  servant "  was  but  a  veil ;  beneath  it  were  the  lineaments  of  the  Lord  ol 
glory.  In  our  own  day  there  is  a  like  difference  between  the  popular  estimate  o! 
the  religion  of  Christ  and  the  true  one.  But  if  a  man  can  retire  into  the  solitude  of 
prayer,  he  may  learn  to  take  a  different  view  of  religious  truth  and  life.  It  is  not 
that  he  invests  it  with  ideal  qualities  that  do  not  properly  belong  to  it ;  it  ia  that 
he  escapes  from  the  obscure  traditions  which  have  hidden  from  him  the  reality. 
The  Transfiguration  marked  Christianity  as  a  distinctly  suijeruaMiral  religion.  We 
ean  oonceive  that  Christianity  might  have  been  merely  natural ;  in  auch  a  ay  stem 


972  ,  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  .       [chap,  xrtb 

the  Transfignration  would  have  been  out  of  character.  The  soul  requires  an  object 
above  this  world.  The  Transfiguration  is  an  answer  to  this  need.  III.  The 
Transfiguration  was  a  scene  of  glory  ;  but  it  was  something  more — it  was  a  pbeea* 
BATION  FOB  A  SCENE  OF  SDFFEBiNG.  "  His  decease  which  He  should  accomplish  at 
Jerusalem."  Does  not  this  show  us  the  true  use  of  a  time  of  prosperity,  whethei 
in  material  or  in  spiritual  things ;  to  prepare  for  time  of  trial.  Thus  is  it  with 
nations :  times  of  peace  and  plenty  enable  us  to  prepare  for  reverse.  On  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration  we  should  always  hear  whispers  of  Calvary.     IV.  The 

BELIQIOUS    VALUE    OF    OCCASIONAL    WITHDRAWAL    FROM    THE    ABSORBING    INTEBE8T    OF 

oBDiNARY  LIFE.  Not  scldom  docs  He  now,  as  of  old,  take  Peter  and  James  and 
John  into  a  mountain  apart,  and  is  transfigured  before  them.  He  detaches  men  by 
some  unforseen  providence,  by  some  great  perplexity,  by  some  great  humiliation, 
by  some  heart-searching  sorrow,  fi'om  their  surroundings,  aud  from  their  past ;  He 
takes  them  with  Him  into  a  high  mountain  of  thought  and  feeling  to  which  they 
were  previously  unaccustomed,  and  they  see  how  little  hitherto  they  have  understood 
either  tbemselves  or  Him.  Hitherto  they  have  "  known  Christ  after  the  flesh  ;  " 
henceforth  know  they  Him  so  no  more.  The  prayers  which  had  been  long  used, 
but  with  little  sense  of  their  meaning,  are  lighted  up  with  force  and  pathos  that 
makes  them  the  very  language  of  the  soul ;  the  Scriptures,  which  had  been  read 
only  «8  a  more  interesting  department  of  literature,  are  found  to  be,  indeed,  as  St, 
Augustine  calls  them,  "  Letters  from  the  heavenly  country,  describing  all  that  ia 
most  important  to  know  about  God  and  about  man ;  "  the  sacraments,  which  had 
been  scarcely  thought  of,  or  which  had  been  noticed  only  as  graceless  forms,  are 
now  seen  to  be  channels  of  the  life  of  the  Divine  Redeemer ;  fellow-Christians  who 
had  in  former  days  been  deemed  uninteresting  or  stupid  are  now  reverently  looked 
up  to  as  characters  of  rare  and  of  unselfish  beauty,  whom  it  is  a  privilege  and  a 
blessing  to  approach.  {C(mon  Liddon.)  The  Transfiguration  : — I  have  seen  men 
transfigured  by  love,  by  duty,  and,  in  death,  by  faith.  1.  Love  was  within  Christ, 
perfect,  undefiled,  intense,  filled  with  the  joy  of  giving  and  blessing.  On  the  moun- 
tain He  let  His  love  loose,  and  oh,  what  the  face  of  Christ  must  have  been  then, 
when  infinite  love  overflowed  His  eyes  and  trembled  on  His  mouth,  no  tongue  can 
tell.  2.  And  the  mighty  stress  of  duty,  filled  full  with  the  ideas,  infinite  in  beauty, 
majestic  in  truth,  which  He  was  yet  to  accomplish — tbat  and  these  arose  like  a  tide 
of  hght  into  His  expression.  3.  And  He,  too,  had  come  to  endure  death,  aud  here, 
on  Hermon's  side.  He  realized  the  last  sacrifice.  And  death  seemed  to  Him  then, 
in  that  hour  of  the  ecstasy  of  love  and  duty,  not  sad  as  it  was  when  its  power  t4  . 
subdue  was  brought  home  to  Him  by  the  sin  and  sorrow  of  earth,  but  moss 
beautiful  and  joyous,  full  of  glory  and  life.  It  was  beautiful,  for  it  was  death 
for  the  sake  of  ideas  of  eternal  beauty ;  it  was  joyous*,  for  it  was  filled  with  impas- 
sioned love;  it  was  glorious,  for  it  was  filled  with  the  splendour  of  the  truths  He 
was  through  death  to  make  alive  among  men.  Therefore  as  He  spoke  of  His  death 
His  face  shone  like  the  sun.  II.  We  bee  Christ  here  in  the  uttermost  BEAiiizA- 
HON  OF  SPIRITUAL  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD.  Always  God  and  He  were  at  one ;  but  the 
rapture  of  that  union  was  not  always  present.  From  end  to  end,  body,  soul,  spirit, 
brain,  and  heart  were  all  vividly  happy  with  the  indwelling  God.  This  the  highest 
conception  of  prayer  ever  given  to  the  world — the  transfiguration  of  man  through 
perfect  and  rapturous  union  of  being  with  God.  There  were  two  special  means 
through  which  that  was  reached,  and  they  had  been  wrought  by  Christ  always.  1. 
Obedience  to  God's  will.  A  man  must  be  free  to  pray  perfectly,  and  no  man  is  free 
who  is  under  the  yoke  of  his  own  will  to  do  wrong,  who  loves  pleasure  more  than 
God's  righteousness.  There  must  be  the  freedom  of  love  ;  the  man  can  pray  and 
feel  himself  one  with  God.  It  is  possible  for  him  at  rare  moments  to  stand  on  the 
Mount  with  Christ  and  be  transfigured,  2.  The  other  element  in  Christ  which 
secured  this  communion  was  loving  as  God  loved.  God  is  love.  In  giving  He  is 
blest  and  blesses.  Such  prayer  cannot  be  ours ;  we  are  not  able  to  obey  and  love  as 
Christ  did.  III.  How  is  that  prayer  to  be  lived  ?  Not  in  continued  solitary  con- 
templation. In  the  common  tasks  of  life ;  making  them  the  Father's  business ;  in 
it  finding  communion,  prayer.  (S.  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  permanent  ute  of  re- 
ligious ecstasy : — How  short  in  this  vale  of  tears  are  those  moments — which  we  most 
rightly  call  the  most  salutary  and  most  blissful  of  our  lives — which  beam  on  ont 
mortal  career,  soon  to  be  replaced  by  darkness;  yet  they  are  not  altogether  lost) 
they  leave  a  dew  which  does  not  dry  up  ;  a  meteor  that  anticipates  our  oourse ;  a 
fulness  of  hidden  strength  which  never  abates ;  a  light  against  tempests,  which 
■bines  upon  us  as  sweetly  as  the  rays  of  the  moon.    One  takes,  though  uncon« 


flHAP.  xvn.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  S73 

Bciously,  from  such  moments  a  new  scrip  for  the  long  voyage ;  a  new  pilgrim's  stafi 
for  the  Bteep  road,  and  a  flask  newly  hJled  for  the  days  of  abode  in  the  desert, 
wherewith  the  spirit  is  refreshed ;  the  sails  swell  freely,  the  compass  points  with 
more  force  to  the  pole,  and  a  season  draws  nigh  when  we  delight  in  remembering 
the  enraptured  scenes  on  the  Mount.  (Dr.  Kruvimacher.)  The  fading  of  the  light 
on  Jesus'  face : — When  or  how  the  light  died  away  we  are  not  told.  My  own  fancy 
is  that  it  went  on  shining,  but  paling  all  the  night  upon  the  lonely  Mount,  to  vanish 
in  the  dawn  of  a  new  day.  When  He  came  down  from  the  mountain  the  viitue 
flat  dwelt  in  EUm  went  forth  no  more  in  light  to  the  eyes,  but  in  heal  lu-  to  the 
poor,  torn  frame  of  the  epileptic  boy.  So  He  vanished  at  last  from  the  eyes  of  His 
friends,  only  to  draw  nearer — with  a  more  intense  and  healing  presence — to  their 
heart^5  and  minds.  Even  so  come,  Lord  Jesus !  (George  Macdanald.)  The. 
Transfiguration  a  window : — The  story  of  the  Transfiguration  is  as  it  were  a 
window  through  which  we  gain  a  momentary  glimpse  of  the  region  whence  all 
miracles  appear.  We  find  a  marvellous  change,  a  lovely  miracle,  pass  upon  the 
form  itself,  whence  the  miracles  flowed,  as  if  the  pent-up  grace  wrought 
mightily    upon     the    vessel    which    contained    it.        (Ibid.)  The    injiuence 

of  prayer  on  the  face : — Gambold,  in  a  letter  written  while  Wesley  was  in 
Georgia,  tells  us  that  Wtsley  at  Oxford  was  always  cheerful,  but  never  arrogant. 
By  strict  watchfulness  he  beat  down  the  impetuosity  of  his  nature  into  a  childhke 
simplicity.  His  piety  was  nourished  by  continual  communion  with  God,  for  he 
thought  prayer  to  be  his  greatest  duty  ;  and  often  did  Gambold  see  him  come  out 
of  his  closet  of  devotion  with  a  serenity  of  countenance  that  was  next  to  shining. 
The  watch  before  the  battle : — For  the  disciples,  the  Transfiguration  was  intended  to 
illuminate  with  a  ray  of  glory  the  dark  days  that  were  about  to  begin ;  it  waa 
designed  also  to  strengthen  Jesus  for  His  conflict.  It  was  His  first  watch  before 
the  battle.  (De  Pressense.)  Tlie  mountain,  probably  Ilennon : — It  is  impossible 
to  look  up  from  the  plain  to  the  towering  peaks  of  Harmon,  almost  the  only 
mountain  which  deserves  the  name  in  Palestine — and  one  of  those  ancient  titles 
("  the  Lofty  Peak  ")  was  derived  from  this  very  circumstance — and  not  be  struck  with 
its  appropriateness  to  the  scene.  .  .  .  High  up  on  its  sontbern  slopes  there  must 
be  many  a  point  where  the  disciples  could  be  taken  "apaic  by  themselves."  Even 
the  transient  comparison  of  the  celestial  splendour  with  the  snow,  where  alone  it 
could  be  seen  from  Palestine,  should  not,  perhaps,  be  wholly  overlooked.  (Dean 
Stanley.)  Cloud  on  Mount  Hermon : — A  strange  peculiarity  has  been  noticed  about 
Hermon,  in  • '  the  extreme  rapidity  of  the  formation  of  cloud  on  the  suiLmit.  In  a  few 
minutes  a  thick  cap  forms  over  the  top  of  the  mountuin,  and  as  quickly  disperses 
and  entirely  disappears."  (C.  R.  Conder.)  It  almost  seems  as  if  this,  like  the 
natural  position  of  Hermon  itself,  was,  if  not  to  be  connected  with,  yet,  so  to  speak, 
to  form  the  background  to  what  was  to  be  enacted.  Suddenly  a  cloud  passed  over 
the  clear  brow  of  the  mountain — not  an  ordinary,  but  a  "  luminous  cloud,"  a  cloud 
uplift,  fiUed  with  light.  (Edersheim.)  TJie  shining  face  : — The  face  of  Moseg 
had  shone,  but  as  the  moon,  with  a  borrowed,  reflected  light ;  but  Christ's  shone  as 
the  sun,  with  an  innate,  inherent  light,  which  was  the  more  sensibly  glorious 
because  it  suddenly  broke  out  as  it  were  from  behind  a  black  cloud.  (Matthew 
Henry.)  Witness  of  Judaism  to  Christ: — While  false  Judaism  rejects  the  Mes- 
siah, the  true  owns  and  adores  him  in  the  persons  of  its  two  most  illustrious  repre- 
sentatives. The  old  covenant  and  the  new  meet  together  on  the  glorious  Mount,  as 
righteousness  and  peace  shall  soon  meet  on  that  other  hill  which  is  already  before 
the  eye  of  Jesus.  (E.  De  Fressense.)  The  cojwersation : — The  very  mention  of 
Christ's  death  by  such  men  as  Moses  and  Elias,  without  any  marks  of  surprise  or 
dissatisfaction,  was  of  itself  sufiicieut  to  cause  a  great  change  in  the  sentiments  of 
the  disciples  respecting  those  sufferings.  Christ's  assumption  of  this  glorious 
appearance  at  the  very  time  was  a  visible  and  striking  proof  to  His  disciples  that 
those  suli'erings  were  perfectly  consistent  with  the  dignity  of  His  character,  and  the 
highest  state  of  glory  to  which  He  could  be  exalted.  (Bishop  Porteus.)  Peter'$ 
enjoyment  of  the  scene . — But  what  if  the  contemplation  of  Christ's  glorified  man- 
Jiood  so  filled  the  apustle  with  joy  that  he  was  unwilling  to  be  sundered  from  it,  how 
shall  it  fare  with  those  who  attain  to  the  contemplation  of  His  glorious  Godhtad  f 
And  if  it  was  so  good  a  thing  to  dwell  with  two  of  His  saints,  how  then  to  come  to 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  to  the  peneral  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-bom  that 
are  written  in  heaven,  and  to  G^d,  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  those,  not  seen  through 
a  glass  and  darkly,  but  face  to  face.  (Anselm.)  We  mu^st  come  down  from  the 
holy  mountaint : — Where  we  have  communion  with  God,  and  complaaeuoy  in  that 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEAIOR.  [chaf.  x?ii. 

communion,  and  of  which  we  are  saying,  "  It  is  good  to  be  here  "  :  even  there  wa 
have  no  continuing  city.  Blessed  be  God,  there  is  a  mountain  of  glory  and  joy 
before  us,  whence  we  shall  never  come  down.  But  observe,  when  the  disciples  cama 
down,  Jesus  came  with  them.  When  we  return  to  the  world  again  after  an 
ordinance,  it  must  be  our  care  to  take  Christ  with  us,  and  then  it  may  be  our 
comfort  that  He  is  with  us.  [Matthew  Henry.)  Hear  the  Son : — I,  The  Father'a 
DECLARATION — "  This  is  my  Beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  No  doubt 
there  is  an  allusion  here  to  Deut.  xviii.  18.  He  is  My  Son,  My  own  Son  (Kom. 
viii.  32).  II.  The  Father's  command — "  Hear  ye  Him."  Hear  ye  Him,  ye  thought- 
less men  and  women  that  dwell  at  ease  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  Hear  ye  Him,  ye  self- 
righteous  souls  (Acts  iv.  12).  Hear  Him,  ye  that  have  gone  on  in  the  ways  of 
nugodliness  and  wickedness,  adding  sin  to  sin,  iniquity  to  iniquity  (Isa.  xlvi.  12). 
Hear  Him,  ye  men  of  delay,  whose  watchword  is,  "  To-morrow."  Hear  Him,  ye 
young  sinners,  whose  is  the  bloom,  the  blossom,  the  springtime  of  existence,  but 
who  have  not  yet  begun  to  live.  Hear  Him,  ye  aged  sinners,  whose  is  the  hoaiy  head, 
but  that  head  not  yet  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness  (Prov.  xvi.  31) .  Hear 
Him,  ye  backsliders.  Hear  Him,  ye  His  tried  and  tempted  disciples.  He  speaks — 
"It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  (J.  Evans,  M. A.)  Attention: — "Hear  ye  Him."  I. 
Why  should  we  hear  Him?  1.  Because  God  Himself  commands  us.  2.  Because 
He  dest-rves  to  be  heard.  8.  Because  His  message  concerns  your  present  and 
future  welfare.  4.  With  what  zest  should  those  of  us  hear  Him  who  profess  to  b« 
His  disciples.  5.  Sinners  must  hear  Him  in  this  day  of  grace,  or  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. II  What  are  we  to  heak  ?  1.  There  is  much  to  hear  concerning  the  Person 
of  Christ.  2.  He  has  many  varieties  of  utterance,  but  by  whomsoever  He  speaka 
let  us  hear  Him?  3.  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  not  always  a  voice  of  instruction,  but 
of  command.  4.  He  also  gives  the  word  of  consolation.  III.  How  shall  we  heab 
Him.  1.  With  devout  reverence.  2.  Believingly.  3.  Obediently.  IV.  Whem 
SHALL  WE  HEAR  HiM  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Fear  and  its  antidote: — What  was 
it  the  disciples  feared?  The  voice  from  the  opened  heavens;  the  voice  which 
some  men  think,  if  they  only  could  hear,  all  doubts  would  vanish.  If  such 
men  felt,  under  the  Divine  manifestation,  so  unnerved,  what  warrant  have 
we  for  supposing  that  if  a  Divine  voice  spoke  to  us  from  heaven,  we  should 
gain  any  accession  of  faith?  Let  us  learn  to  be  thankful  for  the  modes  in 
which  the  Divine  Presence  is  made  known  to  us.  Look  at  these  disciples. 
I.  The  loss  of  themselves  through  theie  gbeat  fear.  "And  when  they  heard 
it  they  fell  on  their  faces,"  &c.  They  were  no  longer  the  men  they  had  been.  This 
prostration  sprang  from  the  conscious  nearness  of  God,  and  the  voice  from  the 
cloud  was  the  chief  cause  of  this  feeling.  Are  these  not  experiences  which  peem  to 
rob  us  of  our  manhood  :  iu  great  sorrow  our  powers  seem  paralyzed.  We  feel  that 
it  has  brought  us  into   the    presence  of  God,  and  we  are  sore  afraid.     H.  The 

GRAVE  SENSE  OF  RESPONSIBILITY   WHICH   COMES   UPON   US   IN    SOME   CRISES   OP  OUR  LIFE. 

Then  the  faculties  we  most  want  refuse  to  obey  our  bidding.  The  sudden  out- 
flashing  of  some  great  truth  may  fill  the  mind  with  fear.  II.  But  there  is  yet 
another  side  to  look  at.  We  have  been  looking  at  the  disciples,  let  us  now  turn  to 
the  Master.  In  the  conduct  of  Christ  towaees  these  men  there  is  much  tocheeb 
vs.  He  did  not  leave  them  in  their  helpless  condition.  His  love  toward  them  is 
unchanged.  He  comforts  as  well  as  delivers  from  fear.  (J.  J.  Goadby. )  Jesus 
only  : — What  might  have  happened  to  the  other  disciples  after  thet  had  been 
THE  Transfiguration.  There  were  four  things,  either  of  which  might  have  occurred. 
1.  They  might  have  seen  nobody  with  them  on  the  holy  mount ;  they  might  have 
found  all  gone  but  themselves.  In  such  a  case  they  would  have  been  in  a  sorry 
plight,  like  those  who,  having  begun  to  taste  a  banquet,  suddenly  find  all  the 
viands  swept  away  ;  like  thirsty  men  who  have  tasted  the  cooling  crystal  drops,  and 
then  seen  the  fountain  dried  up  before  their  eyes.  How  many  people  after  such  ex- 
periences have  nothing  left  of  joy  or  comfort ;  the  whole  has  been  a  splendid  vision 
and  nothing  more.  Nothing  is  left  to  bless  the  present  hour.  Christ  is  with  us  for 
ever  by  His  Spirit.  2.  They  might  have  seen  Moses  only.  Who  would  exchange 
Christ  for  Moses ;  the  sun  for  the  moon  ;  love  for  law.  There  are  many  who  see 
Moses  only  ;  they  delight  in  outward  ordinances,  precepts  and  duties.  They  had 
bright  visions  once,  but  have  relapsed  into  condemnation.  3.  They  might  have 
"een  Elijah  only.  Instead  of  the  gentle  Saviour  they  might  have  seen  the  stem- 
■r^irited  El  as.  4.  They  might  have  seen  Moses  and  Elias  with  Jesus,  even  as  in  th« 
Transfiguration.  Moses  could  preach  the  law  and  make  men  tremble,  then  Jesaa 
■rfoolcl  tollow  with  His  gospel  of  grace.    Elias  could  flash  the  thunder  bolt  in  theit 


OHAf.  im.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  871 

laces,  and  then  Christ  conld  have  uplifted  the  humble  spirits.      Would  not  the  aa- 
semblage  of  such  diverse  forces  have  contributed  to  the  greatest  success.  They  wer* 
all  merged  in  Jesus  only;  as  the  morning  star  in  the  sun.    II.  What  beaxlt  hap- 
pened— "  They  saw  no  man  save  Jesus  only."     1.  This  was  all  they  wanted  to  sea 
for  their  comfort — "  Be  not  afraid."  All  the  Saviour  we  want  we  find  in  Jesus  only. 
2.  Jesus  was  enough  for  a  Master — "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."     3.  He  was 
enough  as  their  power  for  future  life.     4.  He  is  enough  as  our  reward.     III.  What 
'WE  DESiBE  may  HAPPEN.     That  the  great  object  of  our  thoughts,  motives,  and  acts 
inay  be  Jesus  only.     (C.  H.  Spurguon.)        Jesus  only  as  a  doctrine: — As  you  grow 
in  grace  you  will  find  that  many  doctrines  and  points  of  church  government  which 
once  appeared  to  you  to  be  all-important,  though  you  will  still  value  them,  will 
seem  but  of  small  consequence  compared  with  Christ  Himself.    Like  the  traveller 
ascending  the  Alps  to  reach  the  summit  of  Mont  Blanc ;  at  first  he  observes  that 
lord  of  the  hills  as  one  horn  among  many,  and  often  in  the  twistings  of  his  upward 
path  he   sees   other  peaks   which   appear   more  elevated  than  that  monarch  ol 
mountains ;  but  when  at  last  he  is  near  the  summit,  he  sees  all  the  rest  of  the  hills 
beneath  his  feet,  and  like  a  mighty  wedge  of  alabaster  Mont  Blanc  pierces  the  very 
clouds.     So,  as  we  grow  in  grace,  other  things  sink  and  Jesus  rises.     They  must 
decrease,  but  Christ  must  increase  ;  until  He  alone  fills  the  full  horizon  of  your 
Boul,  and  rises  clear  and  bright  and  glorious  up  into  the  very  heaven  of  God.     O 
that  we  may  thus  see  "  Jesus  only."     (Ibid.)        Jesus  only  as  an  experience : — You 
will  see  your  need  all  the  better  if  you  look  at  Jesus  only.  Many  a  time  an  appetite 
for  a  thing  is  created  by  the  sight  of  it.  Why,  there  are  some  of  us  who  can  hardly 
be  trusted  in  a  bookseller's  shop,  because  though  we  might  have  done  very  well  at 
home  without  a  certain  volume,  we  no  sooner  see  it  than  we  are  in  urgent  need  of  it. 
So  often  is  it  with  some  of  you  about  other  matters,  so  that  it  becomes  most  dargeroui 
to  let  you  see,  because  you  want  as  soon  as  you  see.  A  sight  of  Jesus,  of  what  He  is  to 
sinners,  of  what  He  makes  sinners,  of  what  He  is  in  Himself,  will  more  tend  to  make 
you  feel  your  need  of  Him  than  all  your  poring  over  your  poor  miserable  self.  You 
will  get  no  further  there,  look  to  '♦  Jesus  only."   "  Ah,"  saith  another,  "  but  I  want 
to  read  my  title  clear,  I  want  to  know  that  I  have  an  interest  in  Jesus."    You  will 
best  read  your  interest  in  Christ  by  looking  at  Him.     If  I  want  to  know  whether 
a  certain  estate  is  mine,  do  I  look  into  my  own  heart  to  see  if  I  have  a  right  to 
it  ?  but  I  look  into  the  archives  of  the  estate,  I  search  testaments  and  covenants. 
{Ibid.)        Jesus  only: — Our  life  has  its  resting  places,  exposed  to  startling,  rude 
alternations ;  but  it  has  also,  in  the  midst  of  all,  it::!  grand  solace.     The  first  of 
these  truths  is  illustrated  in — 1.  Our  external  personal  circumstances.     2.  Our  in- 
tercourse with  men.    3.  Our  Christian  feeling.  High  joys  seldom  last  long.  Jesus, 
60  to  speak,  loses  His  splendour,  and  comes  down  again  from  the  mount,  as  a  man, 
to  His  humiliation.    The  supreme  solace  is  that  Jesus  comes  down  from  the  mount 
along  with  us.     We  learn  to  prize  Him  in  proportion  as  we  learn  the  deceptivenesa 
of  all  beside.     Out  of  our  ecstasies,  which  often  hide  the  reality,  there  comes  a  gift 
of  God  more  precious  than  all — Jesus  Hiviself.    Whatever  form  He  may  assume. 
He  is  still  the  same ;  still  the  same  whether  He  goes  up  the  mountain  with  us,  or 
comes  down  with  us  from  the  mountain.    Our  illusions  vanish,  but  Jesus  does  not 
disappear.     (C.  Bailhache.)       Jesus  only : — Here  is  set  forth  the  central  theme  of 
Christianity— Je«us  only.     This  is  the  theme  of  thought  for  the  scholar,  of  procla- 
mation by  the  preacher,  of  discussion  by  the  student,  of  delight  by  the  saint.     Not 
the  splendours  of  transfiguration,  but  Jesus  only  ;  not  the  blessedness  of  the  saints 
in  glory,  but  Jesus  only  ;  not  the  law  of  the  old  dispensation  represented  by  Moses, 
but  Jesus  only  ;  not  the  prophets  of  the  intermediate  dispensation,  represented  by 
Elijah,  but  Jesus  only  ;  not  the  apostles  of  the  last  dispensittion,  as  represented  by 
Peter,  James,  and  John,  but  Jesus  only.     (Dr.  J.  H.  Vincent.)         Jesus  only : — 

I.    OUB  SPIEITU  AL  LIFE   ON   BABTH  NEEDS   THAT   WB   SHOULD   HAVE   EPECIAL   SEASONS   09 

COMMUNION  WITH  Jesus.  It  was  from  the  midst  of  the  activities  of  His  ministry 
that  our  Lord  took  His  disciples  to  this  "  mountain  apart."  Our  animal  and  mental 
life  needs  stimulating.     II.  OuB    higheb  spiritual  experiences  will  not  havb 

TflEIB    bight   effect   UPON   US   UNLESS   THEY   LEAVE  OUE  ATTENTION   FIXED  ON  "JESUS 

OKLT."  Some  seek  the  evidences  of  their  saved  state,  and  find  all  their  comfort  in 
emotional  experiences.  It  is  "  very  good  "  to  be  alone  with  Christ,  and  to  behold  His 
glory,  but  we  may  forget,  and  lose  sight  of  Him  in  the  sense  of  personal  enjoyment. 
This  was  Peter's  error.  The  three  disciples  were  permitted  to  behold  this  trans* 
figuration  of  the  Saviour,  that  their  attention  might  henceforth  be  fixed  more  on  Him 
and  less  on  themselves.    Do  not  seek  rapturous  religious  experiences  merely  for  theii 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvh. 

own  sake.  III.  No  beligion  will  do  fob  its  to  live  with,  ob  to  die  with,  but  that 
IN  WHICH  WE  BEE  "  Jesds  onlt."  Ethical  theories,  philosophy,  &c.,  will  not  do  for 
UB  to  live  or  die  on.  The  Bimple  gospel  alone  can  give  peace  to  the  soul  in  life  and 
death.  (T.  hands.)  Nothing  but  Jesus : — A  Spanish  artist  was  employed  to  paint 
a  represpntation  of  "  The  Last  Supper."  It  was  his  ambition  to  throw  all  the  subli- 
mity of  his  art  into  the  figure  and  countenance  of  the  Master ;  but  he  put  on  the 
table  in  the  foreground  some  chased  cups,  the  workmanship  of  which  was  exceed- 
ingly beautiful ;  and  when  his  friends  came  to  see  the  picture  on  the  easel,  every 
or  3  was  constrained  to  exclaim,  "  What  lovely  cups  I  "  "  Aj  I  "  said  he,  "  I  have 
made  a  mistake ;  these  cups  divert  the  eyes  of  the  spectator  from  the  Master,  to 
whom  I  wished  to  direct  the  attention  of  the  observer."  He  then  took  his  brush, 
and  deliberately  painted  them  off  the  canvas  ;  for  he  was  determined  that  "  Jesus 
only  "  should  be  the  centre  of  attraction  and  admiration.  Contrasts  in  life  : — 
Here  in  London  we  find,  side  by  side,  anxious,  earnest,  di7iiful  work,  and  thcught- 
lesB,  frivolous,  selfish  indolence ;  great  intellect  expanded  by  cultvre  and  exercise, 
and  stolid  ignorance  which  will  not  learn ;  splendid  abundance,  and  squalid  want ; 
health  radiant  in  its  present  joy,  and  sickness  suffering  in  its  gaunt  despair;  cruelty, 
and  kindness ;  generosity,  and  meanness ;  courage,  and  cowardice ;  in  the  saina 
street — in  the  same  house — some  of  these  antitheses  in  the  same  heart  1  Observe — 
1.  In  the  streets.  Apathy  and  zeal,  honesty  and  fraud,  the  athlete  and  the  cripple, 
the  millionaire  and  the  pauper,  the  abstainer  and  the  drunkard,  the  sister  of 
mercy  and  the  painted  harlot,  meeting  and  touching  each  other — joy  and  sorrow, 
?ood  and  evil,  life  and  death.  I  passed  by  a  great  mansion  glowing  with  hght  from 
foof  to  basement,  with  long  lines  of  carriages  hard  by ;  and  tapers  glowed,  and 
music  breathed,  and  beauty  led  the  ball.  Not  many  days  after  I  passed  it  again, 
and  the  stones  were  thickly  covered  with  litter  to  deaden  the  sound  of  wheels,  and  I 
knew  that  sickness  was  in  that  house.  And  yet  once  again,  and  the  rooms  were 
darkened  which  had  been  ablaze  with  light,  and  there  was  silence  where  I  heard 
the  jr-y  ous  music,  broken  now  only  by  the  sigh  of  the  sorrowful ;  and  again  there  was  a 
long  line  of  carriages,  but  they  were  filled  with  mourners,  and  at  the  head  of  all 
was  the  hearse.  II.  In  our  homes — what  contrasts  1  Only  an  outer  wall  may 
separate  the  house  where  there  is  peace  and  contentment,  where  hearts  are  of  each 
other  sure,  where  there  is  the  tenderness,  the  respect,  the  loyalty  of  true  affection, 
where  forethought  and  forbearance  unite  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child, 
brother  and  sister,  master  and  servant,  and  bring  domestic  happiness — that  only 
bliss  of  paradise  which  has  survived  the  fall.  Only  an  outer  wall  may  divide  this 
bright  abode  from  the  dwelling-place  of  jealous  suspicion,  fretful  disquiet,  sullen 
resistance,  waste,  lewdness,  and  tyranny.  III.  In  our  hearts — ah  1  you  know, 
you  only,  the  bitterness  and  the  joy.  Yes,  j  ou  know  the  cold,  dark  shadows  and  the 
sunny  gleams  succeeding  in  such  swift  and  strange  alternation,  like  the  uncertain 
glories  of  an  April  day.     {S.  R.  Hole,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14,  21. — And  when  they  were  come  to  the  multitude. — The  healing  of  the 
lunatic  child : — I.  The  Divinely  appointed  alternations  of  the  Chbistun  lotb 
(Mark.  ix.  2,  17).  II.  Spiritual  work  can  be  done  csi.t  pt  bpiritdal  men 
(Mark  ix.  28,29;  Acts  xix.  13-16).  Correspondence  in  the  worker  to  the  work 
to  be  done  is  never  overlooked  in  any  other  department  of  activity.  Who 
employs  a  plague-stricken  nurse  to  tend  a  plague-stricken  patient?  Christ's  own 
argument  (chap.  xii.  25-28) ;  Satan  will  not  cast  out  Satan.  IH.  The  weaknesb 
OF  THE  Christian  apart  fbom  Christ.  IV.  The  absolute  necessity  of  faith. 
1.  The  disciples  could  do  nothing  without  faith.  2.  The  father  of  the  lunatic  child 
could  receive  nothing  without  faith.  How  this  is  to  be  explained.  Faith  is  more 
than  belief ;  it  is  a  consequent  putting  of  ourselves  into  connection  with  God.  The 
wire  must  be  brought  into  connection  with  the  battery  before  it  can  be  charged  with 
electricity.  The  pitcher  must  be  placed  in  connection  with  the  fountain  before  it 
can  be  filled.  V.  The  omnipotence  of  faith.  By  believing  we  place  ourselves  in 
connection  with  Almighty  God.  What  pool  cannot  the  ocean  fill  ?  What  earthly 
space  cannot  the  sun  illumine  T  No  man,  then,  who  desires  to  be  saved,  need  des- 
pair.  You  cannot  expel  sin  from  your  own  heart ;  but  the  word  of  Christ  is  omni- 
potent. {Anon.)  The  contrast : — Life  is  full  of  changes  and  contrast.  The  best 
of  man's  quality  and  character  is  what  he  is  in,  and  how  he  meets  these  abrupt  and 
broken  changes.     I.  Christ's  life  was  made   dp  of  contrasts.      Not  one   morh 

masked    or     extreme     than     this,     and     nowhere     18    CHRIST    so     FULLY   AND      IBULY 

BUPBEMB  AND  SUBLIMELY  HiMSELF.     The  Contrast  was  painful  to  Him,  painful  to  all 


CHIP,  rvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  37J 

His  Boul  in  its  love  of  the  beautiful  and  true  and  right.  What  a  descent  it  was  ! 
Every  true  life  has  such  contrasts,  and  in  them  the  true  man  is  revealed.  Christ 
found  His  lifework,  not  in  His  glory,  but  in  the  valley,  and  was  there  truly  and 
fully  the  Messiah.  The  value  of  the  vision  and  glory  is  but  their  gift  of  fitness  for 
work  and  endurance.    II.  The  confused  scene  which  greets  Christ  is  a  tbub 

PICTURE    OF  LIFE,    INTO    WHICH   WITH     HEALING   AND   OBDEB    MAKING,    ChEIST   IS   EVSB 

ENTERING.  1.  A  sad  picture  of  the  world  to-day.  We  are  perplexed  and  almost 
despairful.  2.  A  sad  picture  of  our  own  inner  life,  the  home  of  so  much  strife,  of 
80  much  unbelief.  Our  wondering  question  is  often,  Why  could  we  not  cast  them  out  f 
{S.  D.  Thovias.)  The  gracious  welcome  : — *'  Bring  him  hither  to  me."  1.  Whose 
words  are  these  T  2.  To  whom  are  they  spoken  ?  3.  Concerning  whom  are  they 
spoken  1  4.  What  do  they  teach  usf  (1.)  Something  as  to  Chiist.  He  is  the  great 
Healer,  the  sinner's  one  Physician.  (2.)  Something  as  to  ourselves.  Contact  with 
Him  is  health,  and  life,  and  warmth.  Into  this  close  contact  He  invites  us  to  bring 
others.  And  was  any  "brought  one"  ever  sent  away?  (H.Bonar,  D.D.)  A 
grain  of  faith  : — The  boundaries  of  the  province  of  faith.  I.  Faith's  limitations. 
1  The  different  ages  of  the  Church  have  called  for  different  kinds  of  faith.  The 
faith  of  a  miraculous  age  would  not  be  the  same  with  the  faith  of  a  period  when  God 
worked  by  ordinary  operations.  But  even  in  the  same  period,  and  at  the  same 
moment,  not  only  the  measure,  but  the  character  of  the  faith  of  different  men  must 
vary.  A  common  man  at  the  time  of  Christ  would  not  have  been  reproved 
as  the  apostles  were  for  not  being  able  to  cast  out  an  evil  spirit,  because  it  was 
an  authority  only  given  to  the  apostles.  3.  Faith  and  its  achievements  must 
be  as  God  is  pkased  to  give  it  to  every  one.  It  is  a  pure  creation  of  God  in 
man's  soul.  4.  Every  man's  responsibility  is  just  to  use  the  faith,  whatever  its 
measure  may  be,  which  God  has  given  him  ;  he  cannot  go  beyond  it.  Neverthe- 
less within  this  the  state  of  every  man's  faith  depends  upon  the  condition  of  hia 
heart,  and  the  life  which  he  is  leading.  II.  The  ranges  of  faith.  1.  It  is  plain 
that  everything  hinges  upon  faith,  that  the  success  of  faith  does  not  depend  upon 
the  quantity,  but  upon  the  quality — "A  grain."  You  may  not  be  able  to  remove 
material  mountains,  but  you  can  sinritual  mountains  of  sin,  care,  and  difficulty.  God 
puts  it  into  a  man's  mind  to  believe  what  He  intends  that  man  to  do.  But  may  we 
not  mistake  the  leadings  of  faith?  Yes:  just  as  we  may  mistake  the  leadings  ol 
prayer  and  providence.  The  security  is,  in  a  scriptural  mind,  disciplined  to  know 
the  still  small  voices  of  God.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Mysterious  failure : — I.  That 
the  honest  efforts  of  God's  servants  may  sometimes  end  in  failure.  As  Christian 
workers,  we  often  think  we  succeed  when  we  in  reality  faU,  and  the  reverse.  But 
in  this  case  there  could  be  no  mistake.  1.  It  was  a  conscious  failure — ' '  Could 
not."  2.  It  was  a  failure  without  a  redeeming  feature.  In  the  pulpit  we  some- 
times partially  atone  for  failure  in  the  end  by  the  good  impression  we  made  at  the 
beginning,  and  the  reverse.  The  demon  was  only  exasperated  to  ten-fold  fury,  tiU 
the  "lad"  was  flung  "  to  the  ground,  and  wallowed  foaming."  3.  It  was  a  pubho 
failure.  It  was  witnessed  by  the  multitude,  and  among  them  the  vindictive,  sar- 
castic scribes.  4.  It  was  a  humiliating  failure.  This  devil  in  the  •'lad"  was  too 
much  for  nine  men,  who  were  the  divinely-credentialed  ambassadors  of  Christ.    H. 

That  the  failure  of  Christian  workers  may  sometimes  be  a  mystebt  to  themselves 

•'  Why  could  not  we?  "  They  had  honestly  tried  ;  had  no  doubt  done  the  like  be- 
fore ;  certainly  they  did  it  afterward  ;  why  not  now?  Everything  appeared  to  justify 
them  in  lookirg  for  success.  1.  They  were  Christ's  chosen  disciples.  2.  They  were 
His  recognized  ambassadors.  He  had  confirmed  their  call  by  giving  them  the 
Divine  gift  of  miracles.  3.  They  had  not  put  their  hands  to  a  work  which  God 
designed  for  others.  The  very  terms  of  their  commission  specified  the  work  which 
they  had  tried  to  do  and  failed — "raise  the  dead,  cast  out  devils."  4.  No  reason  to 
beUeve  thej  used  their  own  names  instead  of  Christ's  on  this  occasion.  No  wonder 
they  were  humiliated  and  thunder-struck  at  such  a  failure.  There  is  comfort  here 
for  all  disappointed  workers.  The  feeling  of  disappointment  which  prompted  this 
question  was  a  hopeful  feature  in  their  case.  What  we  should  be  most  concerned 
about  is,  not  succei-s,  but  downright  honesty  in  our  work.    IH.  The  failube  of 

MANY  men  TN  the  PULPIT  AND  OUT  OF  IT  NEED  BE  NO  MYSTEBY  EVEN  TO  THEMSELVES. 

Many  of  us  fail  because  we  forget  to  take  aim.  Have  you  tried  to  "  cast  out  devils," 
and  failed?  Tell  Jesus  about  it.  (T.  Kelly.)  Hope  in  hopeless  canes: — I.  The 
DETAILS  OF  THE  DEPLORABLE  CASE  BEFORE  US.  Physical  miracles  of  Christ  typical  of 
spiritual  works.  1.  The  disease  appeared  every  now  and  then  in  overwhelming 
attacks  of  mania,  in  which  the  man  was  utterly  beyond  his  own  control.     So  wt 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  irsa 

have  Been  melancholy  persons  in  whom  distrust,  despair  have  raged  at  times  with 
unconquerable  fury.  2.  The  patient  at  such  times  was  filled  with  a  terrible  anguish. 
8.  The  evil  spirit  sought  his  destruction  by  hailing  him  in  different  directions.    So 
with  distressed  souls  ;  fly   to  extremes.      4.  This  child   was  deaf.      6.  He  was 
dumb.    6.  He  was  pining  away.    Men  are  a  prey  to  their  own  unbelief.    7.  All  this 
had  continued   for  years.     8.    The   disciples  had  failed  to  cast  out  the  devil. 
II.  The  one  reboubce.    1.  Jesus  Christ  is  still  alive,  2.  Jesus  lives  iu  the  place  of 
authority.     3.  Jesus  lives  in  the  place  of  observation,  and  He  graciously  inteiposes 
etiJl.     4.  Jesus  expects  us  to  trest  Him  as  the  living,  powerful,  intf  rjiosing  One,  and 
to  confide  in  Him  as  such.     III.  The  bdbe  result.     The  word  of  CI nist  was  sure; 
was  opposed  by  the  devil.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)      Chrixt's  life  viade  up  of  cotitrasts: — 
None  of  them  more  marked  and  extreme  than  this ;  and  nowhere  is  Christ  so  fully 
and  truly  supreme  and  sublimely  Himself.   He  needs  no  pause  to  fittingly  enter  the 
clanging  discord  of  anger,  despairing  sorrow  and  rude  scorn.    He  is  alike  supreme, 
tpuching  manhood's  apex  in  the  mount,  and  mingling  with  manhood's  depravity  in 
ignorance  and  evil  in  the  valley.     And  that  not  because  He  lived  above  and  indif- 
ferent to  each,  but  because,  identifying  Himself  with  each,  He  was  true  and  great 
enough  to  subordinate  all  to  His  life's  mission.     The  contrast  was  painful  to  Him, 
painful  to  all  His  soul  in  its  love  of  the  beautiful  and  true  and  right.     From  the 
peace  of  the  Transfiguration  glory — the  heart's  ecstasy  touching  heaven;  touching 
God  in  its  fellowship;  the  glad  satisfaction  of  an  ideal  realized.  His  life's  meaning 
and  appointment  found,  all  Moses  promised  and  Elijah  wrought  for  consummated 
— to  the  discordant  throng  of  unhallowed  passion  and  faithless  failure.     What  a 
descent  it  was  !  And  this  even  in  a  moment,  as  abrupt  as  from  dream  to  waking.  The 
change  and  contrast  is  infinitely  sad.  Suddenly  Christ,  from  calm  vision  and  peace- 
ful vow,  descending  with  the  glory  yet  about  Him,  mantling  face  and   form,  is 
greeted  with  taunt  and  scorn,  and  the  bitter  cry  of  shame  and  despair.    Hardly  the 
cross  was  a  sorer  trial  to  the  patience,  earnestness,  and  love  of  Christ.     Tet,  fn  the 
midst  He  stands,  all  calm  and  good,  all  patiently  laying  aside  His  own  pain  to 
minister  to  others — His  one  concern  the  honour  of  the  kingdom  of  man  and  God. 
Every  true  hfe  has  such  contrasts,  and  in  them  the  true  man  is  revealed  ;  they  com- 
pel to  the  surface  that  which  is  most  of  a  man — good  or  bad,  weak  or  strong.     In 
them  we  have  the  gauge  of  a  man's  piety  and  true  devotion.     It  is  easy  to  serve  and 
worship  and  to  be  strong  in  our  moments  of  vision  and  conscious  contact  with  God, 
when  His  Spirit  thrills  us  with  joy  and  faith.    It  is  possible  even  to  brace  ourselvpa 
up  with  ardour  and  enthusiasm  for  some  notable  and  well-defined  task  ;  but  to  find 
swift  following  (all  discordant)  our  vision,  a  bitter  trial,  and  wake  from  peaceful  re- 
solve to  stern  reality  of  strife,  and  still  be  true,  needs  all  our  faith.     It  is  possible 
only  to  the  Christ-like  man,  and  should  be  our  aim  and  glory.      (iS.  D.  Thomas.) 
The  power  of  faith: — When  man  has  faith  in  God  his  nature  so  opens  itself  to  be 
filled  with  God,  that  God  and  he  make  a  new  unity,  different  at  once  from  pure 
heavenly  divinity  and  from  pure  earthly  humanity,  the  new  unit  of  man  inspired 
by  God ;  and  by  that  new  unit,  that  new  being,  it  is  that  the  evil  is  to  be  conqnered 
and  the  world  is  to  be  saved.     Can  we  understand  that  ?    Let  us  take  two  simple 
illustrfltions  which  may  make  it  plain.    Look  at  the  artist's  chisel.    Most  certainly 
it  carves  the  statue.     The  artist  cannot  carve  without  his  chisel.    And  yet  imagine 
the  chisel,  conscious  that  it  was  made  to  carve  and  that  that  is  its  function,  trying 
to  carve  alone.     It  lays  itself  against  the  hard  marble,  but  it  has  nt^ither  strength 
nor  skill ;  it  has  no  force  to  drive  itself  in,  and  if  it  had  it  does  not  know  which  way 
it  ought  to  go.     Then  we  can  imagine  the  chisel  full  of  disappointment.     "  Why 
cannot  I  carve  ?  "  it  cries.    And  then  the  artist  comes  and  seizes  it.     The  chis^ 
lays  itself  into  his  hand,  and  is  obedient  to  him.    That  obedience  is  faith.    It  opens 
the  channels  between  the  sculptor's  brain  and  the  hard  steel.     Thought,  feeling, 
imagination,  skill,  flow  down  from  the  deep  chambers  of  the  artist's  soul  to  the 
chisel's  edge.     The  sculptor  and  the  chisel  are  not  two,  but  one.     It  is  the  unit 
which  they  make  that  carves  the  statue.     Then  again,  look  at  the  army  and  its 
great  commander.     The  army  tries  to  fight  the  battle,  and  is  routed.     Tlien  its 
scattered  regiments  gather  themselves  togetlipr,  and  put  themselves  into  the  hands 
of  the  great  general,  and  obey  him  perfectly,  and  fight  the  battle  once  more  and 
succeed.     **  Why  could  not  I  succeed  ?  "  the  army  cries  ;  and  the  general  answers, 
"Because  of  your  unbelief.    Because  you  had  no  faith.    Tou  separated  yourself 
from  me.    You  are  but  half  a  power,  not  a  whole  power.    The  power  which  has 
won  the  battle  now  is  not  you  and  is  not  I ;  it  is  made  up  of  you  and  me  together, 
•nd  the  power  which  made  ns  a  unit  was  your  obedient  faith.     (Phillips  Brooks, 


CHAP,  xvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  379 

D.D.)  Faith  in  action : — It  may  be  interesting  and  useful  to  consider  in  what 
way  the  apostles  actually  worked  out  the  lessons  which  our  Lord  gave  them  con- 
cerning faith.  The  lessons  which  Christ  gave  them  while  He  was  yet  with  them 
were,  doubtless,  intended  to  guide  them  when  they  were  left  to  themselves ;  He 
dropped  into  their  minds  many  maxims,  and  precepts,  and  seeds  of  thought,  which 
He  knew  that  they  would  not  understand  at  the  time,  intending  that  the  things  said 
should  be  brought  to  remembrance  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  should  then 
be  comprehended  in  all  their  fulness,  and  be  guides  to  their  feet  and  lanterns  to 
their  paths.  Well,  then,  how  did  they  deal  with  the  mountains  of  difficulty  which 
they  had  to  remove  in  order  to  lay  the  foundations  of  the  Church  ?  How  did  they 
put  in  practice  the  precept  of  their  Lord,  that  they  should  command  the  mountains 
in  faith  to  be  removed  ?  and  in  what  way  and  to  what  degree  did  they  realize  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  that  a  command  so  given  and  backed  by  prayer  should  be 
forthwith  obeyed,  and  that  nothing  should  be  impossible?  It  is  plain  that  you 
may  easily  conceive  a  very  wild  and  fanatical  system  of  attempts  to  propagate  the 
gospel  being  based  upon  our  Lord's  words  literally  taken.  You  may  conceive,  e.g., 
of  St.  Peter  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  instead  of  arguing  calmly  with  the  people  and 
declaring  the  facts  connected  with  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  attempt- 
ing some  Bti iking  miracle  which  would  batter  down  all  opposition;  or  yoo  can 
conceive  of  St.  Paul  at  Ephesus,  instead  of  pleading  his  cause  in  the  theatre, 
commanding  the  great  Temple  of  Diana  to  be  removed  and  cast  into  the  sea ;  in 
fact,  you  may  conceive  of  a  course  of  conduct  as  different  as  possible  from  that 
which  the  apostles  with  one  consent  and  in  their  corporate  capacity  actually  adopted. 
Look  at  the  history  contained  in  the  Book  of  Acts,  or  at  the  incidental  living  history 
which  comes  out  in  the  Epistles,  and  you  will  see  that  the  whole  work  of  the  apostleg 
is  a  combination  of  faith  and  prayer  with  judgment  and  calm,  quiet,  good  sense ; 
they  were  conspicuously  what  we  should  call  good  men  of  business ;  like  all  such 
men,  they  attended  to  small  matters  as  well  as  great;  when  difficulties  arose,  they 
took  counsel  together,  and  discussed  the  difficulties  at  a  general  meeting ;  they 
framed  rules  when  rules  were  necessary ;  they  never  forgot  that  in  this  world 
prudence  is  as  necessary  with  regard  to  the  kingdom  of  God  as  it  is  with  regard  to 
mere  worldly  success ;  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  apostles  founded  and  governed 
the  Church  of  Christ.  And  yet  the  apostles  would  have  been  the  last  men  to  put 
trust  in  their  own  wisdom,  or  their  business  capacity,  or  their  powers  of  organization. 
At  all  times  of  their  ministry,  in  bright  days  and  in  dark,  in  the  council  chamber  at 
Jerusalem  or  in  prison  for  the  name  of  Christ,  in  legislating  for  the  churches  or  in 
dealing  with  individual  hearts  and  consciences,  in  striving  by  all  manner  of  means 
to  cast  out  the  legion  of  devils  by  which  maukind  was  possessed,  they  would  have 
in  their  minds  such  words  as  these.  (BisJiop  Harvey  Goodwin.)  Want  of  faith  the 
source  of  weakness  : — How  the  whole  story  of  humankind  is  like  that  scene  which 
took  place  at  the  foot  of  Tabor,  while  Jesus  was  being  transfigured  on  the  top. 
You  remember  how,  in  Raphael's  great  painting,  the  whole  story  is  depicted.  Up 
above  Christ  is  hovering  in  glory,  lifted  from  earth  and  clothed  in  light  and  accom- 
panied on  each  side  by  His  saints.  Down  below,  in  the  same  picture,  the  father 
holds  his  frantic  child,  and  the  helpless  disciples  are  gazing  in  despair  at  the 
struggles  which  their  charms  have  wholly  failed  to  touch.  It  is  the  peace  of  Divine 
strength  above ;  it  is  the  tumult  and  dismay  of  human  feebleness  below.  But  what 
keeps  the  great  picture  from  being  a  mere  painted  mockery  is  that  the  puzzled 
disciples  in  the  foreground  are  pointing  the  distressed  parents  of  the  chid  up  to  the 
mountain  where  the  form  of  Christ  is  seen.  They  have  begun  to  get  hold  of  the 
idea  that  what  they  could  not  do  He  could  do.  So  they  are  on  the  way  to  the  faith 
which  He  described  to  them  when  they  came  to  Him  with  their  perplexity.  Let 
the  picture  help  to  interpret  them  to  us,  and  is  not  the  meaning  of  Christ's  words 
to  His  disciples  this  ?  He  claims  the  disciples  for  Himself.  He  tells  them  that 
the  reason  of  their  failure  is  that  they  have  been  trying  to  do  by  themselves  what 
they  can  only  do  when  He  is  behind  them,  when  their  natures  are  so  open  that  Hia 
strength  can  freely  flow  out  through  them.  That,  I  think,  is  what  Ho  means  by 
faith.  The  man  who  is  so  open  Christward  that  Christ  is  able  to  pour  His  strength 
out  through  him  upon  the  tasks  of  life  has  faith  in  Christ.  The  man  who  is  so 
closed  Christward  that  nothing  but  his  own  strength  gets  utterance  upon  the  tasks 
of  life  has  not  faith,  and  is  weak  because  of  his  unbelief.  (Phillips  Brooks.) 
Reason  of  failure : — Whence  comes  it  that,  when  assailed  by  temptation,  we  so 
seldom  conquer  and  so  often  fail  ?  It  is  because  of  our  unbelief — because  we  are 
fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  God  Himself  has  told  us.   We  do  not  g« 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xvu. 

to  Him  first  of  all ;  we  do  not  take  His  instructions,  r'o  not  consult  His  revealed 
will  as  our  first  rule  of  action.  Is  it  not  so  as  regards  that  evil  spirit  whose  name 
is  Legion,  whose  accursed  power  we  meet  everywhere — not  only  in  our  streets,  but 
in  eome  of  its  manifold  inllnences  in  our  homes  and  hearts — the  spirit  of  selfish- 
nesj  and  sensuality,  lust,  intemperance,  sarcasm,  spite,  hypocrisy,  cheating,  lying, 
meanness?  We  do  not  say,  we  have  not  faith  to  say,  "I  command  thee  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ  to  come  out."  We  dare  not  say  to  impotence,  "  In  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  rise  up  and  walk."  We  have  more  faitla  in  ourselves  ; 
in  clever  Is^gislation,  compulsory  education,  commercial  prosperity,  in  what  we  call 
"  progress,  '  in  the  discoveries  of  science.  We  will  not  read,  or  we  forget,  history — 
how  all  the  great  empires  of  the  Nile,  tlie  Euphrates,  the  Tiber,  and  the  Tigris 
rose  and  tell  as  they  realized  that  which  was  true  and  right  in  the  religion  they 
professed ;  how  the  golden  glory  of  Babylon,  the  silver  sheen  of  Cyrus  the  Persian, 
the  brazen  splendom*  which  gleamed  on  the  victorious  arms  of  Alexunder,  the  iron 
strength  of  Kome,  were  ground  into  powder  as  the  stone  fell  upon  them,  the  stone 
which  the  builders  rejected,  but  which  became  the  head  of  the  corner  and  the 
shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land — the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  His 
Christ ;  and  when  in  this  season  of  decadence,  and  in  the  time  of  their  visitaticti, 
they  heard  the  war-cry  of  their  conquerors,  and  staggered  from  the  wioe-cup  and 
the  harlot's  lap  to  put  on  the  armour  which  they  could  hardly  bear,  and  the  sword 
which  tney  could  scarcely  wield,  it  was  as  they  asked  in  their  dt  feat,  "  Why  could  not 
we  cast  them  out?"  that  the  answer  came,  " Because  of  your  unbelief ;  because 
you  have  ceased  to  believe  in  righteousness,  and  'righteousness  exalteth  a  nation.'" 
(S.  R.  Hole,  M.A.)  Had  these  disciples  been  not  faithless  but  believing;  had 
they  prayed  more  frequently  and  earnestly  ;  had  they  shown  more  of  that  self- 
denial  which  He  taught  and  set  before  them,  distrusted  themselves  and  humbled 
themselves  instead  of  disputing  which  should  be  the  greatest,  they  would  have  cast 
oat  that  evil  spirit.  But  he  perceived,  and  prevailed  over,  their  want  of  faith. 
He  said,  "  Jesus  I  know,  but  who  are  ye  that  utter  His  name,  but  do  not  believe 
in  its  power?  "  Perhaps  the  absence  of  the  Master  from  those  nine  apostles  made 
them  doubtful  and  feai-ing  among  the  unbelieving  Jews  ;  just  as  you  and  I,  when 
we  leave  the  church,  or  our  place  of  prater  at  home,  or  the  company  of  those  wham 
we  most  revere  and  who  influence  us  most  for  good,  are  teropted  to  forget  the  omni- 
present God,  to  be  of  the  world  worldly,  and  to  set  our  aii'ections  upon  the  things 
of  the  earth.  So  to  lose  the  power,  the  only  true  power  over  ourselves  and  others, 
whijh  we  have  in  exact  proportion  to  our  faith,  our  prayers,  our  self-denial ;  for 
they  are  inseparable,  these  three — trinity  in  unity.  I.  Ii  is  impossible  to  believe 
'n  our  heavenly  Father  and  not  to  go  to  Him  always  as  cuildren  to  rejoice  in  His 
LOVE,  to  thank  Him  for  His  gifts,  to  be  protected  in  danger,  taught  in  iguorKUce, 
relieved  in  pain,  and  forgiven  when  we  have  done  wrong.  II.  We  cannot  bealli 
BELIEVE  IN  His  power  and  love  without  going  to  Him  and  praying  to  Him  oft 
A.ND  earnestly  ;  not  from  a  MERE  IMPULSE  OF  FEAR,  in  some  sudden  terror,  in  the 
great  storm,  carried  up  to  heaven  and  down  again  to  earth,  in  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death  ;  but  always  out  of  a  pure  heart  and  faith  unfeigned.  And  this 
true  prayer  does  not  begin  when  we  kneel,  nor  cease  when  we  rise.  God  has  not 
only  given  us  a  voice  to  pray  with,  but  a  mind  with  which  to  think  about  onr 
prayers,  and  capacities,  and  means,  and  time,  and  money,  with  which  wo  may  fulfil 
them.     True  prayer  is  prayer  in  action.     Duty  is  prayer,  and  work  is  worsliip.. 

III.    So   IT   IS    IMPOSSIBLE    TO  BELIEVE    REALLY   IN  ChRIST,  AND  NOT  TO  PRACTISE   8ELF« 

DENIAL.  To  believe  is  to  love,  and  to  love  is  to  obey.  (Ibid.)  Spiritual  failure — 
its  cause  and  cure  : — Nothing  can  be  better  than  to  bring  oub  spiritual  failures 
TO  Christ  Himself,  as  did  the  disciples.  "  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  ?  " 
So  asked  the  baffled,  eager  disciples  of  old,  and  got  their  answer.  So  let  us  ask, 
and  hear  what  Christ  will  say  to  us.  I.  Cause  of  spiritual  failure.  1.  Whatever 
the  peculiar  character  of  the  malady,  the  disciples  had  had  power  given  them  to 
heal  it  (Matt.  x.  8),  which  they  had  already  freely  and  successfully  put  forth 
(Luke  X.  17).  This  power  was  not  unconditionally  exercised.  Some  of  the  condi- 
tions of  success  depended  upon  the  sufferers,  some  upon  themselves.  The  causa 
of  failure  lay,  not  in  forms  or  methods,  &c.,  the  mischief  lay  deeper  down — 
**  unbelief."  2.  Are  there  none  possessed  with  evil  spirits  within  our  ken  7  Da 
we  not  in  this  description  recognize  phenomena  of  our  own  life  ?  3.  There  are  fair 
excuses  enough ;  undue  dwelling  upon  the  evil  to  be  cured ;  mere  reasouiu^ 
on  the  causes  of  evil ;  reserve  and  fastidiousness  in  dealing  with  religioui 
topics;  perfunctory  methods   of  using  the   gospel  means.     II.   Christ's  cuia 


eHAP.  XTii.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  381 

There  is  no  unnecessary  upbraiding  in  our  Lord's  answer,  no  dwelling  on  tha 
merely  negative  side  of  truth.  From  the  mention  of  unbelief  He  passes  at  once 
to  the  power  of  faith.  1.  Faith  needs  to  be  cultivated.  In  the  Revised  Version 
Christ's  answer  reads,  "  Because  of  your  little  faith."  You  may  trust  doubt  to 
spring  up  readily  and  flourish  easily,  but  the  power  to  discern  the  invisible,  and 
hold  fast  amidst  a  thousand  discouragements  our  conhdence  in  an  unseen  God,  an 
unseen  Saviour,  and  in  the  power  of  truth  which  as  yet  far  from  prevailing  must 
receive  due  cultivation  if  it  is  to  conquer.  2.  Let  it  be  clearly  understood  thit 
while  God's  power  in  Christ  works  the  miracle,  our  faith  in  that  power  is  a  condi- 
tion of  its  operation  and  success.  3.  This  is  no  question  of  fervid  enunciati'  >n, 
excited  gestures,  display  of  emotion.  Faith  may  be  small  at  first.  4.  Our  Load's 
addition  to  this  main  answer  to  the  disciples'  query  has  an  importance  of  its  own. 
Faith  in  all  cases  needs  to  be  sustained,  but  in  special  cases  it  needs  to  be  specially 
sustained  by  (1)  prayer ;  (2)  fasting — self-denial.  (IF.  T.  Davison,  M.A.)  The 
influence  of  earnest  faith  upon  men : — And  so  for  the  most  part  it  is  not  abstract 
truth  that  wins  men.  I  can  read  abstract  truth  at  home  and  go  to  sleep  over  it ;"" 
argue  it  out  by  myself  and  never  be  moved  to  alter  my  course  one  jot.  What  moves, 
me  is  the  sight  of  a  man  who  is  himself  moved  by  the  truth  of  what  he  proclaims,! 
and  in  this  high  region  of  religious  truth  a  man  adequately  moved  in  proportion  to  \ 
the  importance  of  the  troth  he  announces.  A  true  herald  of  Christ  is  one  who, 
not  in  the  mere  announcing  of  doctrine,  but  who  in  mien,  gesture,  tone,  life,  shows 
that  he  believes  the  God-in-Christ  doctrine  of  the  salvation  of  the  worst  of  men 
who  are  willing  to  yield  and  obey.  Such  a  herald  of  the  gospel  is  everywhere  a 
quickening  power,  a  kindling  flame.  (Tbid.)  Faith  not  emotion  or  formalism  :— 
Those  who  would  cast  out  devils  in  Christ's  name  are  not  like  pagan  exorcists  to 
work  themselves  into  a  fever  of  excitement  and  imagine  that  obstacles  will  disappear 
before  them  because  they  shout  and  gesticulate.  A  man's  manner  may  be  as  qaiet 
or  as  impetuous  as  you  please,  but  it  should  be  the  natural  expression  of  the  truth 
which  animates  all  the  powers  of  his  being.  There  is  electricity  enough  in  nature, 
and  at  certain  times  the  air  is  burdened  with  it,  but  a  good  conductor  is  needed  if 
its  energy  is  to  be  gathered  and  transmitted.  And  in  this  case  the  force  is  to  be 
gathered,  not  that  it  may  be  dissipated  in  the  earth,  but  that  it  may  rend  rocks  an4 
overturn  mountains.  A  great  problem  of  the  day  is  the  storage  and  use  of  electri- 
city ;  but  who  is  fit  for  a  work  like  this,  to  be  in  any  degree  a  vehicle  ©f  the  Divin* 
power  to  save  men  ?  Not  the  noisy  assertor  of  self  who  reminds  you  of  his  own 
personality  and  agency  at  every  turn.  Not  the  formalist,  the  mechanical  utterer 
of  pious  phrases,  nor  the  mere  excited  rhapsodist ;  but  only  the  man  of  single  eye 
and  pure  heart,  whose  soul  is  inter-penetrated  with  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and 
who  believes  with  all  his  mind,  and  soul,  and  strength  in  its  might  and  efficacy. 
(Ibid.)  The  secrets  of  victory  : — Christ's  power,  first,  last,  middle ;  our  faith  in 
that  power  unhesitating,  unshrinking,  unwavering ;  earnest  prayer  to  Him  whose 
ear  attends  the  softest  prayer,  accompanied  by  that  self-discipline  which  the  holiest 
saint  knows  he  needs,  and  the  humblest  Christian  should  be  the  last  to  disdain, 
these  are  the  secrets  of  victory.  Constantine,  before  the  great  battle  of  the  Milvian'^ 
bridge,  is  said  to  have  beheld  in  the  sky  a  flaming  cross,  with  the  words,  "  Bt  this 
CONQUER."  Only  by  the  power  of  the  Cross  can  the  world  be  subdued  ;  but  only  by 
the  faith  of  its  followers  can  the  power  of  the  Cross  reach  the  world's  heart  and 
free  it  from  the  tyranny  of  the  legion  of  evil  spirits  that  now  rule  and  riot  there. 
Onward  Christian  soldiers,  and  by  your  faith  help  to  win  a  world  for  Christ ! 
(Ibid.)  The  spirit  of  worldliness  rebuked  : — I.  The  evil.  The  efforts  of  Satan  have 
been  different  at  different  times.  Persecution;  heresy;  fashions  of  men;  worldliness. 
II.  The  bemedt.  Faith.  By  prayer  faith  is  increased,  also  we  shall  be  given  less 
to  luxury.  (S.  Robins,  M.A.)  A  man  wholly  consecrated  to  Christ: — It.  is  said  that 
shortly  before  Mr.  Moody  began  those  labours  which  were  so  marvellously  blessed, 
he  was  greatly  impressed  by  the  remark  made  by  a  Christian  friecd  :  "  It  remains 
for  the  world  to  see  what  the  Lord  can  do  with  a  m&n  wholly  consecrated  to  Christ." 
The  secret  of  power : — Consider  the  principles  which  flow  from  this  text.  I.  Wh 
HATE  AN  DNVARTiNG  POWER.  A  gospel  which  never  can  grow  old.  An  abiding  spirit. 
An  unchanging  Lord.  11.  The  condition  of  exercising  this  power  is  faith.  The 
Church  to-day  is  asking  the  same  question  as  the  disciples.  What  is  to  blame? 
Not  our  modes  of  worship,  Ac.  While  leaving  full  scope  for  all  improvements  in 
subordinate  conditions,  the  main  thing  which  makes  us  strong  for  our  Christian 
work  is  the  grasp  of  living  faith,  which  holds  fast  the  strength  of  God.  Faith  has 
»  natural  operation  on  ourselves  which  tends  to  fi*  us  for  casting  out  the  evil  spirits. 


882  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLLSTEATOR.  [chap,  xyo. 

Faith  has  power  over  men  who  see  it.  III.  Odb  faith  la  ever  threatened  bt  subtlb 
UNBELIEF.  All  our  activity  tends  to  become  mechanical,  and  to  lose  its  connection 
will)  the  motive  which  originated  it.     The  atmosphere  of  scornful  disbelief  which 

tenrrounded  the  disciples  made  their  faith  falter.  So  with  us.  IV.  Our  faith  can 
ONLY  BE  MAINTAINED  BT  CONSTANT  DEVOTION  AND  RIGID  SELF-DENIAL.    {Dr.  A,  Maclaren.) 

The  secret  of  Cliristian  failure  and  success: — They  were  justified  in  undertaking  to 
cast  the  demon  out,  and  ought  to  have  succeeded.  It  was  the  right  and  privilege  of 
their  di.scipleship,  and  they  were  guilty  of  the  luumfulntss  of  tbeir  failure.  And  bo 
with  us,  our  demons  and  the  world's  demons  have  been  subjected  to  ns.  Our  duty 
and  privilege  is  to  master  and  exorcise  them.  And  to  the  measure  of  our  oppor- 
tunity we  are  guilty  of  the  world's  evilness  and  our  heart's  weakness.  It  should 
not  be  Christ's  direct  act.  Thank  God  it  will  be  that  if  we  fail,  they  shall  at  last 
be  cast  out ;  but  it  should  be  ours  through  the  Christ-life  and  power  with  us.  He 
has  committed  the  work  and  responsibility  of  evil's  overthrow  to  us,  and  sternly 
and  awfully  He  will  require  at  our  hauda  the  lives  marred  and  wrecked  by  our 
failure.  Our  great  need  is  faith  in  this  power  of  ours.  We  want  to  know  and  feel 
we  are  not  helplessly  in  sin's  grip,  nor  weak  though  despised  before  evil's  array  and 
Beeming  sovereignty  in  the  world.  The  woild  is  ours  as  we  are  Christ's — ours  to 
be  conquered  and  won.  (S,  D.  Thomas.)  Eastern  epilepsy  and  mania : — In  Sidon 
there  are  cases  of  epilf-ptic  fits  which,  in  external  mauifehtation,  closely  resemble 
that  mentioned  in  this  verse.  These  fits  have  seized  a  young  man  in  my  house 
repeatedly  ;  "  And,  lo!  the  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he  suddenly  crieth  out,  andfoameth 
at  the  mouth,  and  gnasheth  with  his  teeth,"  and  is  cast  down  wherever  he  may  be 
seized,  and  pineth  away  until  you  would  think  he  was  actually  dead,  Matthew 
calls  him  a  lunatic,  but,  according  to  Mark,  it  was  a  dumb  spuit.  And  there  are 
cases  in  which  the  disease  referred  to  accompanies,  and  in  others  it  obviously 
occasions,  dumbness.  I  will  not  say  that  such  unfortunate  creatures  are  tormented 
by  an  evil  spirit,  but  I  am  sure  that  no  cavilling  sceptic  can  prove  that  they  are  not. 
(Dr.  Tliomson.)  Explanation  of  devil  possessions  : — Many  think  that  in  the  cases 
recorded  we  have  but  the  symptoms  of  well-known  diseases  which,  from  their  excep- 
tionally painful  character,  involving  loss  of  reason,  involuntary  or  convulsive 
motions,  and  other  abnormal  phenomena,  the  imaginative  and  unscientific  Easterns 
attributed,  as  the  easiest  mode  of  accounting  for  them,  to  a  foreign  power  taking 
possession  of  the  body  and  mind  of  the  man.  They  say  there  is  no  occasion  what- 
ever to  resort  to  an  explanation  involving  an  agency  of  which  we  know  nothing 
from  any  experience  of  our  own ;  that,  as  our  Lord  did  not  come  to  rectify  men's 
psychological  or  physiological  theories,  He  adopted  the  mode  of  speech  common 
among  them,  but  cast  out  the  evil  spirits  simply  by  healing  the  diseases  attributed 
to  their  influences.  There  seems  to  me  nothing  unchristian  in  this  interpretation. 
But  I  have  no  difficulty  in  receiving  the  old  Jewish  belief  concerning  possession ; 
and  I  think  it  better  explains  the  phenomena  recorded  than  the  growing  modem 
opinion.  {George  Macdonald.)  Prayer  for  a  wicked  son : — Spener's  prayer  for 
his  son : — Philip  James  Spener  had  a  son  of  eminent  talents,  but  perverse  and  ex- 
tremely vicious.  All  means  of  love  and  persuasion  were  without  success.  The 
father  could  only  pray,  which  he  continued  to  do,  that  the  Lord  might  yet  be 
pleased  to  save  hia  son  at  some  time,  and  in  some  way.  The  son  fell  sick,  and 
while  lying  on  his  bed  in  great  distress  of  mind,  nearly  past  the  power  of  speech  or 
motion,  he  suddenly  started  up,  clasped  his  hands,  and  exclaimed,  "My  lather's 
prayers,  like  mountains,  surround  me."  Suou  after,  his  anxiety  ceased,  a  sweet 
peace  spread  over  his  face,  his  malady  came  to  a  crisis,  and  the  son  was  saved  in 
body  and  soul.  He  became  another  man.  A  pitiable  sight : — Whoever  has  held 
in  his  arms  his  child  in  delirium,  calling  to  his  father  for  aid  as  if  he  were  distant 
fai,  and  beating  the  air  in  wild  and  aimless  defence,  will  be  able  to  enter  a  little  into 
the  trouble  of  this  man's  soul.  To  have  the  child,  and  yet  see  him  tormented  in 
■ome  region  inaccessible ;  to  hold  him  to  the  heart,  and  yet  be  anable  to  reach  the 
thick-coming  fancies  which  distract  him ;  to  find  himself  with  a  great  abyss  between 
him  and  his  child,  across  which  the  cry  of  the  child  comes,  but  back  across  which 
no  answering  voice  can  reach  the  consciousness  of  the  sufferer—  is  terror  and  misery 
indeed.  But  imagine  in  the  case  before  us  the  intervals  as  well — the  stupidity,  the 
vacant  gaze,  the  hanging  lip,  the  pale  flaccid  countenance  and  bloodshot  eyes, 
idiocy  alternated  with  madness — no  voice  of  human  speech,  only  the  animal  babble 
of  the  uneducated  dumb — the  misery  of  his  falling  down  anj'whore,  now  in  the  fire, 
now  in  the  water,  and  the  Divine  shines  out  as  nowhere  else — for  the  father  lovet 
his  own  child  even  to  agony.   What  was  there  in  such  a  child  to  love?    Everything, 


CHAP.  XVII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  583 

The  human  was  there,  else  whence  the  torture  of  thai  which  was  not  human  ? 
whence  the  pathos  of  those  eyes,  harilly  up  to  the  dog"a  in  intelligence,  yet  omni- 
potent over  the  father's  heart?     God  was  there.     The  misery  was  that  the  devil 
was  there  too.     Hence  came  the  crying  and  tears.     "Rescue  the  Divine;  send  the 
devil  to  the  deep,"  was  the  unformed  prayer  in  the  father's  soul.     {George  Mac- 
donald.)        "  This  mountain  "  as  Ilerinon : — There  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  the  '*  hi^h^ 
mountain  apart "  was  one  of  the  peaks  of  Hermon,  which  towers  over  Caesarea.     On  j 
coming  down  again  from  the  mountain  the  lunatic  boy  was  healed ;  and  in  such  / 
s  position  the  force  of  Christ's  rebuke  to  EUs  disciples  cotdd  be  fully  comprehended.  * 
"  K  ye  have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain  [Her- 
mon], Remove  hence  to  yonder  place  [pointing  down,  perhaps,  into  the  deep  valley 
of  the  Jordan  which  lay  below],  and  it  shall  rtmove."     (Dr.  J.  L.  Porter.)       Faith'^ 
removing  mountains: — A  grain  of  faith  can  remove  spiritual  mountains ;  mcantaius 
of  guilt  from  the  conscience,  mountains  of  hardness  from  the  will,  mountains  of  I 
eartbliness  from  the  affections.     (£.  Polhill.)        Faith  that  works  wonders : — All 
the  marvels,  all  the  apparent  impossibilities,  which  men  have  wrought,  have  been 
wrought  by  the  energy  of  faith.     It  is  by  his  faith  in  the  laws  of  nature,  and  in  hia 
interpretation  of  them,  that  the  man  of  science  has  achieved  the  marvels  which  have 
altered  the  whole  form  and  tone  of  modem  life.     It  is  by  his  faith  both  in  thtP) 
courage  of  his  soldiers,  and  in  his  own  power  of  handling  them,  that  is,  his  system  j 
of  tactics,  that  every  great  captain  has  won  his  victories,  often  snatching  them  from  i 
the  very  mouth  of  defeat.     It  is  by  his  faith  in  men,  and  in  his  reading  of  the  laws  \ 
of  social  and  political  science,  that  every  great  statesman  learns  how  to  take  occasion 
by  the  hand,  and  to  make  the  bounds  of  freedom  broader  yet.    It  is  by  his  faith  in 
great  reli>,'ious  principles  and  truths  that  every  successful  reformer  of  the  Church, 
e.g.,  Luther,  has  purged  the  Church  from  its  accretions  of  error  and  superstition, 
elevated  and  liberalized  at  once  her  creed,  her  ritual,  and  her  morality,  in  the  teeth 
of  both  priestly  and  imperial  power.     By  faith  the  early  Church  put  a  new  heart 
into  the  decrepit  Roman  empire.     By  faith  the  reformers  put  a  new  heart  into  the 
northern  kingdoms  of  Europe,  and  suppressed  some,  at  least,  of  the  most  flagrant 
vices  and  superstitions  even  of  the  southern  kingdoms  who  rejected  their  teaching. 
(Almani  Peloni.)        Power  in  a  mustard  seed : — The  mustard  seed  is  one  of  the 
tiniest  of  seeds,  although  in  the  fierce  heat  of  the  Jordan  valley  it  will  grow  np  into 
a  herb  as  high  as  a  man  on  horseback,  and  throw  out  sprays  on  which  the  birds  of 
tho  air  perch  and  feed,  attracted  by  its  pungent  fruit.     Take  such  a  seed  into  yoor 
hand  and  consider  it,  and  you  will  find  it  hard,  round,  dry,  and  apparently  dead 
and  inert.     Put  it  under  a  microscope  and  dissect  it ;  and,  small  as  it  is,  you  will 
find  that  it  contains  a  germ  far  smaller  than  itself  in  which  its  whole  potency  ia 
summed  up.     Bom  in  the  air,  nourished  by  the  sunshine  and  the  dew,  it  yet  cannot 
live  and  appropriate  their  virtues  while  it  remains  in  them,  so  long  as  it  lies  in  the 
pod,  or  continues  above  the  ground.     Bat  bury  it  in  the  soil,  and  soon  a  process  of 
dissolution  and  disintegration  sets  in  which  is  also  a  process  of  vitality  and  growth. 
Its  main  bulk  rots,  but  rots  only  that  it  may  feed  the  tiny  germ  of  quickened  life 
which  resides  within  it,  for  even  a  seed  must  lose  itself  to  find  itself,  must  die  that 
it  may  live.     Through  death  it  rises  into  a  new  life,  pushes  its  way  through  what, 
compared  to  itself  in  size  and  weight,  are  whole  mountains  of  obstruction  and  resis- 
tance, piercing  clod  after  clod,  and  compelling  each  to  yield  its  virtues,  and  to 
minister  to  its  needs ;  until,  at  last,  it  rises  into  that  fellowship  with  the  air  and  the 
■unshine  and  the  dew  for  which  it  yearned  and  was  designed.     "  The  mountains  of 
the  earth  are  dead  in  comparison  with  its  Ufe."    Hence  it  commands  them  to  be 
removed,  and  they  obey.     So  astonishing  is  the  vital  energy  of  even  the  smallest 
g«eds  that  "  mushroom  spores,  which  singly  are  almost  invisible,"  have  been  known 
to  lift  large  paving  stones  an  inch  or  two  from  the  earth  in  the  course  of  a  single 
night.     {Ibid.)        The  power  of  faith: — I.  The  text  speaks  to  those  who  have  no 
VAiTH.     The  disciples  had  failed  through  lack  of  faith.     If  we  could  but  believe  we 
should  see  difiiculties  vanish.     1.  The  sphere  of  faith.     Faith  has  relation  to  man'a 
spiritual  needs;  temporal  needs  not  overlooked.     The  boundaries  of  faith  are  to  be 
looked  for  in  the  promises.     2.  How  faith  operates.    By  laying  hold  on  God's 
power.     To  make  His  work  serviceable  to  us  it  must  be  done  in  some  way  through 
our  instrumentaUty.     But  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  His.     3.  Its  necessity. 
God's  work  cannot  be  done  without  our  faith.  He  has  so  appointed.    II.  Of  comfoet 
TO  THOSE  OF  LITTLE  FAITH.     1,  It  may  be  little  in  two  senses:  in  its  object,  or  in  its 
intensity.     2.  Weak  faith  is  faith.     It  lays  hold  on  God  like  a  thin  wire  touching  » 
strong  battery.     3.  It  can  remove  mountains.    God  will  honour  faith  as  such  and 


964  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn, 

not  beeanse  of  its  strength  merely.  (G.  T.  Horton.)  Poiver  through  faith : — That 
power  is  put  forth  according  to  our  faith.  You  have,  perhaps,  seen  a  steam-hammer, 
or  clipper,  which  is  moat  mighty  to  crush  or  cut  thick  iron  like  shavings.  The  force 
applied  is  steam,  which  seems  almost  omnipotent.  But  how  is  It  applied  ?  By  a 
simple  tube  of  connexion  and  a  common  valve,  by  which  the  steam  is  let  in  upon 
the  ponderous  apparatus.  An  infant  could  turn  the  tap.  So  faith  simply  turns  on 
to  any  work  we  have  to  do  the  whole  power  of  deity ;  yet  He  hath  appointed  oi 
fellow-workers  with  Him,  by  entrusting  to  us  this  prerogative  of  faith.     (Ibid.) 

Yet.  21.  By  prayer  and  fasting. — Fasting  a  means  of  subduing  sin: — I.  This 

DUTY  OF  FASTING  ADMITS   OF   SEVERAIj   KINDS   AND   DEGKEES.      For  in  fasting  SS  Well  m 

in  feasting  we  may  find  variety.  1.  The  first  kind  is  of  constant,  universal  ex?roie3. 
It  obliges  at  all  times  and  extends  to  all  persons.  This  is  a  temperate  use  of  the 
creature;  in  abridging  the  appetites  of  nature  for  the  designs  of  religion.  2.  The 
second  kind  of  fast  is  of  a  total  abstinence,  when  for  some  time  we  wholly  abstain 
from  bodily  repasts.  The  remedy  to  be  successful  must  bear  some  proportion  to 
the  distemper.  Necessity  gives  place  to  extremity.  3.  The  third  kind  of  fast  is  an 
abstinence  from  bodily  refreshments  in  respect  of  a  certain  degree,  for  some  space 
of  time.  We  must  distinguish  between  murder  and  mortification ;  Christ  never 
destroys  the  body  to  save  the  soul.  Self-denial  is  a  duty,  but  not  self-murder. 
The  height  of  prudence  is  in  all  precepts,  laws,  and  institutions  to  distinguish 
persons,  times,  and  ocoaBions,  and  accordingly  to  discriminate  the  obligation.  II. 
The  qualifications  that  must  bender  this  dutt  of  fasting  both  acceptablb  to 
God,  and  efficacious  to  this  great  pheposb.  1.  The  first  is,  that  it  is  to  be  used, 
not  as  a  duty  either  necessary  or  valuable  for  itself,  but  only  as  an  instrument. 
There  is  no  excelling  in  fasting  itself  ;  is  any  spiritual  design  carried  on  in  it  ?  3. 
The  second  condition  of  a  religious  fast  is,  that  it  be  done  with  a  hearty  detestation 
of  the  body  of  sin,  for  the  weakening  of  which  it  is  designed.  Fasting  means  war 
against  sin ;  who  ever  fought  valiantly  against  him  whom  he  did  not  first  hate  ? 
3.  The  third  condition  of  a  duly  qualified  fast  is  that  it  be  quickened  and  enlivened 
with  prayer.  The  reason  of  the  fast  requires  the  society  of  prayer  for  the  procuring 
of  good  or  deprecation  of  evil.  David,  Daniel,  took  this  course.  4.  The  fourth 
condition  of  a  truly  rehgious  fast  is  that  it  be  attended  with  alms  and  works  ol 
charity  (Isa.  Iviii.  4,  7).  III.  Show  how  this  duty  of  fasting  comes  to  have  such 
A  peculiar  influence  in  dispossessing  the  evil  spirit,  and  subduing  oub  corrup- 
tions. That  it  does  not  efifect  this  work — 1.  Either  by  any  casual  force  naturally 
inherent  in  itself,  for  if  it  did,  fasting  would  constantly  and  certainly  have  this  effect 
upon  all  who  used  it.  2.  Nor  does  fasting  effect  this  great  change  by  way  of  merit, 
as  procuring  and  enjoying  the  help  of  that  grace  that  does  effect  it,  it  is  impossible 
for  a  created  nature  to  merit  anything  from  God  by  way  of  reward.  From  whence 
then  does  this  duty  derive  this  great  virtue  ?  1.  It  receives  it  from  Divine  institu- 
tion. 2.  Fasting  comes  to  be  effectual  to  dispossess  the  evil  spirit,  by  being  a  direct 
defiance  to  that  disposition  of  body  and  mind  upon  which  especially  he  works.  1. 
It  is  a  notable  act  of  self-revenge.  2.  It  corrects  the  ill  temper  of  pride.  {B. 
South,  D.D.)  Constant  temperance  better  than  occasional  fasting : — And  whoso- 
ever struggles  with  any  unruly  corruption,  will  perhaps  find,  that  the  constant  turn 
of  a  well-guided  abstinence  will,  in  the  issue,  give  a  surer  despatch  to  it,  than  those 
extraordinary  instances  of  total  abstinence  and  higher  severities,  only  undertaken 
for  a  time.  As  a  land  flood,  it  carries  a  bigger  stream  and  comes  with  a  mightier 
force  and  noise,  yet  presently  dries  up  and  disappears ;  but  the  emissions  of  a 
fountain,  though  gentle  and  silent,  yet  are  constant  and  perpetual ;  and  whereas 
the  other,  being  gone,  leaves  nothing  behind  it  but  slime  and  mud,  this,  wheresoever 
it  flows,  gently  soaks  into  verdure  and  fertility.  This  constant  temperance,  there- 
fore, is  by  all  means  intended  by  the  rules  of  Christianity  ;  the  constancy  of  which, 
running  through  our  whole  lives,  makes  abstinence  our  diet,  and  fasting  our  meat 
and  drink.  (Ibid.)  Obstinate  sin  to  be  overcome  by  strict  fasting  : — Every  remedy 
is  successful  according  to  the  proportion  it  bears  to  the  distemper :  and  certainly  a 
cure  is  not  likely  to  be  wrought  where  an  ordinary  remedy  encounters  an  extra- 
ordinary disease ;  where  the  plaster  is  narrow  and  the  wound  broad.  _  Temperance 
is  good,  but  that  is  to  be  our  continual  diet ;  and  surely,  that  man  is  not  like  to 
recover  who  makes  his  food  his  physic.  Where  the  humour  is  strong  and  predom- 
inant, there  the  prescription  must  be  rugged,  and  the  evacuation  violent.  We  must 
leave  the  road  of  nature  when  nature  itself  is  disordered,  and  the  principles  of  life 
in  danger.    {Ibid.)        Necessity  must  give  place  to  extremity : — And  the  physio 


OHAP.  xvu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  385 

is  merciful,  if  he  pines  his  patient  into  a  recovery.  In  this  ease  we  enconnter  sin 
in  the  body,  like  a  besieged  enemy  :  and  such  a  one,  when  he  has  once  eugarrisoned 
himself  in  a  strong  hold,  will  endure  a  storm  and  repel  assaults :  you  must  cut  off 
his  supplies  of  provision,  and  never  think  to  win  the  fort,  till  hunger  breaks  through 
the  walls,  and  starves  him  into  a  surrender.  {Ibid.)  Fasting  a  help  to  virtue  : — 
Now,  by  all  that  has  been  said  it  appears,  that  fasting  is  required,  not  as  a  virtue, 
but  as  a  help  to  virtue;  and  that  by  controlling  its  hindrance,  removing  its 
impediments,  subduing  the  emulations  of  a  contrary  principle,  and  so  enabling  it  to 
act  with  freedom.  Otherwise,  were  there  no  reluctaucy  from  the  inferior  appetites 
against  a  virtuous  and  a  pious  course,  these  arts  and  stratagems  against  the  flesh 
would  be  superfluous,  and  we  should  have  no  more  need  of  fasting  than  the  angels 
or  the  blessed  spirits  have  of  eating.  Could  the  mariner  sail  with  as  much  ease  and 
safety  in  a  storm,  as  he  does  in  a  calm,  he  would  never  empty  or  "Unlade  his  vessel. 
(Ibid.)  Fasti n(j  joined  with  hatred  of  sin: — If  we  have  not  first  wrought  our 
minds  to  a  settled  dislike  and  a  bitter  disgust  of  sin  as  our  mortal  enemy,  all  our 
attempts  against  it  will  be  faint  and  heartless,  our  mortifications  treacherous,  and 
our  fastings  frustraneous ;  much  like  David's  sending  an  army  against  Absalom 
with  a  design  to  save  him,  and  to  deal  with  him  gently.  It  will  be  only  an  alarm 
to  sin  to  put  itself  into  a  posture  of  defence,  to  retreat  further  into  the  soul,  and 
there  to  rally  together  its  strengths,  and  to  secure  itself  by  a  firmer  possession. 
(Ibid.)  Fasti.ig  joined  with  humility : — It  is  not  a  mournful  expression,  a  solemn 
dress,  or  a  thin  table,  that  God  so  much  regards.  It  is  the  heart,  and  not  the 
stomach,  that  He  would  have  empty ;  and,  therefore,  if  a  man  carries  a  luxurious 
soul  in  a  pining  body,  or  the  aspiring  mind  of  a  Lucifer  in  the  hanging  head  of  a 
bulrush,  he  fasts  only  to  upbraid  his  Maker,  and  to  disgrace  his  religion,  and  to 
heighten  his  final  reckoning,  till  he  becomes  ten  times  more  the  son  of  perdition 
than  those  who  own  their  inward  love  of  sin  by  the  open  undissembled  enmities 
of  a  suitable  behaviour.  (Ibid.)  Fasting  and  prayer: — Prayer,  joined  with 
fasting,  is  like  *'  an  apple  of  gold  set  off  with  a  picture  of  silver."  Now  we  have  it 
at  its  best  advantage ;  it  shines  bright,  and  it  flames  pure,  like  fire  without  the 
incumbrances  of  smoke,  or  the  allay  of  contrary  blasts.  {Ibid.)  Fasting  : — No 
doubt  the  primary  meaning  of  the  word  translated  "fasting,"  is  that  abstinence 
from  food  which  was  practised  by  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament,  by  our  Lord 
Himself,  His  apostles,  and  His  Church  in  all  times  and  climes,  for  the  subjection 
of  the  flesh  to  the  spirit.  But  the  C^iurch  of  England,  while  she  commends  and 
commands  this  Scriptural  discipline,  makes  no  severe  definitions  and  lays  down  no 
rigid  rule,  for  many  and  righteous  reasons.  I.  Because  no  rules  could  be  applicable 
to  all,  the  young,  the  old,  the  weak,  the  poor.  II.  Because,  if  it  were  compulsory, 
it  would  become  a  mere  form  or  evasion  ;  e.g.,  a  fast  from  flesh  meat  might  be  only 
a  feast  on  other  dainties.  IH.  Because  a  fast  kept  ostentatiously  in  direct  dis- 
obedience to  our  Lord's  warning  that  we  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast,  would  only 
be  a  feast  of  pride — the  pride  which  apes  humility.  TV.  Because  under  the  gospel, 
in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free,  we  fast  by  the  love  of  virtue  and 
our  own  choice,  rather  than  by  the  coercion  of  any  law.  V.  Because  the  best  form 
of  abstinence  is  to  be  temperate  in  all  things.  VI.  Because  bodily  fasting  is  but  a 
part  of  that  self-denial  which  Christianity  teaches,  and  which  has  a  far  more  definite 
and  comprehensive  scope.  True  fasting  is,  to  spend  less  upon  ourselves,  that  we 
may  have  more  to  spend  upon  others ;  less  upon  luxuries  and  dainties,  that  others 
may  have  common  food.  {S.  R.  Hole,  M.A.)  Fasting  : — When  the  greatest 
speed  of  a  horse  is  to  be  tested,  the  trainer  does  not  allow  him  to  run  at  will  over 
in  the  pasture,  nor  does  he  simply  put  him  on  a  wholesale  diet.  He  almost  counts 
the  straws  that  he  gives  the  horse.  He  cleans  and  sifts  the  oats,  and  gives  him  the 
very  best  kinds.  He  measures  the  horse's  exercise,  and  every  part  of  the  horse  is 
under  the  trainer's  watch  and  care,  that  he  may  be  in  the  finest  condition  when  he 
puts  forth  his  energy  in  competition.  And  shall  a  man  do  so  much  for  his  horse 
and  nothing  for  himself  ?  Shall  there  be  no  preparation,  no  discipline,  no  care  as 
to  diet,  no  training,  nothing  but  going  on  through  the  linked  year.  Sabbath  joined 
to  Sabbath,  taking  things  as  they  come,  allowing  themselves  to  move  about  as  the 
current  sweeps  them  along  ?  Is  that  the  wisest  method  of  spiritual  culture?  (H. 
W.  Beecher. )  Extraordinary  means  necessary  : — When  the  Christian  is  buffeted 
with  any  temptation,  or  overpowered  with  a  corruption,  and  cannot  by  the  use  of 
ordinary  means  quench  the  one  or  mortify  the  other ;  when  the  short  dagger  of 
ordinary  prayer  will  not  reach  the  heart  of  a  lust,  then  it  is  time  to  draw  out  the 
long  Bword  of  extraordinary  prayer  upon  it.     S  me  poor  souls  complain  that  they 

25 


B86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xm, 

have  come  to  the  Word  in  tboir  daily  prayers,  begged  power  over  such  a  last,  resolved 
against  it  many  a  time,  and  none  of  these  means  cure  it ;  what  can  they  now  do 
more  ?  Here  thou  art  told  :  bring  thy  condition  to  Christ  in  this  solemn  ordinance 
of  prayer  and  fastiug  ;  this  hath  been  the  happy  means  of  strengthening  many  a 
poor  Christian,  to  be  avenged  on  those  spirituaJ  enemies  which  have  outbraved  all 
his  former  efforts,  and,  like  Samson,  to  pull  down  the  devil's  house  upon  his  head. 
(GurPMll.)  National  fasting  : — If  we  are  not  to  expect  that  the  devil  should  go 
out  of  a  particular  person,  under  a  bodily  possession,  without  extraordinary  prayer, 
or  "  prayer  and  fasting ;  "  how  much  less  should  we  expect  to  have  him  cast  out  of 
the  land  and  the  world  without  it  1     (President  Edward.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  The  Son  of  Man  shall  be  betrayed  Into  the  hands  of  men. — ChrisCt 
gecond  announcement  of  His  death  : — 1.  In  rapid  succession  the  Saviour  brings  before 
His  disciples  the  great  facts  in  His  history  as  the  Mediator — facts  which  have  the 
most  direct  bearing  on  man's  redemption  and  spiritual  recovery.  2.  His  complete 
knowledge  of  His  future,  and  the  calm  magnanimity  with  which  He  talked  about 
these  stupendous  events,  demonstrate  Him  to  be  superhuman.  3.  What  considerate 
kindness  toward  His  disciples  does  this  evince.  For  it  was  not  only  necessary  that 
their  material  notions  of  His  mission  should  be  corrected  (Luke  ix.  43,  44) ;  but 
still  more  necessary  that  they  should  be  prepared  for  these  wonderful  events,  so  that 
when  they  come  they  should  regard  them  as  the  fulfilment  of  His  prediction  and  an 
argument  for  faith.  I.  The  Saviour  fortellinq  the  great  facts  in  His  histobt 
AS  Mediator.  1.  He  foretells  Hiabetrayal — "  Betrayed  into  the  hands  of  men  " — 
"  men  to  whom  He  was  allied  by  nature,  and  from  whom  He  might  therefore  expect 
pity  and  tenderness;  men  whom  He  had  undertaken  to  save,  and  from  whom  there- 
fore He  might  expect  honour  and  gratitude ;  but  these  were  His  persecutors  and 
murderers"  {Acts  ii.  23).  2.  He  foretells  His  passion  and  death.  His  being 
"  killed  "  was  the  mortal  termination  of  His  sufferings,  and  nothing  less  would 
satisfy  the  rage  of  His  foes.  (1)  The  manner  of  His  death  is  expressly  mentioned 
(chap.  XX.  17-19).  (2)  The  Saviour  declares  the  necessity  of  His  sufferings  and 
death  (chap.  xvi.  21).  This  necessity  was  independent  of  prophecy.  To  accom- 
plish His  redeeming  purposes  He  "  must  "  suffer  and  die.  God  cannot  forgive  sin 
'  on  the  ground  of  mercy.  (3)  The  voluntariness  of  His  sufferings  and  death  is 
manifest.  He  foreknew  all.  He  could  have  escaped  all.  He  was  free.  The  will 
of  the  Father  did  not  coerce  the  Son.  Besides,  there  can  be  no  merit  in  exacted 
suffering.  Herein,  behold  the  wonderful  love  of  Jesus !  (John  x.  18  ;  Rom.  v.  5,  6). 
3.  He  foretells  His  resurrection.  This  event  is  not  only  the  crowning  evidence  of 
His  claims,  and  the  commencement  of  His  state  of  exaltation,  but  the  demonstra- 
tion of  the  sufficiency  of  His  atonement  (Rom.  iv.  24,  25 ;  i.  3,  4  ;  viii.  34 ;  Acta 
xvii.  31).  If  we  are  true  believers  we  have  a  personal  interest  in  every  part  of  His 
mediatorial  work,  II.  The  disciples  sorrowing  exceedingly  but  impbopbrlt. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  their  sorrow  was  on  account  of  the  sins  involved  in  these 
coming  events.  And  though  it  showed  their  love  to  their  Master,  it  also  disclosed 
their  ignorance  of  the  real  character  of  His  mi.-sion.  1.  For  if  it  was  sorrow  for 
hemselves  it  was  improper,  because  the  accomplishment  of  these  facta  were  essential 
to  their  happiness  (John  xvi.  7).  How  often  we  regret  the  loss  which  serves  our 
highf^st  interest  1  2.  If  it  was  sorrow  for  their  fellow-men  it  was  improper,  for  Hia 
sufferings,  <fec.,  were  the  only  means  of  their  redemption  and  spiritual  recovery, 
3.  If  it  was  sorrow  for  their  loved  Master  and  Lord  it  was  improper,  for  His  suffer- 
ings, &c.,  were  an  essential  part  of  His  great  plan,  and  the  prelude  to  His  glory 
(1  Peter  i.  11).  In  His  deepest  agonies,  He  is  an  object  for  praise  not  pity — com- 
mendation not  commiseration.     (A.  Tucker.) 

Vers.  24,  27.  And  when  they  were  come  to  Capernaum,  they  that  received 
tribute  money  came  to  Peter. — Christ  and  the  tribute  money : — I.  On  what  prin- 
ciple Christ  claimed  exemption.  This  tax  levied  for  temple  services.  On  no 
principle  but  that  of  His  being  essentially  Divine,  and  therefore  not  bound  to  con- 
tribute towards  services  virtually  rendered  to  Himself.  Christ  was  His  own  Temple. 
II.  The  principle  on  which,  nevertheless,  He  determined  on  pating  the  tax. 
Not  to  put  an  occasion  of  stumbling  in  the  way  of  others.  How  unwilling  we  are 
to  withdraw  pretensions.  It  requires  Christian  discretion  to  know  when  to  give 
way.  Christ  surrendered  no  principle  ;  He  did  not  say  that  He  was  not  the  Son  of 
God.  He  forbore  from  asserting  it.  III.  The  mib/  cle  bv  which  BLb  pboodbed  thb 
BsquisiTE  MONET.    Though  tl;ie  Proprietor  of  all  things,  He  had  made  Himself  poor 


OHAP.  xvii.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  887 

for  our  sakes.  He  here  gave  proof  of  superhuman  endowments ;  omniscience  and 
omnipotence.  He  knew  the  money  was  in  the  mouth  of  the  fish  ;  His  power  was 
felt  in  the  waters.  There  was  propriety  in  the  miracle  when  we  consider  which 
apostle  our  Lord  dispatched  on  this  errand.  Had  St.  Matthew  been  sent  the 
money  would  have  been  got  differently,  as  he  was  a  tax-gatherer ;  St.  Peter  was  a 
fisherman,  hence  he  got  the  money  from  a  fish.  Christ  put  honour  on  this  honest 
occupation.  We  are  not  to  neglect  mems  because  we  seem  to  need  miracles.  {H. 
Melvill,  B.D. )  The  hidden  coin : — 1.  The  Divine  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  A  lesson  of  moderation.  The  coin  was  only  enough  to  pay  the  tax.  Christ  had 
no  de?ire  for  earthly  possessions.  3.  For  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  ordinances 
of  religion.  4.  Learn  to  trust  our  Lord  in  trying  circumstances.  (C.  J.  Maginn, 
Jil.A.)  Peter's  money-fish: — Christ  here  showed  His  Divine  knowledge,  and 
especially  His  power  over  the  natural  world.  1.  Obedience  to  law  is  the  true 
guarantee  of  individual  safety,  the  preservation  of  justice  and  right,  the  peace  of 
society.  2.  Christ  will  use  His  mighty  control  of  the  material  world  to  care  for 
His  followers  as  He  did  for  Peter.  3.  Let  Christians  remember,  Christ  has  moved 
His  treasury  from  the  mouth  of  the  fish  to  the  loving  hearts  and  purses  of  His 
people.  4,  Now  every  Christian  must  cherish  the  idea,  and  act  upon  the  recognized 
principle  that  God  has  right  of  property  in  all  of  ours  as  well  as  of  ourselves,  and 
that  we  are  but  agents  to  distriimte,  as  God  wills,  what  He  has  placed  us  in  charge 
of    as   stewards.      (W .    H.    Anderson,  D.D.)  Notice   respecting  our  Lord — 

I.  His  poverty.  Hence  learn  :  Contentment  and  resignation,  benevolence  and 
liberality.  II.  His  peaceable  spirit.  Hence  take  example — Of  a  candid  spirit 
towards  brethren  who  differ  from  us,  particularly  in  meats  and  drinks ;  of 
prudence  in  our  intercourse  with  the  world,  especially  in  attempts  to  i^o  good. 
III.  His  Divinity.  Learn,  hence,  that  He  is  an  all-sufficient  Saviour  and  an 
A.lmighty  Friend,  a  formidable  enemy.  IV.  His  sympathy.  He  took  on  Him 
our  nature,  that  He  might  sympathize  with  our  weakness  and  suffering;  He  gives 
OS  a  share  in  all  His  possessions  (John  xvii.  24;  xiv.  2,  3).  {J.  Flirst.)  Nature 
attesting  Christ's  lord^ltip  : — An  old  ballad  represents  one  of  our  English  kings  as 
losing  his  way  in  a  wood,  and  becoming  parted  from  his  retinue.  A  countryman, 
who  met  him,  began  to  pick  up  acquaintance  with  him  in  an  easy,  familiar  style, 
not  knowing  his  dignity.  But  when  the  nobles,  having  discovered  their  missing 
monarch,  came  riding  up,  with  heads  uncovered,  and  lowly  homage,  the  CDuntiyman 
trembled  at  his  mistake.  So  the  laws  and  powers  of  nature  did  homage  before  Christ, 
attesting  Him  to  be  their  Sovereign,  and  authenticating  the  apostles  as  His  servants 
and    messengers.  The   lessons  taught  by  this  episode  and  miracle : — I.  The 

FREEDOM  OF  THE  SoN.  To  this  position  and  privilege  Christ  here  lays  claim  for 
Himself.  What  a  deduction  must  be  made  from  the  wisdom  of  His  teaching,  and 
from  the  meekness  of  His  Spirit,  if  that  claim  was  an  illusion  I  For,  what  did  it 
imply  ?  1.  That  He  had  no  need  of  a  ransom  for  His  soul.  2.  That  He  needed  no 
temple  to  worship  in.  II.  The  voluntary  submission  of  the  Son  to  the  bonds 
FROM  WHICH  He  is  free.  Self-sacrifice  even  in  the  smallest  details  of  His  life. 
III.  The  supernatural  glory  that  ever  accompanies  the  humilution  of  the  Son. 
He  so  submits  as,  even  in  submitting,  to  assert  His  Divine  dignity.  In  the  midst 
of  the  act  of  submission,  majesty  flashes  forth.  A  multiform  miracle — containing 
many  miracles  in  one — a  miracle  of  omniscience,  and  a  miracle  of  influence  over  the 
lower  creatures,  is  wrought.  The  first  fish  that  rises  carries  in  its  mouth  the  exact 
<3um  needed.  The  miracle  was  for  a  trivial  end  in  appearance,  but  it  was  a  demon- 
Btirttion,  though  to  one  man  only  at  first,  yet  through  him  to  all  the  world,  that 
this  Christ,  in  His  lowliness,  is  the  Everlasting  Son  of  the  Father.  IV.  The 
BUFFiCENCY  FOR  US  ALL  OF  WHAT  He  PBovinES.  Thatwhich  He  brings  to  us  by  super- 
natural act,  far  greater  than  the  miracle  here,  is  enough  for  all  the  claims  and 
obhgations  that  God,  or  man,  or  law,  or  conscience,  have  upon  any  of  us.  His 
perfect  obedience  and  stainless  Ufe  discharged  for  Himself  all  the  obligations  under 
which  He  came  as  a  man,  to  law  and  righteousness  ;  His  perfect  life  and  His  mighty 
death  are  for  us  the  fall  discharge  of  all  that  can  be  brought  against  us.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Siiperfiuities  not  to  be  coveted: — The  piece  of  money  was  just 
enough  to  pay  the  tax  for  Christ  and  Peter.  Christ  could  as  easily  have  commanded 
a  bag  ol  money  as  a  piece  of  money  ;  but  he  would  teach  us  not  to  covet  super- 
fluities, but,  having  enough  for  our  present  occasions,  therewith  to  be  content,  and 
not  to  distrust  God,  though  we  live  but  from  hand  to  mouth.  Christ  made  the  fish 
His  cash-keeper ;  and  why  may  not  we  make  God's  providence  our  storehouse  and 
Ueasoiy  ?    If  we  have  a  competency  for  to-day,  let  to-morrow  take  thought  for  the 


388  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

fhings  of  itself.  (Matthew  Henri/.)  This  singular  miracle  of  finding  the  coin  in 
the  fish's  vurith  is  unlike  our  Lord's  other  works  in  several  particulars : — I.  It  is  the 
only  miracle — with  the  exception  of  the  cursing  of  the  barren  fig-tree,  and  the 
episode  of  the  unclean  spirits  entering  into  the  swine — in  which  there  is  no  message 
of  love  or  blessing  for  man's  sorrow  and  pain.  11.  It  is  the  only  miracle  in  which 
our  Lord  uses  His  power  for  His  own  service  or  help.  III.  It  is  like  the  whole 
brood  of  legendary  miracles,  and  unlike  all  the  rest  of  Christ's,  in  that,  at  first  sight, 
it  seems  done  for  a  very  trivial  end — the  providing  of  some  three  shillings  of  our 
money.  Putting  all  these  things  together,  the  only  explanation  of  the  miracle  is  by 
regarding  it  as  a  parable,  designed  to  teach  us  some  important  lessons  with  reference 
to  Christ's  character,  person,  and  work,  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Tribute: — The 
whole  point  of  the  story  depends  upon  the  fact  that  this  tribute-money  was  not 
a  civil,  but  an  ecclesiastical  impost  It  had  originally  been  levied  in  the  wild- 
erness, at  the  time  of  the  numbering  of  the  people,  and  was  enjoined  as  to  be 
repeated  at  each  census,  when  every  male  Israelite  was  to  pay  half-a-shekel  for 
"  a  ransom  for  his  soul,"  an  acknowledgment  that  his  life  was  forfeited  by  ain. 
In  later  years  it  came  to  be  levied  as  an  annual  payment  for  the  support  of  the 
Temple  and  its  ceremonial.  It  was  never  compulsory;  there  was  no  power  to 
exact  it.  Being  an  "  optional  church-rate,"  Jews  who  were  or  wished  to  be 
considered  patriotic  would  be  very  punctihous  in  the  payment  of  it.  ijbid.) 
Christ  identifies  Himself  with  a  life  of  poverty : — The  Prince  is  free,  but  Kin^'?  Son 
though  He  be.  He  goes  among  His  Father's  poor  subjects,  lives  their  squalid  Ufe, 
makes  experience  of  their  poverty,  and  hardens  His  hands  by  labouring  like  them. 
Sympathy  He  learns  in  huts  where  poor  men  lie.  (Ibid.)  The  payment  of 
tribute : — I.  In  what  spibit  was  this  question  asked  of  Peter  ?  It  was  asked, 
not  by  Koman  tax-collectors,  but  by  Jews.  It  is  most  natural  to  suppose  that 
they  asked  the  question  in  a  captious  spirit.  Such  a  spirit  is  a  bad  sign  of 
the  state  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  intellect  too.  This  is  not  the  right  spirit 
for  attaining  to  a  knowledge  of  truth ;  it  is  very  dishonouring  to  God,  and 
very  likely  to  endanger  the  stability  of  our  faith.  II.  What  answeb  was  given 
BY  Peter?  The  whole  character  of  the  man  seems  to  come  out  in  his  eager, 
positive,  instantaneous  reply.  He  was  sensitively  anxious  for  the  credit  of  his 
Master,  and  he  spoke  without  thought.     III.  How  did  our  Lord  prevent  Peteb? 

IV.  On  what  principle  did  our  Lord  claim  exemption  ?  As  the  Son  of  God  He 
was  necessarily  exempt  from  an  ecclesiastical  tax.  V.  The  reason  for  his  payment. 
"  Lest  we  shoiald  offend  them."  It  is  this  delicate  regard  for  the  scruples  of  others 
which  constitutes  the  occasion  so  signal  an  example  to  ourselves.  VI.  Observe 
the  dignity,  as  well  as  wisdom,  of  the  miracle.  It  is  Christ's  royal  mode  of 
answering  all  cavils.  The  very  triviality  (so  to  speak)  of  this  miracle  is  part  of  its 
greatness.  How  minute  is  the  knowledge  of  Christ !  How  vigilantly  He  watches 
all  the  things  He  has  made  I  There  is  not  a  fish  on  a  summer  day  under  the 
shadow  of  a  stone  that  is  not  God's  creature  still.  (Bean  Howson.)  A  likenesa 
between  what  God  does  and  what  man  invents: — They  say  the  story  of  a  fish 
with  a  piece  of  money  in  its  mouth  is  more  like  one  of  the  tales  of  Eastern 
fiction  than  a  sober  narrative  of  the  quiet-toned  gospel.  I  acknowledge  a 
likeness :  why  might  there  not  be  some  likeness  between  what  God  does  and 
what  man  invents  ?  But  there  is  one  noticeable  difference :  there  is  nothing 
of  colour  in  the  style  of  the  story.  No  great  rock,  no  valley  of  diamonds, 
no  earthly  grandeur  whatever  is  hinted  at  in  the  poor  bare  tale.  Peter  had  to  do 
with  fishes  every  day  of  his  life  :  an  ordinary  fish,  taken  with  the  hook,  was  here 
the  servant  of  the  Lord — and  why  should  not  the  poor  fish  have  its  share  in  the 
Borvice  of  the  Master?  Why  should  it  not  show  for  itself  an  I  its  kind  that  they 
were  utterly  His  ?  that  along  with  the  waters  in  which  they  dwelt,  and  the  wind 
which  lifteth  up  the  waves  thereof,  they  were  Hia  creatures,  and  gladly  under  His 
dominion?  What  the  scaly  minister  brought  was  no  ring,  no  rich  jewel,  but 
a  simple  piece  of  money,  just  enough,  I  presume,  to  meet  the  demand  of  those 
whom,  although  they  had  no  legal  claim,  our  Lord  would  not  offend  by  a  refusal :  for 
He  never  cared  to  stand  upon  His  rights,  or  treat  that  as  a  principle  which  might  be 
waived  without  loss  of  righteousness.  I  take  for  granted  that  there  was  no  other  way 
at  hand  for  these  poor  men  to  supply  the  sum  required  of  them.  (George  Macdonald.) 
The  payment  of  the  tribute  money : — I.  The  extreme  poverty  of  Christ.  II.  The 
Btrict  integrity  of  Christ,  *'  render  to  all  their  due."  HI.  The  peculiar  relation- 
IHIP  of  Christ,  •'The  Father's  house."     IV.  The  admirable  prodence  of  Christ. 

V.  The  wonderful  kmowi<xi>ok  of  Christ.     YL  The  bounolebs  rowEB  of  Christ 


CHap.  xvm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  889 

(Expository  Outlines.)  Finding  the  tribute  money  : — I.  The  modesty  of  Jesus. 
Bather  than  offend  prejudice  He  would  waive  His  claim — the  children  are  free. 
II.  The  povEBTT  of  Jesus.  III.  The  kesources  of  Jesus.  Though  He  had 
not  the  money,  He  knew  where  it  was.  If  God  dare  trust  His  people  H« 
would  put  them  in  the  way  of  getting  wealth  that  now  lies  waste.  IV.  God 
DOBa  tfOT  often  act  without  human  agenct.  He  uses  the  best  means — Peter 
was  a  fisherman.  V.  He  who  works  fob  Jesus  is  sure  to  get  his  pat. 
"And  give  unto  them  for  thee  and  me."  Peter  in  obeying  Christ  patd  his  own 
taxes.  In  keeping  His  commandments  there  is  great  reward.  (T.  Champnees.) 
The  Divine  resource : — This  is  true  of  everything  that  God  needs.  He  can  help 
Himself  to  what  He  wants  out  of  Satan's  lockers.  Was  not  Saul  of  Tarsus  as 
much  out  of  the  Church's  reach  as  the  piece  of  money  many  fathoms  deep  ?  And 
jet  Christ  put  a  hook  in  Satan's  nostril,  and  brought  Saul  to  make  many  rich  by 
eirculating  among  the  heathen.  It  may  be  that  some  of  us  may  live  to  see  the  work 
of  God  carried  on  by  hands  now  used  to  build  forts  for  Satan  to  occupy.  Was  not 
Luther  the  monk  as  much  hidden  as  the  piece  of  money  ?  And  it  may  be  that 
from  the  Eomish  communion  we  may  get  some  one  who  shall  be  as  effective  aa  he 
was.  (Ibid.)  The  Temple  Tax  :  An  illustration  of  the  Sermon  : — Our  Lord  had 
been  preaching  humility  to  His  disciples ;  now  He  exhibits  it  in  His  own  self- 
humiliation.  He  would  say  in  effect,  "  Were  I  covetous  of  honours  I  should  stand 
on  my  dignity  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  claim  to  be  free  from  servile  obligations ;  but 
I  suffer  my  honours  to  fall  into  abeyance,  and  make  no  demands  for  a  recognition 
which  is  not  voluntarily  conceded."  I.  The  manner  of  payment  was  also  so  contrived 
by  Him  as  to  reinforce  the  lesson.  He  gave  directions  as  the  Lord  of  nature  to 
whom  all  creatures  in  land  or  sea  were  subject.  "  Behold  who  it  is  that  pays  this 
tax  and  that  is  reduced  to  such  straits  ;  it  is  He  who  knoweth  the  paths  of  the  sea." 
II.  The  REASON  which  moved  Him  to  adopt  the  policy  of  submission  to  what  was 
in  itself  an  indignity,  "  Lest  we  should  offend."  How  careful  was  our  Lord  not  to 
offend.  He  did  not  take  offence.  He  did  not  resent  the  demand  for  tax  as  an  insult. 
The  lowly  one  did  not  assume  this  attitude,  but  gave  what  was  asked  without 
complaint.  It  teaches  the  children  of  the  kingdom  not  to  murmur  because  the 
world  does  not  recognize  their  status  and  respect  their  dignity.  They  must  wait  for 
the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  HI.  A  lesson  for  those  who  consider  them- 
selves aggrieved  by  demands  for  "  church  rates  "  and  **  annuity  taxes. "  Let  the 
children  be  free  if  possible,  but  beware  of  imagining  that  it  is  necessary  for  conscience* 
sake  always  to  resist  indignities,  and  to  fight  for  a  freedom  which  mainly  concerns 
the  purse.  It  is  not  a  mark  of  greatness  in  the  kingdom  to  bluster  about  rights. 
The  higher  one  rises  in  spiritual  dignity  the  more  he  can  endure  in  the  way  of 
indignity.  The  humility  of  Jesus  was  thus  shown  in  not  taking,  so  His  love  was 
manifested  by  His  solicitude  to  avoid  giving,  offence.  ••  Lest  we  should  offend." 
How  happy  for  the  Church  and  world  if  this  oonciliatiug  epirit  ruled.  (A.  B% 
Bruc4t  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  xvm. 


Ybb.  1.  WIio  Is  tbe  greatest  In  the  kingdom  of  heaven  Y — The  greatest  in  ttu 
hingdom  of  heaven: — I.  The  occasion  op  this  question.  The  payment  of  the 
tribute  money  (Matt,  xvii.)  They  might  have  learnt  from  hence  humility  and 
obedience  to  princes,  though  tyrants  exacting  that  which  is  not  due ;  and  a  willing- 
ness to  part  with  their  right  rather  than  to  offend.  But  prejudice  makes  Christ's 
humility  an  occasion  of  evil.  Some  of  the  Fathers  were  of  opinion  that  the  disciples, 
when  they  saw  Peter  joined  with  Christ  in  this  action  of  the  tribute,  did  imagine 
that  he  was  preferred  before  them.  The  true  explanation  is  that  "We  trusted  that 
this  had  been  he  "  (Luke  xxiv.  21).  Can  Christ  do  this,  and  thus  submit  Himself? 
Can  He  be  a  king  that  thus  pays  tribute.  This,  instead  of  teaching  the  disciples 
humility,  foments  their  pride.  II.  The  persons  that  move  the  question — "  The 
disciples."  The  disciples  had  been  instructed  that  the  kingdom  of  Clirist  was  not 
of  this  world,  yet  conceit  sb  ut  their  understanding  against  the  truth.  "  Ambition  finds 
a  pillow  to  sleep  on  even  in  the  bosom  of  disciples  themselves."  Satan  makes  snares 
of  our  own  desires.    He  maketh  curious  nets,  entangles  our  fancy,  and  we  straight 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvm 

dream  of  kingdoms.  "  Wlio  shall  be  greatest  ?  "  They  are  not  always  the  worst 
men  that  put  this  qupstion.  1.  And  this  we  need  not  much  marvel  at,  if  we 
consider  the  nature  of  this  vice.  It  is  a  choice  vice,  preserved  hy  the  devil  to  abuse 
the  best ;  this  weed  only  grows  in  a  fat  soil.  Base  natures  seldom  bear  it.  What 
cares  the  covetous  person  for  honour,  who  will  bow  to  dirt?  2.  It  is  a  vice  to 
which  the  world  is  much  beholden,  and  therefore  finds  more  countenance  than  any. 
Ambition  has  been  productive  of  the  world's  chiefest  books  and  deeds.  3.  It  is  a 
vice  which  amongst  many  men  hath  gained  the  reputation  of  virtue.  It  is  the 
kindler  of  industry.  Inferences  : — 1.  Prejudice  kept  the  disciples  so  long  from  the 
true  knowledge  of  the  Messias  who  had  been  so  long  with  them.  Prejudice  puts 
out  the  eye  of  our  judgment.  So  dangerous  was  it  to  the  disciples  that  no 
words  or  miracles  could  root  it  out ;  not  till  the  fiery  tongues  consumed  it 
(Acts  ii.  2,  3).  2.  Since  the  devil  made  use  of  this  error  of  the  disciples,  and 
attempted  them  where  they  were  most  open  to  him,  let  us  as  wise  captains  used  to 
do,  double  our  watch,  and  strengthen  our  weakest  part.  If  the  disciples  leave  all 
and  follow  Christ,  he  will  tempt  them  with  honour.  3.  Let  us  not  seek  the  world 
in  the  Church,  nor  honours  and  prefennents  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Let  us  not  fit 
religion  to  our  carnal  desires,  but  lay  them  down  at  the  foot  of  religion.  Let 
Christianity  swallow  up  the  world  in  victory.  Let  us  clip  the  wing  of  our  ambition, 
and  the  more  beware  of  it  because  it  carries  with  it  the  show  of  virtue.  III.  Thb 
QUESTION  ITSELF.  The  disciples  were  mistaken  in  the  terms  of  their  question,  for 
neither  is  greatness  that  which  they  supposed,  nor  the  kingdom  of  heaven  of  that 
nature  as  to  admit  of  that  greatness  which  their  fancy  had  set  up.  In  this  kingdom 
Lazarus  may  be  ruler  over  Dives.  The  difference  between  this  kingdom  and  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world.  1.  The  subjects  of  this  kingdom  are  unknown  to  any  but 
God  Himself.  2.  Of  this  kingdom  there  is  no  end.  3.  The  seat  of  this  kingdom 
is  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.  4.  Their  laws  are  different.  It  is  a  common  error 
amongst  men  to  judge  of  spiritual  things  by  carnal.  Goodness  is  greatness.  Let 
us  seek  for  honour ;  but  seek  for  it  in  its  own  coasts  ;  let  us  look  up  to  the  highest 
heavens  where  its  seat  is.  (A.  Farindon,  B.D.)  Prejudice  fruitful  of  mistake  : 
— For  all  mistake  is  from  the  eye,  all  error  from  the  mind,  not  from  the  object.  If 
thf-  eye  be  goggle  or  mis-set,  if  the  mind  be  dimmed  with  malice  or  ambition  and 
prejudice,  it  puts  upon  things  what  shape  it  pleaseth,  receiveth  not  the  true  and 
natural  species  they  present,  but  views  them  at  home  in  itself,  as  in  a  false  glass 
(which  renders  them  back  again  as  it  were  by  reflexion),  whif*h  is  most  deceitful. 
This  makes  gods  and  sets  up  idols  in  itself,  and  then  worships  them.  And  this  is 
the  reason  why  Christ  is  so  much  mistaken,  why  the  gospel  of  Christ  receivies  such 
different  entertainment.  Every  man  lays  hold  on  it,  wrests  it  to  his  own  purpose, 
works  it  on  his  own  anvil,  and  shapes  it  t-o  his  own  fancy  and  affection.  {Ibid.) 
Desires  turned  into  snares : — The  craft  of  Satan  is  various,  and  his  wiles  and 
devices  manifold.  He  knows  in  what  breast  to  kindle  lust,  into  which  to  breathe 
ambition.  He  knows  who  n  to  cast  down  with  sorrow,  whom  to  deceive  with  joy, 
whom  to  shake  with  fear,  and  whom  to  mislead  with  admiration.  He  searcheth 
our  affections,  he  fans  and  winnows  our  hearts,  and  makes  that  a  bait  to  catch  us 
withal  which  we  most  love  and  most  look  upon.  "  He  fights,"  as  the  father  speaks, 
'•  with  ourselves  against  ourselves  ;  "  he  makes  snares  of  our  own  desires,  and  binds 
and  fetters  us  up  with  our  own  love.  If  he  overcome  us  with  his  more  gross 
temptations,  he  insults  :  but  if  he  fail  there,  he  then  comes  towards  us  with  those 
temptations  which  are  better  clothed  and  better  spoken.  He  maketh  curious  nets, 
entangles  our  fancy,  and  we  straight  dream  of  kingdoms.  Like  a  wise  captain,  he 
plants  all  his  force  and  artillery  at  that  place  which  is  weakest  and  most  attempt- 
able.  We  see  the  disciples'  hearts  were  here  the  weakest,  and  here  lay  most  open  : 
hither  therefore  the  devil  directs  his  darts,  here  he  placeth  his  engines,  to  make  a 
breach.  So  dangerous  a  vice  is  ambition  ;  and  so  hard  a  thmg  it  is  even  for  good 
men,  for  mortified  persons,  for  the  disciples  of  Christ  to  avoid  itl  (Ibid.) 
Greatness  adds  nothing  to  virtue  : — Nothing  accrues  to  a  good  man  when  he  rises 
and  comes  on  in  the  world  ;  nothing  is  defalked  from  him  when  he  falls  and  decays. 
The  steed  is  not  the  better  for  his  trappings ;  nor  doth  the  instrument  yield  sweeter 
music  for  its  carved  head,  or  for  the  ribbon  which  is  tied  unto  it.  (Ibid.) 
Greatness  adda  nothing  to  comfort : — It  is  but  a  fancy,  and  a  vain  one,  to  think  there 
is  most  ease  aud  most  content  in  worldly  greatness,  or  that  we  sleep  best  when  our 
pillow  is  highest.  Alas  1  when  our  affrighted  thoughts  shall  awake  each  other,  and 
our  conscience  put  forth  her  sting;  when  those  sius  shall  rife  up  against  us,  by 
which  we  have  climbed  to  this  pitch ;  all  the  honour  of  the  world  will  not  give 


CHAP,  xviu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  391 

us  eaae,  {Ihid.)  Ambition  corrected : — I.  A  stkange  inquibt.  1.  They  did  do< 
inquire  about  character,  but  persons.  2.  They  did  not  perceive  the  nature  of  His 
kingdom.  3.  They  thought  of  the  crown  •without  the  cross.  4.  They  set  up  a 
mistalien  claim.  5.  TLey  forgot  the  Saviour's  omniscience.  II.  An  instructivb 
BEPLT.  1.  It  shows  a  danger.  2.  It  teaches  a  necessity.  3.  It  speaks  n  privilege. 
{Congregational  Pulpit.)  The  peerage  of  the  kingdom: — I.  The  question.  It 
showed  ignorance,  pride,  selfishness.  II.  The  answeb.  Learn  :  The  way  of 
entrance.  The  principle  of  recompense,  not  merit ;  not  personal  worth  and 
greatness.  The  acknowledgment  of  unworthiness  even  to  get  in  at  all.  {H.  Bonar, 
D.D.)  The  members  of  ChrisVs  kingdom  : — I.  None  but  the  childhke  are  in  the 
kingdom  at  all.  The  entering  implies  a  "  conversion,"  a  turning  of  the  back  upon 
the  old  course  of  life,  and  setting  the  face  in  the  opposite  direction.  II.  The  most 
childlike  are  the  greatest.  That  which  is  most  admirable  in  a  Christian  man,  and 
the  mark  of  truest  greatness,  is  childlike  humility.  III.  The  childlike  axe  Christ's 
tnsest  representatives  in  the  world.     (Dr.  Culross.) 

Vers.  2-5.  And  Jesus  called  a  little  child  unto  Him. — Christian  humility  :— 
The  question  of  the  disciples  brings  them  very  distinctly  before  us,  and  makes  them 
very  real  to  us,  as  men  like  unto  ourselves.  Nothing  can  be  more  artless,  and  evi- 
dently truthful,  than  their  representation  in  these  Gospels  of  their  own  thoughts  and 
conduct.  How  beautifully  does  Jesus  rebuke  all  this.  -What  a  profound  and  original 
idea  of  greatness  does  this  unfold  1  I.  The  commendation  of  humility.  That 
humility  is  not  set  forth  as  the  sole  condition  of  the  htavenly  estate.  The  Saviour's 
words  do  not  limit  the  entire  range  of  Christian  character  to  this  one  quality.  It 
is  its  secret  fountain.  What  humility  is  not.  1.  Humihty  is  not  a  weak  and 
timid  quality.  It  must  be  distinguished  from  a  grovelhng  spirit.  We  should  think 
something  of  our  humanity,  and  not  cast  it  under  men's  feet.  Servants  to  all ; 
servile  to  none.  2.  It  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  that  morbid  self-abasement 
which  grows  out  of  certain  religious  views.  We  may  well  be  humble  when  we  see 
the  infinite  love  against  which  we  have  sinned.  3.  Genuine  humility  is  not 
incompatible  with  a  consciousness  of  merit ;  for  a  secret  persuasion  of  power 
is  the  spring  of  noble  enterprise.  The  consciousness  of  possessing  something  is 
essential  to  the  sense  of  deficiency  which  makes  us  truly  humble.  1.  Now  see 
how  humility  lies  at  the  base  of  all  true  greatness.  We  instinctively  associate 
humility  with  greatness.  We  always  suspect  ostentation.  2.  The  weakness 
which  pride  covers,  but  does  not  obviate,  in  the  matter  of  dress  and  show.  It 
is  a  great  thing  for  a  man  to  know  and  feel  that  he  is  a  man ;  it  is  a  great  thing 
for  him  to  understand  where  he  is,  and  to  profess  what  he  is.  Humility  is  the 
spring  of  all  intellectual  greatness  ;  also  of  religious.  The  man  who  is  convinced 
that  he  is  perfect,  the  farthest  from  being  perfect.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a 
sinner,"  is  the  spring  of  all  real  acquisition  in  religious  things.  The  child's  humility 
is  unconscious;  man's  humility  is  reached  by  experience.  3.  The  cbild-lika 
relation  in  all  who  in  any  degree  enter  into  the  sphere  of  Christian  faith  and  feeling. 
Christ  would  bring  all  men  to  filial  dependence  upon  God.  There  is  no  humility 
without  love  and  confidence  ;  subjection  to  a  tyrant  is  not  humihty ;  but  the 
reverence  which  I  give  to  a  father.  {E.  H.  Chapin,  D.D.)  Greatness  determined 
by  use,  not  extent : — When  you  take  the  loftiest  standards  in  comparison,  who  is 
filling  a  great  sphere  in  God's  universe  ?  What  king,  what  president,  what  states- 
man, what  man  of  pride  and  renown,  is  filling  a  great  sphere  ?  But  the  moment 
you  come  down  and  take  the  ordinary  earthly  standards,  the  time  test  of  any 
man's  condition  is  the  uses  to  which  he  puts  it— and  to  which  the  Almighty 
Himself  puts  it.  The  uses  of  a  thing  make  it  great,  not  its  extent.  The  uses 
of  the  wayside  spring,  that  refreshes  the  traveller's  march;  or  the  flower  that 
grows  at  the  foot  of  awful  ice-peaks  and  battlemeuted  crags,  unfolding  all  the 
summer  long  its  beautiful  parable  of  Providence  and  love — who  can  limit  the 
usefulness  of  that?  and  who  can  say  that  it  is  nothing,  because  its  sphere  is  little  ? 
(Ibid.)  Humility  the  spring  of  intellectual  greatness : — The  humbler  men  are,  the 
greater  they  are.  What  are  the  proudest  triumphs  of  our  day,  intellectually 
speaking  ?  They  are  in  little  things.  The  great  men  of  our  day  do  not  construct 
cosmologies  ;  do  not  sit  down  and  build  up  great  theories  of  the  universe.  We 
laugh  at  such  things  ;  we  suspect  their  soundness  at  once.  When  a  man  comea  to 
us  and  tells  us  that  he  has  a  new  theory  of  creation,  we  begin  to  think  whether  he 
had  not  better  have  a  theory  of  his  own  sanity.  The  things  which  occupy  »h« 
greatest  minds  of  our  day  are  the  little  sparks  of  electricity,  the  little  wayside  shelly 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ivn* 

the  blossoms,  the  infusorias  myriad-fold  that  hang  in  a  single  drop  of  water  Dowa 
in  the  little  lowly  things  men  find  the  great  secret  of  the  world ;  away  down  they 
begin  to  find  the  spring  and  sources  of  things,  and  the  profoundest  books  of  science 
are  founded  on  these  little  ordinary,  unobserved  affairs.  Humility  is  the  spring  of 
all  intellectual  greatness.  {Ibid.)  The  unconscious  humility  of  a  child  combined 
with  the  experience  of  a  man : — But  we  have — and  let  us  thank  God  that  we  have — 
something  better  than  childhood's  innocence,  if  we  have  lived  truly  and  Christ-like. 
We  have  strength  to  overcome  evil  which  the  child  must  learn;  we  have  a  power  to 
trample  sin  underneath  us  that  the  child  must  undergo  much  to  gain ;  we  have  not 
the  innocence  of  Eden,  but  by  God's  help  and  Christ's  example  we  may  have  the 
victory  of  Gethsemane.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  the  humbleness  of  a  child.  But 
it  is  to  be  joined  with  the  consciousness  and  the  effort  of  the  man,  (Ibid.)  The 
spiritual  worth  of  childhood : — But,  moreover,  there  is  testimony  in  Christianity,  not 
only  for  the  love  of  God  to  the  child,  but  to  the  spiritual  worth  of  the  child.  The 
child  illustrates  the  value  of  the  soal  as  Christ  brings  it  before  us  here.  Now, 
observe,  there  is  no  materialistic  theory  that  would  be  consistent  with  the  way  in 
which  Christ  treats  the  child,  because,  on  the  materialistic  theory,  everything 
grows  upward,  grows  wider  and  better.  But  the  doctrine  of  the  text  is  not  the 
doctrine  of  development ;  we  must  go  back  to  childhood  again ;  we  don't  develop 
humility.  We  may  develop  physical  strength ;  we  may  develop  intellectual 
splendour;  we  may  develop  hnagination  or  reason,  but  we  do  not  develop  humility. 
In  that  the  child  has  the  advantage  of  us.  If  it  were  merely  material,  why  should 
not  the  child  have  less  humility  than  the  man  ?  No ;  we  come  back  to  the  child's 
condition,  in  some  respects ;  and  that  illustrates  the  child's  share  of  our  common 
spiritual  nature.  And  here  is  the  reason  why  we  find  the  element  of  greatness  set 
forth  as  it  is  by  Jesus  Christ.  Greatness  is  in  spiritual  power  ;  it  is  not  an  outward 
attainment  that  the  man  can  attain  and  the  child  can  not.  It  is  not  any  outside 
clothing ;  it  is  not  in  crowns ;  it  is  not  in  the  world's  fame  ;  it  is  a  spiritual  quality, 
and  the  child  has  that  spiritual  quality  which  is  the  condition  of  all  greatness.  {Ibid.) 
The  nature  and  necessity  of  conversion : — I.  The  nature  of  conversion.  A  change 
of  character  (Psa.  li.  13 ;  Acts  xiii.  19 ;  James  v.  20)  implies — 1.  A  change  of  mind. 
2.  A  change  of  heart.  3.  Followed  by  a  change  of  conduct.  Eegulated  by  the 
word  of  God.  II.  The  effect  of  conversion.  Its  subjects  become  as  little  children, 
not,  indeed,  in  every  respect — ignorance,  idleness,  &c.  But,  1.  In  the  affectionate 
dispositions  of  their  hearts  towards  each  other.  2.  In  simplicity  and  sincerity.  3. 
In  humility  and  lowliness  of  mind.  III.  The  necessity  of  conversion.  1.  What 
we  are  to  understand  by  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  The  necessity  of  conversion 
in  order  to  enter  into  this  kingdom.  The  unconverted  have  no  right  to,  and  no 
meetuess  for,  this  kingdom.  Were  it  possible  for  them  to  enter  they  would  still  be 
unhappy.     (R.  Treffrey.)  The  necessity  of  conversion: — I.  The  natuee  of  the 

KINGDOM  OF  Christ,  and  what  is  implied  in  entering  into  it,  1.  The  kingdom  of 
Christ  is,  His  reign  in  and  over  mankind.  It  must  be  considered  in  two  states  and 
periods — (1)  In  a  state  of  imperfection,  warfare,  and  suffering  on  earth,  (2)  In  a 
state  of  perfection,  triumph  and  joy  in  heaven.  2.  We  enter  this  kingriom  by  be- 
coming members  of  Christ's  true  Church — militant,  triumphant,  II.  The  naturk 
of  this  conversion,  or  in  what  sense  we  must  be  converted  and  made  like  little 
children,  in  order  to  our  entering  into  this  kingdom,  1.  It  implies  being  turned 
from  self  to  Christ;  from  the  world,  and  sin,  &c.  2.  It  implies  being  inwardly 
changed,  understanding  enlightened,  <fcc.  3,  Conversion  makes  us  like  little  children 
— sincere,  humble,  Ac.  4.  The  works  of  conversion.  Light  in  the  understanding  ; 
love  to  the  godly ;  obedience  to  all  God's  commands  ;  hatred  to,  and  victory  overall 
known  sin  ;  avoiding  temptation,  cfec.  III.  The  absolute  necessity  of  this  conver- 
sion. Unconverted  persons  are  unfit  for  heaven.  (Joseph Benson.)  Conversion. 
— The  occasion  of  this  remark  was  like  the  manifestation  of  a  desire  for  pre- 
eminence. I.  The  NATURE  of  conversion.  II.  The  evidence  op  it  is  the  dis- 
position OF  A  CHILD,  1.  A  disposition  which  is  the  opposite  of  an  ambitious 
spirit,  2.  A  child  is  confiding.  It  trusts  its  parents.  8,  A  child  is  submissive. 
III.  Why  this  change  is  necessary.  Because  the  disposition  of  a  child  is  the  only 
one  that  agrees  with  our  relation  to  God.     This  will  apply — 1.  To  our  ignorance. 

2.  To  our  weakness.  3.  To  our  guilt  and  pollution.  IV.  JThb  blessedness  of  this 
DISPOSITION.     1.  The  peace  it  gives.     2.  The  security  it  affords.     God  cares  for  us. 

3.  It  places  us  in  our  normal  relation  to  God.  4.  It  secures  our  admission  into  the 
kingdom  of  God,  of  which  Christ  is  the  head  and  centre.  {C.  Hodge,  D.D.) 
This  teaches  ns  all — I.  The  necessity  of  humility  in  order  to  salvation.     II.  That 


CHAP,  xvm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  898 

even  converted  souls  have  need  of  a  daily  conversion.  III.  How  abominable  in  the 
eyes  of  God  ambition  and  pride  are  in  any,  especially  in  ministers  of  the  gospeL 
IV.  That  in  the  Church  the  way  to  be  great  is  to  be  humble.  V.  Tliat  true 
humility  consists  in  a  mean  opinion  of  ourselves,  not  minding  high  things,  not 
being  wise  in  our  own  conceits,  in  honour  preferring  one  another.  (M.  Pool.) 
Conversion: — Let  us  see  what  "  turn  "  is  necessary  before  we  can  be  Christians.  I, 
It  is  evident  that  we  are  all  too  much  men  and  women,  else  it  would  not  have  been 
eaid,  "  Turn  and  be  children."  1.  We  as  men  fancy  ourselves  independent  and 
Belf-sufficient ;  we  must  get  back  to  simplicities,  self-renunciation,  to  a  babyhood  of 
trust.  2.  To  be  a  little  child  is  to  be  in  a  si  ate  to  receive.  Be  a  little  child  in  the 
lowest  form  and  receive  discipline.  3.  This  image  does  not  convey  the  idea  of  a 
perfectly  new  being,  but  of  an  old  being  begun  again,  that  it  may  do  better.  4. 
There  is  another  beautiful  trait  of  childhood,  purity.  {J.  Vaughan,3I.A.)  Con- 
version ;  its  nature,  effects,  and  i?nportance  : — I.  Its  natdee.  II.  The  evidences 
of  conversion.  1.  A  child  is  inquisitive.  2.  Teachable  in  his  disposition.  3. 
A  child  believes  the  testimony  of  his  parents.  III.  Its  necessity.  (J.  WUliams, 
M.A.)  Conversion: — I.  The  temper  that  distinguishes  the  subjects  of  Divine 
GEACE.  *•  As  little  children."  Not  like  them  in  ignorance,  not  in  fickleness,  not 
in  waywardness.  Little  children  are  teachcble  and  ready  of  belief;  are  devoid  of 
malignity  ;  are  characterized  by  humility.  II.  The  way  in  which  we  are  to  attain 
IT.  We  must  be  "converted"  and  "  become  as  little  children."  1.  The  temper 
we  are  required  to  possess  is  not  in  us  naturally,  but  is  the  consequence  of  a  Divine 
change.  2.  The  change  is  to  be  judged  of  by  its  effect.  III.  The  importance  ov 
POSSESSING  this  TEMPER.  "Ye  shall  not  enter,"  <fcc.  This  exclusion — 1.  The  most 
iwful.  2.  The  most  unavoidable.  •' Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 
J.  The  most  universal.  4.  What  a  difference  there  is  between  the  opinion  of  the 
yorld  and  the  judgment  of  God.  (IF.  Jaij.)  I.  Childlikeness  is  the  test  of 
aREATNEBs  IN  THE  KINGDOM  OP  UEAVEN.  ResemblHnce  to  children,  not  in  ignorance 
sr  in  fickleness,  but— 1.  In  a  teachable  spirit  (Acts  ix.  6 ;  x.  33 ;  xvi.  30).  2.  In  a 
oonscioueuess  of  weakness  (2  Cor.  xii.  9;  Phil.  iv.  13).  3.  In  a  dependent  spirit 
{Matt.  vi.  31 ;  Phil.  iv.  18,  19).  4.  In  freedom  from  ambition  (Kom.  xii.  16).  5. 
In  a  forgiviog  temper  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20 ;  Eph.  iv.  32).  II.  The  degree  op  child- 
likeness  IS  the  measure  of  greatness.  1.  Because  it  raises  its  possessor  in  the 
scale  of  our  excellence.  2.  Because  it  qualifies  its  possessor  for  higher  usefulness. 
8.  Because  it  assimilates  its  possessor  more  nearly  to  the  Redeemer.  4.  Because  it 
secures  for  its  possessor  a  more  exalted  position  in  the  heavenly  world.  (1)  The 
necessity  of  conversion.  (2)  The  beauty  of  humility.  (3)  The  attraction  of 
heaven.  (VarioiLs.)  Humility : — 1.  Some  are  naturally  more  humble  than  others ; 
there  is  a  natural  humility.  2.  Still  lower  than  this,  there  is  a  humility  of  word, 
love,  and  manner,  which  is  a  mere  worldly  ornament  to  be  put  off  and  on.  How 
shall  we  cultivate  humility?  1.  Be  sure  that  you  are  loved.  We  are  all  inclined 
to  be  proud  to  those  whom  we  think  do  not  like  us.  2.  Realize  yourself  the  object 
of  great  mercy.  3.  Seek  to  be  reverent  in  worship,  for  if  humble  before  God,  you 
will  be  before  men,  4.  Always  try  to  re-live  the  life  of  chihlhood,  to  think  and  feel 
as  when  you  were  a  child.  5.  Deal  often  with  your  real  self  in  some  of  the  hum- 
bling parts  of  your  history.  6.  Exercise  inward  disciphne  to  meet  the  first  buddings 
of  pride.  7.  Do  acts  of  humility.  8.  God  always  empties  before  He  fills;  He 
will  humble  before  He  will  use  a  person.  2.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  much 
intercourse  with  little  children.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  A  lesson  of  humility: — 
The  question  of  the  disciples  reveals  the  appearance  and  the  nature  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  To  these  disciples  it  was  the  most  natural  question  in  the  world.  I. 
The  ambition  to  be  greatest  is  a  vert  coMMO^J  weakness  IN  ODB  nature.  But 
there  are  very  many  considerations  which  wonderfully  qualify  this  desire  to  bo  first. 
1.  It  is  a  thing  of  great  responsibiUty.  2.  You  may  be  first  and  be  very  miserable.  8. 
It  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  II.  How  oub  Lord 
TAUGHT  THE  LESSON  OP  HUMILITY  TO  His  DISCIPLES.  He  not  Only  spoke  about  it 
to  them,  but  He  showed  it  to  them.  What  is  the  ground  of  comparison  between 
that  beautiful  boy  and  a  true  disciple — a  disciple  in  the  right  spirit  ?  1.  The  per- 
fect non-resistance  of  a  child.  Christ  called  the  child,  and  the  child  came,  &o. 
There  was  no  resistance.  The  very  reverse  of  tbis  was  the  case  with  the  disciples. 
Give  instances.  They  did  not,  like  the  little  child,  yield  and  come  the  moment  the 
Master  called.  They  resisted  the  Spirit  of  Christ ;  the  darknei-s  in  them  opposed 
the  light  that  came  from  Him.  There  is  very  much  in  the  best  of  us  that  resists 
Christ.    2.  Perfect  trust  and  the  absence  of  all  fear.    It  was  so  with  this  child.  To 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  mn 

be  a  Christian  is  to  trust  Christ  perfectly,  and  to  cast  all  fear  to  the  wind.  In  oni 
darkness  and  ignorance,  &c.  In  our  sin  and  weakness.  In  our  trials  and  peiplexi- 
ties.  And  when  death  comes.  3.  Humility.  Observe  what  Christian  humility  ia 
— Coming  when  Christ  calls,  &c.,  without  endeavouring  to  appear  to  be  anything 
that  we  are  not.  Conclusion.  The  dignity  and  glory  of  true  humility.  (Thovias 
Jones.)  The  nature  of  hvmiUty  : — It  is  not  at  all  the  thing  that  people  suppose 
it  to  be.  Take  Christ's  exposition  of  it.  The  child  humbles  hims:elf.  How  did 
the  child  humble  himself  ?  He  'came  when  Christ  called,  he  suffered  himself  to  be 
embraced,  and  he  stood  where  Christ  put  him,  vvitliDut  pretending  to  be  anything 
more  than  he  was,  an  honest,  fine,  healthy-looking  boy.  Christ  calls  that  humility- 
People  think  that  going  and  moping  about  the  world  and  saying,  "  I  am  very  im- 
perfect," is  humility.  Protect  me  from  such  humility.  Some  of  the  proudest 
creatures  I  ever  met  in  the  world  were  the  most  humble,  if  that  be  humility — people 
who  complained  about  themselves  ;  but  if  you  were  ever  to  say  to  them,  "  Yes,  sir," 
or  "  Yes,  madam,  I  know  you  really  are  bad,"  they  would  turn  round  and  say,  *'  Who 
told  you  so  ?  What  do  you  know  about  me  ?  "  That  is  not  Christian  humility. 
Humility  is  that  of  the  boy  coming  when  Christ  called,  suffering  himself  to  be 
embraced,  standing  there  as  long  us  Christ  wanted  him  to  stand,  without  endeavour- 
ing to  appear  to  be  anything  that  he  was  not.  That  is  Christian  humility.  There 
is  a  real  charm  in  this  child,  if  you  will  only  think  of  it,  in  his  unconsciousness. 
He  never  thought  he  was  doing  anything  praiseworthy  ;  it  never  entered  into  his 
little  head  that  there  was  anything  beautiful  in  his  little  actions.  That  is  the 
essence  of  the  thing.  He  came  quickly  when  the  Master  called,  he  looked  happy 
in  Hie  arms,  he  stood  where  Christ  put  him,  and  he  never  thought  for  one  moment 
that  there  was  any  praise  due  to  him  for  that.  He  was  moved  to  confidence  ;  the 
instincts  of  the  boy  were  moved  by  the  tenderness  of  Cijrist's  voice  and  the  ex- 
pression of  His  face.  The  little  man  went  under  his  natural  instincts  and  never 
thought  for  a  moment  that  there  was  any  virtue  or  beauty  in  his  actions.  What 
is  that  ?  That  is  Christian  humility — to  yield  ourselves  to  Christ,  to  serve  Him,  to 
serve  our  brothers  and  our  sisters,  going  about  doing  good,  beautiful  as  lamps  in 
the  darkness,  sweet  and  fragrant  as  the  breeze  from  the  south.  Go  and  do  this, 
live  this  beautiful  life,  yet  never  showmg  that  we  are  conscious  of  its  beauty,  never 
letting  it  escape  the  lip  that  we  know  we  are  doing  anything  grand.  Wuat  is  the 
most  beautiful  thing  in  the  world  ?  A  man  or  a  woman  living  a  high  Christian  life 
without  ever  letting  it  escape  the  lip  or  the  expieisioc  that  they  consider  there  ia 
anything  beautiful  or  grand  in  it.  It  is  the  unconsciousness  of  the  child  that  con- 
stitutes the  highest  climax  of  the  Christian  life.  To  be  great,  to  be  greatest  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  excel  in  that  direction.  I  have  looked  lately  at  some  large 
fruit  trees  covered  with  fruit ;  and  a  rich  fruit  tree  is  a  very  beautiful  object ;  it  has 
a  massive  trunk  and  far-stretching  boughs ;  the  foliage  is  rich,  the  dew  of  the 
morning  is  wet  upon  its  leaves,  and  the  sun  plays  in  the  little  crystal  drops,  and 
the  branches  bending  under  their  fruit  barely  move  in  the  very  gentle  movement  of 
the  wind.  There  are  very  few  things  in  nature  more  beautiful  than  a  tree  like  that, 
and  a  man  of  sensibility,  a  man  with  a  right  state  of  heart,  looking  upon  such  a 
thing  cannot  but  admire  it.  But  if  (which  of  course  it  is  folly  to  suppose)  that  tree 
for  one  moment  could  be  self-conscious,  if  it  had  the  power  of  speech  for  one  instant 
and  let  out  the  secret  that  it  thought  itself  very  beautiful,  it  would  be  a  different 
thing  to  us  the  moment  it  had  spoken.  It  is  the  unconsciousness,  the  absence  of  the 
knowledge  of  self,  that  is  one  charm  of  the  vegetable  world.  So  in  character.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  be  this,  my  brethren  ;  it  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  stand  here  Sunday  after 
Sunday  and  speak  to  you  without  reveaUng  some  little  bit  of  vanity,  somehttle  bit  of 
self-consciousnets ;  but  if  I  have  not  got  it  I  cannot  show  it.  Two  great  preachers  in 
Wales  met  at  a  public  meeting.  It  was  usual  then,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  as  it  is  now, 
for  men  of  different  denominations  to  justify  their  appearing  before  each  other.  One 
of  them  was  a  very  eloquent  man,  one  of  the  greatest  preachers  in  the  Principality, 
and  he  said  he  had  left  his  party  zeal  at  home  before  he  started.  Another  as  great 
as  he  got  up  and  said,  "  Well,  I  thank  God  I  had  none  to  leave,  and  I  came  here 
just  as  I  was  at  home."  Let  a  man  be  free  from  vanity  and  self-consciousness,  and 
it  will  not  appear.  This  is  Christian  humility  as  taught  by  the  Saviour.  (Ibid.) 
The  desire  to  be  great  natural  : — Now  this  ambition  to  be  the  greatest  is  a  very 
common  weakness  in  our  nature, — to  be  great,  to  be  first,  to  be  the  greatest  any- 
where, however  small  the  little  kingdom  may  be,  to  be  the  first  minister  in  the 
kingdom,  or,  if  you  can,  to  be  the  king  of  the  little  kingdom.  Better  reign 
anywhere  than  serve  in  high  positions.     To  have  power,  to  see  our  own  thought! 


CHAP.  XTin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  395 

carried  out,  to  make  men,  and  things,  and  circumstances,  do  as  we  like, — it  is  very 
delightful,  exceedingly  fascinating,  and  it  has  a  great  charm  for  our  minds.  I 
believe  somewhat  of  it  is  natural,  and  I  do  not  think  it  is  altogether  sinful.  The 
natural  is  not  sinful.  Whatever  God  has  put  in  us  is  right.  A  lad  has  line  powers, 
and  God  has  put  ambition  into  the  lad  to  use  his  powers,  so  that  if  he  is  at  school 
he  desires  to  take  the  first  place.  Do  not  blame  him ;  it  is  quite  natural ;  tha 
ambition  is  in  him.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  1  must  say  what  is  true  about  this. 
There  are  very  many  considerations  which  wonderfully  qualify  this  desire  to  be  first. 
{Ibid.)  The  responsibility  of  greatness  overlooked  : — To  be  first  in  the  world  is  a 
thing  of  great  responsibility.  To  be  first  is  veiy  pleasant.  Yes,  but  it  has  a  burden 
of  responsibility.  To  be  the  first  poet — the  fierce  rays  of  criticism  beat  upon 
yon  ;  to  be  the  first  preacher,  the  first  minister — it  is  a  most  solemn  responsibility. 
Nothing  is  expected  of  a  dehcate  flower  but  that  it  should  be  beautiful  and  just  give 
a  little  fragrance.  Everybody  is  satisfied  with  the  flower  if  it  will  do  these  two 
things.  But  a  large  tree  upon  which  nature  has  expended  years  of  time  and  care, 
and  made  the  trunk  massive,  and  the  boughs  wide,  and  the  foliage  thick  and  rich, 
a  tree  that  nature  has  taken  years  of  trouble  with,  much  is  expected  from  that. 
Oh,  delicate  flower,  if  thou  art  beautiful  and  hast  a  little  fragrance  nobody  will 
blame  thee ;  but  oh,  great,  massive  tree,  everybody  will  blame  thee,  and  thy  foliage, 
and  thy  massiveness,  except  thou  bringest  forth  much  fruit.  Like  the  delicate 
flower  is  the  man  with  one  talent,  the  humble  Christian  man,  doing  his  duty, 
walking  humbly  with  God.  I  think  myself  that  is  the  finest  life  in  the  whola 
world,  incomparably  the  most  blessed  life  in  the  world — not  to  be  rich,  not  to  ba 
very  poor,  to  have  a  little  home  of  your  own,  surrounded  by  those  you  love  and  by 
whom  you  are  loved,  unobserved  by  the  world  around,  like  the  delicate  flower,  just 
being  beautiful  and  giving  forth  fragrance.  The  world  never  criticises  you,  never 
says  anything  about  you ;  you  pass  on  doing  your  duty,  you  lay  your  throbbing 
head  down  in  death,  you  shall  rest  and  go  home  and  be  with  God,  and  the  report 
of  your  doings  shall  be  read  in  another  world  than  this.  The  responsibiUty  of  being 
first  is  very  great,  and  the  criticism  upon  those  who  are  first  is  very  fierce.  Plant 
the  sapling  in  the  valley,  it  shall  have  shelter, — put  the  same  sapling  on  tha 
monntain  top,  and  the  fury  of  every  element  shall  be  expended  upon  it.  There  are 
men  in  England,  authors,  statesmen,  and  preachers,  upon  whom  every  element, 
good,  bad,  and  indifferent,  at  the  command  of  criticism  comes  in  all  its  fury, 
expending  its  strength  upon  them.  I  would  not  be  one  of  them  for  any  earthly 
consideration.  I  would  not  be  first  in  England  for  the  possession  of  a  nobleman's 
estate.  To  be  in  such  a  position,  especially  as  Tennyson  says,  *•  in  the  fierce  light 
of  the  throne,"  is  to  be  in  a  position  of  solemn  responsibility.  My  friend,  if  God 
has  not  called  you  to  be  very  prominent  you  have  reason  to  thank  God  that  He  has 
consented  you  should  live  a  quiet,  reverent,  honest,  generous.  Christian  life, 
nncriticised,  nnpraised,  and  imabusei  {Ibid.)  Child-like  non-resistance  : — There 
is  very  luuch  in  the  best  of  us  that  resists  Christ  We  are  not  like  that  little  child. 
Christ  calls  (it  is  all  the  better  for  you  if  I  am  not  speaking  truth),  bat  there  is  no 
answer  ;  Christ  commands,  but  we  do  not  obey ;  Christ  stands  at  the  door,  and  we 
do  not  open;  He  has  been  there  long.  He  is  there  now,  and  will  be  there  to-morrow, 
and  many  of  you  keep  Him  out.  The  comparison  in  the  Bible  to  express  this  want 
of  child-likeness,  this  want  of  non-resistance,  is  a  rock.  The  rain  comes,  the  rock 
is  not  softened ;  the  winds  blow,  the  rock  makes  no  response ;  the  sun  shines,  the 
rock  is  not  made  fertile ;  summer  comes,  autumn  comes,  winter  comes,  spring 
comes — spring,  summer,  autumn,  winter  find  and  leave  the  rock  the  same  cold, 
hard,  insensate  thing  as  it  ever  was.  I  do  not  know  you,  but  I  am  describing 
exactly  the  state  of  many  hearts  even  in  the  Church  of  God.  The  gospel  comes 
like  rain  showers  upon  the  rock,  but  it  has  not  softened  you  ;  brtezes  from  tha 
eternal  mountains  blow  upon  you — they  are  not  vivifying ;  God's  eternal  love  shines 
upon  you — it  has  not  changed  you  ;  life  with  its  wonderful  lessons  comes — you 
grow  very  little  better.  Do  you  not  know  men  in  the  circle  of  your  acquaintance 
who  are  not  at  all  better  than  they  were  ten  years  ago  ?  Success  came — they  were 
no  better  ;  disappointment  came ;  the  marriage  morning  came,  they  were  the  same ; 
the  funeral  day — they  were  the  same.  All  the  elements  of  the  gospel,  all  tha 
influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  all  the  wonderful  events  of  life,  all  its  friendships,  all 
its  love,  left  them  where  they  were.  They  resist  God,  they  resist  His  influences. 
Brethren,  I  ought  to  be  a  better  man,  having  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  many  of  yoa 
for  many  years ;  I  should  be  unworthy  of  that  friendship,  if  I  were  not  wiser  and 
better,  and  more  humble  and  more  reverent.    Tou  ought,  as  day  after  day  carries 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rvut 

you  nearer  to  eternity,  to  resist  God  less.  Oh,  my  friends,  be  as  little  children  } 
lean  to  Clirist,  resist  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  mission  and 
ministry  of  infants  in  the  family  and  in  the  world  : — I.  Some  of  the  doctbinai. 
lessons  taught  us  by  the  mission  of  infants.  1.  By  man's  original  trangression 
temporal  death  ensued  to  infants  as  a  part  o£  the  race.  2.  Universal  atonement, 
3.  Their  immortality.  4.  Their  resurrection.  II.  Some  of  the  practical  lessons. 
1.  The  duty  of  parental  watchfulness  and  tender  care  over  the  helplessness  ol 
infancy.  2.  The  duty  of  self-sacrifice  is  taught  by  the  mission  of  infants.  3.  The 
solemn  responsibility  of  a  most  important  trust.  4.  The  duty  of  resignation  to 
the  work  of  God,  in  the  dispensations  of  His  Providence.  5.  The  ministry  ol 
infants  in  the  family  is  intended  to  teach  patience.  6.  It  teaches  the  highest 
Christian  virtues,  such  as  innocency,  dependence.  7.  God's  providential  care  over 
childhood.  8.  That  the  path  of  true  greatness  lies  through  the  vale  of  humility. 
(J.  E.  Edwards,  D.D.)  God's  care  of  little  children: — A  poor  little  boy  was 

found  standing  in  the  streets  by  a  kind-hearted  man.  The  child  was  lean  and 
thinly  clad,  bearing  the  marks  of  hunger  and  poverty.  "  What  are  you  doing  here  ?" 
inquired  the  man.  The  boy  replied  :  *'  I  am  waitin;:r  for  God  to  come."  "  What  do 
you  mean  ?"  inquired  the  man,  touched  by  the  novelty  of  his  reply.  The  poor  little 
boy  responded  :  "  Mother  and  father,  and  my  Uttle  brother  died,  and  my  mother 
said  God  would  come  and  take  care  of  me.  Won't  He  come  ?  "  "  Yes,"  replied  the 
man,  "  I  have  come."  "  Mother  never  told  me  a  lie,"  said  the  little  boy ;  '•  I  knew 
you  would  come ;  but  you  have  been  so  long  on  the  way."  Childhood  educate$ 
man  on  the  best  side  of  his  nature : — It  is  probable  that  every  one  of  the  traits  of 
higher  manhood  in  adults  springs  from  the  drill  and  the  training  which  little  children 
require  and  inspire.  I  doubt  whether  preceptual  teaching  could  ever  have  brought 
into  this  world  any  considerable  degree  of  disinterested  affection.  I  doubt  if  self- 
denial  and  heroism  in  that  direction  could  ever  have  been  propagated  in  this  world 
as  a  matter  of  duty.  Conscience  never  brings  forth  love.  Intellectual  reasoning 
never  produces  rich  and  warm  caresses.  It  is  the  economy  of  God's  providence  to 
set  men  and  women  together  in  the  household,  and  give  them  little  children,  and 
draw  them  toward  these  little  children  by  the  mstinct  of  love  (instinct  in  the  early 
day,  and  companionable  love  in  a  later  day),  and  out  of  this  love  to  develope  all  the 
character,  forethought,  and  industry  which  are  necessary  for  the  good  of  these 
children.  There  are  men  who  are  very  selfish  toward  their  neighbours,  very  selfish 
in  their  business,  very  selfish  in  their  pleasures ;  there  are  men  who,  as  citizens, 
are  not  true  to  the  laws  under  which  they  live,  not  true  to  commonwealth,  but  who, 
if  you  go  into  their  households,  and  see  how  they  deal  with  their  children,  seem  to 
have  an  entirely  different  nature.  They  lay  aside  their  selfishness.  The  pride  and 
greediness  which  characterize  them  out-of-doors  are  gone  when  they  are  indoors. 
Indeed,  the  faults  which  they  exhibit  outside  are  often  faults  which  they  take  on 
for  the  sake  of  being  able  to  take  care  of  the  little  children  that  are  inside.  (II.  W. 
Beecher.)  Christ  in  a  child : — There  is  an  old  story,  a  kind  of  Sunday  fairy  tale, 
which  you  may  sometimes  have  seen  represented  in  pictures  and  statues  in  ancient 
churches,  of  a  great  heathen  giant  who  wished  to  find  out  some  master  that  he 
should  think  worthy  of  his  services — some  one  stronger  than  himself.  He  went 
about  the  world,  but  could  find  no  one  stronger.  And,  besides  this,  he  was  anxioua 
to  pray  to  God,  but  did  not  know  how  to  do  it.  At  last  he  met  with  a  good  old  man  by 
the  side  of  a  deep  river,  where  poor  wayfaring  people  wanted  to  get  across  and  had 
no  one  to  help  them.  And  the  good  old  man  said  to  the  giant,  "  Here  is  s  plao« 
where  you  can  be  of  some  use,  and  if  you  do  not  know  how  to  pray,  you  will,  at  any 
rate,  know  how  to  work,  and  perhaps  God  will  give  you  what  you  ask,  and  perhapi 
also  you  will  at  last  find  a  master  stronger  than  you."  So  the  giant  went  and  sat 
by  the  river-side,  and  many  a  time  he  carried  poor  wayfarers  across.  One  night  he 
heard  a  little  child  crying  to  be  carried  over  ;  so  he  put  thechiM  on  his  shoulder  and 
strode  across  the  sticam.  Presently  the  wind  blew,  the  rain  fell,  and  as  the  river 
beat  against  his  knees,  he  felt  the  weight  of  the  little  child  almost  more  than  he 
could  bear,  and  he  looked  up  with  his  great  patient  eyes,  and  he  saw  that  it  was  a 
child  glorious  and  shining,  and  the  child  said,  "  Thou  art  labouring  under  thii 
heavy  burden  because  thou  art  carrying  one  who  bears  the  sins  of  all  the  world." 
And  then,  as  the  story  goes  on,  the  giant  felt  that  it  was  the  child  Jesus,  and  when 
he  reached  the  other  side  of  the  river,  he  fell  down  before  Him.  Now  he  had  found 
some  one  stronger  than  he  was,  some  one  so  good,  so  worthy  of  loving,  as  to  be  a 
master  whom  he  could  serve.  (Dean  Staiilcy.)  Nature  of  conversion  .-—Convert- 
ing grace  makes  persons  become  like  little  children ;  both  like  tbose  iust  born,  and 


CHAP,  xvni.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  Ml 

those  who  are  a  little  grown.  I.  Converts  resemble  littlb  CHrLDBEN  nbwlt 
BORN.  1.  Children  enter  the  world  with  much  difficulty  and  hazard.  So  God's 
children  have  a  difficult  entrance  into  a  state  of  grace.  2.  An  infant  has  always  a 
principle  of  Ufe  and  motion  ;  so  converts  have  a  principle  of  spiritual  life  infused  into 
their  souls.  8.  The  child  bears  the  image  of  the  father ;  so  converts  bear  a  likeness 
to  God  ;  they  have  His  image.  4.  A  child  comes  weeping  into  the  world  ;  so  God's 
children  are  crying  children.  6.  There  is  a  natural  instinct  in  children,  as  soon  as 
bom,  to  seek  the  mother's  breast ;  so  a  gracious  soul,  when  newly  converted, 
desires  •  •  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  he  may  grow  thereby."  6.  Converts 
resemble  little  children  in  their  weakness  and  dependence.  7.  There  is  a  resem- 
blance between  little  children  and  converts  in  their  harmlessness.  II.  Converts 
BEPRESENT  CHILDREN  A  LITTLE  GROWN.  1.  In  their  guilelcss  dispositiou.  Little 
children  are  generally  plain  and  downright,  what  they  seem  to  be,  and  do  not  dis- 
semble. 2.  They  are  of  a  gall-less  disposition  ;  they  may  be  angry,  but  bear  no 
maUce.  3.  They  are  submissive  to  correction.  4.  They  are  full  of  jealousies  and 
fears.  5.  They  are  very  affectionate.  6.  They  are  very  inquisitive.  7.  They  are 
generally  tractable.  8.  They  do  all  for  their  parents,  and  acknowledge  them  in  all 
they  have  ;  so  the  child  of  God  does  nothing  for  himself  but  for  God's  glory.  9. 
Converts  resemble  little  children  in  their  growth.  10.  They  are  mostly  of  an 
humble  and  condescending  disposition.  Application — (1)  If  converting  grace 
makes  persons  become  like  little  children,  then  conversion  is  no  half  work  ;  (2)  If 
true  conversion  makes  men  become  like  little  children,  then  there  is  reason  to  fear 
few  people  go  to  heaven.  {Oliver  Heywood.)  Marks  of  a  true  conversion  : — I. 
What  are  we  to  understand  by  our  Lord's  saying?  The  words  imply — 1.  That 
before  you  or  I  can  have  any  well-grounded,  scriptural  hope,  of  being  happy  in  a 
future  state,  there  must  be  some  great,  some  notable  and  amazing  change  pass  upon 
our  souls.  2.  That  Uttle  children  are  not  perfectly  innocent,  but  in  a  comparative  and 
rational  sense.  3.  That,  as  to  ambition  and  lust  after  the  world,  we  must  in  this 
sense  become  as  little  children  ;  we  must  be  as  loose  to  the  world,  comparatively 
epeaking,  as  a  little  child.  4.  That  we  must  be  sensible  of  our  weakness,  as  a  little 
child.  5.  That,  as  little  children  look  upon  themselves  to  be  ignorant  creatures,  so 
those  that  are  converted,  do  look  upon  themselves  as  ignorant  too.  6.  That,  as  a  little 
child  is  looked  upon  as  a  harmless  creature,  and  generally  speaks  true,  so,  if  we  are 
converted,  we  shall  be  guileless  as  well  as  harmless.  (George  Wkitefield,)  Humility 
aids  spiritual  vision  : — He  that  is  in  the  low  pits  and  caves  of  the  earth,  sees  the 
stars  in  the  firmament,  when  they  who  are  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains  discern  them 
Dot.  He  that  is  most  humble,  sees  most  of  heaven,  and  shall  have  most  of  it ; 
for  the  lower  the  ebb,  the  higher  the  tide  ;  and  the  lower  the  foundation  of  virtue 
is  laid,  the  higher  shall  the  roof  of  glory  be  over-laid.    (John  Trapp.) 

Yer.  6. — But  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little  ones. — The  claims  of  the  young 
upon  the  Chvrch : — 1.  In  presenting  these  claims  I  would  remind  you  of  the  peculiar 
tenderness  which  our  Lord  Himself  manifested  in  relation  to  children.  2.  I  would 
urge  the  claims  of  the  children  upon  the  care  of  the  Church  by  reminding  yon  of 
their  peculiar  susceptibility  to  influence,  whether  for  good  or  for  evil.  3.  Their 
alaims  are  strong  when  we  remember  that  upon  them  the  Church  depends  for  its 
Suture  workers.  4.  They  will  not  always  remain  "  little  ones."  (F.  Wagttaff. ) 
The  crime  of  degrading  men : — I.  Parents  are  frequently  the  cause  of  many  of  the 
laults  which  grow  into  great  depravities  in  their  children.  II.  Our  pride  and  in- 
eonsideration  may,  and  often  do,  result  in  a  train  of  evils  to  the  character  of  oar 
servants,  of  our  clerks,  and  of  the  working  men  that  are  under  our  care.  III.  By 
the  inconsiderate  use  of  our  Uberty  we  are  in  danger  of  causing  men  to  oSend,  and 
of  essentially  damaging  human  nature.  IV.  Men  deteriorate  their  fellow-men, 
and  weaken  society,  by  such  conduct  as  puts  meu  iu  their  commercial  intercourse 
into  very  tempting  relations  to  each  other.  V.  Avarice — and  that,  too,  in  its  most 
Ignoble  forms — is  continually  tempting  so-called  good  men  to  the  injury  of  their 
fellow-men.  VI.  Great  damage  is  done  by  men  professing  godliness,  as  well  as 
men  professing  honesty,  though  not  avowedly  Christian,  by  the  iujustioe  which 
lurks,  and  is  almost  inherent,  in  their  vanity.    (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Yet.  7. — Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  offences. — Christian  Influence : — Some 
sinners  defend  themselves  by  saying  that  if  they  had  not  tempted  their  comrades 
to  evil,  some  one  else  would.  If  your  action  made  no  difference  in  the  man's  olti- 
jnate  course,  it  is  not  excused.    It  may  be  true;  hat  the  temptation  would  baT« 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvto, 

oome  without  you  ;  it  by  no  means  follows  that  it  would  have  been  equally  powerful 
if  you  had  not  put  it  in  the  way ;  your  example  may  have  given  it  special  force. 
How  often  is  this  so  between  friends  and  near  kindred  I  Obedience  to  God  extends 
to  the  temptation  that  is  likely  to  lead  to  sin.  The  eye,  the  hand,  must  be  plucked 
out,  cut  off,  if  it  proved  a  temptation  too  strong  for  the  man's  resistance.  If  the 
temptation  is  clearly  too  much  for  you,  you  are  bound  to  put  yourself  in  such  a 
position  that  it  shall  not  be  able  to  reach  you.  But  our  Lord  not  only  requires  a 
man  to  deal  thug  with  himself,  but  also  with  his  neighbour.  We  are  not  allowed 
to  suppose  that  our  brother's  conduct  is  indifferent  to  us.  We  are  to  have  regard 
to  the  effect  of  our  conduct  upon  others.  Let  us  consider  the  form  which  thi» 
teaching  takes  in  some  of  the  ordinary  relations  of  Ufe.  I.  Look  at  life  in  our  own 
HOMES.  The  doctrine  that  each  must  look  only  to  himself  would  not  be  admitted 
here.  We  are  ready  to  interfere  with  what  affects  our  comfort ;  are  we  as  ready 
with  loving  care  to  remove  stumbling-blocks.  It  is  easy  to  expose  selfishness,  but 
not  so  easy  to  be  perpetually  setting  an  example  of  sacrifice.  II.  The  relationship 
or  MASTKB  AND  SEBVANT  is  peculiarly  one  which  calls  for  the  constant  care  for  one 
another.  How  many  temptations  can  we  remove  from  the  path  of  servants  if  we 
give  our  thoughts  to  it.  Living  in  a  household,  servants  imbibe  the  principle  of 
their  masters.  What  a  power  for  removing  temptation  from  a  child  does  every 
servant  possess.  HI.  Look  at  society  and  see  how  the  rule  applies  there.  In  a 
Christian  country  society  should  have  regard  for  the  weaknesses  of  humanity ;  to 
mould  the  customs  of  society  so  as  to  put  as  few  temptations  as  possible  in  the  way 
of  these  weaknesses.  True,  the  demand  for  this  is  not  so  strong  here  as  in  our  own 
homes  ;  but  it  is  easier  to  recognize.  In  the  home  you  deal  vrith  individuals, 
peculiarity  and  diversity  of  temperament,  and  it  may  be  hard  to  recognize  what  ia 
a  temptation,  and  what  the  best  way  of  removing  it ;  but  in  regard  to  society  we 
have  no  such  diCiculties ;  here  we  have  to  deal  with  the  effects  of  temptation  oa 
thousands,  and  this  does  not  admit  of  much  doubt.  Every  member  of  society  itf 
responsible  for  his  share  in  customs  which  create  temptation.  IV.  Consider  thin 
rule  as  applied  to  legislation.  No  act  of  legislation  ought  to  pass  without  con- 
sideration as  to  its  moral  effects,  its  likelihood  to  increase  or  diminish  the  temp- 
tations of  the  people.  It  is  often  urged  that  man  gains  strength  by  conflict  witl^ 
temptation,  and  that  the  removal  of  temptation  is  a  weakness.  This  not  th« 
entire  truth  :  the  removal  of  temptation  is  often  the  only  thing  which  gives  the  sou* 
time  to  gather  the  forces  of  grace  to  triumph,  [BisJiop  Temple.)  Offences: — 
I.  Let  us  inquire  why  it  must  needs  be  that  offences  come.  1.  Not  from  any 
fault  in  the  gospel  of  the  Eedeemer.  2.  Not  that  God  necessitates  men  to  lay  before 
others  these  hindrances  in  the  path  to  heaven,  and  encouragements  to  sin.  8.  Why 
then  ?  "  Light  has  come  into  the  world,  and  men  love  darkness,"  &o.  He  does  not 
interpose  by  omnipotent  force.  II.  Let  ub  examine  what  abe  the  chief  offence* 
against  which  we  should  guard  ?  1.  False  sentiments  in  religion,  and  doctrmec 
inconsistent  with  the  Word  of  God  often  prove  an  offence  and  tend  to  lead  othert 
away  from  felicity.  2.  The  influence  of  unholy  examples.  3.  Persecution.  4.  Thf 
unsuitable  walk  of  professing  Christians.  III.  Illustrate  the  propriety  of  th» 
DOUBLE  WOE  PRONOUNCED  BY  ouB  LoBD.  1.  Woe  to  the  world  because  of  offenceBf 
for  many  will  be  seduced  by  them.  2.  Woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offeuc* 
Cometh.  (1)  Because  he  frustrates  as  far  as  in  his  power  the  design  which  ChrisI 
had  in  coming  into  the  world.  (2)  Because  he  renders  himself  guilty  of  all  the 
crimes  he  has  led  others  to  commit.  (3)  Because  the  reparation  of  those  evils  it 
morally  impossible.  (H.  Kollock,  D.D.)  Offences  inevitable  and  evil : — A  cautio» 
this,  as  Jerome  has  well  observed,  "particularly  necessary  for  the  disciples  at  this  tim« 
striving  for  superiority ;  for  if  they  had  continued  in  tbat  spirit,  they  would  havt 
turned  out  of  the  way  those  they  had  gained  to  the  faith."  Let  us  inquire — I, 
What  we  are  to  understand  herb  by  "offences."  Stumbling-blocks  in  the  waj 
that  leads  to  heaven.  Figurative  expression  (Rom.  xiv.  13,  21) :  offences  may  b« 
taken  when  they  are  not  givtn.  Oliences  may  be  given  when  they  are  not  taken. 
StumbUng-blocks  aie  of  three  kinds — 1.  Such  as  God  has  laid  in  the  way.  (1) 
Jesus  Christ  is  in  this  sense  a  stumbling-block  (1  Peter  ii.  6,  8 ;  Rom.  ix.  31-33 : 
Isa.  viii.  13-15 ;  Luke  ii.  34 ;  Matt.  xiii.  57 ;  xxvi.  64,  65).  (2)  The  doctrine  ol 
Christ  is  a  cause  of  offence  (Matt.  xv.  12  ;  xix.  22 ;  1  Cor.  i.  22,  23 ;  John  vi.  61 -G6; 
Matt.  xiii.  54).  (3)  The  suffering  and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  is  a  stumbling, 
block  (1  Cor.  i.  23 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  31,  33  ;  Luke  xxiv.  21).  The  Jews  called  Christ,  in 
derision,  "  Talui,"  the  man  that  was  hanged.  An  offence  without  reason.  2.  Such 
AS  are  laid  in  the  way  by  the  subtlety  and  malice  of  the  devil  and  his  children. 


OBAP.  xviu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  889 

Snch  as  false  doctrine,  reproaches,  &c.  3.  Such  as,  through  the  devices  of  the 
grand  adversary,  are  laid  in  the  way  by  the  inattention,  folly,  and  misconduct  of  those 
who  are,  or  profess  to  be,  the  children  of  God  (Rom.  xiv.  21 ;  1  Cor,  viii.  7,  9). 

IL    How  IT   APPEAES  THAT   IT   MUST   NEEDS   BK   THAT   OFFENCES   COME.      1.   OffeUCeS  el 

the  kind  first  mentioned  must  come  (Matt.  ii.  6).  These  are  only  stumbling-blocks 
in  our  apprehension.  They  that  stximble  at  these,  stumble  at  their  own  mercies 
and  salvation.  2.  Offences  of  the  second  kind  will  come,  not,  strictly  speaking  of 
necessity,  but  in  the  nature  of  things.  For  the  devil  and  his  children  will  hate  the 
children  of  God,  &c,  (Zech.  iii.  2;  1  Cor.  li.  19 ;  Acts  xx.  30;  2  Cor.  xi.  26).  3. 
Offences  of  the  last  kind  will  also  come,  as  appears  from  the  text,  and  from  (Luke 
xvii.  1),  where  the  Greek  word  imports  it  is  not  to  be  expected,  &o.  He  does  not 
appoint  or  ordain  these  offences.  He  does  not  withhold  the  grace  whereby  they 
may  be  avoided.  But  He  permits,  or  does  not  absolutely  hinder  them.  III.  Why 
CUB  Lord  pbonotjnces  a  '•  woe  "  upon  the  world  because  of  offences,  and  upon 
THAT  MAN  BT  WHOM  THE  OFFENCE  COMETH.  1,  By  "  the  world,"  may  be  here  meant, 
those  that  know  not,  and  love  not,  God  (John  xv.  18,  19 ;  xvii.  9,  14 ;  I  John  v. 
19).  Through  offences,  especially  those  of  the  last-mentioned  kind,  many  of  these 
perish  eternally.  Therefore,  woe  to  them !  They  dishonour  God,  obstruct  and 
injure  others,  and  lose  their  own  souls.  2.  "  The  world,"  may  mean  mankind  in 
general,  including  cen  the  people  of  God.  3.  "  Woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the 
offence  cometh."  For  he  dishonours  God  in  a  manner  none  else  can  do — he  doee 
the  work  of  the  devil  and  pleases  him — he  confirms  the  wicked  in  their  prejudices, 
&o.  All  this  mischief  will  be  required  at  his  hands,  &o.  Application — 1.  See  thai 
you  offend  not  (ver.  6).  2.  See  that  you  be  not  offended  yourself  (ver.  8,  9). 
{Joseph  Benson.)  A  discourse  of  offences : — i.  The  unavoidableness  of  offenceg. 
ii.  The  woes  pronounced  against  them.  I.  What  we  are  to  understand  here  by 
offences.  II.  From  whence  the  unavoidableness  of  them  doth  arise.  III.  That 
offences  are  of  woeful  consequence,  both  to  men  in  general,  and  to  those  particular 
persons  by  whom  they  come.  {Bishop  Fowler.)  Warjs  of  offending: — 1.  The 
drawing  of  our  brethren  into  erroneous  opinions  ;  such  as  have  an  ill-influenoe  on 
men's  lives  and  manners.  2.  Enticing  men  to  sin  by  wicked  advice  and  solici- 
tations. 3.  Affrighting  or  discouraging  others  from  being  religious,  or  from  the 
doing  of  their  duty  in  particular  instances:  such  things  as  (1)  persecuting  for 
righteousness'  sake :  (2)  representing  the  ways  of  religion  as  very  rugged  and 
difficult,  and  the  duties  thereof  as  over-harsh  and  severe:  (3)  making  a  great  number 
of  additions  to  the  law  of  God,  and  imposing  them  as  necessary  to  salvation :  (4) 
treating  those  who  have  fallen  into  errors  of  judgment  or  practice,  with  too  great 
harshness  and  severity.  4.  Offering  an  evil  example.  {Ibid.)  Necessity  oj 
scandals  arising :  —Let  us  grant  that  in  individual  cases  a  man  may  give  such  care 
and  attention  as  not  to  sin,  yet  it  is  impossible  that — taking  all  contingent  events 
in  the  lump — a  man  should  not  sometimes  be  remiss,  and  fail,  or  slip.  For  this  is 
the  infirmity  of  the  mind  of  man  since  the  Fall.  In  the  same  way  it  is  necessary 
that  the  most  skilful  archer,  who  to  a  certainty  hits  the  mark  as  often  as  he  choose* 
to  do  80,  should  sometimes  miss  it,  if  he  is  perpetually  shooting  at  it.  For  this  is 
a  condition  and  result  of  human  weakness — that  mind,  hand,  or  eye  cannot  long 
keep  up  the  strain  of  their  attention,  that  a  man  should  hit  the  mark  a  hundred 
time?  running.      He  must  miss  sometimes.     {Lapide.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Wherefore  If  thy  hand  or  thy  foot  oCend  thee. — Renouncing  thingt 
ikat  hinder: — The  every-sided  development  of  all  our  faculties,  the  inferior,  as 
well  as  the  more  elevated,  is  certainly  to  be  regarded  as  the  highest  attainment,  yet 
he  who  finds  by  experience  that  he  cannot  cultivate  certain  faculties — the  artistia 
for  example — without  injury  to  his  hohest  feelings,  must  renounce  their  cultivation, 
and  make  it  his  first  business,  with  painstaking  fidelity,  to  preserve  entile  the 
innermost  Hfe  of  his  soul,  that  higher  hfe  imparted  to  him  by  Christ,  and  which, 
by  the  dividing  and  distracting  of  his  thoughts,  might  easily  be  lost,  nor  muit  it 
give  him  any  disturbance,  if  some  subordinate  faculty  be  thus  wholly  sacrificed  by 
him.  Assuredly,  however,  we  must  add,  tiiat  this  loss  is  only  in  appearauce,  for, 
in  the  development  of  man's  higher  life,  everything  of  a  subordinate  kind  which  he 
had  sacrificed  is  again  restored  with  increase  of  power.  {Olshauten.)  Better 
tuffer  than  sin  : — It  is  not  merely  that  we  should  abstain  from  actual  wrong-doing. 
That  of  course.  It  is  not  even  that  we  should  shun  the  avenues  of  sin ;  bat,  what* 
ever  the  pain  or  loss  involved,  we  are  utterly  to  renounce  that  which  we  find  to  be 
the  oceanon  of  sin.     The  merely  literal  and  outward  is  not  the  thing  to  dwell  upon. 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvm- 

A  man  might  oat  off  both  hands,  or  pluck  out  both  eyes,  and  yet  leave  the  root  of 
Bin  untouched.  What  Christ  summons  to  is  the  surrender  of  everything,  however 
pleasant,  or  dear,  or  seemingly  necessary  for  the  present  life,  and  whatever  suilering 
there  may  be  in  the  surrender,  rather  than  sin  against  God.  The  boldly  figurative 
language  well  expresses  the  intensity  of  the  change.  (Dr.  Culros$.)  Moral 
surgery  ; — 1.  That  the  binnee'b  sin  is  his  own — a  part  of  himself.  '*  Thy  right 
hand."     Few  people  admit  the  ownership  of  their  sins.     II.  That  delivkranch 

FBOM  SIN  CAN  BE  EFFECTED  ONLT  THROUGH  THE  SINXEB'S  OWW   ACT.      "  Cut  it  off."      1. 

Painful.  "  Cut  it  off."  2.  Promptness.  "  Cut "  with  a  determined  stroke.  3. 
Persistent.  "Cut  it  off."  III.  That  heroically,  in  order  to  make  reformation  « 
permanent  blessing,  must  the  sinner  abandon  his  sin.  "Cast  it  from  thee."  1. 
This  figure  is  suggestive  of  danger.  The  last  resort.  2.  The  great  Physician 
Himself  urges  the  operation.  3.  Every  consideration,  past,  present,  and  future, 
calls  upon  the  sinner  to  decide.  '» It  is  profitable  for  thee."  4.  The  fearful  conse- 
quences of  neglect.  " Cast  into  hell."  (J.  Kelhj.)  Self-discipline: — The  Rev. 
R.  Cecil  possessed  remarkable  decision  of  character.  Wlien  he  went  to  Cambridge, 
he  made  a  resolution  of  restricting  himself  to  a  quarter  of  an  hour  daily  in  playing 
the  violin — on  which  instrument  he  greatly  excelled,  and  of  which  he  was  ex- 
travagantly fond  ;  but,  on  finding  it  impracticable  to  adhere  to  his  determination, 
he  cut  the  striof^s,  and  never  afterwards  replaced  them.  He  had  studied  for  a 
painter ;  and  retained  through  a  life  a  fondness  and  taste  for  the  art.  He  was  once 
called  tc  visit  a  sick  lady,  in  whose  room  there  was  a  painting  which  so  strongly 
attracted  his  notice,  that  he  found  his  attention  diverted  from  the  sick  person  and 
absorbed  by  the  painting;  from  that  moment  he  formed  the  resolution  of  mortifying 
a  taste  which  he  found  so  intrusive,  and  so  obstructive  to  him  in  his  nobler  pursuits, 
and  determined  never  again  to  frequent  the  exhibition.  8  elf -mortification: — This 
is  the  circumcision  of  the  heart,  the  mortifications  of  earthly  members,  which  is  no 
less  hard  to  be  done  than  for  a  man  with  one  hand  to  cut  off  the  other,  or  to  pull  out 
his  own  eyes,  and  then  rake  in  the  holes  where  they  grew.  And  yet,  heurd  or  not 
hard,  it  must  be  done  ;  for  otherwise  we  are  utterly  undone  for  ever.  Hypocrites, 
as  artificial  jugglers,  seem  to  wound  themselves,  but  do  not ;  as  stage-players,  they 
seem  to  thrust  themselves  through  their  bodies,  whereas  the  sword  passeth  only 
through  their  clothes.  But  the  truly  religious  lets  out  the  life-blood  of  his  beloved 
lusts,  lays  them  all  dead  at  his  feet,  and  burns  their  bones  to  lime,  as  the  king  of 
Moab  did  the  king  of  Edom  (Amos  ii.  1).  As  Joshua  put  down  all  the  Canaanites, 
so  doth  grace  all  corruptions.  As  Asa  deposed  his  own  mother,  so  doth  this,  the 
mother  of  sin.  It  destroys  them  not  by  halves,  as  Saul ;  but  hews  them  in  pieces 
before  the  Lord,  as  Samuel.     (John  Trapp.) 

"Ver.  10.  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones. — Contempt : — 
Look  at  the  sources  of  contempt ;  and  what  are  its  correctives.  I,  The  sources  or 
CONTEMPT.  1.  Want  of  knowledge  will  produce  contempt.  You  could  not  despise 
the  smallest  and  meanest  in  God's  great  universe  if  only  you  had  a  true  and 
enlarged  conception  of  what  that  universe  is.  God  watchc3  over  all ;  how  can  we 
treat  with  contempt  the  meanest  object  of  His  care.  2.  Want  of  wisdom  produces 
eontempt.  I  cannot  imagine  it  being  said  it  is  hardly  true  that  enlarged  knowledge 
diminishes  contempt.  As  we  grow  older  we  find  out  the  weaknesses  of  those  we 
were  taught  to  reverence.  But  no  wisdom  lies  in  that.  A  wise  man  never  despiseg ; 
he  reads  beneath  the  surface.  There  is  an  angel  behind  the  meanest  form.  3. 
Want  of  reverence  produces  contempt.  II.  The  remedy.  Sympathy  is  the  anti- 
dote  to  contempt,  as  love  is  the  restorative  of  all  the  ills  of  the  universe.  This 
shows  that  in  the  meanest  men  there  are  splendid  possibilities.  (Bishop  Carpenter^ 
D.D.)  Contempt  for  the  little  impossible,  whenregarded  as  part  of  a  great  wliole : — 
And  just  as  surely  as  a  crushed  finger  is  understood  and  felt  by  the  thrill  and  ache  in 
the  brain,  so  the  wounded  one  here,  or  the  little  one  injured  and  offended  and 
despised  here,  is  not  simply  a  thing  isolated  from  the  rest  of  God's  universe,  but 
one  bound  with  it  in  the  whole  relationship  and  web  of  life,  so  intimately  connected, 
that  its  grief  and  its  sorrow  and  its  wound  is  felt  right  away  up  there,  where  God 
sits  enthroned.  As  He  gives  us  that  conception  of  life,  so  He  says  it  is  impossible 
now  you  should  despise.  Let  a  larger  knowledge  of  being  enter  into  your  thoughts, 
and  then  yon  will  see  all  creation  is  interlocked  and  interlaced  in  such  a  way  that 
to  understand  one  is  to  understand  the  whole  ;  that  there  is  no  creature,  however 
mean,  that  is  outside  the  range  of  Divine  superintendence  and  Divine  knowledge, 
"Their  angels  dc  always  behold  the  face  of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 


CHAP,  xvia.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  *01 

{Ibid.)        Contempt  banished  by  insight ;— A  wise  man  never  despises.     See  one 
moment.     Unwise  men   are  ready  to  despise  because  they  do  not  understand,  or 
think  out  the  meaning  of  little  things.  But  the  man  of  wisdom  sees  there  is  nothing 
in  the  world,  however  mean,  that  cannot  have  a  real  significance,  and  that  just  as 
you  can  see  that  the  universe  is  one  so  you  may  see  in  a  single  thing  the  whole 
universe  reflected.     Here  is  the  man  who  will  not  despise.     Other  rnen  have  been 
looking  day  by  day  at  the  same  thmg,  but  they  have  not  had  the  wisdom  to  reau 
beneath  the  surface.     To  them  this  is  merely  a  bit  of  broken  crystal ;  but  the  eyes 
of  the  man  of  wisdom  look  underneath  the  fractured  morsels  and  see  the  law  of 
form.     This  is  but  a  swinging  lamp  in  the  eye  of  the  world  ;  but  this  man  sees  in 
it  the  angel  of  the  law  of  movement.     There  again  is  only  a  falling  stone,  and  yet 
he,  with  his  keen  eye,  shall  read  beneath  it  the  law  of  order  in  the  universe. 
Surely,  it  is  true,  where  great  wisdom  exists  there  is  an  inclination  to  banish  con- 
tempt,   for    contempt  hinders  the  growth   of    knowledge.     {Ihid.)     _    Contempt 
ignoble  : — The  man  who  is  above  all  these  things  looks  with  profound  disdain  upon 
the  toys  of  the  Uttle  children  around  him.     Do  you  think  he  is  nobler  at  that 
moment  when  he  says  he  is  above  all  these  things,  than  that  other  who  stoops  from 
out  of  his  range  of  knowledge  to  help  the  little  child  with  the  broken  toy  ?    There  is 
a  contrast  of  character.     The  one  has  knowledge  and  conceit,  which  is  always  twin 
brother  to  contempt,  and  the  other  has  the  sympathy  and  the  reverence,  and  these 
are  linked  in  their  kinship  together.     Or  it  takes  the  form  in  another  man's  nature 
of  that  determination  to  view  himself  as  exempt  from  the  laws  which  govern  other 
men.    Other  men  are  studious,  other  men  are  prayerful,  and  other  men  watch  their 
characters  and  examine  themselves.     He  says,  "  I  never  could  do  that  sort  of 
thing."    There  is  the  spirit  of  contempt  for  that  which  is  the  help  of  others.    But 
is  it  a  great  thing  to  hold  ourselves  above  our  fellows,  or  is  it  not  the  very  teaching 
of  Jesus  Christ  that  the  noblest  thing  for  man  is  to  recognize  that  he  is  man,  and 
that  his  best  manliness  is  in  submitting  himself  to  those  laws  and  orders  which  are 
needful  for  the  education  and  discipline  of  man  ?     It  is  always  Satan's  method  to 
Bay,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods  ;  "  and  it  drops  in  well  with  our  conceit,  and  it  ministers 
to  our  contempt.     (Ibid.)        The  Nemesis  oj  contempt : — There  comes  a  time  when 
we  esteem  ourselves  so  great  and  others  so  little,  we  get  into  a  habit  of  a  nil 
admirari,  and  we  never  think  it  noble  or  great  to  show  pleasure  or  admiration  at 
anything.     And  thus  it  happens  that  a  human  being,  born  into  God's  world  with 
all  the  rich  glories  of  creation  falling  thick  and  fast  in  light  and  form  and  colour 
about  him,  stands  there  where  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  men,  poets, 
painters,  orators,  and  historians,  have  stood  and  gazed  upon  that  world,  with  its 
growth  and  beauty,  with  admiration  aghast,  and  he  sees  nothing  to  admire  in  iv. 
What  a  miserable  distortion  of  humanity  I    What  a  miserable  falling  back  into  H 
vain  and  irretrievable  egotism,  because  he  has  allowed  the  spirit  of  contempt  to  g«t 
hold  of  him !     [Ibid.)        The  dullest  life  has  angelic  light  behind  it ;— Is  it  not  true 
also  in  regard  to  human  life  ?    Over  all  the  dark  angel  of  contempt  hovers.     But  is 
there  not,  if  we  look  wisely  at  human  life,  a  marvellous  display  of  real  angelic 
force  ?     Mark  this  life  you  will  be  disposed  to  despise.    Who  can  find  anything  of 
angel  ministers  and  poetry  in  that  of  a  mere  labourer  of  the  fields,  whose  to-day  is 
just  Uke  yesterday — rising  early,  ploughing,  casting  in  the  seed,  reaping,  and  with 
an  ignorant  and  dull  brain  following  the  plough,  and  pursuing  the  field  labour  from 
day  to  day,  no  other  thought  leaping  up  in  his  mind  but  a  moody  anticipation  of 
next  year's  harvest.    Yet,  if  you  look  aright,  there  is  a  light  ae  of  an  angel's 
presence  behind  such  a  life  as  that.     This  is  one  of  God's  ministers.    Is  it  nothing 
to  stand  before  the  face  of  the  great  Creator  and  receive  from  His  hand,  as  the  dis- 
ciples did  of  old,  the  bread  to  be  distributed  to  the  sons  of  men  ?    Behind  the  mosf 
prosaic  life  there  is  an  angel  form  for  those  who  look  through  it.     Take  the  dull 
rocnd  of  the  man  of  medicine.  With  its  weariness  there  grows  upon  him  the  feeling 
that  life  is  nothing  but  a  monotonous  round  of  visits — fruitless  visits  if  he  has  to 
minister  to  the  miserable  hypochondriac — and  then  follows  despair  that  hi^  life  is 
a  useless  one.     Yet  behind  it  there  is  the  hght  of  the  angel's  wing,  for  when  he  is 
present  that  poor  hypochondriac  has  her  powers  and  energies  strengthened  to  excite 
themselves  against  the  weakness  of  her  nature.     His  is  the  soothing  hand  that 
restores  to  the  tired  nerves  their  power.  Yes,  th    dullest  life,  the  hardest  existence, 
the  most  monotonous  career,  has  an  angel  of  hg  t  behind  it.     (Ibid.)        Grtardiam 
angels  : — The  offices  of  the  guardian  angels  are— 1.  To  avert  dangera  both  of  the 
body  and  the  soul.    2.  To  illuminate  and  instruct  those  committed  to  their  charge, 
and  to  urge  them  to  good  works.    3.  To  restrain  the  devil,  that  he  may  not  BOggert 

26 


<02  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xyih. 

wicked  thoughts,  or  furnish  occasions  for  sin.  4.  To  offer  to  God  the  prayers  of  him 
whom  He  guards.  6.  To  pray  for  him.  6.  To  correct  him  if  he  sin.  7.  To  stand 
by  him  at  the  hour  of  death,  to  cooifortand  assist  him  in  his  last  struggle.  8.  After 
death  to  convey  the  soul  to  Paradise.  (Lapide.)  I.  How  great  is  the  dignity  of 
fouls,  that  they  have  angels  for  their  guardians.  H.  How  great  is  the  condescension 
of  God,  that  He  assigns  to  us  such  guides.  III.  How  great  is  the  humility  and  love 
of  the  anp;els,  who  do  not  disdain  these  offices,  hut  delight  in  them.  (Ibid.)  TAy< 
guardian  angels  of  nature  : — The  knowledge  of  nature  is  a  conception  which  has 
broadened  our  thoughts  and  ensured  our  convictions.  And  in  proportion  as  this  is 
true,  does  not  the  thought  rush  upon  us  that  this  great  creatii^n,  with  its  law,  and 
system,  and  organization,  becomes  ministerial  in  its  aspect  ?  Everything  ministerg 
to  another.  Our  angels  are  not  vanished,  but  our  conception  of  angel  ministers  is 
enlarged-  We  need  not  to  wait  for  some  angelic  beings  as  guardian  angels  to  direct 
our  steps  and  hold  us  up  in  their  hands.  Now  every  law  and  every  force  becomes 
God's  angel.  The  flame  that  leaps  up  from  our  hearths,  the  wind  that  beats  in  our 
face,  and  star  that  shines  in  the  sky,  these  are  God's  angels  as  much  as  ever  were 
the  guardian  around  us.  The  flowers  that  dispelled  their  fragrance  in  our  faces, 
the  great  blue  sky,  and  the  cheery  breezes,  all  these  excited  our  admiration  and 
Btimulated  our  reverence.  (Bp.  Carpenter.)  Training  the  little  ones  : — Ministry  of 
angels  to  Christian  children.  Practical  lessons.  I.  Bewabe  lest  you  put  btombuno- 
BLOCKS  IN  THEiB  WAT.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how  early  the  real  moral  and  spiritual 
character  begins  to  form  itself — long  before  we  can  externally  trace  what  is  going 
on.  Flowing  from  this  is  the  great  blessedness  of  being  allowed  to  deal  with  such 
creatures.  "  Workers  together  with  God."  The  great  danger  that  you  should  do 
your  work  badly  through  any  fault  of  yours.  The  nurse  who  lets  the  child  drop 
and  gets  crippled  for  life  never  forgives  herself.  But  what  if  they  should  become 
epiritual  cripples  I  II.  He  guards  against  doing  this.  Knowing  what  the  trea- 
Bure  is  that  is  committed  to  you.  Not  a  class,  but  souls,  for  whom  Christ  died, 
Ac.  This  idea,  once  laid  hold  of,  settles  all  difficulties  about  what  should  be  taught 
Deal  with  them  separately.  {S.  Wilberforce,  D.D.)  Value  of  a  little  child : — 
Louis  IX.,  king  of  France,  was  found  instructing  a  poor  kitchen  boy,  and,  being 
♦sked  why  he  did  so,  replied,  "  The  meanest  person  bath  a  soul  as  precious  as  my 
own,  and  bought  with  the  same  blood  of  Christ."  Dofpising  the  little  ones: — Anni- 
versary address  to  parents.  We  all  need  this  text  and  its  kindly  warning,  for  we 
are  all  in  danger  of  "  despising  the  little  ones. "  See  how — I.  By  undebvaluino 
THE  INFLUENCE  THEY  CAN  EXEET.  Especially  on  a  mother.  On  a  home.  In  saving 
men  from  vice.    II.  By  undekebtimating  the  caeb  and  help  they  need  if  they 

ABE  TO  GROW  UP  GOOD.  III.  By  MISUNDEBSTANDING  THE  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  LITTLE 
ONES.      IV.   By  CHERISniNO    THE   NOTION   THAT   THEY   MUST   BE   BIG    BEFORE   THEY   CAN 

BEALLY  LOVE  AND  SERVE  Chhist.  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  What  value  Christ  sets  on 
every  man : — 1.  Think  of  His  words,  and  you  will  see  that  Jesus  isolates  each  of  us. 
Belting  us  man  by  man  apart :  "  despise  not  one  "  ;  "  if  one  of  them  be  gone  astray." 
He  who  counts  our  hairs,  much  more  counts  us.  2.  Jesus  measures  the  worth  of 
each  human  being  by  God's  special  and  separate  care  of  him.  F^-ebleness  com- 
mends us  to  His  care  ;  much  more  does  sin.  He  has  more  pity  even  for  the  "  lost," 
more  than  for  the  "  little  ones."  He  seeks  them.  3.  Such  teaching  from  the  lipa 
of  Jesns  was  a  nsw  thing  in  the  world,  and  wrought  a  revolution.  How  cheap  men 
held  human  life  till  Jesus  taught  the  equal  worth  of  manhood.  4.  It  deserves 
special  notice  in  what  way  it  is  that  the  teaching  of  Jesus  has  cut  the  roots  frcm 
that  self- valuing  or  self-praising  which  has  always  led  men  to  uiadervalne  and 
despise  others.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  to  correct  the  boa8t^iJ  man's  estimate. 
I  may  seek  to  sober  his  conceit  by  showing  him  man's  littleness  at  his  beet,  Christ 
did  not  lower  the  dignity  of  human  nature ;  He  came  to  cure  contempt  for  the 
little  and  lost  by  making  us  think  more.  He  came  to  put  our  self-esteem  on  its 
true  footing ;  not  on  what  is  accid  ntal  or  peculiar  to  one  man,  but  on  what  is 
common  to  the  race.  In  such  an  atmosphere  as  Christ  lived  in  pride  dies.  5.  Let 
me  show  you  one  or  two  of  these  i  ward  prerogatives  which  assert  your  personal 
value  in  God's  reckoning  to  be  as  great  as  any  other  man's.  (1)  From  each  one  of 
ns  God  chims  a  separate  re?ponsibi  ity.  We  have  each  a  moral  constitution  of  our 
own,  as  recognizable  as  the  features  of  our  face.  (2)  From  the  moment  of  birth 
God  subjects  each  person  to  a  separate  coutse  of  training.  (3)  That  God  is  Father 
•8  well  as  Judge  to  all,  and  permits  each  soul  ready  access  to  Him.     (4)  Perhaps 

Jou  eay,  "  can  a  man  be  of  value  to  God  after  his  soul  is  ruined."    God's  love  is 
idostractible  by  human  sin — He  oame  to  save  sinners.     (5)  Let  us  embrace  in  • 


CHAP,  xvml  ST.  MATTHEW.  4«3 

hopeful  charity  the  worst  of  our  fellow  men.  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  Self-respect 
inspired  by  the  view  of  a  common  manhood : — I  pray  you  note  how  at  one  stroke 
Jesus  has  thus  annihilated  our  pride  and  heightened  our  self-respect.  Pride  lives 
on  the  petty  pre-eminences  which  here  for  a  Uttle  lift  one  mortal  an  inch  or  two 
higher  than  another;  an  extra  handful  of  gold,  a  hotter  education,  a  longer 
pedigree,  a  title,  a  serener,  and  less  tempted  life.  Among  the  ups  and  downs  oi 
Bociety  these  look  mighty  things,  as  straws  and  leaves  look  large  to  emmets'  eyes, 
and  they  fill  the  foolish  hearts  of  men  with  vain  conceit  and  unbrotherly  scorn 
From  the  height  from  which  God  and  His  Son  Jesus  survey  this  human  world,  such 
paltry  degrees  of  more  and  less  dwindle  into  insignificance,  and  are  lost  iu  the  broad, 
equal  level  of  a  common  manhood.  {Ibid.)  Self-respect  inspired  by  the  Divine 
culture  of  mew;— Next,  from  the  moment  of  birth,  God  subjects  each  person  to  a 
(Separate  course  of  training.  Men  never  appear  before  God's  eight  clustered  in 
crowds  ;  never  like  the  countless  pines  which  on  the  lower  ranges  of  the  Alps  stand 
undistmguishable,  row  behind  row,  in  thickset  serried  masses  like  a  host ;  but  like 
the  singled  vines  of  the  vineyard,  each  of  which  the  husbandman  knows  and  tends 
with  a  care  that  is  all  its  own.  To  each  of  you  He  has  ordained  your  own 
career,  with  its  early  influences,  domestic  or  educational,  its  companionships,  its 
experiences,  its  trials,  duties,  losses,  labours.  All  through  your  life  He  is  moulding 
it  to  suit  both  what  He  made  you  to  begin  with  and  what  He  means  you  to  become 
at  last ;  so  that  from  yonr  deathbed  you  look  back  along  a  life  history,  wholly  your 
own  and  not  another's,  the  match  of  which  no  mortal  man  ever  lived  through 
before.  (Ibid.)  Despising  the  little  ones:—!.  A  strict  prohibition,  and  that 
ushered  in  with  a  severe  charge  by  way  of  caveat  (Take  heed!).  1.  Whom  Christ 
means  by  these  little  ones.  2.  What  it  is  to  despise  them.  II.  A  solemn  reason 
given  for  the  prohibition  ;  and  this  reason  backed  with  our  Saviour's  own  authority 
and  sacred  Word.  Those  little  ones  have  angels  for  their  guardians  and  attendants, 
and  those  angels  none  of  the  lower  form,  but  the  most  eminent  favourites,  who 
continually  stand  in  God's  presence,  and  do  always  behold  His  face.  (Adam 
Littleton.) 

Vera.  11, 13.  If  a  man  have  an  hundred  ^esj).— Seeking  the  lost ;— 1.  The  image 
tinder  which  it  pleases  God  to  describe  His  creatures  upon  earth,  "  Sheep  "  "  gone 
astray."  2.  What  is  said  as  to  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  creatures  under  these 
circumstances,  "  seeketh,"  &c.  3.  The  feelings  with  which  the  Shepherd  is  de- 
scribed  as  regarding  the  sheep  when  found,  "  He  rejoiceth  more,"  &c.  4.  The 
general  deduction  which  our  gracious  Saviour  draws  from  these  several  particulars— 
"  Even  80  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  that  one  of  these  little 
ones  should  perish."  (1)  What  a  conception  does  this  text  lead  us  to  form  of  the 
character  of  God  our  Redeemer.  (2)  Wliat  an  encouragement  does  the  doctrme  of 
the  text  supply  as  to  our  dealings  with  others.  (J.  W.  Cunningham.)  Tlie  ex- 
ample of  saving  the  lost:—l.  Who  abb  they  that  are  here  described  as  peraona  lost, 
and  what  is  meant  by  the  expression  f  Our  blessed  Saviour  means  all  who  did  not 
receive  Him  as  the  messenger  and  interpreter  of  the  Divine  will  to  mankmd.    II.  In 

WHAT   SENSK   CUB    BLESSED    SaVIOUB   18    HEBE    SilD   TO   HAVE   COME   TO   PAVE    MANKIND. 

(1)  He  came  to  instruct  mankind  in  the  true  and  the  whole  nature  of  the  Divine 
will :  (2)  to  show,  in  His  own  example,  that  human  nature  is  capable  of  such  a 
degree  of  perfection,  as  will  make  us  fit  objects  of  the  Divine  favour :  (3)  to  make  a 
eatisfaction  for  us  upon  the  cross,  such  as  showed  that  God  would  not  pardon  the 
Bins  of  men  unless  His  justice  was  satisfied ;  and,  therefore,  Christ's  suffering  and 
death  upon  this  account  were  a  full  and  proper  satisfaction  made  to  tne  Divine 
justice  for  the  sins  of  such  as  were  till  then  lost  to  the  benefits  of  eternal  life. 

in     How  FAB   SHOULD  THE   EXAMPLE  OF  ChRIST,  IN   THIS   PABTIOULAB  OF  BAVINS   THAT 

WHICH  WAS  LOST,  BB  IMITATED  BY  VS.  The  natural  means,  those  of  instruction  and 
of  example,  which  He  made  use  of  in  His  life-time  for  reforming  mankind,  and  im- 
proving their  morals,  these  are  what  we  may  copy  after  Him.  (Ntch.  Brady.) 
A  needful  caution  .—I.  A  needful  caution.  '•  Take  heed  that  ye  despise  not,"  &c. 
1.  To  despise  them  is  fearfully  dangerous.  2.  The  interest  taken  in  them  by  the 
highest  intelligences  should  prevent  us  from  thinking  lightly  of  them.  3.  The  high 
destiny  which  awaits  them.  II.  A  blessed  announcement.  "  For  the  Son  of  Man 
is  come,"  &c.  1.  The  title  assumed.  2.  The  act  declared,  not  merely  to  improve, 
but  to  save.  8.  The  miserable  objects  regarded.  IIL  A  familiar  compabison. 
*'  How  think  ye  "  (ver.  12).  These  words  may  be  considered :  1.  In  tbeir  hteral 
signification.    The  recovery  of  lost  property  is  a  principle  of  human  nature.    2.  In 


«0i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnn. 

their  spiritnal  allusion.  IV.  An  encoubaging  inference.  "  Even  so  it  is  not  the 
will  of  My  Father,"  &c.  1.  The  harmony  that  existed  between  the  mission  of 
Christ  and  the  purposes  of  the  Eternal  Father.  2.  If  it  is  not  the  will  of  God  that 
the  most  despised  and  insignificant  believer  should  perish,  their  salvation  is  assured. 
{Expository  Outlines.)  The  Son  0/  Man  the  Saviour  of  the  lost : — I.  A  pboof  and 
BTATEMENT  OF  THE  Savioub's  WORK  AND  BBRAND.  1.  One  feature  of  the  mediatorial 
character  is  particularly  displayed  in  the  very  name  in  which  the  Saviour  is  intro- 
duced to  our  attention,  "the  Son  of  Man."  2.  These  words  point  out  the  fact  of 
the  Savicar"s  incarnation,  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  come."  3.  This  description  of  the 
object  of  His  coming  we  may  contrast  with  another,  when  He  comes  a  second  tiifi 
into  this  our  world.     II.  View  the  Saviour's  errand  and  work  as  it  is  exhibited 

TO  OS  IN  THAT  FIGDBATIVB  ILLUSTRATION  THAT  FOLLOWS    THE    TEXT.       1.    He    represents 

the  state  of  the  guilty  sinner  whom  He  came  into  the  world  to  save  under  the  idea 
of  a  wandering  sheep.  Prone  to  wander.  2.  The  care  and  kindness  of  the  Great 
Shepherd  of  the  sheep.  Manifests  particular  care  over  case  of  individual  sinner. 
3.  Christ's  search  for  the  lost  embraces  all  the  means  used  for  the  salvation  of 
sinners.  4.  He  carries  back  the  sheep  when  He  has  found  it.  To  prevent  exposure 
to  danger.     5.  His  joy.    III.  The  great  principle  of  the  Divine  conduct  that  is 

DEVELOPED  IN  THE  WORK  TO  WHICH  WE  HAVE  TURNED  YOUR  ATTENTION.       "  It  is  not  the 

will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven,"  &c.  1.  The  connection  that  is  here 
obviously  formed  between  the  end  in  view,  and  the  means  for  the  accomplishment 
of  that  end.  2.  In  redemption  the  will  of  the  Father  and  Son  are  equal.  3.  The 
work  of  Christ  was  designed  to  accomplish  that  intention,  and  is  efficacious  to  its 
accomphshment.  4.  Magnify  the  fulness  of  Christ's  work.  6.  Have  you  learnt 
that  your  characters  are  that  of  lost  sheep?  (IF.  U.  Cooper.)  God's  minute  and 
all-inclusive  care  of  the  universe  : — I.  He  is  the  Shepherd  of  the  flock.  II.  His  love 
is  impartially  shown  to  all  who  are  in  the  fold.  III.  The  salvation  of  the  least  ia 
worth  all  the  efforts  of  the  highest.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  shepherd  faithful- 

nesB  of  the  Son  of  Alan  in  seeking  the  lost : — I.  Let  us  notice  the  consolation  in 
His  comparing  them  with  sheep  who  have  gone  astray.  1.  It  reveals  to  us  how 
dear  every  single  soul  is  to  the  Lord.  2.  He  misses  each  sheep  as  soon  as  it  is  lost. 
3.  He  will  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  on  the  mountains  and  hunt  for  only  one  that 
has  gone  astray.  4.  He  rejoices  over  the  one  that  is  found.  II.  For  what  does  it 
RENDEB  CB  RESPONSIBLE  f  1.  Tlirtt  WB  keep  watch  ovcT  those  who  are  liable  to  go 
astray.  2.  The  shepherd-faithfulness  of  our  Lord  renders  you  responsible  for  com- 
passion on  the  lost.  3.  Also  for  active,  zealous  seeking  and  leading  home  all  wno 
are  willing  to  be  saved.  4.  It  requires  us  to  rejoice  over  every  one  who  lets  himseli 
be  saved.  {T.  Christlieb,  D.D.)  The  lost  sheep  and  the  seeking  Shepherd : — I.  Th» 
FIGURE  OF  THE  ONE  WANDERER.  1.  All  men  are  Christ's  sheep.  All  men  are  Christ'a 
because  He  has  created  them.  "  We  are  His  people  and  the  sheep  of  His  pasture.' 
2.  The  picture  of  the  sheep  as  wandering,  "  which  goeth  astray."  It  pictures  th» 
process  of  wandering  ;  not  the  result  as  accomplished.  The  sheep  has  gone  astray, 
though  when  it  set  out  on  its  journey  it  never  thought  of  straying  ;  more  mischief 
is  wrought  from  want  of  thought  than  by  an  evil  will.  3.  The  progressive  character 
of  our  wanderings  from  God.  A  man  never  gets  to  the  end  of  the  distance  that 
separates  between  him  and  the  Father  if  his  face  is  turned  away  from  God.  Every 
moment  the  separation  is  increasing.  4.  The  contrast  between  the  description 
given  of  the  wandering  sheep  in  our  text  and  in  St.  Luke.  Here  it  is  represented 
as  wandering,  there  it  is  represented  as  lost.  God  wants  to  possess  us  through  our 
love ;  if  He  does  not  we  are  lost  to  Him.  II.  The  pictdbe  of  thb  sebssb.  Tba 
incurnatiou  of  Christ  was  for  the  seeking  of  man.    {Dr.  Maclaren.) 

Ver.  14.  Even  so  It  1b  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  Is  In  heaven. — T*« 
children's  friends : — I.  The  childben  around  ds  have  friends.  1.  They  have 
Divine  Friends.  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  these 
Friends.  2.  They  have  angelic  friends.  3.  They  have  human  friends.  Some  in 
heaven  ;  also  on  earth.  II.  Lessons.  1.  These  thoughts  should  encourage  anxious 
parents.  2.  These  thoughts  should  encourage  despondent  teachers.  3.  These 
thoughts  should  encourage  neglected  and  sorrowing  children.  {J.  Morgan.)  The 
children' t  foet: — 1.  Among  the  children's  foes  may  be  reckoned  physical  diseases 
and  ailments.  2.  Among  the  children's  foes  must  be  ranked  evil  passions.  8.  Among 
the  children's  foes  are  to  be  found  many  vile  and  malicious  demons.  4.  Among  th« 
children's  foes  are  to  be  found  many  foolish  and  wicked  men.  (1)  Persons  who 
indulge  vicious  habits.    (2)  The  circulators  of  profane  literature,    (ibid.)      Hidden 


CHAP,  xvin.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  401 

force  in  a  child  : — For  they  are  the  men  and  women  of  the  future,  and  within  them 
lurk  ■wondrous  possibihtiea  and  powers  which  shall  be  developed  and  manifested 
and  felt  aoother  day.  Natuialists  tell  us  that  in  every  single  drop  of  water  in  the 
ocean  there  is  electricity  enough  to  generate  two  thunder-storms.  The  power  is 
there  silent  and  hidden,  nevertheless  ready  at  any  moment  to  leap  forth  and  do 
terrible  execution.  So  within  the  soul  of  every  little  child  in  our  homes,  in  our 
(schools,  and  in  our  streets,  there  is  a  moral  force  Ijing  hidden  on  which  two  utterly 
opposite  eternities  hang.  (Ibid. )  Children  in  danger  of  perishing  : — The  children 
around  us  are  in  danger  of  perishing.  What  that  means  none  of  us  can  fully  de- 
scribe or  imagine.  We  may  have  seen  a  superb  mansion  perish  by  a  fire,  or  an 
extensive  mill  perish  by  an  exploi^ion,  or  a  magnificent  ship  perish  in  a  Btoim,  and 
may  have  attempted  to  estimate  the  loss,  and  have  mourned  over  the  wreck  and 
ruin.  But  for  a  child,  with  a  God-given,  a  God-endowed,  and  a  God-redeemed 
nature  to  perish,  must  be  something  far  more  terrible  than  the  loss  of  any  mansion, 
or  mill,  or  ship  that  ever  was  built,  however  elaborately  finished,  or  expensively 
furnished.  (Ibid.)  God's  love  for  little  children : — 1.  It  is  a  love  of  utter 
nnselfishness.  2.  It  is  the  love  of  delight  in  them.  3.  It  is  a  love  of  compas- 
sion toward  them.  4.  It  is  the  love  of  trust  in  the  almost  infinite  capacities  of 
children.      {T.    Gasquoine,   B.A.)         Destitute  children : — I.  A  cabefdi.  kegakd 

SHOULD     BE     PAID     TO    CHILDREN.       II.    ThET     ARE     LIABLE     TO     PERISH.       1.    ThrOUgh 

lack  of  food.  2.  Through  lack  of  knowledge.  3.  In  a  moral  sense  they  are  liable 
to  perish.     III.  It  is  not  the  will  of  the  Parent  or  Good  that  these  littlh 

ONES     SHOULD      BE      INCLUDED      IN      PERIL     AND      BDIN.         (D.     Ace,    M.A.)  I.    ThB 

dangerous  exposure  of  mankind.  II.  The  will  of  the  Father  respectin(J 
TJ8.  III.  How  that  will  is  to  take  effect.  (J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.)  God's 
care  for  His  children: — 1.  The  existence  of  things  which  put  in  peril  the  souls  of 
them  that  may  be  the  children  of  God.  2.  It  is  contrary  to  God's  will  that  these 
dangers  should  be  fatal  to  the  salvation  of  His  people.  3,  The  means  which  God 
has  provided  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  gracious  will  in  the  salvation  of  the 
little  ones.  4.  The  encouragement  which  the  text  affords  to  those  who  are  desirous 
of  imparting  that  knowledge  which  maketh  wise  unto  salvation.  (Bishop  Sumner.) 
The  Father  and  the  little  ones: — I.  The  truth  asserted.  God's  will  is  for  their 
welfare.  1.  Because  He  is  their  Creator.  2.  Because  He  is  Love.  3.  These 
words  apply  to  the  whole  realm  of  childhood.  They  are  not  limited  to  children  of 
the  good  and  wealthy.  II.  A  sad  truth  implied.  That  notwithstanding  God's 
will  children  may  ripen  for  evil  and  be  lost.  (C.  Vince.)  Not  an  ideal  child : — 
I  saw  some  time  ago  a  great  painter's  representation  of  this  scene.  He  makes  this 
child  so  noble-featured,  full  of  brightness  and  beaiity,  standing  there  as  a  young 
prince,  fetched  for  the  purpose  from  a  fair  palace.  That  is  artistic,  but  it  does  not 
answer  the  purpose.  What  was  done  was  done  on  the  spot.  The  Master  did  not 
send  for  and  bring  the  fairest  and  best-trained  child  that  Galilee  contained.  No ; 
it  was  a  street  loiterer  He  called  to  Himself.  Some  little  one  busy  at  play  in  the 
market-place,  or  one  looking  on  wondering  at  the  edge  of  the  crowd — the  first  little 
one  on  which  His  eyes  could  rest ;  and  taking  him  with  gentle  hands,  with  all  the 
roughness  in  which  He  found  him,  the  Master  pointed  to  him,  and  said :  *•  Do  not 
despise  him  ;  deem  him  not  unworthy  of  your  regard,  but  rather  with  all  yonr 
powers  influence  him  for  good.  Win  his  heart  for  God.  Open  to  him  the  gates  of 
heaven,  and  do  all  you  can  to  smooth  his  path.  Do  not  despise  one  of  these." 
(Ibid.)  Men  must  co-operate  with  the  will  of  God: — Still  there  is  room  for 
human  labour.  What  would  the  earth  be  without  it  ?  Suppose  that  where  we  see 
the  com  ripening  we  saw  only  a  barren  waste  ;  if  the  ground  had  not  been  ploughed, 
or  the  seed  not  sown,  or  the  plants  not  tended,  could  we  look  on  it  and  say,  "  Even 
BO,  Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in  Thy  sight  ?  "  No  ;  we  should  have  to  say : 
"It  is  nut  according  to  God's  will;  God's  goodness  has  been  defeated,  and  man's 
badness  crowned  with  triumph."  God  in  the  course  of  providence  ordains  that  our 
work  and  effort  should  be  used  to  produce  that  on  which  He  has  set  His  heart. 
When  a  house  is  being  built,  there  are  different  sets  of  labourers.  On  a  certain 
day  yon  see  the  work  standing  still,  and  on  inquiry  as  to  the  cause  you  find  that 
one  set  of  men  were  idlers,  they  had  gone  hoUday-makiug,  and  all  the  others  were 
baffled  and  could  do  nothing.  Look  into  the  sluggard's  garden  ;  the  sun  is  there, 
and  the  dew,  and  they  cannot  do  anything ;  the  showers  descend ;  all  God's 
celestial  workers  are  there ;  but  they  cannot  do  anything  because  man  is  idUng, 
has  not  dug  the  earth,  has  not  scattered  the  seed;  therefore  God's  means  can 
do  nothing.     This  is  one  of  the  great  mysteries  of   the  ani^erse.      I  '7?ondei 


tm  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnn. 

that  God  did  not  determine  to  do  it  all  Himself,  and  not  wait  for  onr  work, 
and  have  His  purposes  baffled,  because  we  do  not  do  our  share  of  the  labour, 
{Ibid.) 

Vers.  15, 18.  Moreover  If  thy  brother  shall  trespass  against  tkee.—Hmo  to  meet 
f^ences : — Observe  the  method  Christ  has  laid  down — I.  The  trespass  supposed, 
whether  accidental  or  designed.  Whether  it  regards  reputation,  or  property,  or 
teehugs,  &c.  Then,  the  direction  given — II.  Seek  a  private  interview.  That 
he  may  explain,  if  possible.  Better  adapted  for  him  to  confess.  More  faithfully 
and  aiTectionately  admonished.  III.  If  this  tail,  take  one  ob  two  more.  Let 
them  be  unobjectionable,  peaceable,  prudent  persons.  These  are  to  witness  and 
aid  by  their  counsel  and  influence.  If  this  fail — IV.  Bring  it  to  the  Chdroh. 
Do  BO  for  these  reasons:  1.  For  the  offender's  sake.  He  may  hear  the  Church. 
2.  For  Christianity's  sake.  3.  For  the  world's  sake,  that  they  may  see  we  aro 
neither  indifferent  or  malevolent.  If  he  refuse  to  hear  the  Church,  then  he  must 
— V.  Be  removed  feosi  Christian  communion.  This  is  the  last  act,  and  if  this 
is  rightly  done,  it  is  ratified  in  heaven  (verse  18).  Do  not  let  us  neglect  this  order. 
You  object,  *'  He  is  not  worthy  of  all  this,"  &c. ;  ♦'  This  is  troublesome,"  <tc.  But 
it  is  your  duty ;  Christ  demands  it.  {J.  Burm^,  LL.D.)  Tell  the  offender  hit 
fault : — A  person  came  one  day  to  see  Mr.  Lon^don,  of  Sheffield,  and  said,  "I  have 
something  against  you,  and  I  am  come  to  tell  yon  of  it."  "Do  walk  in,  sir,"  he 
replied ;  "  you  are  my  best  friend.  If  I  could  but  engage  my  friends  to  be  faithful 
with  me,  I  shall  be  sure  to  prosper.  But,  if  you  please,  we  will  both  pray  in  the 
first  place,  and  ask  the  blessing  of  God  upon  our  interview."  After  they  rose  from 
their  knees,  and  had  been  much  blessed  together,  he  said,  ••  Now  I  will  thank  you, 
my  brother,  to  tell  me  what  it  is  you  have  against  me."  "  Oh,"  said  the  man,  •*  1 
really  don't  know  what  it  is  ;  it  is  all  gone,  and  I  believe  I  was  in  the  wrong ! " 
{Anon.)  Private  reproof: — A  reprover  is  like  one  that  is  taking  a  mote  out  ot 
his  brother's  eye — now  this  must  be  done  very  tenderly.  For  this  purpose  it  would 
be  convenient,  where  it  may  be,  that  reproofs  be  given  privately.  "  If  thy  brother 
offend  thee,  tell  him  his  fault  between  him  and  thee."  The  presence  of  many 
make  him  take  up  an  unjust  defence,  who  in  private  would  have  taken  upon  him  a 
just  shame.  The  open  air  makes  sores  to  rankle — other's  crimes  are  not  to  be  cried 
at  the  market.  Private  reproof  is  the  best  grave  to  bury  private  faults  in.  (Switi- 
nock.)  Brotherhj  reproof: — I.  Whom  are  we  to  reprove?  Our  brother.  Thia 
term,  in  general,  comprehends  all  mankind.  II.  For  what  are  we  to  reprove  our 
brother  ?  It  is  for  trespassing  against  us.  III.  How  we  are  to  reprove.  1.  Be 
sure  that  the  person  whom  you  are  about  to  reprove  is  really  guilty  of  the  sin. 
2.  See  that  the  sin,  which  you  are  about  to  reprove,  be  that  heinous  sin  which  you 
have  taken  it  to  be.  We  are  not  for  every  trifle  to  fly  in  the  face  of  our  brother, 
and  to  hale  him  before  our  tribunal.  3.  When  you  are  about  to  reprove  a  brother, 
you  should  consider  whether  there  is  any  probability  of  your  doing  him  any  good 
by  your  reproofs.  If  the  goldsmith  were  persuaded  that  his  toil  and  sweat  at  the 
refining  pot  would  answer  no  good  but  to  injure  his  health,  and  perhaps  to  shorten 
his  days,  he  would  sooner  break  his  utensils  in  pieces,  and  burst  his  bellows  apart 
than  engage  in  such  unprofitable  and  unhealthy  employment.  Equally  fruitless  it 
is  to  reprove  some  men.  To  reprove  successfully  requires  no  small  degree  of 
dexterity  and  penetration.  It  must  be  the  combined  work  of  a  cool  head,  and  a 
gracious  compassionate  heart.  4.  When  you  are  about  to  reprove  a  brother,  go  to 
him  yourselves.  Do  not  wait  until  he  comes  of  his  own  accord  to  you.  6.  He  who 
would  reprove  with  success,  should  be  as  unblemished  as  possible  in  his  own 
conduct.  IV.  For  what  end  we  are  to  reprove  him.  Not  to  please  ourselves,  or 
to  gratify  our  private  resentments — not  to  triumph  over  his  infirmities  or  to  display 
our  superiority  to  him ;  not  to  insult  him,  or  to  make  ourselves  merry  with  his 
faults ;  but  that  we  may  win  him  over  faom  the  camp  of  the  aliens,  and  restore  him 
to  his  rightful  owner.  {Daniel  Roioland.)  The  necessity  of  ecclesiastical  discip- 
line : — I.  The  gospel  cannot  be  preserved  without  salt ;  nor — II.  Fraternal  love 
without  frankness ;  nor — HI.  A  particular  Church  without  discipline  ;  nor — IV. 
The  Church  in  general  without  a  spirit  of  discipline.  (J.  P.  Lange.)  Correction 
of  fault  a  duty  : — He  who  sees  his  brother  commit  a  sin  and  keeps  silence,  is  equally 
in  fault  with  him  who  does  not  forgive  him  who  repents.  The  very  elements  teach 
OS  the  benefit  of  this  correction.  For  so  fire  chastises,  and  by  burning  purifies  the 
air.  The  air  by  the  blasts  of  winds  chastises  and  purifies  the  water.  In  like 
manner,  ao  does  the  water  the  earth.    There  can  be  no  Christian  charity  in  any 


CHAP,  xvin.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  40T 

one  unless  lie  afford  the  medicine  of  correction  to  an  erring  brother.  {ArMn.) 
Private  admonition  best : — It  is  tme  open  sinuers  deserve  open  censures ;  but 
private  admonitions  will  beet  suit  private  offences.  While  we  seek  to  heal  a 
wound  in  our  brother's  actions,  we  should  be  careful  not  to  leave  a  soar  upon  hia 
person.  We  give  grains  of  allowance  in  all  current  coin.  That  is  a  choice  friend 
who  conceals  our  faults  from  the  view  of  others,  and  yet  discovers  them  to  our  own. 
That  medicine  which  rouses  the  evil  humours  of  the  body,  and  does  not  carry  them 
off,  only  leaves  it  in  a  worse  condition  than  it  found  it.  {Archbishop  Seeker.) 
Do  not  parade  other  people's  faults  : — They  are  fittest  to  find  fault  in  whom  there  is 
no  fault  to  be  found.  There  is  no  removing  blots  from  the  paper  by  laying  upon 
them  a  blurred  finger.  What  do  you  get  by  throwing  stones  at  your  enemy's 
windows  wliile  your  own  children  look  out  at  the  casements  ?  He  that  blows  into 
a  heap  of  dust  is  in  danger  of  putting  out  his  own  eyes.  (Ibid.)  Test  of  friend- 
ship : — It  is  one  of  the  severest  tests  of  friendship  to  tell  your  friend  of  his  faults. 
If  you  are  angry  with  a  man,  or  hate  him,  it  is  not  hard  to  go  to  him  and  stab  him 
with  words  ;  but  so  to  love  a  man  that  you  cannot  bear  to  see  the  stain  of  sin  upon 
him,  and  to  speak  painful  truth  through  loving  words — that  is  friendship.  But 
few  have  such  friends.  Our  enemies  asuallj  teaoh  us  what  we  are  at  the  point  of 
the  Bword.    (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Yen.  19-20.   For  when  two  or  tliree  are  gathered  together  In  My  name. — Tht 

S'esence  of  Christ  in  the  sanctuary  : — I.  What  is  implied  in  this  promise  of  thb 
iviNB  PRESENCE.  God  comes  not  here  as  to  a  court  of  assize,  but  to  a  Bethesda, 
to  dispense  mercy.  II.  The  conditions  under  which  the  promise  will  be  ful- 
riLiiED.  1.  To  meet  in  the  Saviour's  name  is  to  seek  its  exaltation.  2.  His  name 
must  be  pleaded  as  the  ground  of  approach  to  God.  3.  The  sole  authority  of  Christ 
must  be  recognized  if  we  would  meet  in  His  name.  III.  The  Jewish  Church  as 
WE^LL  AS  the  Christian  had  God's  gracious  presence.  1.  The  incarnation  was 
substituted  for  the  Shekinah — a  symbol.  2.  The  bodily  exercises,  carnal  ordinances 
are  at  an  end  in  the  Christian  worship.  3.  We  have  the  indwelhug  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  4.  Let  us  expect  the  Divine  blessing.  5.  If  the  presence  of  God  be  pro- 
mised,  how  is  it  that  professors  are  content  with  an  occasional  visit  to  the  sanctuary  ? 
{J.  S.  Pearsall.)  The  presence  of  Christ  in  the  meetings  of  His  people  : — I.  Thb 
Promise.  1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  true  that  Jesus  is  present  with  all  men 
at  all  times.  2.  But  in  the  text  He  meant  something  different  from  that  to  which 
we  have  referred.  Jacob  at  Bethel.  3.  It  implies  a  readiness  on  the  part  of  Christ 
to  do  for  His  people  what  they  ask.  4.  It  implies  a  gift  of  those  graces  which  are 
fitted  to  sweeten  the  spiritual  intercourse  of  the  soul  with  Himself,  and  to  enrich 
it  with  those  Divine  ornaments  which  shall  best  display  the  lustre  of  His  own  glory. 

II.  That  in  order  to  realize  the  riches  op  the  promise  the  disciples  must 
BB  gathered  together.  Also  to  meet  in  the  name  of  Christ.  Acknowledge  on 
our  part  all  fulness  and  power  in  Christ.  (W.  Willson.)  I.  When  the  peoplk 
OF  God  meet  together  for  religious  worship  it  should  bb  in  the  namb 
0»  Christ.  1.  With  His  authority.  2.  Agreeably  to  His  directions.  3.  That  our 
expectations  of  success  are  founded  on  the  influence  which  may  connect  itself  with 
His  name.  II.  When  Christians  are  thus  gathered  together  thet  uxy  ex- 
pect their  Master's  presence.  1.  A  large  number  not  necessary.  2.  A  particular 
class  not  necessary.     3.  A  particular  place  not  necessary.    Christ  once  present. 

III.  The  Eedeemer  has  important  ends  to  accomplish  in  connection  with  thb 

VOUCHSAFEMENT   OF   HiS   PRESENCE   WHEN    HiS   DISCIPLES  ARE  ASSEMBLED.       (T.  Brod- 

shaw.)  Christ's  presence  consecrating  His  Church: — I.  The  Speaker.  1.  The 
beaming  of  His  essential  glory.  2.  How  our  Lord  claims  to  Himself  omnipresence, 
S.  That  our  Lord  here  claims  to  Himself  self-existence,  independent  existence.  4, 
Our  Lord  does  not  contemplate  His  own  existence  as  a  contingency.  H.  Thb  ac- 
knowledged relation  in  which  Christ  stands  to  His  Church.  1.  Our  Lord 
declares  His  headship.  2.  The  declaration  which  He  here  makes  of  His  mind  to- 
wards the  Church  (1)  condescension ;  (2)  faithfulness.  III.  The  view  here  given 
BY  Christ  Himself  of  the  Church.  1.  The  amount, "  two  or  three."  The  Church 
small  in  the  world.  2.  The  unobstrusive,  humble  character  of  the  Church.  3. 
The  special  bond  of  the  Church.  IV.  The  gracious  promise  which  Christ  herb 
MAXES  TO  the  Church  AS  THUS  EXERCISED.  (J.  Macdonald,  M.A.)  United 
prayer: — I.  United  prater  is  to  those  who  exercise  it  a  means  of  gbaob.  1. 
In  recognizing  this,  you  will  get  a  clue  to  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  united 
prayer  as  an  agency  for  personal  and  relative  spiritual  advancement.    2.  United 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvnt. 

prayer  strongly  tends  to  draw  out  tbe  Bonis  of  tbose  engaged  therein  in  sympathy 
and  care,  and  love  for  one  another,  and  for  Christians  generally.  II.  Unitbd 
PRATEB  IS  AN  INSTRUMENT  OF  SERVICE  FOB  CiiRisT.  Sotne  phases  of  Rervico  to  which 
Christians  are  called.  Tbe  cultivation  of  personal  spiritual  life.  The  development 
and  maintenance  of  the  true  nature,  status,  and  influence  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
Effort  to  save  souls.  III.  How  shall  we,  as  Christians,  avail  ourselves  of 
THIS  MEANS  OF  oBACE  and  instrument  of  service  for  Christ?  Exercis-e  united  prayer 
for  tho  outpouring  of  God's  Holy  spirit  upon  the  Church,  &o.  For  the  conversion 
of  men.  women,  and  children.  For  the  agencies  employed,  that  they  may  accom- 
plish the  devout  ends  they  have  in  view.  (John  Thomas.)  I.  The  religion  o» 
Jesus  Christ  is  social.  "  Two  or  three."  Man  is  a  social  being.  The  gospel 
raises  men  to  considerations  of  tbe  highest  nature,  and  to  a  uniting  order  of  things. 
The  servants  of  God  have  similarity  of  views ;  a  common  ground  of  dependence, 
a  common  relation  to  Christ ;  the  same  object  of  endeavour ;  oneness  as  to  cause 
and  inteiest,  look  for  the  same  blessed  end.  We  are  not  surprised  that  they 
•'  meet  tocether."  II.  Wherever  thet  meet  Christ  is  in  the  midst  or  them. 
1.  It  is  His  word,  grace,  and  spirit  that  forms  tlie  Church.  2.  It  is  the  love  of 
Christ  that  prompts  and  influences  them.  3.  This  subject  constitutes  a  criterion 
of  discipleship.  4.  It  may  serve  to  encourage  us  when  few  in  number.  5.  It 
animates  our  thought  in  view  of  the  eternal  world.  In  heaven  there  will  be  a  great 
gathering.  (J.  Birt.)  An  augiist  visitor: — I.  The  place.  "Wliere,"  &c.  A 
meeting  place  is  intended ;  simple ;  it  may  be  lonely.  II.  The  Presence.  A 
spiritual  presence.  The  world  sees  Him  not.  Time  was  when  He  granted  sensible 
tokens  of  His  presence  to  man ;  burning  bush,  Jacob ;  Christ  incarnate ;  now  the 
Comforter  is  come.  IH.  The  purpose.  He  is  in  tbe  midst  for  (1)  inspection,  "  His 
eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire;"  (2)  for  protection  ;  (3)  direction  ;  (4)  probation.  He 
is  in  the  midst  to  try  with  means  and  mercies  —  (5)  salvation.  (J.  Basley.) 
Jesus  present  in  worship: — More  than  the  numbers  stated  here  have  thus  met. 
Christ  is  here.  If  we  had  met  this  evening  to  discuss  questions  concerning 
geography,  we  should  probably  have  felt  ourselves  honoured  with  the  presence  of 
Bucb  a  man  as  Sir  Roderick  Murchison  or  Dr.  Livingstone.  Had  the  discussion 
related  to  history,  to  antiquity,  to  chemistry,  with  what  elatedness  and  bated  breath 
rihould  we  have  listened  to  that  prince  of  historians,  the  late  Lord  Macaulay,  to  the 
world-renowned  Layard,  and  to  the  wonder-working  Faraday.  Had  this  been  a  con- 
gress of  nations — a  meeting  of  crowned  heads — planning  the  course  of  politics, 
disposing  of  the  destinies  of  nations,  and  marking  the  limits  of  empires,  how  im- 
portant should  we  have  deemed  the  occasion  1  Notable  visitors  from  other  climes, 
men  of  mark  and  might  from  other  lands,  would  have  attracted  our  observation — 
have  riveted  our  attention  ;  our  interest  would  have  risen  with  the  occasion.  But 
we  meet  with  other  ends  in  view.  We  come  together  about  our  souls'  affairs  ;  our 
present  peace,  and  our  everlasting  salvation,  are  the  matters  which  concern  us. 
Compared  with  these  other  things  are  temporary  and  trivial.  (Ibid.)  Jesus 
present  in  a  simple  sanctuary  : — "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together." 
There  is  evidently  a  meeting-place  intended.  Proud  mortals  love  display.  When 
Henry  of  England  and  his  neighbour  monarch  of  France  met  with  fiiendly  greet- 
ings, it  was  amid  the  most  gorgeous  glitter  on  th°  Field  of  Cloth  of  Gold.  Christ 
makes  no  demand  for  parade  or  ostentatious  display.  It  forms  no  condition  in  the 
terms  upon  which  He  will  visit  us.  We  have  not  a  tesselated  pavement ;  we  can 
worship  God  without  it.  Wu  have  no  encaustic  tUes  ;  Christ  does  not  want  them. 
(Ibid.)  Jesus  present  to  inspect : — He  is  Light.  He  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  the 
great  Kevealer.  He  visits  thus  all  His  Churches.  He  knows  them  all — their  con- 
Btitution,  their  practice,  their  state.  He  visits  them  as  the  florist  visits  his  garden, 
to  watch  the  progress  of  choice  plants  and  flowers.  He  visits  them  as  the  shepherd 
does  his  flock,  to  inspect  the  condition  of  his  sheep.  He  visits  them  as  the  officer 
does  his  soldiers,  to  see  if  they  are  at  their  post,  if  their  discipline  is  as  it  should 
be,  and  their  arms  in  good  condition.  What  a  sight  for  Christ  do  some  churches 
professedly  Christian  pre-sent  1  How  must  His  holiness  loathe  the  worUUinpss,  sel- 
fishness, pride,  and  the  many  foul  abominations  that  are  covered  with  a  Christian 
name  !  Christ  is  here  for  inspection.  No  member,  no  character,  no  practice,  no 
thought,  word,  wish,  or  feeling,  escapes  the  notice  of  His  eye.  Christian  professor  I 
Christ  sees  thee.  Thou  art  fully  and  thoroughly  known  to  Him.  (Ibid.)  Four 
■present,  but  only  one  visible  .-—When  it  was  decided  to  close  the  prayer-meeting  in 
a  certain  village,  a  good  woman  declared  that  she  would  be  there  if  no  one  else  was. 
She  was  true  to  her  word,  and  when  the  next  morning  some  one  said  to  her  rathef 


CHAP,  xvin.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  40t 

jestingly,  •♦  Did  you  have  a  prayer-meeting  last  night  f  "  "  Ah  !  that  vre  did,"  sha 
replied.  "  How  many  were  present  7  "  "  Four,"  she  said.  "  Why,"  said  he,  •'  1 
heard  that  you  were  there  all  alone."  "  No,"  she  said  ;  "  I  was  the  only  one  visible, 
but  the  Father  was  there,  and  the  Son  was  there,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  was  there,  and 
we  were  all  agreed  in  prayer,"  Before  long  there  was  a  revival  prayer-meeting  and 
a  prospering  church.  (Ibid.)  In  My  name  : — I.  The  place  which  the  kamb  of 
jEbr-w  0CCDPIE8  IN  Cheistianitt.  The  subject  of  knowledge.  The  object  of  faith 
arid  love.  Doctrines,  duties,  precepts  permeated  with  His  name.  Does  not  imply 
nominality,  as  the  name  of  a  book ;  but  He  is  the  substance  of  the  thing.  He  is 
the  life  of  Christianity.  11,  On  what  ground  does  the  name  of  Jesds  occupy 
THIS  PLACE  IN  Chbistlanitt.  1.  The  Father's  appointment.  2.  On  His  own 
authority  as  Messiah.  3.  His  Divine  nature.  4.  His  perfect  manhood.  5.  His 
mediatorship.  Jesus  : — 1.  The  central  force  of  Christianity.  2.  The  radiating 
glory  of  Christianity.  3.  The  attractive  power  of  Christianity.  4.  The  ultimate 
victory  of  Christianity.  5.  Wlio  then  will  be  ashamed  of  the  name  of  Jesus?  (J. 
Bate.)  Public  worship  acceptable  to  God: — No  doubt  the  prayers  which  the 
faithful  put  up  to  heaven  from  under  their  private  roofs  were  very  acceptable  unto 
Him.  But  if  a  saint's  single  voice  in  prayer  be  so  sweet  to  God's  ear,  much  more 
the  church  choir.  His  saints'  prayers  in  consort  together.  A  father  is  glad  to  see 
any  one  of  his  children,  and  makes  him  welcome  when  he  visits  him,  but  much 
more  when  they  come  together ;  the  greatest  feast  is  when  they  all  meet  at  his 
house.  The  public  praises  of  the  Church  are  the  emblem  of  heaven  itself,  where 
all  the  angels  and  saints  make  but  one  consort.  There  is  a  wonderful  prevalency 
in  the  joint  prayers  of  His  people.  When  Peter  was  in  prison,  the  Church  meets 
and  prays  him  out  of  his  enemies'  hands.  A  prince  will  grant  a  petition  subscribed 
b)  the  hands  of  a  whole  city,  which  may  be  he  would  not  at  the  request  of  a  private 
Bubject,  and  yet  love  him  well,  too.  There  is  an  especial  promise  to  public  prayer 
**  Where  two  or  three,"  &c.    {Gurnall.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  a^inst  me,  and  I  forgive 
lam  7 — The  forgiveness  of  injuries  : — I,  The  best  exemplification  op  the  spirit 
OF  forgiveness  is  our  Lord's  own  life.  There  were  two  kinds  of  sin  in  these 
djsys  of  which  Christ  took  cognizance  ;  those  atjainst  society  or  the  race,  and  those 
agalcst  Himself.  To  each  He  applied  the  principle  of  the  text.  He  forgave  the 
vilest  sinners  who  came  to  Him  ;  and  Saul  who  persecuted  His  Church.  But  we 
find  the  highest  illustrations  of  His  love  when  we  mark  His  dealings  with  the  souls 
He  seeks  to  save.  Christ  does  not  turn  against  the  man  who  rejects  Him.  IL 
This  principle  is  intended  to  guide  us  in  our  actions  towards  oub  fellows. 
1.  Shall  not  Christians  be  forbeariug  towards  other  men.  Let  us  bear  wrong  in  as 
generous  a  spirit  as  we  can.  The  feeUng  of  brotherhood  must  be  kept  higher  than 
that  of  revenge.  2.  This  law  must  be  observed  in  the  family.  3.  Christ  teachea 
the  spirit  in  which  we  must  regard  offenders  whose  sin  is  against  society.  Un- 
limited forgiveness  you  will  say  is  unpractical.  Put  it  into  action,  and  let  it  fail. 
Christianity  conquers  by  failing ;  its  martyrs  are  its  victors.  This  is  not  a  dead 
law;  but  life-giving.     {A.J.  Griffith.)        Forgiveness  of  offences: — 1.  A  personaIi 

OFFENCE   IS   anything   WHEREBY   WE   ARE   PEBSONALLY   INJURED   IN  OUB  FEELINGS,  OUB 

beputation,  oue  pebson  or  ESTATE.  A  public  offence  is  one  by  which  the  Church 
is  injured  by  any  of  its  interests.  II.  The  question  is,  What  is  oub  duty  in 
befebence  to  PERSONAL  OFFENCES  ?  1.  We  sliould  uot  cherish  any  malignant  or 
revengeful  feelings  towards  those  who  injure  us.  2.  We  should  not  retaJiate,  or 
avenge  ourselves  on  our  offenders.  3.  We  should  cherish  towards  those  who  offend 
ns  the  feelings  of  kindness,  regarding  them  with  that  benevolence  which  forbids 
OUT  wishing  them  any  harm.  4.  We  should  treat  them  in  our  outward  conduct 
with  kindness,  returning  good  for  evil,  and  acting  towards  them  as  though  they 
had  not  injured  us.  III.  When  are  we  to  forgive?  There  are  two  classes  of 
passages  which  bear  upon  this  subject.  1.  Those  which  prescribe  the  condition  of 
repentance  (Luke  xvii.  3).  2.  Those  in  which  no  such  condition  is  prescribed 
/Matt.  vi.  14,  xviii.  21,  v.  44,  45).  So  Christ  prayed  for  His  crucifiers.  So  Stephen 
prayed.  So  is  God  in  His  dealings  with  us.  These  passages  are  not  inconsistent. 
The  word  forgiveness  is  used  in  a  wider  or  a  stricter  sense.  In  the  wider  sense,  it 
includes  negatively,  not  having  a  spirit  of  revenge ;  and  positively,  exercising  a 
spirit  of  kindness  and  love,  and  manifesting  that  spirit  by  all  appropriate  outward 
acts.  This  is  forgiveness  as  a  Christian's  duty  in  all  cases.  In  a  more  restricted 
sense  it  is  the  remission  of  the  penalty  due  to  an  offence.  This  is  illustrated  in  the 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  rviu. 

case  of  an  offence  against  the  Church.  Eepentance  is  the  condition  only  of  the 
remission  of  the  penalty,  not  of  forgiveness  in  the  wifler  sense.  There  are  penal- 
ties proper  to  private  as  well  as  public  offences.  IV.  Grounds  of  thb  duty. 
1.  God's  command,  2.  God's  example,  3.  Our  own  need  of  forgiveness.  Our 
sins  against  God  are  innumerable  and  unspeakably  great.  4.  The  threatening  that 
we  shall  not  be  forgiven  unless  we  forgive  others.  5.  It  is  a  dictate  of  Christian 
love.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  forgiveness  : — I.  Is  urged  by  a  considera- 
tion of  the  greatness  of  God's  mercy  to  us.  II.  Of  the  lightness  of  our  brother's 
sina.  III.  Of  the  terrible  consequences  of  indulging  an  unforgiving  spirit.  {Dr. 
Dobie.)  The  forgiveness  of  sins : — 1.  If  God  commands  us  thus  to  forgive,  ther» 
must  06  an  infinite  ocean  of  forgiving  love  in  His  own  heart.  2.  That  God's  for- 
giveness is  altogether  above  man's  conception  of  it.  {J.  II.  Evans,  M.A.)  A 
forgiving  spirit  essential  to  vital  religion : — I.  The  Christian  duty  of  forgive- 
ness. II.  The  consequences  of  refusing  to  fulfil  that  duty.  {B.  W.  Noel, 
M.A.)  The  duty  of  forgiving  offences: — There  are  many  wrong  notions  about 
forgiveness.  Consider  the  following  conspicuous  points — I.  The  principle  of  for- 
giveness is  single.  II.  Forgiveness  and  forbearance  are  two  separate  principles  of 
action.  III.  The  object  of  the  Christian  religion  is  to  make  like  God,  and  therefore 
the  Christian  is  called  upon  to  imitate  God  in  his  action.  IV.  Compassion  and 
forgiveness  are  very  different  thiugs.  V.  Forgiveness  has  an  element  of  justice  in 
it.  [N.  Schenck,  D.D.)  Limited  forgiveness  : — This  question  was  framed  in  the 
very  spirit  of  the  old  law  of  retaliation.  By  proposing  any  limit  whatever  to  for- 
giveness, Peter  showed  that  he  still  considered  that  to  forgive  was  the  exceptional 
thing,  was  to  forego  a  right  which  must  some  time  be  reassumed,  was  not  an 
eternal  law  of  the  kingdom,  but  only  a  tentative  measure  which  at  any  moment 
may  be  revoked  ;  that  underneath  the  forgiveness  we  extend  to  an  erring  brother, 
there  lies  a  right  to  revenge  which  we  may  at  any  time  assert.  This  feeling, 
wherever  it  exists  shows  that  we  are  living  with  retaliation  for  the  law,  forgiveness 
for  the  exception.  But  Christ's  law  is,  that  forgiveness  shall  be  unUmited.  (Marcu$ 
Dods,  D.D.)  Injuries  not  to  be  made  public  : — A  man  strikes  me  with  a  sword, 
and  inflicts  a  wound.  Suppose,  instead  of  binding  up  the  wound,  I  am  showing  it 
to  everybody,  and  after  it  has  been  bound  up  I  am  taking  off  the  bandage  con- 
stantly, and  examining  the  depths  of  the  wound,  and  making  it  fester,  is  there  a 
person  in  the  world  who  would  not  call  me  a  fool  ?  However,  such  a  fool  is  he  who, 
by  dwelling  upon  little  injuries  or  insults,  causes  them  to  agitate  and  influence 
his  mind.  How  much  better  were  it  to  put  a  bandage  on  the  wound  and  never  look 
to  it  again.  {Simeon.)  The  superior  influence  of  forgiveness : — A.  soldier  in  the 
American  army  heard  of  the  severe  illness  of  his  wife.  He  applied  for  leave  of 
absence  but  was  refused.  He  left  the  army,  but  before  he  got  away  he  was  retaken, 
and  brought  in  as  a  deserter.  He  was  tried,  found  guilty,  and  summoned  before 
the  commanding  officer  to  receive  his  sentence.  He  entered  the  tent,  saluted,  and 
stood  perfectly  unmoved  while  the  officer  read  his  fearful  doom — ' '  To  be  shot  to 
death  with  musketry  on  the  next  Friday."  Not  a  muscle  of  his  face  twitched,  not 
a  limb  quivered.  "  I  deserve  it,  sir,"  he  replied,  respectfully ;  "  I  deserted  from  my 
flag.  Is  that  all,  sir  ?  "  "  No,"  replied  the  officer  ;  "  I  have  something  else  for 
yon  ;  "  and,  taking  another  paper,  he  read  aloud  the  doomed  man's  pardon.  The 
undaunted  spirit  which  severity  had  failed  to  move  was  completely  broken  down  by 
clemency.  He  dropped  to  the  ground,  shaking,  sobbing,  and  overcome,  and,  being 
restored  to  his  regiment,  proved  himself  grateful  for  the  mercy  shown  him,  and  was 
soon  promoted  for  good  conduct.  Forgiveness  awakens  gratitude  : — A  private 
was  court-martialled  for  sleeping  at  his  post.  He  was  convicted,  sentenced  to  death, 
and  the  day  fixed  for  his  execution.  But,  the  case  reaching  the  ears  of  the  Presi- 
dent, he  resolved  to  save  him  ;  he  signed  a  pardon  and  sent  it  to  the  camp.  The 
day  came.  "  Suppose,"  thought  the  President,  "  my  pardon  has  not  reached  him." 
The  telegraph  was  called  into  requisition  ;  but  no  answer  came.  Then,  ordering 
his  carriage,  be  rode  ten  miles  and  saw  that  the  soldier  was  saved.  When  the 
Third  Vermont  charged  upon  the  rifle-pits,  the  enemy  poured  a  volley  upon  them. 
The  first  man  who  fell,  with  six  bullets  in  his  body,  was  William  Scott,  of  Com- 
pany E.  His  comrades  caught  him  up ;  and,  as  his  life-blood  ebbed  away,  ha 
raised  to  heaven,  amid  the  din  of  the  war,  the  cries  of  the  dying,  and  the  shouts  of 
the  enemy,  a  prayer  for  the  president,  {Moore.)  Forgiveness : — Peter's  question 
showed  that  he  wholly  misunderstood  the  nature  of  forgiveness.  He  thought  it  was 
something  he  might  withhold  or  give  as  he  pleased.  Our  Lord  shows  that  it  is  • 
state  of  the  heart  which  cannot  be  called  forth  by  order  or  oalonlation.    L  Both  in 


CHAP,  xvm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  411 

ttie  parable  and  in  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  here  it  is  admitted  that  all  men  havk 
CLAIMS  ON  ONE  ANOTHEB.  Theso  ate  not  to  be  compared,  in  point  of  magnitude, 
with  the  claims  which  God  has  on  all,  but  still  they  are  claims.  The  man  who  is 
debtor  towards  God  may  be  a  creditor  towards  somebody,  and  the  man  who  has 
committed  most  wrongs  may  be  able,  in  his  turn,  to  say  that  there  ia  some  one  who 
has  wronged  him.  II.  Admitting  to  the  full  the  claims  which  one  man  has  against 
another  in  the  way  of  personal  offences,  tet  there  is  something  of  more  impor- 
tance STILL  THAN  THE  RECTIFYING   OF  A  WRONG  ACT  OB  WORD.      It  is  of  importance   tO 

have  the  wrong  righted,  but  Jesus  Christ  has  more  respect  still  to  the  character, 
repentance,  and  restoration  of  the  individual  who  has  offended.  It  is  difficult  to 
realize  that  the  offender  has  inflicted  a  worse  injury  on  himself  than  on  the 
offended,  the  injury  he  has  wrought  on  his  own  spirit.  This  truth  will  come  out 
more  clearly  when  you  consider  the  precepts  Christ  gives  for  guidance  in  the 
matter,  and  the  great  result  of  success — "Tell  him  his  fault  between  thee,"  &c., 
"  Thou  hast  gained  thy  brother."  This  is  above  all  personal  gain.  Charity  is  vic- 
tory.    III.  This  duty  of  forgiveness  is  enforced  by  a  parable  where  cub  claims 

ON  OTHERS  are  PLACED  IN  CONTRAST  WITH  God's  CLAIMS  OS  US.     We  have  HO  hopC  but 

in  forgiveness.  If  we  feel  the  need  of  Divine  compassion,  have  we  not  learned  the 
worth  of  it  towards  our  fellow-creatures.  {A.  Wat.-^on,  D.D.)  Forgiveness  not  a 
matter  of  calculation : — Suppose  a  man  were  to  put  the  question.  How  often  must 
I  admire  what  is  beautiful  and  great  in  creation  ?  how  often  must  I  cherish  affeet- 
tion  for  my  child?  how  often  must  I  honour  God?  how  often  must  I  practise  the 
duty  of  kindness  ?  or  how  often  must  I  feel  sympathy  for  the  unhappy  and  the 
Buffering  ?  Tou  will  see  that  any  answer  which  could  be  given  to  such  a  question 
would  be  misleading,  simply  because  the  question  proceeded  on  a  false  notion  of 
what  admiration,  or  affection,  or  sympathy  is.  To  give  a  direct  answer  to  such 
questions,  you  could  only  say,  in  Christ's  words,  "Until  seventy  times  seven"  — 
i.e.,  numbers  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter.  Forgiveness  is  a  simple  state  of 
mind,  like  admiration  of  God's  creation,  for  which  all  that  a  man  needs  is  a  sense 
of  beauty  and  order  in  his  nature.  Forgiveness  is  a  state  of  heart,  just  as  affection 
or  sympathy  is.  And  no  man  thinks  of  determining  how  often  and  how  far  he 
must  feel  sympathy,  or  how  often  and  how  far  he  must  love  those  who  are  dear  to 
him.  The  sympathy  is  always  there,  the  love  is  always  in  the  heart,  and  it  requires 
only  to  be  appealed  to  and  touched  to  come  forth.  You  could  not  imagine  a  man 
of  genuine  tenderness  of  heart  making  up  his  mind  and  calculating  whether  he 
ghould  feel  pity  for  a  case  of  distress  or  not.  You  could  not  imagine  a  friend 
debating  %vith  himself  whether  he  would  sympathize  with  his  friend  in  some 
calamity.  Sympathy  is  free  and  spontaneous ;  it  does  not  come  and  go  at  one'a 
call :  love  is  only  love ;  sympathy  is  only  sympathy,  when  it  can't  help  itself. 
(Ibid.)  The  offender  the  greatest  sufferer,  and  therefore  needs  pity  most : — If  a 
man,  in  robbing  us  of  a  trifle,  were  to  meet  with  an  accident  which  disabled  him  and 
made  him  a  sufferer  for  life,  we  should  feel  that  his  punishment  far  exceeded  our 
loss ;  and  most  of  us  would  have  the  heart  to  commiserate  him,  even  though  he 
had  only  himself  to  blame.  And  if  the  injury  is  not  to  life  or  limb,  but  to  the 
immortal  part  of  the  man — if  he  destroys  his  own  spiritual  life — ^we  shotdd  com- 
miserate him  all  the  more.  (Ibid.)  Forgiveness  must  be  real  and  true : — We 
may  not  forgive  with  our  hps,  and  bear  malice  in  our  hearts.  Such  sham  for- 
giveness is  only  too  common.  A  man  was  lying  on  his  sick  bed,  and  the  clergyman 
by  his  side  vas  urging  him  to  be  reconciled  to  some  oue  who  had  injured  him.  After 
mnch  persuasion  the  man  said, "  If  I  die  I  will  forgive  him,  but  if  I  live  he  had  better 
keep  out  of  my  way."  And  again,  our  forgivenebs  must  be  willing,  not  forced  from 
Ufl.  (Buxton  Wilmot.)  Forgive  and  forget : — How  many  are  there  who  profess 
to  forgive,  but  cannot  forget,  an  injury.  Such  are  like  persons  who  sweep  the 
chamber,  but  leave  the  dust  behind  the  door.  Whenever  we  grant  our  offending 
brother  a  discharge,  our  hearts  also  should  Bet  their  hands  to  the  acquittance. 
(Archbishop  Seeker.)  A  sensibility  to  injury  not  sinful : — We  may  without  Bin  be 
Bensible  of  injuries  (a  sheep  is  as  sensible  of  a  bite  as  a  Bwine) ;  but  it  must  be 
with  the  silence  of  a  sheep,  or  at  utmost  the  mourning  of  a  dove,  not  the  roaring 
of  a  bear,  or  bellowing  of  a  bull,  when  baited.  All  desire  of  revenge  must  be  care- 
fully cast  out;  and  if  the  wrongdoer  say,  "I  repent,"  you  must  say,  "  I  remit," 
and  that  from  the  heart ;  being  herein  like  that  king  of  England  of  whom  it  Li 
taid  that  he  never  forgot  anything  but  injuries.    (John  Tra^p.) 

Vera.  23-35.    T&erefore  Is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  likened  onto  a  ecrtala 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xmt, 

king,  which  would  take  accoiint  of  his  servants. — The  unmerciful  servant: — I. 
That  we  ake  all  God'b  debtobs.  Debt  in  the  New  Testament  is  a  common  figure 
for  sin  ;  but  dutv  is  a  moral  thing,  uot  a  commercial.  It  is  used  figuratively  to 
denote  an  obligation  vhicb  one  has  failed  to  meet.  Ltt  us  compare  our  character 
with  the  requirements  of  God's  law.  II.  That  none  op  us  has  anything  where- 
with TO  PAT  HIS  DEBT  TO  GoD.  Few  will  admit  this.  They  say,  "  Have  patience 
with  me  and  I  will  pay  thee  all."  They  will  try  to  make  themselves  better.  III. 
That  God  is  willing  to  forgive  us  all  our  debt.     IV.  That  the  reception  o» 

THIS  forgiveness  BY  US  INVOLVES  IN  IT  THE  OBLIGATION  TO  FORGIVE  THOSE  OF 
OUR  FELLOW-MEN  WHO  HAVE  TRESPASSED  AGAINST  OURSELVES.  HoW  far  this  obliga- 
tion extends.  It  does  not  imply  that  we  are  to  take  no  notice  of  the  wrong  done 
us  ;  this  would  be  selfish  indifierence  alike  to  onr  brother  and  his  guilt.  But  how 
comes  it  that  the  obligation  to  cherish  this  forgiving  spirit  is  conuected  with  our 
reception  of  God's  mercy.  All  who  accept  God's  pardon  are  at  the  same  time 
renewed  into  His  image  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  so  resembling  Him 
in  cbaracter,  they  seek  to  do  unto  others  ae  He  has  done  to  them.  Gratitude  will 
take  this  form  (Ephes.  iv.  32).  Lessons:  1.  That  our  sins  against  God  are  vastly 
greater  than  our  neighbour's  trespasses  against  us.  2.  We  are  constantly  needing 
the  forbearance  of  God  and  the  long-suffering  of  our  fellow-man.  3.  That  impla- 
cability on  our  part  is  an  evidence  that  we  are  as  yet  unforgiven  by  God.  {W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Man's  unavailing  effort  to  pay  his  sin  debts : — Commonly  the  very 
last  thing  which  he  will  admit  is  that  he  can  do  nothing  to  make  atonement  for  it. 
He  will  go  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness.  He  will  try  to  make  himself 
better.  He  will  promise  future  obedience,  as  if  that  could  be  a  satisfaction  for  the  sins 
of  the  past.  It  is  thus  with  him  as  it  is  too  often  with  business  men  in  a  time  of  em- 
barrassment ;  for,  no  matter  how  involved  his  affairs  may  be,  the  very  last  thing  that 
a  merchant  will  admit  is  that  he  ia  hopelessly  insolvent.  Hugh  Miller,  in  his  auto- 
biography, thus  describes  what  he  learned  by  his  experience  as  a  clerk  in  the  branch 
bank  of  Linlithgow :  "  I  found  I  could  predict  every  bankruptcy  in  the  district ;  but 
I  usually  fell  short  from  ten  to  eighteen  months  of  the  period  in  which  the  event 
actually  took  place.  I  could  pretty  nearly  determine  the  time  when  the  difficulties 
and  entanglements  which  I  saw,  ought  to  have  produced  their  proper  effects,  and 
landed  in  failure  ;  but  I  missed  taking  into  account  the  desperate  efforts  which  men 
of  energetic  temperament  make  in  such  circumstances,  and  which,  to  the  signal 
injury  of  their  friends  and  the  loss  of  their  creditors,  succeed  usually  in  staving  oflf 
the  catastrophe  for  a  season."  So  the  sinner,  in  his  attempts  to  work  out  his  own 
redemption,  sinks  only  the  deeper  into  the  mire.  {Ibid.)  Forgiveness — one  law 
for  lord  and  servant: — It  is  a  parable  to  show  us  that  our  life  must  be  a  repetition 
of  the  life  of  God.  "  How  often  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me,  and  I  forgive 
him  ?  "  I.  The  answer  of  the  Lord,  folded  up  in  this  parable,  is  "  As  often 
AB  God  FOEoiVEa  you."  As  soon  as  the  lord  began  to  reckon  with  his  servants, 
he  found  this  great  defaulter ;  in  any  company  God  would  immediately  find  such 
an  one.  What  our  Lord  represents  as  one  act,  is  really  a  contiuued  flow  of  acts; 
every  hour  we  are  the  subjects  of  forgiveness.  Just  as  often  you  are  to  let  forgive- 
ness flow  forth  to  others  ;  the  heart  of  the  servant  must  be  in  unison  with  th8 
heart  of  the  master.  II.  God's  mercy  to  cs  is  to  be  a  spring  of  mercy  in  va 
10  OTHERS.  The  unmerciful  servant  would  not  resemble  his  master.  We  are 
receivers  mainly  that  we  may  be  givers.  Observe  the  circumstances  in  which  aa 
Christians  we  are  expected  to  exercise  a  forgiving  spirit.  Christ  does  not  ask  us  to 
make  bricks  without  straw.  Everything  that  we  need  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
command  is  provided.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  given  to  mould  ns  to  the  form  of  mercy 
which  ie  in  Him.  It  is  a  reasonable  and  ample  provision.  Christ  endeavours 
to  open  our  hearts  by  kindness ;  not  by  reproaches  or  commands,  but  by  forgive- 
ness. He  dies  that  our  transgressions  may  be  put  away.  If  the  power  to  forgive 
be  greater  in  us  in  this  way  than  any  other,  the  responsibility  under  which  we  lie 
to  put  forth  that  power  is  enormously  increased.  III.  We  must  take  the  entirb 
oirr,  OB  lose  all.  The  entire  gift  of  the  king  was  eomething  more  than  forpive- 
ntss.  It  was  also  a  forgiving  heart.  It  is  the  gift  of  a  new  life.  He  took 
the  liberty,  joy,  relief,  and  then  stopped.  He  took  the  remission  of  his  debt ;  but 
not  the  debt-remitting  heart.  Pardon  is  not  salvation  ;  there  must  be  holiness  as 
well.  {A.  Maclcod,  D.D.)  Ood's  mercy  reproduced  in  the  life  of  the  Christian: — 
If  you  cleave  a  stem  of  rock  crystal  into  fragments,  every  fragment  will  be  found  • 
repetition  more  or  less  complete  of  the  unbroken  crystal.  In  a  single  drop  of  seat, 
water  you  will  find  all  tha  elements  of  the  sea  itself.    Pluck  a  leaf  from  the  oak, 


CHAP,  svin.]  8T.  Matthew.  4i» 

the  beech,  the  plane,  or  any  forest  tree  ;  place  it  between  you  and  the  light — yon 
will  find  that  the  profile  of  the  leaf  is  the  profile  of  the  perfect  tree.  Look  at  its 
veins  ;  they  are  a  little  map  of  the  branches  of  the  tree.  The  tree  reproduces  itself 
in  the  leaf  ;  the  leaf  is  a  picture  of  the  whole  tree.  The  form  of  the  fragment,  of 
the  drop,  of  the  leaf,  is  the  form  of  the  whole  to  which  it  belongs.  This  law 
holds  throughout  the  wide  variety  of  nature.  A  single  bone  reveals  the  animal; 
a  single  ray  of  light  contains  the  mysteries  of  all  light ;  the  pebble  you  start  with 
your  foot  is  an  epitome  of  the  globe  we  inhabit.  {Ihid.)  The  unmerciful  servant: 
— This  f  arable.  I.  The  cibcumstances  which  liED  to  its  delivery.  Our  Lord 
had  been  giving  instructions  to  his  disciples  concerning  the  restoration  of  aiii  erring 
brother.  The  injured  party  should  be  ready  to  forgive.  II.  The  several  parts 
OF  WHICH  rr  IS  composed.  The  king  is  intended  to  represent  the  Most  High ;  but 
He  is  not  too  exalted  to  attend  to  the  concerns  of  His  subjects,  1,  A  servant  is  in  debt 
to  his  sovereign.  (1)  Its  amount  exceedingly  great.  Our  sin  is  great.  (2)  This 
servant  being  unable  to  meet  his  heavy  liabilities,  the  claims  of  justice  are  advanced. 

J 3)  To  arrest  the  execution  of  the  sentence  a  humble  and  earnest  plea  is  presented. 
4)  Touched  with  a  feeling  of  pity  the  king  relinquishes  his  claims  and  extends  to 
the  debtors  a  full  and  free  pardon.  2.  One  servant  in  debt  to  another ;  even  to 
him  who  had  been  so  heavily  in  debt  himself,  but  was  most  generously  released 
from  all  his  obligations.  (1)  A  contrast  truly  appalling.  (2)  A  punishment  richly 
deserved.  III.  The  practical  lessons  it  enforces.  (Expositortj  Outlinei.) 
Twenty-second  Sunday  after  Trinity :  —  Warn  against  misapplications  of  the 
parable.  1.  It  would  be  an  error  to  apply  it  to  the  subject  of  property  obligation* 
and  money-debt.    2.  Neither  does  it  relate  to  civil  punishments  (Rom.  xiii.  1-5) 

5.  Neither  are  we  to  see  in  this  parable  the  history  of  any  particular  persons,  bul 
eimply  the  exhibition  of  the  nature  and  working  of  the  Divine  principle  of  grace, 
first  in  absolving  us,  and  then  in  the  temper  which  it  begets  in  the  hearts  of  thoi4 
who  are  the  subjects  of  it.  4.  Neither  is  it  intended  to  teach  us  by  this  parable, 
that  our  exercise  of  forgiveness  is  in  any  way  the  procuring  cause  of  God's  forgive 
ness.  The  way  thus  cleared,  consider  some  of  the  elements  of  the  parable  itsci.% 
1.  Man  is  an  immense  debtor.  2.  Sad  is  man's  estate  in  view  of  this  enormous 
indebtedness.  There  is  a  way,  however,  for  these  terrible  consequences  to  be 
averted.  4.  But  there  may  be  great  debtors  to  whom  the  Lord's  word  of  entir# 
forgiveness  has  been  spoken,  who  yet  in  the  end  fail  of  the  advantages  of  it.  S 
God's  forgiveness  is  not  bestowed  that  we  may  indulge  our  selfishness  and  greed. 

6.  There  are  other  servants  spoken  of  besides  the  two  debtors.  "  When  they  aa-w 
what  was  done  they  were  very  sorry."  This  is  the  form  which  true  charity  takef 
when  called  to  witness  sinfulness.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D,)  The  unmerciful  servant 
— I.  The  practice  of  forgiving  injuries.  II.  The  principle  of  forgiving  injuries. 
{W.  Arnot.)  Mercy  uncommunicated,  not  truly  received: — If  the  channel  of  hia 
heart  had  really  been  inserted  into  the  fountain-head  of  mercy  for  receiving,  mercy 
would  infallibly  have  flowed  in  the  way  of  giving,  wherever  the  need  of  a  brother 
made  an  opening ;  if  the  vessel  had  been  charged,  it  would  certainly  have  discharged. 
No  compassion  flowed  from  that  heart  to  refresh  a  fellow-creature  in  distress,' 
because  that  heart  had  never  truly  opened  to  accept  mercy  from  God ;  the  reservoir 
was  empty,  and  therefore  the  outbranching  channels  remained  dry.  (Ibid.)  The 
magnitude  of  injury  determined  by  our  temper  towards  it : — Most  of  the  injuries  with 
which  we  are  called  to  deal  are  small,  even  in  relation  to  human  capawty  ;  they  are 
very  often  precisely  of  the  size  that  our  own  temper  makes  them.  Some  people  pos- 
sess the  art  of  esteeming  great  injuries  small,  and  some  the  art  of  esteeming  small 
injuries  great.  The  first  is  like  a  traveller  who  throws  a  great  many  stones  out  of 
♦h«  burden  which  he  carries,  and  so  walks  with  ease  along  the  road;  the  other  is 
like  a  traveller  who  gathers  a  great  many  stones  on  the  wayside,  and  adds  them  to 
his  burden,  and  is  therefore  soon  crushed  by  the  load.  (Ibid.)  Man  freed  from 
an  unforgiving  temper  by  thf  gentle  influences  of  the  Divine  love,  not  by  self-deter 
mination: — A  traveller  in  Burmah,  after  fording  a  certain  river,  found  his  body 
covered  all  over  by  a  swarm  of  small  leeches,  busily  sucking  his  blood.  His  first 
impulse  was  to  tear  the  tormentors  from  his  flesh ;  but  his  servant  warned  him  that 
to  pull  them  off  by  mechanical  violence  would  expose  his  life  to  danger.  They 
mast  not  be  torn  off,  lest  portions  remain  in  the  wounds  and  become  a  poison ; 
they  must  drop  off  spontaneously,  and  so  they  will  be  harmless.  The  native  forth- 
with prepared  a  bath  for  his  master,  by  the  decoction  of  some  herbs,  and  directed 
him  to  lie  down  in  it.  As  soon  as  he  had  bathed  in  the  balsam  the  leeches  dropped 
off.     Each  nnforgiven  injury  rankling  in  the  heart  is  like  a  leech  sucking  the  ike- 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSIEATOR.  [chap,  xvin, 

blood.  Mere  human  determination  to  have  done  vrith  it,  will  not  cast  the  evil  thing 
away.  You  must  bathe  your  whole  being  in  God's  pardoning  mercy ;  and  these 
venomous  creatures  will  instantly  let  go  their  hold.  You  will  stand  up  free. 
{Ibid.)  A  wide  view  of  heavenly  good  lessena  the  power  of  earthly  wrongs: — While 
a  few  acres  of  cold  barren  moorland  constitute  all  your  heritage,  if  a  neighbour 
encroaches  on  it  by  a  hair's-breadth,  you  assert  your  right  and  repel  the  aggres- 
sion  ;  p(j=sibly  you  may,  in  your  zeal,  accuse  him  of  an  intention  to  trespass,  if  you 
see  him  digging  his  own  ground  near  your  border.  While  your  property  is  very 
small,  you  are  afraid  of  losing  any  of  it ;  and  perhaps  you  cry  out  before  you  are 
hurt.  But  if  you  become  heir  to  a  broad  estate  in  a  fertile  valley,  you  will  no 
longer  lie  disposed  to  watch  the  motions  of  your  neighbour,  and  go  to  law  with  him 
for  a  spadeful  of  moss  that  he  may  have  taken  from  a  di'  puted  spot.  Thus,  while 
a  human  soul  has  no  other  portion  than  an  uncertain  shred  of  this  uncertain  world, 
be  is  kept  in  terrjr  lest  an  atom  of  his  property  shoald  be  lost  ;  he  will  do  battle 
with  all  his  might  against  any  one  who  is,  or  seems  to  be,  encroaching  on  his  honour, 
or  business,  or  property:  but  when  he  becomes  a  child  of  God,  and  an  heir  of  an 
iiicorrupiitle  inheritance — when  he  is  a  prince  on  the  steps  of  a  throne,  he  can 
afford  to  overlook  small  deductions  from  a  possession  that  is  insignificant  in  itself, 
and  liable  to  be  taken  away  at  any  time  without  an  hour's  warning.  (Ibid.)  The 
forgiving  spirit  aided  by  prayer : — The  miller,  finding  that  some  of  the  lumps  are 
large  and  hard,  and  that  the  mill-stones  are  consequently  almost  standing  still, 
goes  quietly  out  and  lets  more  water  on.  Go  you,  and  do  likewifce.  When  injuries 
that  seem  large  and  hard  are  accumulated  on  your  head,  and  the  process  of  for- 
giving them  begins  to  choke  and  go  slow  uudur  the  pressure,  as  if  it  would  soon 
stop  altogether ;  when  the  demand  for  forgiveness  grows  great,  and  the  forgiving 
power  in  the  heart  is  unable  to  meet  it ;  then,  enter  into  your  closet  and  shut  your 
door,  and  pray  to  your  Father  si^ecifically  for  more  experience  of  His  forgiving 
love ;  so  shall  your  forgiving  love  grow  stronger,  and  overcome  every  obstacle  that 
stands  in  its  way.  (Ibid.)  Sin  as  debt : — I.  That  sin  is  a  debt,  a  vast  debt ;  or 
that  there  is  much,  yea  great,  exceeding  great  evil  in  sin,  considered  as  a  debt. 
II.  That  sinners  are  debtors,  and  have  nothing  to  pay,  and  therefore  are  forgiven 
freely,  as  an  act  of  God's  mercy,  all  their  debts  without  any  satisfaction  made  by 
them.  III.  That  God  doth  and  will  call  sinners  who  are  debtors  to  Him,  to  an 
account,  be  they  willing  or  no.  IV.  That  a  pardoned  person,  or  one  that  God  hath 
forgiven,  does  forgive  from  his  heart  all  those  that  have  injured  him,  and  they  that 
do  not  so  are  not,  nor  shall  be  ever  forgiven.  (Benjamin  Reach.)  Evil  of  sin : — 
1.  Sin  is  a  vast  debt,  or  an  exceeding  great  evil  in  respect  of  God,  against  whom  it 
is  committed.  2.  Sin  is  a  vast  debt,  considering  what  wrong  it  hath  done  to  God; 
it  is  a  crossing  His  will,  a  violation  of  His  law,  a  contemning  His  authority,  a 
despising  of  His  sovereignty  and  dominion,  a  defacing  His  image,  and  resisting 
His  spirit,  abuse  of  His  patience,  and  a  slighting  of  all  His  love,  mercy,  and  good- 
ness. 3.  Sin  is  a  great  debt,  because  all  men,  yea,  all  the  saints  of  tue  earth,  nor 
angels  of  heaven  can  pay  this  debt.  4.  Sin  is  a  vast  debt,  because  it  exposes  the 
sinner  to  eternal  wrath  and  vengeance.  (Ibid.)  Ways  of  being  debtors  : — 1.  By 
owing  money.  2.  By  being  a  trespasser,  offender,  or  guilty  person.  3.  By  robbery 
of  a  man's  goods  or  good  name.  4.  By  ^'iolating  a  covenant.  5.  By  receiving 
kindnesfes.  He  owes  the  debt  of  gratitude  and  thankfulness.  {Ibid.)  Sinners 
lihe  debtors: — 1.  lu  their  unwillingness  to  be  called  to  account.  2.  Attended  with 
Bhame.  S.  They  have  many  shifts  and  delays.  4.  Do  not  like  to  meet  their 
creditor,  5.  Continually  afraid  of  arrest.  (Ibid.)  Compaasion  God-like: — 
There  is  nothing  that  makes  a  man  so  unlike  to  God,  as  a  hard  heart ;  without 
pity,  without  patience.  In  the  tabernacle,  the  doors  of  the  sanctum  sanctorum  were 
of  ohve-wood  (1  Kings  vi.  31);  which  is  the  hieroglyphic  of  mercy:  but  the  gates  of 
that  fearful  dungeon,  which  is  hell,  are  said  to  be  of  brass  and  iron;  "He  hath 
broken  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron  in  sunder  "  (Psa.  cvii.  16) ;  the 
signs  of  hard  hearts  and  instruments  of  destruction.  Which  serves  to  show,  that 
the  way  to  hell  is  by  inhumanity ;  to  heaven,  by  pity.  Of  all  the  passions  in 
US,  compassion  is  the  bet ;  and  a  man  without  this  tenderness,  is  but  the  statue 
of  a  man ;  a  mere  stone  in  a  human  figure.  The  very  stones  will  seem  to  waep, 
when  foul  weather  is  a-coming ;  and  as  if  they  had  been  once  so  full  of  sorrow  for 
Christ's  suffi  rings,  that  their  solid  breasts  could  no  longer  contain  it,  they  brake 
in  pieces.  There  be  men  harder  than  stones,  that  have  hearts  more  impenetrable, 
obdurate,  and  unrelenting,  and  less  capable  of  remorse ;  nay,  instead  of  pitying  the 
wounds  of  the  miserable,  they  make  those  miserable  woundJs.     {T.  Adams. )        /«• 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  415 

fiuence  of  forgivenest : — The  fate  of  the  nnmerciful  servant  tells  na  in  the  plainest 
language  that  the  mere  cancelling  of  our  guilt  does  not  save  us.  It  tells  us  that 
unless  the  forgiveness  of  God  humbles  us,  and  begets  within  us  a  truly  meek  and 
loving  spirit,  we  cannot  be  owned  as  His  children.  The  best  assurance  that  we  are 
ourselves  forgiven  is  the  consciousness  that  the  very  spirit  of  the  forgiving  God  is 
working  in  our  own  hearts  towards  others.      (Marcus  Dods.)  Forgiveness : — 

Forgiveness  is  cheaper  than  revenge,  and  is  sweeter  and  more  valuable.  Prmlence, 
•s  well  as  piety,  counsels  quiet  to  men  under  reproof  or  reproach.  If  a  bee  stings 
you,  will  you  go  to  the  hive  and  destroy  it  T  Would  not  a  thousand  come  upon 
you?  If  you  receive  a  trifling  injury,  don't  be  anxious  to  avenge  it.  Let  it  drop. 
It  is  wisdom  to  say  little  respecting  the  injuries  you  have  received.  When  enemies 
see  they  have  hit  you  they  know  where  to  strike  next  time,  while  if  you  show  no 
signs  of  disquiet,  they  think  their  stroke  must  have  missed  its  mark.  Lie  quiet, 
and  you  will  be  likely  to  be  let  alone.  (H.  L.  Hastings.)  The  parable  of 
ihe  king  that  took  account  of  his  servant: — Note — I.  The  obeat  goodness  and 
CLEMENCT  OF  GoD.  Delay  was  asked  for,  and  remission  was  given.  How  great 
the  love;  the  gift  exceeds  the  petition.  II.  The  great  poweb  or  hdmiuty. 
The  servant  kneeled  down  and  prayed  in  a  few  simple  words,  and  he  was 
forgiven  his  debt.  Certain  lions  spare  a  prey  that  prostrates  itself  before  them. 
III.  The  punishment  is  one  thing,  the  fault  is  anotheb.  There  is  a  freeing 
from  the  dominion  of  Satan,  and  then  there  is  a  remission  of  the  punishment. 
Two  distinct  acts.  Absalom  was  pardoned,  yet  he  was  not  admitted  to  David'a 
presence  (2  Sara.  xiv.  28).  IV.  The  inconstanct  and  mutability  op  man.  V. 
The  need  we  have  to  fokoivb  injuries.  Like  our  blessed  Lord  and  St.  Stephen, 
we  must  pray  for  our  murderers.  [From  the  Latin.)  The  just  account : — I.  Thb 
SUBLIMITY  OF  THE  JUDICIAL  CONDITION.  "  A  Certain  king,"  endowed  with  the 
highest  powers,  will  be  our  judge — Jesus  Christ  (Rev.  xix.  16).  His  three  attri- 
butes are — 1.  Infallible  knowledge.  2.  Inflexible  justice.  3.  Invincible  power. 
Hence  He  is  to  be  greatly  feared  (Jer.  x.  7).  II.  The  impossibility  of  fimai< 
AVOIDANCE  —  "which  would  take  account."  IH.  The  necessity  of  obedient 
SUBJECTION.  "  Servants,"  implying  total  subjection  to  Him  (Levit.  xix.  37). 
{Ibid.)  Our  great  creditor  : — God  is  our  great  creditor  on  account  —  L  0» 
OBioiNAL  BIN  (Ephes.  ii.  3).  II.  Of  actual  sin  (Isa.  lix.  2).  III.  Of  obediencb 
by  natural  and  Divine  law  (Rom.  ii.  14,  15).  1.  Natural.  God  is  our  creator 
(Acts  xvii.  28).  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Redeemer.  2.  Divine.  He  is  our  King  (RooL, 
xiii.  1).  We  are  His  spiritual  subjects  and  followers.  IV.  Of  gratitude  fob  all 
blessings.  Temporal  and  spiritual  (1  Cor.  xii.  6-11).  V.  Of  eaenbst  love  fob 
ANY  good  WHICH  WE  MAY  HAVE  DONE.  To  Him  be  all  the  praise  and  honour 
(Psa.  cxv.  1).  (Ibid.)  The  tormentors  : — The  torment  of  this  place  of  tormen- 
tors (Matt.  XXV.  30),  arises  from — I.  The  hopelessness  of  escape.  The  im- 
prisonment here  knows  no  end  (Matt.  iii.  12,  xxv.  46 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  24).     II.  Thb 

WEIGHT    WHICH    PRESSES    DOWN    THE    CONDEMNED.         Ill,    ThE    UNCEASING   TORMENT. 

Never  any  relief ;  not  a  moment's  ease  or  forgetfulness  (Rev.  xiv.  11).  IV.  Thb 
WEABiNEss  AND  PAIN  OF  BEING.  A  wakcful  night  seems  multiplied  into  three. 
The  same  round,  or  rather,  unvarying  sameness,  which  makes  an  agony  of  itself. 
V.  The  spectators  of  this  wretchedness  (Rev.  xiv.  10,  vi.  16,  17).  This 
formed  the  agony  of  Samson  (Judg.  xvi.  27,  28).  It  carries  shame  here;  it  will 
increase  the  agony  of  hereafter,  (ibid.)  The  debt  of  man: — Let  us  consider 
the  nature  of  our  debt.  I.  To  God.  Pay  the  debt  of  (1)  Love ;  (2)  Honour ;  (3) 
Fear ;  for  He  is  Lord  of  all.  II.  To  ourselves.  Pay  thy  debt  of  (1)  Love ;  we 
ought  to  love  ourselves  since  God  loves  us,  and  we  ought  to  obey  the  commandment 
of  love — to  love  ourrieLc^;  not  in  and  for  ourselves,  but  as  in  and  belonging  to 
God.  (2)  Care  ;  we  ought  to  guard  and  preserve  ourselves  from  dangers  ghostly 
and  bodily.  Hence  the  gift  of  reason  to  defend  and  protect  the  course  of  Ufe.  (3) 
Salvation  (Phil,  ii  12 ;  Eccles.  ix.  10).  III.  To  our  neighbour.  Pay  thy  debt 
of  (1)  Love  (Matt.  xix.  19),  dealing  with  him  as  with  thyself.  (2)  In>;truction  ;  if 
he  wander,  seek  to  lead  him  back  into  the  paths  of  righteousness  (chap,  xviii.  15 ; 
James  v.  20).  (3)  Help  and  succour  (1  John  iii.  17,  18  ;  Isa.  liii.  7),  Epilogue. — 
1.  Husband  and  discipline  every  resource.  2.  Strive  and  pray  honestly  to  meet 
this  triple  debt.  (Ibid.)  What  contrasts  are  here  !  I.  God,  the  King  of  kings, 
towards  a  servant ;  and  again,  a  servant  towards  his  fellow-servant.  II.  An  inflnita 
debt,  and  again,  a  small  debt.  III.  Impossibility  and  inability ;  and  again,  pos- 
sibility and  ability.  IV.  Compassion  and  kindness ;  and  again,  hardheartednesfl 
snd  cruel  behaviour.  (Heubner.)      The  $inner'$  debt : — This  "  servant,"  or  "  minis* 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iix. 

ter,"  mast  have  been  some  high  functionary  of  state,  who  manipulated  the 
revennes  of  provinces.  He  represents  the  sinner — every  sinner.  Tiie  debt  for 
which  every  sinner  is  accountable,  or  liable,  to  God  is  enormous.  It  is  not  easy  to 
determine  exactly  what  was  the  value  of  the  Hebrew  talent.  It  contained  3,000 
shekels  of  the  sanctuary,  and  is  supposed  by  some  to  have  corresponded  exactly  to 
the  Greek  ^ginetan  talent,  which  exceeded  the  common  Attic  commercial  talent. 
This  common  Attic  talent  is  estimated  by  Boeckh  as  equivalent  to  1,375  German 
thalers.  Taking  the  German  thaler  as  equivalent  to  3s.  sterling,  a  single  Attio 
talent  would  amount  to  a  liltle  above  £200;  so  then  ten  thousand  talents  would  be 
Bomething  more  than  £2,000,000  sterling,  an  immense  sum,  more  especially  in 
those  ancient  times,  when  the  relation  of  bullion  to  commodities  was  such  that 
the  prices  of  commodities  in  bullion  were  far  smaller  relatively  than  now,  with  our 
vast  importations  of  gold  from  America  and  Australia.  This  immense  sum,  almost 
baHiing  ordinary  conception,  represents  the  sinner's  spiiitoal  debt  or  guilt.  (J, 
Moriton,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Vebb.  1-18.  Is  It  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  Ms  wife  for  every  canM. — The 
marriage  tie: — I,  Its  presckibed  limitation.  Enforced  by  (1)  numerical  propor- 
tion of  the  sexes  ;  (2)  evils  of  polygamy  ;  (3)  teaching  of  the  Bible.  LL  Its  tenpeb 
INTIMACY.  HI.  Its  conditional  dissolubility:  (1)  toleration  of  Moses;  (2)  justi- 
liable  grounds  of  divorce.  IV.  Its  optional  fobhation.  (Dr.  Thomas.)  The 
doctrine  of  Christ  concerning  marriage: — (1)  Its  binding  character  as  instituted  by 
God ;  (2)  its  decay  in  the  progress  of  history ;  (3)  its  prepared  reptoration  under 
the  law  ;  (4)  its  transformation  by  the  gospel.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Husband 
and  wife  should  be  not  only  one  flesh,  but  also  one  heart  and  mind.  (Hedinger.) 
Marriage  and  celibacy  : — Marriage  is  the  mother  of  the  world,  and  preserves  king- 
doms, and  fills  cities  and  churches,  and  heaven  itself.  Celibate,  like  the  fly  in  the 
heart  of  an  apple,  dwells  in  a  perpetual  sweetness,  but  sits  alone,  and  is  confined 
and  dies  in  singularity;  but  marriage,  like  the  useful  bee,  builds  a  house  and 
gathers  sweetness  from  every  flower,  and  labours  and  unites  into  societies  and  re- 
publics, and  sends  out  colonies,  and  feeds  the  world  with  delicacies,  and  obeys  their 
king  and  keeps  order,  and  exercises  many  virtues,  and  promotes  the  interests  of 
mankind,  and  is  that  state  of  good  things  to  which  God  has  designed  the  present 
constitution  of  the  world.  Single  life  makes  man,  in  one  instance,  to  be  like 
angels  ;  but  marriage,  in  very  many  things,  makes  the  chaste  pair  to  be  like  Christ. 
This  is  (as  St.  Paul  says)  a  great  mystery ;  but  it  is  the  symbolical  and  sacra, 
mental  representation  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of  our  religion.  Christ  descended 
from  His  Father's  bosom,  and  contracted  His  Divinity  with  flesh  and  blood,  and 
married  our  nature,  and  we  became  a  church,  the  spouse  of  the  Bridegroom,  which 
He  cleansed  with  His  blood,  and  gave  her  His  Holy  Spirit  for  a  dowry,  and  heaven 
for  a  jointure ;  begetting  children  unto  God  by  the  gospel.  {Bp.  Jeremy  'Taylor.) 
Marriage  : — This  union  should  not  be  entered  into  lightly,  or  rashly.  It  involves 
all  the  happiness  of  this  life,  and  much  of  that  to  come.  The  union  demands  con- 
geniality of  feeling  and  disposition;  of  rank  in  life;  of  temper;  similarity  ot 
acquirements  ;  of  age  ;  of  talent ;  intimate  acquaintance.  It  should  also  be  a  union 
on  religious  feelings  and  opinions :  because  religion  is  more  important  than  any- 
thing else ;  because  it  will  give  more  happiness  in  the  married  life  than  anything 
else  ;  because  where  one  only  is  pious,  there  is  danger  that  religion  will  be  obscured 
and  blighted  ;  because  no  prospect  is  so  painful  as  that  of  eternal  separation  ;  be- 
cause it  is  heathenish  to  partake  the  gifts  of  God  in  a  family  and  offer  no  thanks- 
giving, and  inexpressibly  wicked  to  live  as  if  there  were  no  God,  &c. ;  because  death 
is  near,  and  nothing  will  soothe  the  pangs  of  parting  but  the  hope  of  meeting  in 
the  resurrection  of  the  just.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Advantages  of  marriage: — If 
yon  are  for  pleasure,  marry;  if  you  prize  rosy  health,  marry.  A  good  wife  is 
Leaven's  best  gift  to  man :  his  angel  of  mercy ;  minister  of  graces  innumerable ; 
his  gem  of  many  virtues ;  his  casket  of  jewels ;  her  voice,  his  sweetest  music ;  her 
smiles,  his  brightest  day ;  hei  kiss,  the  guardian  of  his  innocence ;  her  arms,  the 
pale  of  his  safety,  the  balm  of  his  health,  the  balsam  of  his  life ;  her  industry, 
jai  surest  wealth ;  her  economy,  his  safest    teward ;  her  lips,  his  faithful  counsel 


CHIP,  xrx.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  41T 

lors;  her  bosom,  the  softest  pillow  of  hia  cares;  and  her  prayers,  the  ablest 
advocates  of  heaven's  blessing  on  his  head.  (Bp.  Taylor.)  The  scriptural  view 
of  divorce  : — I  hold  that  there  is  only  one  cause  for  which  a  man  can  lawfully  be 
divorced  from  his  wife,  according  to  the  Scriptvires  ;  that  is,  adultery.  I.  Lex  us 
TURN  TO  THE  ScRiPTUKES  IN  PROOF  OF  THIS  VIEW.  "  What  God  hath  joined  to- 
gether let  not  man  put  asunder."  God  thought  it  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone ; 
BO  He  made  him  an  helpmeet.  Had  it  been  better  for  a  man  to  have  m  re  than 
one  wife,  God  would  doubtless  have  made  two.  But  in  our  Saviour's  time  women 
had  multiplied;  but  He  did  not  change  the  original  law.  The  relation  of  man  and 
wife  is  nearer  than  that  of  parent  «,iid  offspring.  "  For  this  cause  shall  »  man 
leave  father  and  mother,"  &c.  Where  is  the  nation  or  man  who  shall  assume 
authority  to  put  apart  these  thus  joined  together  save  for  the  one  cause  T  "  And 
I  say  unto  you,  whoso  shall  put  away  his  wife,"  &o.  St.  Paul  says,  "The  woman 
which  hath  an  husband  is  bound  by  the  law  to  her  husband  so  long  as  he  liveth." 
II.  The  views  of  bomb  of  the  leadino  writers  m  the  Christian  Church. 
Dr.  A.  Clarke,  in  his  Commentary,  has  the  following:  "It  does  not  appear  that 
there  is  any  other  case  in  which  Jesus  Christ  admits  of  divorce  "  (Matt.  v.  32).  On 
Matt.  xix.  9,  "  The  decision  of  our  Lord  must  be  very  unpleasant  to  these  men ; 
the  reason  why  they  wished  to  put  away  their  wives  was,  that  they  might  take 
others  whom  they  liked  better;  but  our  Lord  here  declares  that  they  could  not  be 
remarried  whUe  the  divorced  person  was  alive;  and  that  those  who  did  marry 
during  the  life  of  the  divorced  person  were  adulterers."  "  In  this  discourse  our 
Lord  shows  that  marriage,  except  in  one  case,  is  indissoluble,  and  should  be  so. 
1.  By  Divine  institution  (ver.  4).  2.  By  express  commandment  (ver.  5).  3.  Be- 
cause the  married  couple  become  one  and  the  same  person  (ver.  6).  4.  By  tb« 
example  of  the  first  pair  (ver.  8).  And  5.  Because  of  the  evil  consequent  on  sepa- 
ration (ver.  9).  Watson's  "Theo.  Institutes,"  vol.  ii.,p.  543,  has  the  following: 
"  The  foundation  of  the  marriage  union  is  the  will  of  God  that  the  human  race 
should  increase  and  multiply,  but  only  through  a  chaste  and  restricted  conjunction 
of  one  man  and  one  woman,  imited  by  their  free  vows  in  a  bond  made  by  the 
Divine  law  indissoluble,  except  by  death  or  by  adultery."  Dr.  Wayland,  in  his 
"  Elements  of  Moral  Science,"  says :  "  In  the  act  of  marriage,  two  persons,  under 
the  most  solemn  circumstances,  are  thus  united,  and  they  enter  into  a  mutual 
contract  thus  to  live  in  respect  to  each  other.  This  relation,  having  been  estab 
lished  by  God,  the  contract  thus  entered  into  has  all  the  solemnity  of  an  oath. 
Hence,  he  who  violates  it,  is  guilty  of  a  twofold  crime :  first,  the  violation  of  the 
law  of  chastity,  and  second,  of  the  law  of  veracity — veracity  pledged  under  the  most 
solemn  circumstances.  1.  The  contract  is  for  life,  and  is  dissoluble  for  one  cause 
only:  the  cause  of  adultery."  Eeferring  to  the  text,  he  says:  "We  are  here 
taught  that  marriage,  being  an  institution  of  God,  is  subject  to  His  laws  alone,  and 
not  to  the  laws  of  man.  Hence,  the  civil  law  is  binding  upon  the  conscience  only, 
in  so  far  as  it  corresponds  to  the  law  of  God."  Matthew  Henry's  testimony  is, 
"  Christ  allows  of  divorce  in  cases  of  adultery ;  He  disallows  it  in  all  others." 
Olshausen  says :  "  This  union  is  to  be  considered  indissoluble,  one  which  man 
cannot,  and  only  God  can  dissolve,  and  in  which  the  Omniscient  does  really  dis- 
sever only  in  cases  of  adultery."  Such  are  the  opinions  of  some  of  the  most  learned 
and  pious  Biblical  scholars.  III.  Now  let  ds  turn  to  the  question  already 
ANTICIPATED :  What  man  ob  nation  dare  assume  authority  to  put  asunder  thosk 
WHOM  God  hath  joined  tooetheb  ?  The  answer  I  call  your  attention  to  is  this : 
Ist,  the  Jews,  and  2nd,  our  own  nation.  1.  The  Jews.  I  quote  from  Dr.  Adam 
Clarke's  Commentary,  Matt.  xix.  3.  "  At  this  time  there  were  two  famous  divinity 
and  philosophical  schools  among  the  Jews,  that  of  Shammai,  and  that  of  Hillel. 
On  the  question  of  divorce,  the  school  of  Shammai  maintained  that  a  man  could 
not  legally  put  away  his  wife,  except  for  adultery.  The  school  of  Hillel  taught 
that  a  man  might  put  away  his  wife  for  a  multitude  of  other  causes ;  and  when  she 
did  not  find  grace  in  hia  sight,  that  is,  when  he  saw  any  other  woman  that  pleased 
him  better."  Rabbi  Akiba  said  :  "  If  any  man  saw  a  woman  handsomer  than  his 
own  wife,  he  might  put  his  wife  away  ;  because  it  is  said  in  the  law,  *  If  she  fina 
not  favour  in  his  eyes ' "  (Deut.  xxiv.  1).  "  Josephus,  the  celebrated  Jewish 
historian,  in  hia  Life,  tells  us,  with  the  utmost  coolness  and  indifference,  About 
this  time  I  put  away  my  wife,  who  had  borne  me  thiee  children,  not  being  pleased 
with  her  manners."  These  cases  are  enough  to  show  to  what  a  scandalous  and 
eriminal  excess  this  matter  was  carried  amon  the  Jews.  3.  Then  we  inquire. 
How  is  it  with  us  in  America?    I  find  that  divorces  are  very  common,  soma 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

for  one  cause  and  some  for  another.  So  that  the  question,  "  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man 
to  put  away  his  wife  for  every  cause  ?  "  is  far  from  being  foreign,  but  really  is 
applicable  to  us,  and  a  question  of  the  greatest  importance.  For,  for  almost  any 
little  thing  that  springs  up  between  man  and  wife,  a  divorce  is  applied  for,  and  is 
obtained.  From  the  Standard,  a  Baptist  paper,  I  took  the  following:  "Those 
whose  attention  is  not  directed  to  the  subject  of  divorce,  will  be  surprised  at  the 
number  of  applications  in  the  courts  of  our  large  cities  and  centres  of  population 
to  have  the  bouds  of  marriage  dissolved.  In  Indianapolis,  in  1866,  there  were  822 
marriages,  and  210  applications  for  divorce,  which  is  more  than  one  to  four  of 
the  whole  number  of  marriages.  In  Chicago,  the  same  year,  there  were  4,182 
marriages,  and  330  applications  for  divorce,  being  nearly  one  to  every  thirteen 
marriages.  In  both  these  cases  the  number  aeeking  divorce  is  alarming.  But  the 
unenviable  and  disgraceful  distance  in  which  Indianapolis  leads  Chicago  in  this 
warfare  on  marriage,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  pecuharly  lax  legislation  of  Indiana, 
which,  for  years,  has  been  notorious  on  the  subject  of  divorce."  "  The  various 
courts  of  Chicago  granted  bills  ot  divorce  in  1865  to  the  number  of  274 ;  in  1866, 
the  number  was  209  ;  in  1867,  311 ;  making  the  whole  number  of  divorces  granted 
in  three  years,  794.  Is  not  this  appalUng  ?  But  since  1868,  Chicago  has  registered 
as  high  as  730  applications  in  a  single  year,  representing  families  containing  about 
3,500  souls,  and  the  most  of  which  are  poor  women."  The  Christian  Statesman 
says  that  the  number  of  divorces  in  eight  years,  in  four  States,  viz.,  Vermont, 
Massachusetts,  Obio,  and  Connecticut,  have  been  5,831.  And  in  the  year  1877,  in 
Maine,  there  were  500  divorces.  Brethren  and  fellow-citizens,  I  believe  that  our 
lawmakers  are  to  blame  for  allowing  such  laws  to  pxist  as  they  do,  and  not  bringing 
the  law  of  divorce  in  these  United  States  to  the  Scriptural  standard.  Look  at  our 
statutes  of  Minnesota,  and  see  the  looseness  of  this  matter.  In  the  General 
Statutes  of  Mmnesota,  page  407,  sec.  6,  we  find  the  following  :  "  A  divorce  from 
the  bonds  of  matrimony  may  be  adjudged  and  decreed  by  the  district  court  on  suit 
brought  in  the  county  where  parties,  or  either  of  them,  reside,  for  either  of  the 
following  causes :  1st,  adultery ;  2nd,  impotency ;  3rd,  cruel  and  inhuman  treat- 
ment ;  4th,  when  either  party,  subsequent  to  the  marriage,  has  been  sentenced  to 
imprisonment  in  the  State  Prison ;  6th,  wilful  desertion  of  one  party  by  the  other 
for  the  term  of  three  years  next  preceding  the  filing  of  the  complaint ;  6th,  habitual 
drunkenness  for  the  space  of  one  year,  immediately  preceding  the  filing  of  the  com- 
plaint." Here,  then,  are  six  causes  in  our  State  statutes  for  which  a  man  or 
woman  may  put  away  wife  or  husband.  The  first  is  according  to  Scripture ;  the 
others  are  unscriptural.  What  latitude  is  here  given  for  divorces !  I  remark, 
further,  that  the  peace  of  the  churches  is  endangered  by  this  ungodly  practice  of 
divorce.  All  Christian  people  and  all  true  philanthropists  must  awake  to  their 
duty.  Politicians  have  made  these  laws,  and  by  them  public  sentiment  has  been 
educated.  (A.  Cresspy,  in  American  Homiletic  Review.)  Jetvish  divorce  cus- 
toms : — Divorce  is  still  very  common  among  the  Eastern  Jews.  In  1856  there  were 
sixteen  cases  among  the  small  Jewish  population  of  Jerusalem.  In  fact,  a  Jew 
may  divorce  his  wife  at  any  time,  or  from  any  cause,  he  being  himself  the  sole 
judge ;  the  only  hindrance  is  that,  to  prevent  divorces  in  a  mere  sudden  fit  of 
spleen,  the  bill  of  divorce  must  have  the  concurrence  of  three  rabbis,  and  be  written 
on  ruled  vellum,  containing  neither  more  nor  less  than  twelve  lines ;  and  it  must 
be  given  in  the  presence  of  ten  witnesses.  {Allen,  " 3Iodem  Judaism")  The 
usual  causes  of  divorce  (in  Asia  Minor)  are  a  bad  temper  or  extravagance  in  the 
wife,  and  the  cruel  treatment  or  neglect  of  the  husband.  (Van  Lennep.)  The 
Rule  of  Reformation : — "  From  the  beginning  it  was  not  so."  Which  rule,  if  we 
apply  unto  the  scope  of  this  text,  as  it  stands  in  relation  unto  the  context,  we  shall 
have  more  to  say  for  it  than  for  most  constitutions,  Divine  or  human.  For  that  of 
marriage  is  almost  as  old  as  Nature.  There  was  no  sooner  one  man,  but  God 
divided  him  into  two ;  and  then  no  sooner  were  there  two,  but  he  united  them  into 
one.  This  is  that  sacred  institution  which  was  made  with  mankind  in  a  state  of 
innocence ;  the  very  ground  and  foundation  of  all,  both  sacred  and  civil,  govern- 
ment. It  was  by  sending  back  the  Pharisees  to  the  most  venerable  antiquity,  tbat 
our  Lord  here  asserted  the  law  of  wedlock  against  the  old  custom  of  their  divorce. 
Whilst  they  had  made  themselves  drunk  with  their  muddy  streams,  He  directed 
them  to  the  fountain,  to  drink  themselves  into  sobriety.  They  insisted  altogether 
on  the  Mosaical  dispensation ;  but  He  endeavoured  to  reform  them  by  the  most 
primitive  institution.  They  alleged  a  custom  ;  but  He  a  law.  They  a  permission, 
and  that  from  ]\Ioses ;  but  He  a  p  ecept,  and  that  from  God.  They  did  reckon 
from  afar  off  {  bat  not,  as  He,  from  the  beginning.     {Thomas  Fierce.) 


CHAP.  XIX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  419 

Ters.  13-15.— Then  were  there  brought  unto  Him  little  children. — The  children 
for  Christ: — I.  They  need  the  Savioub.  1.  As  children,  thej'  are  within  the 
covenant  and  provisions  of  grace.  2.  They  are  naturally  blind  and  dark,  3.  Nor 
let  UB  forget  that  they  are  guilty.  4.  They  need,  therefore,  to  be  led  to  Jesus  as 
penitent  sinners  for  forgiveness  and  peace.  They  need  a  guide,  a  shield,  a  true 
friend,  &c.  II.  They  may  be  bbodght  to  Hiii  when  veby  tounq.  1.  On  this 
point,  opinion  among  godly  people  has  been  very  much  modified  since  the  general 
establishment  of  Sunday-schools.  2.  It  is  a  great  mistake,  and  involves  a  great  wrong 
to  the  child,  not  to  insist  upon  his  deciding  and  choosing  Christ  now,  for  unbelief 
and  carnality  are  gaining  strength.  3.  There  is  no  kind  of  knowledge  which  will 
find  readier  access  to  the  juvenile  mind,  and  be  more  easily  retained  there,  than 
the  knoM  ledge  of  Christ.  4.  How  many  and  how  marked  are  the  examples  of 
early  piety  which  the  Bible  records.  5.  The  religion  of  children — if  genuine  and 
healthy — will  differ  in  some  respects  from  the  religion  of  elderly  people.  Ignorant 
prejudice  has  done  a  world  of  mischief.  III.  One  of  the  first  duties  we,  as  a. 
Chdrch,  owe  the  Lord  Jesus  is  to  assist  in  bringing  these  children  to  Hiu. 
1.  They  are  our  own  flesh  and  blood.  They  are  our  own  immediate  successors  in 
the  Church  and  the  world.  They  are  immortal.  They  are  the  object  of  Jesus'  re- 
deeming love ;  they  are  brought  within  our  influence  that  we  may  be  Christ's 
ministers  to  them,  and  their  guides  to  Him,  &c.  2.  The  present  is  the  golden 
opportunity.  The  promise  is  true  to  your  children,  that  they  also  shall  receive 
"remission  of  sins,"  and  "the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Bring  them  to  Jesus! 
Alas  I  some  of  you  parents,  masters,  heads  of  households  are  not  yourselves 
following  Christ,  and  how  can  you  bring  your  children  or  young  people  to  Him  ? 
Teachers,  soffer  the  children  to  come  to  Jesus,  and  hinder  them  not,  &c.  [J. 
Findlay.)  A  sermon  on  Sunday-school  work  : — I.  The  principle  on  which  the 
Sunday-school  should  be  founded.  It  must  be  founded  and  carried  on  in  Faith, 
in  its  usefulness,  its  worth,  its  importance.  Faith  in  your  schools  ;  faith  in  God  ; 
in  the  child  whom  you  teach  ;  and  in  the  Scriptures  which  are  to  be  taught.  11. 
The  end,  the  great  object,  which  should  be  proposed  and  kept  steadily  in 
VIEW  BY  its  friends.  The  great  end  is,  to  awaken  the  soul  of  the  pupil,  to  bring 
his  understanding,  conscience,  and  heart  into  earnest,  vigorous  action  on  religious 
and  moral  truth,  to  excite  and  cherish  in  him  spiritual  life.  The  great  end  in  re- 
ligious instruction,  whether  in  the  Sunday-school  or  family,  is,  not  to  stamp  our 
minds  irresistibly  on  the  young,  but  to  stir  up  their  own  ;  not  to  make  them  see 
with  our  eyes,  but  to  look  inquiringly  and  steadily  with  their  own ;  not  to  give 
them  a  definite  amount  of  knowledge,  but  to  inspire  a  fervent  love  of  truth  ;  not  to 
form  an  outward  regularity,  but  to  touch  inward  springs ;  not  to  burden  the 
memory,  but  to  quicken  and  strengthen  the  power  of  thought ;  .  .  .  not  to  tell 
them  that  God  is  good,  but  to  help  them  to  see  and  feel  His  love  in  all  that  He 
does  within  and  around  them.  In  a  word,  to  awaken  intellectual  and  moral  life  in 
the  child.  III.  What  is  to  be  taught  in  Sunday  Schools?  The  Gospels,  the 
Gospels,  these  should  be  the  text-book  of  Sunday  Schools.  There  are  three  great 
views  of  Christianity,  which  pervade  it  throughout,  and  to  which  the  mind  of  the 
learner  must  be  continually  turned.  1.  The  spirituality  of  the  religion.  2.  Its 
dininterestedness.  3.  The  vastness,  the  infinity,  of  its  progress.  IV.  How  shall  it 
BE  taught  ?  Attention  must  be  secured  by  moral  influence.  You  must  love  the 
children.  You  must  be  interested  yourselves  in  that  you  teach  them.  Be  in- 
telligible. Teach  by  questions.  Teach  graphically  where  you  can.  Lay  stress  on 
the  most  important  things.  Carry  a  cheerful  spirit  into  religious  teaching.  {Dr. 
Cluinning.)  Little  children  brought  to  Christ: — I.  Who  were  now  brought  to 
Christ  ?  Probably  infants.  None  of  them  were  arrived  at  the  full  exercise  of 
reason  ;  and  some  of  them  might  be  carried  in  the  arms  of  their  friends.  H.  For 
WHAT  END  WERE  THEY  BROUGHT  TO  Chbist  ?  Pi'obably  uot  to  be  healed  of  sick- 
ness or  weakness.  It  was,  that  He  might  lay  His  hands  upon  them  and  bless  them. 
They  had  a  high  opinion  of  the  piety  of  Jesus,  and  of  His  interest  in  the  Divine 
favour.  III.  The  reception  Jesus  gave  the  children.  Kind  and  gracious. 
IV,  The  declaration  He  made  concerning  them.  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  Christ  commends  in  children  tbree  or  four  things,  wherein  they  who  are 
adalt  ought  to  resemble  them.  1,  Freedom  from  prejudice  or  openness  to  con- 
viction ;  freedom  from  pride,  or  humility ;  freedom  from  worldly  affections,  or  in- 
diflerence  to  earthly  things :  and  finally,  freedom  from  custom  of  sinning,  ox 
innocence.  (Nath.  Lardner.)  Reflections  on  the  incident : — 1.  The  doctrine  ot 
this  text  may  afford  comfortable  thoughts  concerning  such  as  die  in  infancy,  or  in 


i20  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (3HAr.  in 

very  early  age,  before  they  have  done  good  or  evil.  2.  It  teaches  ns  to  be  cautioui^ 
how  we  disparage  the  human  nature,  and  say,  that  it  is,  in  its  original  conception 
corrupt,  depraved,  and  defiled,  3.  This  history  teaches  us  the  rignt  ot  young 
persons  to  be  present  at  the  worship  of  God,  and  seems  to  hold  forth  the  duty  ot 
those  under  whose  care  they  are,  to  bring  them  early  to  it.  4.  We  may  infer 
that  it  is  not  below  persons  of  the  greatest  eminence  for  wisdom  and  piety  to  show 
affection' and  tenderness  for  little  children.  5.  We  hence  learn,  that  all  of  us 
arrived  to  years  of  knowledge  and  understanding  should  see  to  it,  that  we  bear  a 
resemblance  to  little  children.  And  6,  this  history  affords  encouragement  to  young 
persons  arrived  to  the  use  of  reason  and  understanding  to  come  to  Christ,  and 
offer  up  themselves  to  God  in  and  through  Him.  (Ibid.)  Our  likeness  to  littU 
children.  1.  As  respects  faith.  Children  are  trustful ;  its  trust  has  little  to  \o  with 
the  intellect.  Faith  is  not  a  thing  of  the  understanding,  but  of  the  heart.  When 
you  read  the  Bible,  do  it  as  a  little  child,  "  My  Father  says  thus."  A  child's  joy 
is  always  truer  than  a  child's  sorrow.  2.  A  child's  mind  has  a  wonderful  power  of 
reaUzation.  They  soon  picture  what  is  said  to  them.  We  should  realize  the  in- 
visible. 3.  Little  childitn  may  be  angry,  but  their  anger  never  lasts.  4,  They  are 
innocent  and  do  not  hurt.  5.  They  are,  as  a  rule,  geuerous  with  their  possessions. 
6.  The  sympathy  of  a  child  is  perfect,  to  a  tear  or  a  smile  he  will  respond  in  * 
moment.  7.  A  little  child  is  a  thing  new  born.  We  must  be  born  again.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)     "  Suffer  little  children  to  Coyne : " — I.  What  mothers  want  fob 

THEIR    CHn-DBEN.         II.    WhAT   DISCIPLES    SOMETIMES   WANT   FOR   THE    CHILDREN.         TO 

run  away  and  not  be  troublesome.  Sometimes  they  would  keep  them  away  from 
Christ  until  they  grow  big.  Whence  can  such  a  mistake  arise  ?  From  such  ideas 
as — 1.  Christ  is  too  busy  with  saving  men  to  care  about  the  children.  2.  Children 
have  not  the  needs  which  Jesus  came  to  supply.  3.  If  the  children  get  the 
blessing  now  they  will  lose  it  ere  they  become  men.  III.  What  Jesus  wants  fob 
THE  CHILDREN.  To  come  to  Him.  They  can  trust,  love,  &o.  {II.  Tuck,  B.A.) 
Jesus  and  children: — The  most  beautiful  scene  in  the  Bible.  I.  Jesds  is  attrac- 
tive TO  children.  Some  men  and  women  for  whom  they  do  not  care.  Jesua 
not  like  these.  There  are  others  for  whom  children  are  never  shy,  or  afraid. 
Jesus  like  these.  II.  Jesus  is  deepl'j  interested  in  children.  III.  Jesus 
PRAYS  FOB  children.  "  He  put  His  hands  on  them,"  (fee.  Ancient  custom.  "  He 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  IV.  Jesus  wishes  children  to  be  happy. 
He  blessed  the  children  who  came  to  Him,  and  He  blesses  you.  V.  Many  children 
ABE  with  Jesus  in  heaven.     (Alex.  McAudane,  D.D.)  I.  Who  spake  these 

WORDS,  AND  why  WERE  THEY  SPOKEN,  "  Jesus  Said."  Because  He  loved  children 
and  came  to  do  them  good.  II.  How  should  little  children  come  to  Christ. 
1.  By  thought.      2.  Prayer.      3,  Obedience.      III.  What  keeps  little  children 

BACK  FROM    ChRIST,  AND  WHO    FORBIDS    THEM    TO   COME   TO   HiM.        The   discipleS.        I 

will  point  out  what  in  yourselves  keeps  you  back.  1.  Idleness,  2,  The  mockeries 
of  your  playfellows.  3.  Satan.  IV.  What  is  to  be  gained  by  comino  to 
Christ.  (T.  J.  Judkin,  M.A.)  Blessing  by  imposition  of  hands: — From  Christ 
has  been  derived  the  custom  among  Christiana,  that  lay  people,  and  especially 
children,  should  ask  a  blessing  from  their  elders  and  from  priests.  This  is  the 
case  in  Belgium,  where  boys  will  run  up  to  the  priests  and  religious  men,  and  ask 
them  to  sign  them  with  the  sign  of  the  cross.  They  are  taught  to  do  this,  both 
by  the  catechists  and  by  their  parents.  Eemigius  says  this  was  a  custom  among 
the  Jews  before  the  time  of  ChriKt.  The  great  Sir  Thomas  More,  the  glory  of  Eng- 
land and  a  martyr,  when  he  was  Lord  High  Chancellor,  publicly  asked  his  aged 
father  to  give  him  his  blessing.  Moreover,  the  Church  uses  this  ceremony  of  im- 
position of  hands  in  baptism,  confirmation,  and  orders.  It  is  to  pray  for  and 
obtain  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Lapide.)  Christianity  cares  for  children: — 
The  gospel  alone  opens  its  warm  bosom  to  the  young.  Christianity  alone  is  the 
nurse  of  children.  Atheism  looks  on  them  as  on  a  level  with  the  brutes.  Deism 
or  scepticism  leaves  them  to  every  random  inffuence,  lest  they  catch  a  bias.  The 
Bomana  exposed  their  infants.  Barbarians  and  ancient  tribes  offered  them  as 
burnt-sacritices  to  Moloch.  Mahometanism  holds  mothers  and  infanta  as  equally 
of  an  inferior  oast.  Hindooism  forgets  the  infant  she  bears,  and  leaves  it  to  perish 
on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges.  The  Chinese  are  notorious  aa  infanticides.  Chris- 
tianity alone  contemplates  them  as  immortal  creatures,  and  prescribes  for  their 
tuition  for  heaven.  And  the  nearer  the  time  that  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of 
Bighteousness  approached,  the  warmer  and  the  more  'P.tense  did  the  interest  of  th« 
Church  show  itself  in  regard  to  the  young.     Moses  gave  directions  on  the  subjeoU 


OHAP.  xrx.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  421 

Joshua  and  Abraham  commanded  their  hDnscholds  after  them ;  David  declared 
how  the  young  were  to  purify  their  way  ;  and  Solomon  distinctly  enjoined  them  to 
remember  their  Creator  in  the  days  of  their  youth  ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  Him  who 
epake  as  never  man  spake,  to  press  that  sentence,  "  Suffer  the  little  children,"  Ac. 
The  temple  of  Juggernaut  presents  a  grave ;  the  mosque,  contempt ;  infidelity, 
neglect  for  children.  The  bosom  of  the  Son  of  God  alone  finds  them  a  nursery 
and  a  home.  (Salter.)  Children  specially  susceptible  of  spiritual  influeitca. 
In  their  case  there  is  still — 1.  Confidence,  instead  of  scepticism.  2.  Self-surrender, 
instead  of  distrust.  3.  Truth,  instead  of  hypocrisy.  4.  "Want  of  pretension, 
instead   of    pride.       (Lisho.)  Ideas  of   women  and  children  in   tht   East: — 

Women  were  not  honoured  nor  children  loved  in  antiquity  as  now  they  are ;  no 
halo  of  romance  and  tenderness  encircled  them  ;  too  often,  indeed,  they  were  sub- 
ject to  shameful  cruelties  and  hard  neglect.  (Farrar.)  How  children  are  for- 
bidden:— They  may  be  "forbidden,"  both  by  neglect  and  injudicious  teaching.  I. 
By  not  being  taught  of  Christ  through  word  and  example.  II.  By  being  tanght 
legaUsm ;  that  is,  "  Be  good,  or  God  will  not  love  you,"  instead  of  this  :  Christ 
(God)  loves  you,  therefore  go  to  Him  in  order  to  be  good.  {Schaff.)  Christ's 
example  of  dealing  icith  children  : — I.  His  sympathy  for  and  with  children.  2. 
Our  right  to  bring  children  to  Him  for  blessing,  and  this  before  they  can  mider- 
stand  anything  concerning  Him  or  His  truth.  3.  That  they  are  members  of 
Christ's  kingdom,  and  are  so  regarded  by  Him,  and  are  to  be  so  regarded  by  UB, 
and  this  irrespective  of  any  parental  faith.  4.  That  such  as  die  before  they  have 
wandered  out  of  God's  kingdom  into  the  kingdom  of  Satan  are  certainly  saved, 
since  they  are  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  6.  The  incident  condemns  all  conduct 
on  the  part  of  the  church,  the  teacher,  or  the  parent,  which  tends  to  repress,  chill, 
or  check  the  enthusiasm  of  childhood  for  Christ,  and  darken  its  simple  faith  in 
Him.  (Abbott.)  A  sermon  to  mothers  : — I.  A  mother's  love.  II.  A  mother'a 
responsibility.  III.  A  mother's  consolation.  (P.  Robertson.)  Maternal  in- 
fluence on  children : — ^It  has  been  truly  said  that  although  women  may  have  pro- 
duced no  work  of  surpassing  power,  have  written  no  Iliad,  no  "  Hamlet,"  no 
"  Paradise  Lost ;"  have  designed  no  Church  of  St.  Peter's,  composed  no  '•Mes- 
siah," carved  no  "  Apollo  Belvidere,"  painted  no  Last  Judgment ;  although 
they  have  invented  neither  algebra  nor  telescopes  nor  steam  engines,  they  have 
done  something  greater  and  better  than  all  this :  it  is  at  their  knees  that  virtuous 
and  upright  men  and  women  have  been  trained — the  most  excellent  productions 
in  the  world.  If  we  would  fimd  the  secret  of  the  greatness  and  goodness  of  most 
famous  men  we  must  look  to  their  mothers.  It  was  the  patient  gentle  schooling 
of  Monica  which  turned  Augustine  from  a  profligate  to  a  saint.  It  was  the 
memory  of  a  mother's  lessons  which  changed  John  Newton,  of  Oluey,  from  a 
blasphemous  sailor  to  an  earnest  minister  of  God.  It  was  a  mother's  influence 
which  made  George  Washington  a  man  of  such  truth,  such  nobleness,  and  such 
power,  that  he  swayed  the  people  of  America  as  one  man.  (Wilmot  BuxWn.) 
Early  conversion: — Conversions  after  forty  years  are  very  rare  :  like  the  scattered 
gr&pes  on  the  remotest  branches  after  the  vintage  is  over,  there  is  only  one  here 
ani  there.  I  have  sometimes  seen  an  old  withered  oak  standing  with  its  stiff  and 
leafless  branches  on  the  slopes  of  a  woody  hill ;  though  the  same  refreshing  rains 
and  genial  sunshine  fell  on  it  as  on  its  thriving  neighbours,  which  were  green  with 
ren  "jwed  youth  and  rich  in  flowing  foliage,  it  grew  not,  it  gave  no  signs  of  life,  it 
wa'.  too  far  gone  for  genial  nature  to  assist.  The  old  blanched,  sapless  oak  is  an 
emblem  of  the  aged  sinner.    (Dr.  Tliomas.) 

Vers.  16-22.  And,  behold,  one  came  and  said  unto  Elm,  Good  Blaster,  what  good 
tblng  shall  I  do? — Formal  obedience  insiijicient: — It  is  certainly  the  doctrine  ot 
Scripture  that  moral  integrity  alone  can  never  benefit  us  with  God ;  that  even  the 
offering  of  our  prayers  is  accounted  worthless  except  as  it  is  perfumed  with  love. 
Evidently,  then,  his  confidence  is  false  and  dangerous  indeed  who,  because  he  keeps 
nnbroken  the  great  laws  of  social  morality,  imagines  his  claim  to  mercy  and  salva- 
tion secure.  Besides  being  unscriptural,  such  a  theory  is  not  rational.  L  It 
ilNobes  the  vebt  design  of  man's  crkation,  viz. ,  the  glory  of  God.  Social  morality 
is  at  best  a  very  inferior  virtue.  It  is  only  the  submission  of  one  part  of  man's 
na  ure  to  an  inferior  series  of  God's  laws.  If  this  world  were  all,  that  might  be 
eningh.  Man  is  endowed  with  faculties  which  can  only  be  exercised  toward  the 
un«  en  world.  As  well  might  the  planet,  obeying  the  one  law  of  its  propulsion 
arou  d  the  earth,  break  away  from  the  other  which  binds  it  to  the  son,  and  yet  hop« 


421  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xix, 

to  escflpe,  as  he  who,  fulfilling  his  duty  to  man,  neglects  his  duty  to  God.  II  It 
IB  rocNDED  ON  A  FALSE  IDEA  OF  BELiGioN.  God  sccks  Dot  mere  abject  obedience,  but 
the  devotion  of  the  heart.  Without  a  distinct  movement  of  the  will  and  affections 
towards  Him,  all  religious  observances  are  worse  than  naught.  They  are  the  casket 
without  the  diamond — the  body  without  the  sustaining,  invigorating,  glorifying  life. 
m.  It  makes  the  s.crifice  of  Christ  an  unneceksaet  thing.  If  man  by  being 
honest  and  upright  and  humane  and  gentle  could  merit  heaven,  no  need  for  Cal- 
vary.  Yet  Jesus  laid  aside  the  robes  of  His  Deity  and  came  to  earth,  and  offered 
Himself  a  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  To  rely  for  salvation  on  natural  morality  is,  then, 
to  mock  Christ  in  His  sufferings;  it  is  to  go  up,  as  it  were,  upon  the  blood-stained 
elopes  of  Calvary,  and,  beholding  Him  in  His  agony,  to  cry  aloud,  "  We  need  not 
Thy  blood,  we  despise  Thine  aid  I  "  (IF.  Rudder,  B.I).)  Coming  to  Jesu*  .-—A 
right  thing  to  come  to  Jesus,  in  a  right  way,  for  a  right  thing,  in  a  right  spirit. 
This  last  element  of  coming  rightly  was  here  left  out.  I.  How  he  came.  1.  Pub- 
licly.  2.  Eagerly — "  running."  3.  Humbly — "  kneeling."  4.  Eespectfully — •'  good 
Master."  II.  Why  he  came  :  "inherit  eternal  Ufe."  1.  BeUef  in  a  future  state. 
2.  Concern  to  obtain  it ;  in  this  he  differed  from  many.  3.  Thought  something 
must  be  done;  many  think  not  of  this,  and  consequently  do  nothing.  4.  Thought 
he  was  wilUng  and  able  to  do  anything  needful ;  but  did  not  know  himself;  had  not 
counted  the  cost.  III.  Learn— 1.  Salvation  not  by  works.  2.  Works  an  evidence, 
not  a  cause  of  grace.  (The  Hive.)  The  rich  youth's  application  to  Christ. •—- 
I.  The  character  and  pretensions  of  the  todthfcl  applicant  who  approached 
ODB  Lord.  Something  in  his  character  exceedingly  favourable,  interesting  external 
appearance,  air  of  sweetness  about  his  address,  correct  in  morals,  of  ample  means, 
fair  reputation,  he  entertained  proper  views  of  our  Lord ;  he  had  serious  regard  for 
religion.  But — 1.  He  was  ignorant  of  his  moral  inability.  2.  He  displays  an  igno- 
rance of  his  actual  guilt.  3.  He  was  ignorant  of  the  prevailing  disposition  of  his 
heart.  II.  The  manner  in  which  the  application  was  met.  1.  Our  Lord  repels  hia 
adulatory  address.  2.  Our  Lord  shows  the  imperfection  of  his  obedience.  3.  The 
youth  went  away  sorrowful.  III.  Those  important  lessons  which  naturally  arisb 
out  of  this  interesting  case.  1.  Learn  the  danger  and  prevalence  of  self-decep- 
tion. 2.  The  great  responsibility  which  the  ministerial  office  involves.  3.  The 
dangerous  situation  which  the  rich  occupy.  The  suigect  guards  us  against  the 
following :  Low  thoughts  of  God,  high  thoughts  of  ourselves,  slight  thoughts  of  bl^, 
and  mean  thoughts  of  Christ.  (J.  Thorp.)  Men's  persuasions  of  their  own  obedi- 
ence : — Whence  this  ariseth.  1.  Ignorance  of  the  total,  deep,  and  universal  pollu- 
tion of  our  natures.  2  Ignorance  of  the  spiritual  exactness  and  obligation  of  the 
law.  3.  Attention  only  to  the  negative  commandments.  4.  Not  understanding 
either  positive  or  negative  precepts  in  their  comprehensive  sense.  5.  Neglecting 
self-reflection  and  self-examination.  6.  From  the  abominable  self-love,  and  self- 
flattery,  which  cleaveth  to  every  man.  7.  Fear  of  guilt  makes  men  hoodwink  their 
eyes  that  they  may  neither  look  into  the  law,  nor  into  their  hearts.  8.  Ignorance 
of  regeneration  and  the  necessity  for  being  born  again.  9.  The  devil  hath  bUnded 
their  eyes  and  hardened  their  hearts.  10.  Every  man  is  naturally  destitute  of  the 
Spirit,  without  which  we  are  all  devoid  of  light  and  life.  {Anthony  Burgess.) 
The  rich  young  ruler : — I.  Examine  the  toung  man's  boast.  He  boasted  that  his 
obedience  was;  1.  Extensive.  2.  Exact.  3,  Constant.  II.  Answer  his  qdksiion. 
He  lacked :  1.  A  new  heart.  2.  A  sense  of  guilt  and  sin.  3.  Faith  in  Christ.  4. 
Spirituality  and  eelf-denial.  (G.  Brooks.)  I.  How  entirely  even  an  intelligent  man 
may  misapprehend  his  own  spiritual  attainment.  II.  And  his  willingness  to  attain. 
III.  Between  our  present  attainment  and  perfection  there  may  be  a  sacrifice  equiva- 
lent to  cutting  off  a  right  hand,  or  plucking  out  a  right  eye.  IV.  The  one  thing 
essential,  if  we  are  to  attain  perfection,  is  the  following  ofChrist,  V.  Otlier  things 
may  also  be  lacking,  as,  for  example,  deteimination  to  be  holy.  Conclusion  :  The 
lack  of  one  thing  may  make  all  other  attainments  useless.  {M.  Dods,  D.D.) 
The  young  ruler: — I.  A  hopeful  meeting.  It  was — 1,  A  young  man — special  pro- 
mises to  the  young.  2.  A  meeting  with  Christ— patient  and  physician.  3.  One  who 
was  in  earnest.  Mark  says,  "  he  came  running."  4.  One  who  had  many  rara 
qualities.  "Jesus  loved  him,"  6.  One  who  was  bold  (compare  Nicodemus) ;  yet 
reverent,  for  he  "kneeled."  II.  An  important  conversation.  It  reveals:  1.  Our 
eimpleness — unable  to  k^ep  the  law.  2.  Our  pride — trusting  to  our  own  wort's.  3. 
Our  idolatry— loving  other  things  better  than  Christ.  4.  Our  only  hope  of  salva- 
tion— willing  to  leave  all,  take  the  cross  and  follow  Christ.  HI.  A  sorhowfdii 
»ABTiNa.     1.  It  was  parting  with  Christ,  therefore  no  hope.     2.  It  was  a  deUbeiat* 


CHAJ.  XIX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  421 

parting — not  a  sudden  step.  3.  It  was  a  final  parting.  IV.  Impoetant  lessoks. 
How  far  some  may  advance  and  yet  not  be  saved.  Ahandnp  at  once  that  which 
keeps  as  from  Christ.  (D.  Macmillan.)  Morality  made  a  snare: — Take  heed 
that  thy  morality  be  not  thy  snare.  The  young  man  in  the  gospel  might  have 
been  a  better  man  if  he  had  not  been  so  good.  (Gurnall.)  YoutKs  obstructions 
in  their  toay  to  Christ  and  eternal  life: — I.  Self-conceit.  This  young  man  thought 
that  he  had  kept  all  the  law.  Young  people  with  a  smattering  of  knowledge  soon 
imagine  themselves  competent  judges  of  all  truth  and  conduct.  They  have  right- 
eousness to  recommend  themselves  to  God's  favour.  II.  Thk  pleasdess  and 
VANITIES  OF  YOUTH  ;  especially  when  they  are  fed  by  great  possessions.  These  un- 
reasonable sordid  pleasures  are  not  to  be  compared  with  the  exalted  substantiaJ 
delights  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  III.  A  false  pre- 
judice, as  if  the  ways  of  Christ  were  nought  and  melancholy.  Thus  the  young 
mau  thought  when  Christ  told  him  to  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Him.  Grace 
would  give  new  tastes  and  make  the  burden  easy.  Christ  will  never  l6«  yon  be  a 
loser  by  Him.  IV.  An  inconsiderate,  heedless  temper.  To  be  heedle&s  about 
email  matters  is  a  blemish ;  about  essential,  a  reproach  without  excuse.  V.  A  pre- 
sumptuous, DABiNO  rashness  OF  SPIRIT,  YouDg  persons  are  most  sanguine,  even  to 
foolhardiness.  VI.  The  companions  of  youth.  VII.  An  apprehension  or  hot^n 
life.  They  have  a  long  day  before  tbem  and  can  put  away  the  thought  of  dcr.  h. 
(John  Guyse,  D.D.)  A  sorrowful  departure: — 1.  He  was  sorry  at  the  thought  of 
giving  up  those  large  possessions  of  which  he  was  naturally  proud.  2.  He  was  aigo 
grieved  at  the  idea  of  losing  heaven.  3.  Thus  opened  to  the  young  man's  mind  some 
of  the  difficulty  which  there  always  is  in  the  attainment  of  everything  which  is 
really  worth  having.  4.  Part  of  his  sorrow  was  the  discovery  which  he  was  making 
at  that  moment  of  his  own  heart.  5.  But  he  was  most  sorrowful  of  all  in  the 
wretched  sense  he  had  of  his  own  guilty  hesitation  and  inexcusable  weakness. 
Many  worldly  people  are  sorrowful  in  the  midst  of  their  worldliness ;  it  indicates 
life  and  struggle.  In  any  state  of  life  the  characteristic  of  the  Christian  is  self- 
renunciation.  {J.  Vauyhan,  M.A.)  Jes'us'  answer  to  the  young  ruler's  address: — 
I.  What  we  may  infer  from  our  Lord's  question.  1.  That  our  Master  was  not 
fond  of  flattering  titles.  2.  The  language  affords  a  remarkable  instance  of  our 
Lord's  modesty  and  humility.  3.  Our  Lord's  question  contains  a  proof  or  His 
reverence  for  His  Father.  IL  Explain  and  enforce  oub  Lord's  answer.  1.  There 
is  none  good  in  comparison  of  God  ;  and  consequently,  our  sentiments  of  regard 
and  devotion  should  not  stop  short  of  Him.  2.  God  alone  is  absolutely  good.  His 
goodness  is  from  Himself,  independently  of  all  others.  Application — 1.  Our  Lord 
hath  set  us  an  example  for  our  imitation.  2.  Our  Lord  will  not  finally  approve  of 
any  pretended  reverence  and  respect  paid  to  Himself  which  in  the  least  lessens  the 
glory  due  to  His  Father.  (Thomas  Twining.)  The  way  to  happiness: — I.  We 
have  the  example  of  one  who  was  solicitous  and  inquisitive  after  his  future  condi- 
tion, and  desirous  to  know  upon  what  terms  he  might  hope  for  happiness.  II.  We 
have  the  ordinary  way  to  happiness  marked  out  to  us.  III.  In  some  extraordinary 
cases  God  does  require  some  extraordinary  things  of  particular  men,  which  are  not 
generally  necessary  to  the  salvation  of  all  men.  IV.  We  have  the  sad  example  of 
one  that  went  far  towards  happiness,  and  yet  fell  short.  {Samuel  Johnson.)  What 
are  the  senses  in  which  none  is  good  but  God  ? — I.  God  is  the  only  necessarily  good 
being.  II.  God  is  the  only  originally  good  being.  III.  God  is  the  only  self-subsis- 
tently  good  being.  IV.  God  is  the  only  immutably  good  being.  1.  If  God  is  alone 
Bupiemely  good,  He  alone  is  to  be  glorified  and  adored.  2.  If  He  alone  is  supremely 
good,  it  is  Bin,  and  the  very  essence  of  it,  cot  to  glorify  Him.  {Dr.  Shedd.)  What 
he  lacked  • — 1.  A  sense  of  guilt.  He  was  self -complacent.  He  had  obedience,  self- 
respect,  morality.  He  rested  in  these  and  boasted  of  them.  He  did  not  know  the 
estimate  which  heaven  places  upon  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law.  He  was 
under  condemnation,  and  thought  himself  justified.  2.  Faith  in  Christ.  As  the 
only  Saviour.  He  did  not  know  that  Christ  was  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous- 
ness. 3.  A  new  heart.  An  essential.  He  loved  the  world,  &c.  This  shows  the 
old  heart.  4.  Self-denial.  He  loved  ease  and  riches.  He  had  no  heart  to  give 
these  up  for  Christ.  He  had  much  to  give  up,  and  the  surrender  would  be  hard ; 
but  a  Christian  spirit  is  willing  to  give  up  all;  even  life  if  needs  be  for  Christ,  and 
the  "  needs  be"  is  Christ's  word.    (Anon.)      A  new  yearns  personal  inquiry : — I.  There 

MAT  BK  many  EXCELLENCES,  AND  MUCH  THAT  18  AMIABLE  IN  MAN,  WITHOUT  TRUE  RELIOION. 

Morality,  benevolent  and  social  virtues,  orthodoxy,  reverence  for  Divine  ordinances, 
Ac.     IL  There  abe  various  evilb  which  keep  mem  from  bsino  emtibelt  tbs 


<24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  X8^ 

Saviour's.  Self-complacency,  favotir  of  the  world,  attachment  to  riches,  unwillmR- 
ness  to  deny  self,  &c.  III.  The  inquiry  of  the  tpxt  is  one  which  is  worthy  o» 
PEESONAL  consideration.  Ask  the  question  as  in  Christ's  presence,  with  all  pospible 
Beriousness,  with  perfect  deference  to  God's  word,  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  and  with  a 
resolution  to  obey  the  answer.  (J.  Burns,  LL.D.)  Good  things  to  do : — Sidney 
Smith  tells  ns  that  he  cut  the  following  from  a  newspaper,  and  preserved  it  for 
himself :  "  When  you  rise  in  the  morning,  say  that  you  will  make  the  day  blessed 
to  a  fellcw-creature.  It  is  easily  done ;  a  left-off  garment  to  the  man  who  needs  it; 
a  kind  word  to  the  sorrowful ;  an  encouraging  expression  to  the  starving — trifles  as 
light  as  air — will  do  at  least  for  the  twenty-four  hours.  And  if  you  are  young, 
depend  upon  it,  it  will  tell  when  you  are  old ;  and,  if  you  are  old,  rest  assured  it 
will  send  you  gentl;y  and  happily  down  the  stream  of  time  to  eternity.  By  the  most 
simple  arithmetical  sum,  look  at  the  result.  If  you  send  one  person  away  happily 
through  the  day,  that  is  three  hundred  and  sixty- five  in  the  course  of  a  year.  And, 
suppose  you  live  forty  years  only  after  you  commence  that  course  of  medicine,  you 
have  made  fourteen  thousand  six  hundred  persons  happy — at  all  events,  for  a  time." 
Heaven  won  by  being,  not  doing : — Very  likely  the  question  involved  a  mass  of  con- 
fusions. The  young  man  thought,  perhaps,  that  heaven  was  to  be  won  by  external 
actions  and  quantitative  merit.  He  did  not  understand  that  we  must  enter  into 
heaven  by  being,  not  by  doing.  He  held  perhaps  the  vulgar  notion  that  eternal 
only  means  endless,  so  that  eternity  becomes  the  infinitude  of  time  instead  of  its 
antithesis.  He  very  likely  did  not  know  that  every  holy  soul  has  entered  already 
into  eternal  life ;  that  to  all  who  are  in  Christ  it  is  now  as  the  invisible  bright  air 
they  breathe.  He  certainly  did  not  realize  that  "  this  is  life  eternal,  to  know  Thee, 
the  only  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent."  But  yet,  because  the 
question  was  sincere  and  noble,  and  did  not  spring  from  PhariRaism — the  one  thing 
which  the  Lord  detested  most — but  from  the  Divine  dissatisfaction  of  a  struggling 
soul  which  God  alone  can  fill,  Christ  answered  it.  {F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.)  Man 
not  left  in  doubt  as  to  the  good: — "  Why  dost  thou  ask  Me  about  the  good?"  that 
seems  to  have  been  our  Lord's  answer,  not  "  Why  askest  thou  Me  ?  "  as  it  ia  often 
read — for  whom  else  should  the  young  man  ask?  but  "  Why  dost  thou  ask  Me  about 
the  good  t "  Has  God  left  you  in  any  doubt  as  to  what  is  good  ?  Have  you  in  your 
heart  no  voice  of  conscience  ?  Has  duty  never  uplifted  within  you  that  naked  law 
of  right,  so  imperial  in  its  majesty,  so  eternal  in  its  origin,  which  you  know  that 
you  ought  to  follow  even  unto  death?  If  not,  and  if  experience  has  had  no  lessons 
for  you,  and  history  no  teaching,  was  there  no  Sinai ?  Do  not  the  cherubim  of 
your  temple  veil  with  their  golden  wings  the  tablets — alas  I  the  shattered  tablets  of 
your  moral  law  ?  And  there  Jesus  might  have  stopped.  But,  being  unlike  ns, 
being  infinitely  patient  with  man's  irritating  spiritual  stupidity,  not  loving,  as  we 
do,  to  be  cautious  and  reticent,  and  "to  steer  through  the  channel  of  no  meaning 
between  the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  of  yes  and  no,"  He  added,  "  but,  if  thou  wouldst 
enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments."  j^Ibid.)  The  first  step  towards  right- 
eousness: — Christ  did  not  begin  with  the  injunction,  "Go,  sell  all  that  thou  hast." 
He  began  very  much  lower ;  He  said,  "  If  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  com- 
mandments." Let  us  learn  to  flutter  as  sparrows,  before  it  is  worth  considering 
whether  we  ought  also  to  soar  as  eagles.  Let  us  cease  to  be  very  guilty  before  we 
can  be  righteous.  Let  us  be  righteous  before  we  can  attain  to  the  greatness  of  good 
men.  Let  us  be  but  ordinary  good  men  before  we  ask  Christ  for  His  counsels  of 
perfection,  or  attempt  to  attain  to  the  stature  of  His  saints.  Christ  knew  this  well, 
We  come  to  Him,  and  say,  "0  Saviour,  whom  I  love,  tell  me  what  I  must  do  to 
inherit  eternal  life."  And  so  long  as  we  are  all  standing  ankle-deep,  chin-deep,  in 
the  world's  mire,  would  it  be  of  any  use  for  Him  to  point  to  some  shining  cloud  in 
the  deep  blue,  and  say,  ••  Ton  must  stand  there"?  Ah,  no!  He  says  to  you,  "  If 
thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments."  Until  you  have  learnt  to  plant 
firm  feet  on  the  green  lower  slopes,  how  can  you  breathe  the  difficult  and  eager  air, 
or  stand  in  the  glory  of  the  sunrise  on  the  splendour  of  the  snowy  heights?  (Ibid.) 
The  commandment  regarded  as  ordinary : — The  young  ruler,  not  being  so  familiar 
as  we  are  with  those  accumulated  cobwebs  of  two  thousand  years  which  prifcsts, 
and  churches,  and  sects,  and  theologians,  and  theorists,  and  system-mongers,  and 
ichoolmen,  have  spun  over  wellnigh  every  simple  word  of  Christ ;  the  young  ruler, 
whose  natural  instincts  were  not  crushed  under  hundreds  of  ponderous  folios  of 
human  doctrines  and  commandments  of  men,  which,  with  inconceivable  arroganc* 
and  a  bitterness  which  has  become  universally  proverbial,  would  fain  palm  them- 
■elret  off  as  infallible  theology ;  the  young  ruler,  hearing  the  answer  from  the  lipi 


XIX.)  ST.  MATTHEW,  4S8 

of  Jesns,  in  all  its  bare,  naked,  unqualified,  unmistakaMe  simplicity,  was  quite 
frankly  amazed.     He  was  like  the  child  Charoba  in  the  poem,  who,  having  been 
talked  to  about  the  majestic  glory  of  the  sea,  and  being  led  to  the  shore,  innocently 
^claimed,  "  Is  that  the  mighty  ocean  ?  Is  that  all  ?  "    "  Keep  the  commandments." 
X»  that  all  that  Jesus  has  to  tell  him  ?     Surely  there  must  be  some  mistake  f     It  did 
dot  need  a  prophet  to  tell  us  that  1     This  youth  had  gone  to  Christ  seeking  for  some 
great  thing  to  do,  and  secret  thing  to  know.     The  great  Teacher  could  not  mean 
anything  so  commonplace,  so  elementary,  so  extremely  ordinary,  as  those  old  ten 
words  which  He  had  learned  to  lisp,  ever  so  many  years  ago,  when  He  was  a  little 
child,  at  His  mother's  knee  ?   {Ibid.)      Self -satisfaction: — This  young  man  thought 
himself  somewhat  befotehand,  and  that  God,  perchance,  was  in  his  debt.     Truly, 
many  nowadays  grow  crooked  and  aged  with  over-good  opinions  of  themselves,  and 
can  hardly  ever  be  set  right  again.     They  stand  upon  their  comparisons — "  I  am  aa 
good  as  thou;"  nay,  upon  iheir  disparisons,  "I  am  not  as  this  publican."     No, 
for  thon  art  worse  ;  yea,  for  this,  because  thou  thinkest  thyself  better.     This  arro- 
gant youth  makes  good  that  of  Aristotle,  who,  differencing  between  age  and  youth, 
makes  it  a  property  of  young  men  to  think  they  know  all  things,  and  to  afBrm 
lustily  their  own  placits.     {John  Trapp.)         What  lack  If — I.  Examine  his  boast. 
His  obedience  was:  1.  Exact.     2.  Extensive.     3.  Constant.    II.   Snow  his  de- 
riciENCiES.     1.  A  sense  of  guilt.     2.  Faith  in  Chiist.     3.  A  new  heart.     4.  Self- 
denial.     {Pulpit  Germs,)        This  query  must  not  be  regarded  as  an  expression  of 
satisfied  self-righteousness,  as  if  it  implied,  "  In  that  case  I  lack  nothing."     It  is, 
indeed,  true  that  the  young  man  was  still  self-righteous.     He  had  no  conception  of 
the  spirituality,  the  depth,  or  the  height  of  the  commandments  of  God.     Taking 
only  the  letter  of  the  Ihw,  he  considered  himself  blameless,  and  perhaps  even 
righteous,  before  God.     Yet  his  heart  misgave  him,  and  he  felt  that  he  still  lacked 
something.     Under  this  sense  of  want,  he  put  the  question  to  the  Saviour,  as  if  be 
would  have  said,  *'  What  is  it  then  that  I  jet  lack  ?    All  these  things  have  not  given 
me  peace  of  mind."     {J.  P,  Lange,  D.D.)        St;lf-ri(jhteousness  : — The  various  forma 
of  self -righteousness.     1.  Of  the  head  and  of  the  heart  (of  doctrine  and  of  senti- 
ment) ;  or,  Pharisees  in  the  strictest  sense.     2.  Self-righteousness  of  the  heart  with 
orthodoxy  of  the  head,  as  in  the  case  of  some  in  the  Church  who  seem  to  be  zealous 
for  soundness  of  doctrine.     3.  Self-righteousness  of  the  head,  combined  with  a  deep 
sense  of  spiritual  need,  although  its  grounds  may  not  be  fully  understood,  aa  in  the 
case  of  this  young  man  and  of  many  Christian  legalists.     {Ibid.)         Why  jvealth  ks- 
to  be  renounced: — What  did  our  Lord  mean  by  this  reply?    Did  he  mean  that  the 
mere  giving  up  his  wealth  to  the  poor  would  m.ake  this  man  acceptable  with  God  ? 
Certainly  not.     The  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  are  His.     He  asks  no  safrifice  from 
human  hands.     Man  can  give  Him  nothing  that  is  not  His  already.     This,  there- 
fore, could  not  have  been  His  meaning.     Did  He.  then,  mean  that  the  voluntary 
poverty  caused  by  this  distribution  of  his  wealth  wouJd  render  him  meritorious 
with  God?     Poverty  in  itself  is  no  more  a  merit  than  riches.     To  this  question, 
therefore,  we  must  say,  as  to  the  other,  certainly  not.     Well,  then,  what  did  He 
mean?    Evidently  this:  that  whatever  may  be  our  moral  excellence;  however 
exactly  we  n.ay  fulfil  the  law  toward  our  neighbour;  unless  there  is,  besides  this 
Jtod  behind  all  this  and  originating  all  this,  an  ardent  love  of  God — a  love  fuliillinf 
the  first  and  great  commandment,  and  fastening  upon  God  with  all  the  heart  and^ 
soul  and  mind  ;  a  love  born  of  faith,  and  yet  increasing  faith — unless  there  is  such 
a  love  as  this  seated  on  the  very  throne  of  our  being,  originating  all  onr  motives 
and  our  acts ;  making  our  purpose  not  expediency,  but  the  glory  of  God ;  causing 
OS  to  be  ready  if  need  be  to  sell  all  that  we  have — unless  there  is  such  a  love  ruling  j 
in  our  hearts,  our  moral  excellences,  however  great,  are,  in  the  sight  of  God,  of  noj 
account.     This  unquestionably  was  His  meaning;  this  was  the  doctrine  which  He 
designed  to  teach.     {W,  Rudder,  D.D.)        Tlie  true  spirit  of  renunciation : — To  the 
question  "  What  lack  I  yet?  "  Christ  answers  in  substance,  "This:  the  temper  that 
counts  property  worthless  beside  true  life.     You  come  to  me  with  your  money,  with 
your  sense  of  complacency,  of  consequence,  of  power,  and  you  want  to  bring  these 
with  you  into  the  kingdom  of  God.     You  are  not  indeed  satisfied  with  things  aa 
they  are.     How  can  you  be,  so  long  as  you  are  vainly  striving  to  feed  yonr  immor- 
tal  nature  upon  husks  and  chaff  ?    You  want  to  be  enlarged  into  a  life  nobler, 
fuller,  worthier  of  your  better  self.    But  you  would  come  as  Dives,  not  as  Lazarus. 
What  you  have,  yon  think,  ought  to  be  reckoned  in  with  what  yon  are.    You  and 
yonr  estate  are  in  your  own  conception  too  entirely  identified  to  be  separated. 
Believe  me,  my  young  brother,  the  Idngdom  of  Jesus  can  not  know  you  upon  any 


Jl 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRAT01\  [chah    id. 

Buch  terms.  It  is  no-t  necessary  that  you  should  be  stripped  bare  of  all  yonf 
belongings  in  order  to  enter  it.  But  you  should  be  willing  to  be  stripped  bare. 
You  must  come  to  look  upon  what  you  call  yours  as  though  it  mattered  not,  when 
you  set  your  face  toward  the  kingdom  of  God,  whether  it  were  yours  or  no.  The 
spirit  of  renunciation  must  be  so  deep  in  you  that  you  must  be  ready  to  give  up  all 
for  Christ.  And  this  not  from  any  arbitrary  reason,  but  simply  becau^3  a  human 
heart  is  not  large  enough  to  hold  two  thrones.  If  Christ  is  to  be  in  it  at  all,  He 
must  be  king  of  the  whole  domain ;  and  if  He  is  to  be  king,  the  money  power,  the 
sense  power,  the  brain  power  must  go  to  the  rear.  There  wiU  be  a  place  for  each 
of  these  in  every  sanctified  life,  but  it  must  be  a  subordinate  place.  "Go,"  or  at 
least,  if  it  be  a  question  between  your  securities  and  your  Saviour,  be  ready  to  go, 
"  and  sell  all  that  tliou  hast,  and  follow  Me  1 "  (Bishop  H.  C.  Potter.)  Obedi- 
ence to  this  command  not  necessarily  literal: — It  is  not  to  be  hastily  concluded  from 
this,  that  the  rich  man  is  to  give  all  that  he  has  to  the  poor.  If,  in  deference  to 
any  narrow  and  ^superficial  interpretation  of  Christ's  language,  a  man  should  take 
his  wealth  and  distribute  the  whole  of  it  in  largesses  to  the  poor  to-morrow,  ha 
would  be  doing  the  poor  an  incalculable  evil  and  not  a  benefit.  Men  ask,  "  Why 
do  not  you,  as  a  believer  in  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  make  com- 
mon cause  in  the  things  of  this  world  with  the  destitute  around  you,  and  trust  for 
the  needful  food  and  raiment  to  Him  who  feeds  the  birds  and  clothes  the  lilliee?  " 
Why  not,  indeed  1  Is  it  merely  because  such  an  act  would  be  fanatical  and  enthu- 
siastic, or  because  political  economy  forbids  it?  Or,  because,  whatever  else  I  ought 
or  ought  not  to  do,  I  ought  not  to  do  my  brother  tuan  a  wrong  ?  Is  anybody  igno- 
rant of  the  fact  that  every  human  life  needs  the  discipline  of  forethought  and  self- 
denial,  of  res-ponsibility  and  self-help;  and  that  if  I  by  my  ill-judged  kindneefl 
enable  another  to  escape  things,  I  am  degrading  and  hurting  him  as  weU  aa 
abusing  my  own  power?  Wliat  would  be  the  effect  of  the  announcement  that 
half  a  dozen  rich  men  had  disinherited  themselves,  and  that  to-morrow  morning 
fifty  millions  of  dollars  would  be  distributed  to  the  poor?  Does  anybody  cftre 
to  contemplate  the  pandemonium  that  New  Tork  would  become — the  idleness* 
the  licentiousness,  the  fierce  hatreds,  the  bitter  discords,  the  mad  license  tha'« 
would  be  engendered :  and  ought  a  ChrisUan  man  to  do  an  act  that  would  make 
his  brother  men  incalculably  worse  instead  of  better?  {Ibid.)  Great  possessions 
a  hindrance  in  the  way  to  heaven: — How  nimbly  does  tnat  little  lark  mount 
up,  singing,  towards  heaven  in  a  right  line  I  whereas  the  hawk,  which  is  stronger 
of  body  and  swifter  of  wing,  towers  up  by  many  gradual  compasses  to  his  highest 
pitch.  That  bulk  of  body  and  length  of  wing  hinder  a  direct  ascent,  and  require 
the  help  both  of  air  and  scope  to  advance  his  flight ;  while  the  small  bird  cnt» 
the  air  without  resistance,  and  needs  no  outward  furtherance  of  her  motion. 
It  is  no  otherwise  with  the  souls  of  men  in  flying  up  to  their  heaven.  Some  are 
hindered  by  those  powers  which  would  seem  helps  to  their  soaring  up  thither : 
great  wit,  deep  judgment,  quick  apprehension,  send  about  men  with  no  small  labour, 
for  the  recovery  of  their  own  incumbrance ;  while  the  good  affections  of  plain  and 
simple  souls  raise  them  up  immediately  to  the  fruition  of  God.  Why  should  we  be 
proud  of  that  which  may  slacken  our  way  to  glory?  Why  should  we  be  disheartened 
with  the  small  measure  of  that,  the  very  want  whereof  may  (as  the  heart  may 
be  affected)  facilitate  our  way  to  happiness?  (Salter.)  The  warth  of  heaven  :  — 
Far  beyond  the  treasures  of  Eg^pt,  which  yet  is  called  Bahab  because  of  the 
riches,  power,  and  pride  thereof.  Oh  1  get  a  patriarch's  eye  to  see  the  wealth 
t  and  worth  of  heaven,  and  then  we  shall  soon  make  Moses's  choice.  In  the  year 
1  of  grace  759,  certain  Persian  magicians  fell  into  that  madness,  that  they  perinaded 
f  themselves  and  sundry  others  that  if  they  sold  all  they  had  and  gave  it  to  the 
poor,  and  then  afterwards  threw  themselves  naked  from  off  the  walls  into  the  river, 
they  should  presently  be  admitted  into  heaven.  Many  were  cast  away  by  thii 
mad  enterpi  ise.  How  much  better  (if  without  superstition  and  oinnion  of  merit) 
Amadeus,  Duke  of  Savoy,  who  being  asked  by  certain  ambassadors  that  cametohia 
court  what  hounds  he  had,  for  they  desired  to  see  them,  showed  them  next  day  a 
pack  of  poor  people  feeding  at  his  table,  and  said,  "  These  are  the  hounds  where- 
with I  hunt  after  heaven."  (John  Trapp.)  Deteriorating  influence  of  riches: — 
Many  a  Christian  do  you  find  among  the  rich  and  the  titled,  who,  as  a  less  encum- 
bered man,  might  have  been  a  resolute  soldier  of  the  cross ;  but  he  is  now  only  a 
realization  of  the  old  Pagan  fable — a  spiritual  giant  buried  under  a  mountain  of 
gold.  Oh  1  many,  many  such  we  meet  in  our  higher  classes,  pining  with  a  name- 
kess  want,  pressed  by  a  heavy  sense  of  the  weariness  of  existence,  strengthless  in  th« 


OHap.  mc.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  417 

midst  of  affluence,  and  incapable  even  of  tasting  the  profusion  of  comfort  which 
is  heaped  around  them.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  danger  and  misery  of  self' 
deception: — I.  The  state  and  character  of  the  person  who  here  addresses 
OCR  Lord.  1.  We  discover  many  circumstances  which  are  calculated  at  first  sight 
to  impress  us  with  very  favourable  sentiments  of  his  state  and  character.  He  was 
young ;  engaging  manners  ;  amiable  disposition.  He  exhibits  a  pleasing  combina- 
tion of  many  attractive  qualities.  2.  How  inadequate  his  conception  of  ilte 
eorruption  of  his  own  heart.  What  "good"  thing  can  he  do?  3.  The  defective 
views  which  he  entertains  of  his  own  guilt.  4.  He  is  not  better  acquainted  with 
the  secret  bias  of  his  affections  than  with  his  depravity  and  guilt.  II.  The  conduct 
or  OUR  Lord  on  ihib  occasion.  1.  He  does  not  promote  the  self-deception  and 
thtis  augment  the  danger.  He  does  not  compliment  the  young  man  on  his  moral 
attainments.  He  acts  the  part  of  a  true  Physician  and  Friend;  palliatives  will 
only  increase  the  disorder.  2.  Compassionate  regard.  3.  Admirably  suited  to  the 
peculiar  circumstances  of  his  case.  Christ  mentions  the  law  as  a  corrective  to  his 
pride  and  self-sufficiency.  3.  Eminently  calculated  to  prove  in  the  highest  degree 
beneficial  to  his  most  important  interests.  (1)  The  misery  of  a  state  of  self-decep- 
tion. (2)  That  in  removing  the  specious  covering  which  self-deceit  imposes,  and 
in  disclosing  the  sinner  to  himself,  consists  one  important  part  of  the  duty  of  a 
minister,  (8)  Keflect  on  that  disposition  of  heart  which  Christ  requires  of  His  people. 
Follow  Me.  (E.  Cooper.)  The  Christian's  life-long  icork  after  confirmation : — 
"  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "  1.  A  thorough  devotion  to  God's  service.  2.  A  spirit  of 
prayer.  3.  A  due  appreciation  of  the  work  that  God  has  appointed  you  to  do.  4. 
You  may  lack  patience.  6.  You  require  to  be  incited  to  perseverance.  {J.  H, 
Norton,  D.D.)  The  great  question  anstoered: — The  path  a  soul  treads  when  it 
comes  to  Christ  is  one  of  beauty.  To  come  to  Jesus  is  a  noble  and  manly  act. 
It  is  a  soul  diawn  by  the  good ;  rising  above  sinful  forces  which  have  enslaved 
it ;  of  special  interest  to  see  the  young  come  to  Christ.  The  conditions  necessary 
to  such  an  approach  are  illustrated  in  the  young  man — 1.  He  believed  that  the 
character  of  this  life  determiues  that  to  come.  2.  He  believed  that  obedience  to 
God  was  the  first  principle  of  religion.  3.  He  desued  to  exhaust  his  powers  in  per- 
fecting his  character.  4.  He  had  faith  that  Christ  would  show  him  the  way  of  sal- 
vation. "  What  lack  I  yet  ?"  I.  Self-renunciation.  "  Sell  that  thou  hast."  This 
embraces  a  recognition  of  the  supreme  right  of  God  over  the  soul.  God  gave  allr 
this  leads  to  an  abandonment  of  selfish  pursuits.  Why  religion  makes  this  demand. 
1.  Selfishness  is  deceitful  and  delusive ;  it  does  not  see  man's  real  interests ;  it  does 
not  comprehend  the  Divine  relations  of  man ;  it  looks  only  at  things  seen.  2. 
Selfishness  and  self-love  dwarf  manhood  ;  narrow  the  thought  and  corrupt  the 
affections;  they  shut  out  noble  sentiment  which  leads  men  to  deeds  of  daring.  3. 
There  must  be  this  self-abandonment  to  allow  a  higher  ideal  of  life  to  possess  tha 
Boul.  That  man  who  is  full  of  himself  can  contain  nothing  beside.  He  must  forget 
himself  who  would  live  after  the  pattern  shown  him  on  the  mount.  II.  Eeligion 
demands  Christ  consecration.  1.  SuiDreme  affection  for  Christ,  The  heart  must 
be  first  given  to  Him.  2.  The  purposes  of  the  heart  must  be  turned  to  Christ's 
cause.  3.  The  influence  must  be  for  God.  4.  Human  passions  must  be  at  God's 
disposal.  Is  th<  demand  too  rigorous,  and  does  it  embrace  too  much  ?  It  may 
encourage  us  to  j-ield  full  submission  to  call  to  mind  a  few  precious  facts.  1.  It 
assimilates  us  to  a  likeness  of  Christ.  His  soul  exceeded  all  bounds  and  barriers, 
and  poured  out  its  hfe  an  immortal  benediction  upon  His  enemies.  The  widowed 
mother,  whose  midnight  toil  earns  bread  and  raiment  for  her  darling  ones,  is  em- 
balmed in  poetry  and  song  ;  the  artist  weaves  a  crown  of  glory  abaut  her  brow. 
But  such  labour  and  consf  cration  is  yet  only  thai  of  a  true  heart  and  human  im- 

Eulaea,  But  he  who  is  consecrated  to  Christ  is  Godlike.  2.  It  brings  peace  to  the 
eart.  Men  who  are  vacillating  are  unhappy.  No  soul  rests  bo  perfectly  at  ease  as 
that  one  which  has  its  home  on  God's  altar.  3,  It  centralizes  and  makes  the  man 
strong.  Scattered  men  are  weak.  A  consecrated  man  is  a  felt  man.  4.  It  enlivens 
and  sets  the  life  on  fire.  Men  go  to  sleep  and  are  frozen,  as  the  fairy  city  celebrated 
in  story.  God  breathes  on  the  powers  of  the  man  consecrated  ;  he  is  set  on  fire  h^ 
the  breath  of  Jehovah.  Such  a  Hfe  wiU  have  given  back  to  it  from  God,  in  its  new 
realm,  a  better  being.  The  curtains  are  now  withdrawing.  See,  yonder  the  field  is 
fairer  and  the  sward  is  all  green ',  There  that  life  runs  on  and  on  and  on  for  ever  I  It 
gathers  to  itself  all  that  was  of  possible  value  on  earth  in  the  years  of  its  pilgrimage, 
and,  having  yielded  obedience  to  the  conditions  of  its  noble  being,  enters  upon  that 
higher  life  of  love  and  joy  for  which  it  has  been  fitted  by  a  faithful  stewartlishipb 


429  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ns. 

(J.  W,  Holt,)  Christ  and  good  people : — The  gospel  indicates  three  particulars  ia 
regard  to  their  mutual  relations.  I.  There  ib  a  point  which  attracts  the?.t  to  kach 
OTHER.  A  noble  young  man;  although  surrounded  bv  great  wpalf'o^  jjg  haa  not 
yielded  himself  to  youthful  frivolities,  but  has  kept  his  spirit  intent  on  higher  aimf 
than  earthly  qualifications.  He  is  modest  enough  to  be  conscious  of  imperfection, 
and  to  make  inquiry  where  there  is  an  opportunity  to  learn.  He  retains  enthusiasm, 
and  the  object  of  his  enthusiasm  is  no  inferior  one.  Such  people  must  feel  the 
attraction  of  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  love  the  good,  and  Christ  is  the  good 
One.  All  their  ideals  are  realized  in  Jesus.  The  rich  young  man  felt  this.  But 
this  attraction  was  mutual.  Jesus  came  to  seek  the  lost  and  to  save  the  sinner  ;  much 
more  would  the  purity  of  this  naturally  noble  heart  receive  His  recognition.  Neithei 
is  this  mutual  attraction  for  a  moment  merely ;  the  attraction  remains,  though  the 
discipline  required  is  hard  to  understand ;  an  inner  impulse  draws  us  to  Him. 
II.  There  is  a  point  which  separates  them  from  each  other.  At  the  very  point 
where  the  Lord  exerts  the  strongest  power  of  attraction  upon  the  naturally  noble, 
iheir  separation  begins.  It  is  a  necessity  of  the  case.  Our  Lord's  word  about  the 
"  good,"  and  the  mention  of  the  commandments,  had  been  designed  to  awaken  dis- 
trust of  self.  Then  comes  the  unheard-of  demand,  "  Sell  all,"  &o.  He  wag 
touched  in  his  heart's  core.  Christ  exposes  the  point  in  which  this  good  person  was 
not  good.  Christ  wants  complete  persons  for  His  followers  ;  it  takes  a  complete 
person  to  win  the  prize  of  eternal  life.  If  you  want  to  be  perfect  you  must  renounce 
the  secret  reservations  you  oppose  to  the  rigour  of  the  Divine  commands,  put  away 
the  lusts  which  hamper  the  inner  man.  Eenew  your  heart ;  put  a  new  object  in  its 
centre.  But  for  the  sake  of  one  thing  you  will  turn  away  from  your  Saviour,  in 
spite  of  all  your  noble  efforts  and  ideal  endowments.  III.  This  separation  musi 
BE  BBALizEE  IN  ORDER  TBULT  TO  FIND  THE  LoBD.  When  the  physiciau  performs 
an  operation,  it  is  because  he  wants  to  heal ;  and  when  our  Lord  seems  to  discourage 
nearer  approach  it  is  because  He  wants  to  deepen  the  reason  for  it,  so  that  after 
they  unite  nothing  shall  be  able  to  separate  them.  Hence  we  believe  this  young 
man's  separation  was  not  final.  He  will  return,  no  longer  fiery  and  with  a  surplus 
of  power  ;  for  with  God  all  things  are  possible.  It  was  necessary  that  he  should  be 
impressed  with  the  requirements  of  Christ,  for  as  long  as  he  can  say,  "  All  these 
things  have  I  kept,"  a  Kedeemer  is  superfluous — a  Moses  or  a  Socrates  would 
sufiice.  But  when  he  learns  to  despair  of  his  own  strength,  then  he  arrives  before 
the  gate  of  salvation  and  stretches  imploring  hands  for  a  Redeemer.  Therefore 
Christ  first  destroys  this  young  man's  merit ;  and  this  is  the  more  difficult  from  his 
high  virtue.  In  the  light  of  Jesus  little  sins  becomes  great.  To  sacrifice  for  Him 
for  love  is  to  lose  nothing.     His  yoke  is  easy.     {E.  Dryander,  D.D.)  "  What 

lack  I  yet  t "  This  young  man  was  hungry  for  improvement ;  that  was  all  right. 
But  there  were  other  things  for  which  he  had  a  stronger  hunger.  Morality  ia  the 
endeavour  according  to  a  man's  power  to  obey  laws,  and  I  will  divide  moralities  into 
five  different  kinds.  1.  We  call  that  physical  morality  which  consists  in  the  know- 
ledge of  men,  and  of  those  physical  laws  which  surround  them.  Thus  a  man  is 
immoral  who  violates  law  in  eating  and  drinking  and  sleeping.  2.  Next  is  social 
morality.  Men  are  obliged  to  obey  those  laws  which  connect  them  with  their  fellow 
men  ;  also  as  members  of  the  household ;  as  neighbours.  3.  Next  comes  civil 
morality.  Men  are  organized  into  states  and  nations.  4.  Business  morality.  What 
is  the  relation  of  obedience  in  these  different  spheres  to  the  nature  and  character  of 
men?  1.  All  these  observances  are  external.  They  are  not  in  their  nature  internal 
at  all.  They  leave  out  entirely  the  vital  question  of  character.  A  man  may  be 
obedient  to  physical  law,  and  yet  be  proud.  Man  is  a  creature  of  two  worlds  ;  so 
that  when  he  is  called  to  the  other  sphere  the  physical  elements  which  he  has  accu- 
mulated here  drop  off.  The  spiritual  only  he  carries  with  him.  2.  This  lower 
morality  leaves  out  of  view  the  higher  human  relations  to  God.  A  man  may  be  an 
atheist  and  yet  good  in  lower  respects ;  but  it  is  not  fair  to  measure  his  geuial 
qutilities  by  his  atheism  as  he  has  been  brought  up  amidst  Christian  influences.  A 
man  has  an  immortal  self  as  distinguished  from  his  physical,  social,  and  civil  self ; 
what  about  that  part  of  him  which  is  to  live  for  ever  ?  Are  there  no  laws  higher 
than  those  which  belong  to  secular  affairs,  which  apply  to  the  higher  reason  and  the 
mored  sense.  Are  there  no  laws  for  faith,  imagination  in  its  dealings  with  religion, 
which  connect  a  man  with  the  invisible,  universal,  and  infinite?  Is  tliere  no  morality 
which  reaches  beyond  the  earthly  sphere  7  Morality  is  not  complete  without  reUgion. 
There  are  practical  uses  in  the  inferior  forms  of  morality  ;  from  them  we  learn  the 
typical  forms  of  the  higher  religion.    "  If  a  man  say,  I  love  Ck>d,  and  hateth  hifl 


CHAP.  MX. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  «2« 

brothex,  he  is  a  liar,"  Ac.  The  lower  moralities  are  schools,  as  it  were ;  It  is  » 
great  preparation  for  religion.  Generally  speaking  the  higher  you  go  the  more  difS^ 
cnlt  is  the  achievement.  Few  men  are  competent  to  be  eminent  artists.  In 
realizing  the  higher  conceptions  of  religion  there  are  inherent  diliioultieB;  but  some 
make  it  harder  than  they  need.  The  sun  may  shine  on  a  slate  roof  for  ever,  and  yet 
the  garret  beneath  it  may  be  dark ;  but.  make  the  roof  of  glass  and  the  sun  will  shine 
through.  Let  j  our  higher  life  have  thn  best  care.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  central 
principle  of  character: — There  are  multitudes  of  men  who  hve  moral  lives, 
generous  lives,  lives  that  are  good  in  a  thousand  respects ;  but  it  does  not  come  to 
this,  that  their  whole  being  is  centred  in  God  and  spiritual  things.  It  is  centred, 
rather,  in  the  possession  of  wealth.  (Ibid.)  Seljishnesa  may  be  associated  ioith 
many  virtues : — I  remember  watching,  last  summer,  spiders  that  burrowed  in  the 
crevices  of  a  trellis  where  the  wind  had  borne  much  dust.  I  noticed  that  the  hole 
•where  they  lay  lurking  looked  dark  and  ugly.  I  also  noticed,  as  I  sat  one  day 
watching,  a  vagrant  spider  taking  a  morning  glory,  in  full  blossom,  and  spin  his  web 
over  tLe  mouth  of  it.  And  there  never  was  a  prettier  nest  in  this  world — a  nest 
more  richly  gemmed  with  beauty — than  this  was.  But,  after  all,  it  was  the  same 
spider,  whether  he  lay  in  the  dark  hole  at  the  comer  of  the  trellis,  or  in  the  blossom 
of  that  exquisite  flower.  Now,  selfishness  may  weave  its  web  in  the  dusky  places, 
or  in  the  hideous-looking  recesses  of  a  man's  disposition,  or  about  the  mouths  and 
graces  of  sweet  affections ;  but  it  is  the  same  selfishness  after  all.  The  place  is 
changed,  and  the  appearance  of  the  surroundings  is  changed,  but  the  spider  is  not 
changed.  So,  the  point  to  be  remembered  is,  that  in  every  man  there  is  a  centre 
around  about  which  his  life  really  swings.  There  is  a  balance-point,  and  it  pre- 
ponderates one  way  or  the  other.  The  great  influences  of  hfe  weigh  down  toward 
the  flesh,  or  else  they  go  toward  the  spiritual.  You  may  change  the  circumstances 
of  a  man's  life,  and  it  may  be  modified  one  way  or  the  other  ;  but  after  all  there  Ib 
a  predominant  force  in  his  character,  and  that  controls  all  the  minor  forces.  (Ibid.) 
Morality  not  to  be  despised : — Again,  a  selfish-centred  man,  clothing  himself  with 
all  manner  of  Christian  graces  and  aspirations,  is  not  to  be  condemned  as  if  these 
graces  and  aspirations  were  of  no  account.  Here  is  a  point  where  ministers  have 
trouble  in  preaching  to  men.  When  we  see  men  embowered  under  external 
moralities,  and  attempt  to  teach  that  morality  is  not  enough,  the  impression  arises 
that  we  undervalue  morals.  I  do  not  undervalue  morals  any  mure  than  the  tax- 
collector  undervalues  a  hundred  dollars,  when  I  go  to  pay  my  taxes,  and  offer  him 
that  amount,  when  my  bill  is  five  hundred.  He  says :  "  I  will  not  take  it.  It  is  not 
enough."  He  does  not  despise  the  hundred  dollars.  He  merely  says:  "Ton  must 
put  more  with  it."  And  I  do  not  despise  morality  because  I  say  that  it  does  notrise 
high  enough.  It  is  good  as  far  up  as  it  goes.  So  is  a  grape-vine  good  as  far  up  as 
it  goes,  when  it  is  two  or  three  feet  high  ;  but  it  does  not  arrive  at  what  it  was 
planted  for  until  it  reaches  that  point  where  it  has  blossoms  and  clusters.  It  is  the 
cluster  that  determines  its  value.  (Ibid.)  Eejined  selfishness  : — A  man  may  love 
poetry  and  music,  and  have  generous  impulses  which  dbraw  him  toward  a  higher 
range  of  life ;  but  after  all,  it  is  only  a  polished  form  of  selfishness,  or  selfness  that 
is  manifesting  itself  in  him.  It  is  self  that  is  at  the  bottom.  I  do  not  say  that  it 
is  not  better  that  a  man  should  be  refinedly  selfish  than  coarsely  selfish.  It  is  a  great 
deal  better.  It  is  better  that  man  should  be  intellectually  selfiih  than  coarsely 
selfish.  It  makes  social  intercourse  easier.  It  makes  it  easier  for  men  to  get  along 
with  each  other.  And  if  the  centre  of  a  man's  disposition  is  selfish,  and  at  the 
game  time  he  has  aspirations  and  refinements,  and  generosities  and  kindnesses,  I 
do  not  say  that  he  is  no  better  for  having  these  things :  I  say  that  as  a  member  of 
society  he  is  a  great  deal  better.  He  energizes  society.  He  adds  something  to 
those  elements  which  take  away  attrition  and  harshness  and  rudeness  from  society. 
But  he  is  not  inwardly  better  ;  for  nothing  makes  a  man  better  within  until  the  centre 
of  his  life  and  character  are  changed.  Every  blossom  that  you  put  upon  a  man  who 
is  radically  selfish,  and  is  going  to  be  selfish,  the  worse  you  make  it  for  him.  The 
prettier  you  make  a  man's  selfishness,  the  more  music  there  is  that  accompanies  it, 
the  more  flowers  there  are  that  decorate  it,  the  more  balm  there  is  along  with  it,  the 
more  snnlight  there  is  shed  upon  it,  the  more  it  is  painted  with  glowing  colours,  the 
better  is  it  for  society ;  but  the  worse  it  is  for  him,  because  these  things  delude ;  becaaae 
they  are  satisfying  ;  because  they  hide  the  mischief ;  because  they  do  not  let  him  see 
what  an  anf  orgiveable  and  what  a  demoralizing  quality  selfishness  is.  {Ibid. )  The 
need  of  an  inner  spiritual  change : — What  is  that  change  ?  It  does  not  consist  in 
doing  a  few  more  things,  or  in  adding  a  few  more  excellences,  as  the  yoong  man 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtx, 

thonght  it  did.  "  Good  Master,  what  new  thing  shall  I  do  ?  What  new  prayer  shall 
I  say  ?  What  extra  morality  shall  I  take  on  ?  What  other  charities  and  bountiea 
shall  I  bestow  for  man's  relief  7  I  should  be  glad  to  add  to  my  stock  of  excellen- 
ces." That  was  the  purport  of  the  young  man's  inquiry.  The  Master  said  to  him, 
in  substance:  •'Your  whole  character  is  wrapped  up  in  your  position.  You  ara 
rich,  you  have  largo  estates,  and  you  know  it,  and  you  stand  centred  in  them. 
And  now,  with  this  centre,  you  want  to  add  various  excellences.  Go  sell  all  these, 
give  them  away,  and  take  up  your  cross  and  follow  Me."  That  brought  him  to  a 
decision  instantly.  Choosing  between  the  higher  and  the  lower,  he  took  the  lower, 
and  went  away  sad  and  grievei.  And  Christ  everywhere  brought  men  to  this  choice. 
If  you  are  to  be  Cliristians,  Christianity  does  not  mean  having  some  few  things  on 
a  selfish  basis.  You  must  change  the  foundation  of  your  life.  You  must  pass  over 
from  the  animal,  up  from  the  lower,  away  from  the  predominantly  self-seeking  life 
that  is  in  all  of  us  by  nature.  You  must  come  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  is 
the  kingdom  of  love.  Beneficent  love,  love  for  others,  and  not  for  yourself,  must 
be  the  predominant,  the  governing  tendency.  (Ibid.)  Religion  more  than  an 
outward  addition : — Being  possessed  of  all  that  could  gratify  his  senses,  he  did  not 
mean  to  be  over-indulgent  in  it,  but  he  did  not  want  to  give  it  up.  Being  in  this 
position,  he  wanted,  not  to  exchange  it  for  anything  else,  but  simply  to  have 
sprouting  up  around  about  him,  over-arching  him,  and  embowering  him,  flowers  of 
spiritual  and  poetical  aspirations,  and  all  manner  of  Divine  feelings,  so  that  he 
should  have  both  things — his  feet  rooted  in  this  earth,  and  his  head  placed  in  the 
other  life.  He  wanted  to  take  this  world  first,  and  then  superadd  the  kingdom  o£ 
God  as  a  polish  to  it.  He  wanted  all  spiritual  excellence  to  sit,  as  it  were,  in  the  cloudt 
above  him,  like  an  orchestra,  and  play  sweet  music  to  him,  while  he  sat  below,  on  8 
level  with  the  earth,  sensuous,  and  indulging  himself  selfishly.  (Ibid.)  Tht 
spiritual  mutt  supplant  the  physical  life: — Men  have  wanted,  in  every  age,  to  havt 
both  worlds — a  tbing  which  Christ  said  was  impossible.  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon."  Our  Saviour  taught  this  young  man  that  the  spiritual  life  must  sup- 
plant the  physical  life.  The  two  can  co-exist ;  but  the  spiritual  life  must  be  in  the 
ascendency,  and  must  control  the  lower  physical  life.  Our  Saviour  taught  all  the 
way  through  His  life  that  spirituality  cannot  be  simply  the  complement  of  secu- 
larity.  It  cannot  be  a  parasite  growing  on  the  boughs  of  worldly  prosperity.  If  i 
man  ia  to  have  the  kingdom  of  God,  he  must  make  that  first,  and  that  must  be 
supreme.  Or,  to  change  it  to  a  more  psychological  statement,  if  a  man  is  to  b« 
tiuly  a  Christian,  his  spiritual  nature  must  predominate  and  bear  rule  over  every- 
thing else  that  is  in  him.  You  cannot  have  the  temporal,  lower  nature  strongest, 
and  then  expect  the  spiritual  nature  to  please  it  and  play  down  to  it.  And  yet,  that 
is  what  men  are  attempting  to  bring  about  everywhere.  Every  person  has  some 
dominant  point.  There  is  no  uncentred  character  anywhere.  There  is  a  point  in 
ever}'  man's  character  which  rules,  and  to  which  everything  is  brought  for  compari- 
son and  settlement.  This  point  often  seems  to  shift  and  change  ;  but,  after  all,  ther# 
is  some  point  in  a  man's  character  which  you  may  say  is  the  dominant  point,  and 
before  which  all  things  above  it  and  below  it  have  to  come  into  judgment.  It  is  thii 
that  gives  character  to  a  man,  and  determines  whether  he  is  high  or  low,  good  or  bad. 
Religious  impressions  soon  shaken  off : — After  a  shower  in  the  night,  if  you  gc  out  in 
the  morning,  it  is  scarcely  safe  for  you  to  go  near  a  bush  or  a  tree,  because  if  yon 
touch  it,  there  will  rain  down  such  multitudes  of  drops  on  you.  I  sometimes  think 
this  church  is  like  a  tree  that  has  stood  out  in  the  open  air,  and  collected  the  dew. 
Every  leaf  is  covered  with  it.  If  you  shake  the  tree,  down  comes  a  shower  of  drops. 
I  see  you  moved  to  tears  every  Sunday.  I  know  that  you  follow  and  enjoy  the 
service  of  prayer  and  of  song  and  of  preaching.  You  have  much  deep  religious 
feeling,  and  a  great  deal  of  thought.  The  pews  are  full  of  young  men  and  young 
women  who  are  going  to  Christ  and  saying  :  "  Master,  what  good  tiling  shall  I  do 
that  I  may  inherit  eternal  life?  "  And  Christ  says,  by  me,  to-day,  to  every  one  of 
you,  "  It  is  not  adding  one  good  thing  to  another  that  you  need,  but  that  yon 
ihould  rise  from  the  centre  of  selfishness,  and  go  over  to  the  centre  of  true  Divine 
benevolence,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  which  power  no  man  can 
rise  to  the  higher  level. "  {Ibid. )  The  price  of  a  great  ambilion : — Yours  is  a  great 
ambition,  and,  withal,  a  very  noble  ambition :  are  you  prepared  to  pay  the  price  for 
youi  great  smabition  ?  You  are  a  man  of  the  very  finest  impulses,  but  you  live  in 
ft  fine  house  and  know  nothing  of  hardship,  and  while  these  things  may  do  for  your 
old  life,  the  new  to  which  you  aspire  demands  sacrifice  and  surrender.  Sell  up  all, 
and  let  us  know  how  much  is  due  to  an  impulsive  temperament  and  how  muoh  to 


OHAF,  iix.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  431 

inherent  nobility.  If  it  be  due  to  that  no  change  of  eircum=tances  will  matter.  It 
was  a  Spartan-like  call  to  duty,  but  did  he  not  look,  like  a  Spartan  youth,  equal  to 
it  ?  {J,  W.  Thew.)  Nobility  worthy  of  the  highest  culture  : — I  apprehend  that 
here  lay  the  chief  reason  of  our  Saviour's  great  demand  upon  him.  Is  it  not  pre- 
cisely  because  he  is  so  good  that  that  demand  is  so  great  ?  Is  it  venturesome  to  say 
the  Master  would  not  have  made  such  a  demand  upon  an  inferior  mind  to  his? 
That  was  not  simply  because,  being  a  young  man,  he  was  better  able  to  bear  it ; 
it  was  because,  standing  already,  as  he  does,  so  high,  occupying  such  a  vantage 
ground — shall  I  put  it  this  way — the  Master's  ambitiovis  are  fired,  He  sees  him  on 
such  a  level,  and  He  would  have  him,  at  one  grand  stride,  take  the  highest  level  of 
fiJl.  As  when  you  have  a  lad  at  school  of  more  than  ordinary  promise,  you  keep 
him  longer  there,  you  say  the  lad  shows  signs  of  genius,  and  the  opportunity  of 
becoming  a  genius  shall  not  be  wanting.  Here  are  signs  of  uncommon  goodnesa 
and  greatness,  and  the  opportunity  should  be  afforded  for  accomplishing  good. 
This  view  is  borne  out  by  the  story.  "  Sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,"  is 
not  given  in  answer  to  the  question,  •*  What  good  thing  shall  I  do  V  but  in  answer 
to  the  question,  "  What  lack  I  yet  f  "  It  is  not,  "If  thou  wouldst  be  saved,  sell  all 
that  thou  hast ;"  it  is,  "If  thou  wouldst  be  perfect."  It  is  not  merely  a  question 
of  eternal  life,  but  of  eternal  distinction.  It  is  not  a  mere  matter  of  getting  through 
the  curriculum,  but  of  getting  through  it  vrith  honours.  (Ibid.)  The  whole  sur- 
render:— I.  There  is  a  certain  spurious  sort  of  religion  which  because  it  is  not 
COMPLETS  (or  perfect)  IS  USELESS.  A  vessel  may  look  very  well,  but  if  it  have  a 
hole  in  the  bottom,  it  will  hold  nothing — useless  for  want  of  being  perfect.  II. 
The  whole  surrender.    The  decisive  act  which  consecrates  all  to  the  kingdom. 

— MUST    BE    DONE   BY   THE    MAN    HIMSELF.       Not  eVCU   God   CaU  do  it  fOt  yOU.      It  W»8 

useless  for  Christ  to  say  "  Follow  Me  "  as  He  was,  for  his  body  only  could  have 
followed,  his  anxieties  would  still  have  been  with  his  possessions.  It  was  also  a 
prudent  provision  against  approaching.persecution.  III.  How  can  I  go  and  sell  ? 
By  a  full  consecration  to  God.  Like  the  whole  bumt-oilering,  every  portion  must 
be  consumed  on  the  altar.  IV.  It  is  an  awpul  consideration  that  the  Word  of 
Life  itself  is  powerless  to  persuade  a  covetous  will.  {W.  I,  Keay.)  On 
being  right  in  the  main  : — I.  He  displayed  a  degree  of  moral  earnestness.  2.  He 
employed  the  language  of  veneration.  3.  He  was  well  instructed  in  Biblical 
ethics.  4.  He  was  inordinately  attached  to  worldly  possessions.  Christ's  conduct 
showed :  1.  That  He  compels  men  to  look  at  the  logical  consequences  of  their  own 
admissions.  2.  That  personal  regard  may  be  entertained  where  full  moral  appro- 
bation cannot  be  expressed.    I.  The  necessary  limitations  of  the  most   oabbtuIi 

BELiaiOUS  TBAININO.      II.    ThAT  THE  FINAL  ATTAINMENT  OF  EDUCATION  13  THE  C0NQUF8T 

OF  THE  HEART.  1,  That  Christ-foUowing  involves  self-abnegation.  2.  That  Christ- 
following  must  be  the  expression  of  the  soul's  supreme  love.  3.  That  Christ- 
following  means  self-giving.  III.  That  lack  of  one  thing  may  be  lack  of  every- 
thing. IV.  That  the  sincerity  of  men  must  be  tested  according  to  theib 
peculiar  ciRcnMSTANCES.  What  is  a  test  to  one  man  may  be  no  test  to  another.  A 
man  must  be  prepared  to  surrender  what  he  values  most.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
lack  of  one  thing  the  lack  of  all: — The  garden  is  beaatifuUy  laid  out:  the  straight 
lines  and  the  curves  are  exact ;  the  terraces  are  arranged  with  artistic  taste ;  but 
no  seed  is  sown, — and  the  summer  says,  "  One  thing  thou  lackest."  The 
machinery  is  perfect :  cylinder,  piston,  valve,  are  in  excellent  order;  no  flaw  is  in  the 
wheel,  no  obstruction  in  the  flue ;  finer  engine  never  stood  on  the  iron  way ;  every- 
thing is  there  but  steam, — and  the  intending  traveller  says,  "  One  thin?  thou 
hckeat."  The  watch  has  a  golden  case,  the  dial  is  exquisitely  traced  and  figured, 
the  hands  are  delicate  and  well- fixed;  everything  is  there  but  the  mainspring — 
and  he  who  inquires  the  time  says,  *'  One  thing  thou  lackest."  (Ibid.)  Sins  a* 
great  possessions : — There  are  sins  so  rooted,  so  riveted  in  men,  so  incorporated,  so 
eonsubstantiated  in  the  soul,  by  habitual  custom,  as  that  those  sins  have  contracted 
the  nature  of  ancient  possessions.  As  men  call  manners  by  their  names,  so  sins 
have  taken  names  from  men,  and  from  places ;  Simon  Magus  gave  the  name  to  » 
dn,  80  did  Gehazi,  and  Sodom  did  so.  There  are  sins  that  run  in  names,  in  families, 
in  blood ;  hereditary  sins,  entailed  sins ;  and  men  do  almost  prove  their  "  gentry  " 
by  those  sins,  and  are  scarcely  believed  to  be  rightly  borne,  rf  they  have  not  those 
sins.  These  are  great  possessions,  and  men  do  much  more  easily  part  with  Christ 
than  with  these  sins.  But  then  there  are  less  sins,  light  sins,  vanities ;  and  yet  even 
Ihese  come  to  possess  us,  and  separate  us  from  Christ.  How  many  men  neglect 
this  ordinary  means  of  their  salvation,  the  coming  to  these  exercises,  not  becauM 


«M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xsx, 

their  undoing  lies  on  it,  or  their  discountenancing,  but  merely  out  of  levity,  of 
vanity,  of  nothing,  they  know  not  what  to  do  else,  and  yet  do  not  this.  You  heat 
of  one  man  that  was  drowned  in  a  vessel  of  wine,  but  how  many  thousands  in 
ordinary  water  1  And  he  was  no  more  drowned  in  that  precious  liquor  than  they 
in  that  common  water.  A  gad  of  steel  does  no  more  choke  a  man  than  a  feather 
or  a  hair.  Men  perish  with  whispering  sins,  nay  with  silent  sins,  sins  that  never 
tell  the  conscience  tht^y  are  sins,  as  often  as  with  crying  sins.  And  in  hell  there 
shall  meet  as  many  men  that  never  thought  what  was  sin,  as  that  spent  all  their 
thoughts  in  compassing  sin ;  as  many  who,  in  a  slack  inconsideration,  never  cast 
a  thought  upon  that  place,  as  that  by  searing  their  conscience,  overcame  the  eense 
and  fear  of  that  place.  Great  sins  are  great  possessions,  but  levities  and  vanities 
possess  U8  too ;  and  men  had  rather  part  with  Christ  than  with  any  possessions. 
(J.  Donne.)  Estimate  of  the  ruler: — He  was  not  a  spiritual  man;  there  was 
really  nothing  spiritually  good  and  loveable  in  him  ;  nothing  truly  gracious,  as  a 
Puritan  divine  would  call  it.  He  was  but  a  natural  man  after  all — a  beautiful 
specimen  of  the  natural  man,  as  Dr.  Chalmers  said  of  some  one,  but  still  ouly  a 
natural  man.  Nature  had  indeed  done  much  for  him,  all  it  could  for  him  ;  it  had 
endowed  him  with  riches,  power,  a  high  moral  nature,  an  amiable,  wann,  frank, 
loving,  loveable  disposition.  See  here  what  nature  can  do;  she  can  raise  her 
favourites  very  high  in  the  scale  of  humanity,  so  as  to  compel  the  homage  even  of 
the  Saviour's  Uve  and  admiration.  See  here  what  nature  cannot  do ;  she  cannot 
earry  any  one  across  the  boundary  that  separates  the  kingrlom  of  God  from  the 
world ;  she  can  bring  him  to  the  very  threshold,  but  there  she  leaves  him ;  there 
she  is  powerless  ;  there  her  weakness  is  made  known.  {A.  L.  R.  Foote.)  Giving 
up  all  for  Chri$t : — The  words  are  terribly  clear,  sharp,  and  stern.  Francis  of 
Assisi  heard  them  once.  Straying  into  a  church,  they  were  in  the  lesson  for  the 
day  which  was  read.  The  words  seized  on  his  conscience ;  they  haunted  him,  they 
tormented  him.  He  sold  everything  but  the  bare  garment  which  clothed  him. 
Still  the  obedience  seemed  to  fall  short  of  the  Saviour's  command.  So  he  stripped 
himself  even  of  his  poor  raiment ;  and  they  clothed  him  there  in  the  church,  for 
very  shame,  in  a  peasant's  tunic,  which  he  wore  on  till  death.  {J.  B.  Broicn.) 
Human  perfectibility : — It  is  as  if  our  Lord  had  said,  "  Thou  aimest  at  perfection, 
and  on  the  footing  of  this  thou  art  looking  for  eternal  hfe;  thou  indulgest  the 
dream  of  human  perfectibility.  Well,  I  will  put  thee  here  to  the  test :  sell  all  that 
thoo  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor.  What  I  dost  thou  hesitate?  What,  then,  becomaa 
of  thy  favourite  doctrine  of  perfectionism  ?  Ah  I  thy  fond  idol  is  dashed  to 
pieces,  and  by  thine  own  hand,  too;  and  wilt  thou  still  indulge  in  such  a  golden 
tireum  ?  Is  this  all  the  length  thy  doctrine  of  human  perfectibility  can  carry  theef  " 
If — an  important  qualification  this — if  thou  wouldst  be  perfect  I  Who  can  fail  to 
see  a  delicate  yet  severe  irony  here  ?  The  Saviour  is  not  teaching  the  doctrine  of 
perfection  in  any  sense,  but  is  trying  to  wean  him  from  a  theory  which  was  deeply 
rooted  in  his  mmd,  and  which  was  exercising  so  prejudicial  an  influence  over  him. 
{A.  L,  R.  Foote.)  Possessions  that  possess : — Every  man  hath  some  such  posses- 

sions as  possess  him,  some  such  affections  as  weigh  down  Christ  Jesus,  and  separate 
him  from  Him,  rather  than  from  those  affections,  those  possessions.  (Dr.  Donne.) 
Not  wise  to  go  from  God  : — That  no  man  that  ever  went  from  Him  went  by  good 
way  or  came  to  good  end.  There  is  none  good  but  God  ;  there  is  centrical,  visceral, 
gremial  gold,  goodness  in  the  root,  in  the  tree  of  goodness,  God.  (Ibid.)  The 
regulation  of  conduct: — Conduct  may  be  regulated  in  two  ways  : — 1.  By  thehaMd; 
2.  Bv  the  heart :  as  with  a  watch  so  with  the  life.  The  face  of  the  watch  may  be  made 
to  represent  the  truth  by  simply  altering  the  hands,  or  it  may  be  corrected  by 
touching  the  interior  works.  Here  is  a  young  man  who  says,  "What  shall  I  do  to 
make  my  watch  tell  the  hour  accurately  ?  "  He  is  answered,  ••  Thou  knowest  the 
great  clocks  by  which  time  is  kept  in  the  city."  He  repUea,  "  All  these  have 
I  observed."  He  is  then  told  to  open  his  watch  and  correct  the  regulator.  So  is 
it  with  human  life :  many  seek  to  correct  it  by  the  outside  ;  they  search  for  models, 
they  inquire  for  foot-prints;  but  they  neglect  the  life-spring  within,  and  conse- 
quently never  get  beyond  the  affectation  of  artificialism,  or  the  stiffness  of  Pharisaic 
conceit.  (Dr.  Parker.)  But  how  is  thit  spiritual  lack  to  be  supplied  f  How  is 
this  hiatus  in  human  character  to  be  filled  up  ?  How  shall  the  fountain  of  holy 
and  filial  affection  towards  God  be  made  to  gush  up  into  everlasting  life,  within 
your  now  unloving  and  hostile  heart  f  here  mi  no  answer  to  this  question  of 
questions,  but  in  the  person  and  work  f  the  Uoly  Ghost.  If  God  shall  shed 
abroad  His  love  in  yoni  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  you,  you  will 


«HAP.  XIX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  431 

know  the  blessedness  of  a  new  affection,  and  will  be  able  to  say  with  Peter,  "  Thon 
knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."  You  are  shut  up  to  this  method 
and  this  influence.  To  generate  within  yourself  this  new  spiritual  emotion 
which  you  have  never  yet  felt  is  utterly  impossible.  Yet  you  must  get  it,  or 
religion  is  impossible,  and  immortal  life  is  impossible.  {W.  O.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.) 
The  remorse  occasioned  by  enlightened  reason  on  the  rejection  of  Christ : — There  is 
no  misery  comparable  to  that  which  follows  after  a  near  access  to  happiness ;  nor 
any  sorrow  so  quick  and  pungent  as  that  which  succeeds  a  preconceived,  but  dis- 
appointed joy.  Neither  was  the  proposal  unreasonable,  because  usually  practised, 
even  by  the  most  worldly,  it  being  frequent  with  men  to  sell  an  estate  in  one  place 
to  buy  another  in  a  more  convenient.  We  may  observe  in  this  passage  these  four 
things  considerable — 1.  The  person  making  the  address  to  Christ,  who  was  one 
whose  reason  was  enlightened  to  a  solicitous  consideration  of  his  estate  in  another 
world.  2.  The  thing  sought  for  in  this  address,  viz.,  eternal  life.  3.  The  condi- 
tion upon  which  it  was  proposed,  and  upon  which  refused;  viz.,  the  sale  and 
relinquishment  of  his  temporal  estate.  4.  His  behaviour  upon  this  refusaL  He 
that  deliberately  parts  with  Christ,  though  for  the  greatest  and  most  suitable  worldly 
enjoyment,  if  but  his  natural  reason  is  awakened,  does  it  with  much  secret  sting 
and  remorse.   I.  I  shall  show  whence  it  is  that  a  man  actuated  by  an  ENuaHTEXED 

REASON  FINDS  SUCH  EELUCTANCT  AND  REGRET  UPON  HIS  REJECTION  OF  ChRIST.       It  may 

proceed  from  these  causes — 1.  The  first  may  be  taken  from  the  nature  of  conscience, 
that  is  apt  to  recoil  upon  any  error,  either  in  our  actions  or  our  choice.  After  a 
good  action,  though  never  so  difficult,  so  grim,  and  unpleasant  in  the  onset,  yet 
what  a  lightsome,  refreshing  complacency  does  it  leave  upon  the  mind  I  What  a 
fragrancy,  what  a  cheerfulness,  upon  the  spirits !  So,  on  the  contrary,  an  action 
morally  evil  and  irregular.  A  man  no  sooner  displeases  God  but  he  presently  dis- 
pleases himself.  No  sooner  is  the  action  past  but  conscience  makes  the  report. 
As  soon  as  David  cut  off  a  piece  of  Saul's  robe  how  quickly  did  his  heart  smita 
him  1  An  impure  heart,  Uke  a  foul  gun,  never  vents  itself  in  any  sinful  commis- 
sions but  it  recoils.  It  is  impossible  to  sequester  and  divide  sin  from  sorrow.  Thet 
which  defiles  will  as  certainly  disturb  the  soul.  As  when  mud  and  filth  is  cast  in^ 
a  pure  fountain,  it  is  not  so  much  said  to  pollute,  as  to  trouble  the  waters.  Aud 
do  you  think  that  this  young  man  had  net  the  experience  of  this  ?  He  departed 
indeed,  but  it  was  sorrowful,  his  conscience  ringing  him  many  sad  peals  within, 
hitting  him  in  the  teeth  with  the  murder  of  his  soul ;  that  he  had  foolishly  awd 
irrationally  bartered  away  eternity  for  a  trifle,  and  lost  a  never-returning  oppor- 
tunity, in  its  improvement  invaluable,  and  in  its  refusal  irrecoverable.  2.  The 
second  cause  of  this  trouble  and  reluctancy  that  men  find  in  the  very  instant  of 
their  rejecting  Christ  is  taken  from  the  usual  course  of  God's  judicial  proceeding 
in  this  matter,  which  is  to  clarify  the  eye  of  reason  to  a  clearer  sight  of  the  beauti«s 
and  excellences  of  Christ  in  the  very  moment  and  critical  instant  of  his  departure. 
God  can  affect  it  with  a  sudden,  instantaneous  view  of  a  good.  It  is  like  a  sudden 
lightning  that  flashes  in  the  face,  but  alters  not  the  complexion ;  it  is  rather  vision 
than  persuasion;  it  struck  his  apprehension,  but  never  changed  his  resolution. 
This  ie  another  cause  that  whets  the  sting,  that  enhances  the  vexation,  and  sends 
him  away  sorrowful.  3.  The  third  and  last  cause  of  the  anxiety  that  a  sinner  feels 
upon  his  relinquishment  of  Christ,  if  his  reason  be  enlightened,  is  because  there 
is  that  in  Christ  and  in  the  gospel,  even  as  they  stand  in  opposition  to  the  best  of 
such  enjoyments,  that  answers  the  most  natural  and  generous  discourses  of  reason. 
For  the  proof  of  wliich  I  shall  produce  two  known  principles  of  reason  into  which 
the  most  severe,  harsh,  and  mortifying  commands  of  the  gospel  are  by  clear  and 
genuine  consequence  resolved.  (1)  The  first  is  that  the  greatest  calamity  ia  to  be 
endured  rather  than  the  least  sin  to  be  committed.  (2)  A  second  principle  ia  this, 
that  a  less  good  is  to  be  forsaken  for  a  greater — an  aphorism  attested  to  by  the 
natural,  untaught,  universal  judgment  of  reason.  Now  to  reduce  this  principle  to 
the  case  in  hand  we  are  to  demonptrate  two  things.  1st.  That  the  good  promised 
by  our  Saviour  to  the  young  man  was  really  greater  than  that  which  was  to  be  for- 
saken for  it.  Christ  opposed  eternal  life  to  the  young  man's  possessions,  ani 
what  comparison  is  there  between  these  upon  terms  of  bare  reason  ?  2nd.  Tha 
second  thing  to  be  demonstrated  is  that  the  good  promised  by  our  Saviour  was  not 
only  greater  in  itself,  but  also  proposed  as  such  with  sufficient  clearness  of  evidence, 
and  upon   sure,  undeniable  grounds.     II.  To   show  the  causes  that,  notwith- 

BTANDINO  ALL  THIS    REMORSE    OF  CONSCIENCE,  THE  SOUL   IS  YET   BROUGHT  IN  THE    ISSUB 

vo  BEJEOI  AND  SHAKs  HANDS  WITH  Chbist.     1.  The  first  cause  is  from  thia,  that  th« 

23 


mi  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XOb 

perceptions  of  sense  overbear  the  discourses  of  reason.  The  yoang  man  desired 
eternal  Ufa  ;  but  he  had  no  notion  of  the  pleasure  of  it,  what  kind  of  thing  it  was ; 
but  he  knew  and  found  the  sweetness  of  an  estate,  so  that  the  sensible  impressioni 
of  this  quickly  overcame  and  swallowed  up  the  weak  and  languid  conceptionfl  that 
he  had  of  the  other.  2.  The  second  cause  or  reason  of  this  final  rejection  of  Christ 
is  from  the  prevailing  opposition  of  some  corrupt  affection,  which  being  predominant 
in  the  soul,  commands  the  will  and  blears  the  eye  of  the  judgment,  showing  it  ftll 
things  in  its  own  colour  by  a  false  and  partial  representation.  Coras  to  the  sensual 
and  voluptuous  perpon  and  convince  him  that  there  is  a  necessity  of  his  bidding 
larewell  to  all  inordinate  pleasure  in  order  to  his  future  happiness ;  perhaps  you 
gain  his  reason,  and  in  some  measure  insinuate  into  his  will ;  but  then  his  sensual 
desire  interposes  and  outvotes  and  unravels  all  his  convictions.  As  when  by  much 
ado  a  vessel  is  forced  and  rowed  some  pretty  way  contrary  to  the  tide,  presently  a 
gust  of  wind  comes  and  beats  it  further  back  than  it  was  before.  3.  The  third 
cause,  inducin;^  men  to  relinquish  Christ  contrary  to  the  judgment  of  their  con- 
Bcience,  is  the  force  and  tyranny  of  the  custom  of  the  world.  And  amongst  other 
dissuasives  from  following  Clirist  the  young  man  could  not  but  be  assaulted  with 
Buch  as  these  :  "  ^Vhat !  part  with  all  for  a  new  notion  of  another  world  ?  Sell 
land  to  buy  hope,  be  preached  out  of  my  estate,  and  worded  out  of  such  fair  farms 
and  rich  possessions  ?  "  He  would  do  like  the  world  though  he  perished  with  it ; 
swim  with  the  stream,  though  he  was  drowned  in  it ;  rather  go  sociably  to  hell, 
than  in  the  uncomfortable  solitude  of  precise  singularity  to  heaven — the  jollity  of 
the  company  made  him  overlook  the  broadness  and  danger  of  the  way.  Now  the 
inferences  and  deductions  from  the  words  thus  discussed  are  these  :  (1)  "We  gather 
hence  the  great  criterion  and  art  of  trying  our  siucerity,  which  is  by  the  test  of 
Buch  precepts  as  directly  reach  our  peculiar  corruptions.  (2)  The  issue  of  the  whole 
action  in  the  young  man's  not  closing  with  Christ's  proposals  about  eternal  life, 
and  his  sorrowful  departure  thereupon,  lays  before  us  a  full  account  of  that  misery 
which  attends  a  final  dereliction  of  Christ,  (a)  Of  that  which  is  eternal, 
(fc)  But  it  bereaves  even  of  temporal  happiness  also,  even  that  which  it  pro- 
mises, and  which  only  it  designs,  and  for  the  retaining  of  which  it  brings  a  man  to 
part  with  his  hopes  of  that  which  is  future  and  eternal.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Man 
ruled  by  his  affections : — In  sum,  the  economy  of  the  soul  in  this  case  is  like  a 
public  council  sitting  under  an  armed  force  ;  let  them  consult  and  vote  what  they 
■will,  yet  they  must  act  as  the  army  and  the  tumult  will  have  them.  In  this  sense 
every  soldier  is  a  commander.  In  like  manner,  Irt  both  the  judgment  and  the  will 
be  for  Christ,  yet  the  tumult  of  the  affections  will  carry  it ;  and  when  they  cannot 
out-reason  the  conscience,  they  will  out-cry  it.  (Ibid.)  If  Christ  ever  wins  the 
lort  of  the  sonl,  the  conquest  must  begin  here :  for  the  understanding  and  will  seem 
to  be  like  a  castle  or  fortified  place ;  there  is  strength  indeed  in  them,  but  the  affections 
are  the  soldiers  who  manage  those  holds,  the  opposition  is  from  these  :  and  if  the 
soldiers  surrender,  the  place  itself,  though  never  so  strong,  cannot  resist.  (Ibid.) 
The  evil  temper  varied  : — Now,  as  in  a  tree,  it  is  the  same  sap  and  juice  that  spread! 
itself  into  all  that  variety  of  branches :  some  straight,  some  crooked,  some  of  thit 
figure,  some  of  that :  so  it  is  the  same  stock  and  furniture  of  natural  corruption 
that  shoot  forth  into  that  great  diversity  of  vices,  that  exert  such  different  opera- 
tions in  different  tempers.  And  as  it  is  the  grand  office  of  judgment  to  separate 
and  distinguish,  and  so  to  proportion  its  applications ;  so  herein  is  the  great 
spiritual  art  of  a  prudent  ministry,  first  to  learn  a  man's  proper  distemper,  and 
then  to  encounter  it  by  a  peculiar  and  suitable  address.  Reprehensions  that  ara 
promiscuous  are  always  ineffectual.  (Ibid.)  Sincerity  tested: — Observe  the 
excellent  method  that  Christ  took  to  convince  this  person.  H'ld  he  tried  Lim  by  a  pre- 
cept of  temperance,  chastity,  or  just  dealing,  He  had  never  sounded  the  bottom  of 
his  heart :  for  the  civility  of  his  life  would  have  afforded  a  fair  and  satisfactory 
reply  to  all  these :  but  when  He  ca  e  close  to  him,  and  touched  upon  his  heart- 
•tring,  his  beloved  possessions,  the  man  quickly  shows  himself,  and  discovers  tha 
temper  of  his  spirit  more  by  the  ve  of  one  particular  endeared  ein,  than  by  hia 
forbearance  of  twenty,  to  which  he  stood  indifferent.  (Ihid.)  Every  man's  sin- 
cerity is  not  to  be  tried  in  the  same  way.  He  that  should  conclude  a  man  pious, 
because  not  covetous,  would  bring  but  a  short  argument ;  for  perhaps  he  may  bt 
lustful  or  ambitious,  and  the  stream  be  altogether  as  strong  and  violent,  though 
it  runs  in  a  different  channeL  (Ibid.)  Sins  of  omission : — When  the  archer 
■hoots  at  the  target,  he  as  really  fails  to  strike  it  if  his  arrow  falls  short  of  it,  aff 
wben  he  shoots  over  and  beyond  it.     (Dr.  Shedd. ) 


CHAP.  XIX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  m 

Ver.  19.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother. — Honouring  parents : — Implies  :  I 
Obedience.  Keep  their  commands  (Col.  ill.  20 ;  Eph.  vi.  1-3).  II.  Eespect, 
reverence.  III.  Kegabd  their  Opinions.  Do  not  despise  them  or  ridicule  thenu 
rV.  Respect  their  habits.  May  be  different  from  ours,  antiquated,  &c.  V.  Pro- 
vide FOR  THEM.  Deny  ourselves  to  promote  their  welfare.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  The 
duties  of  children : — I.  You  are  required  to  view  and  treat  your  parents  with 
BKSPECT.  Nothing  is  more  unbecoming  in  you,  nothing  will  render  you  more 
unpleasant  in  the  eyes  of  others,  than  forward  or  contemptuous  conduct  towards 
your  parents.  II.  You  should  be  ORATEPOii  to  your  parents.  Consider  how  much 
you  owe  them — every  comfort,  &c.  III.  You  must  make  it  your  study  to  obey 
your  parents,  to  do  what  they  command,  and  to  do  it  cheerfully.  IV.  Do  all  in 
your  power  to  assist  and  oblige  your  parents.  You  can  very  soon  make  some 
return  for  the  kindness  you  receive.  V.  Place  your  unreserved  confidence  iu 
them.  Be  honest,  sincere,  and  open-hearted.  VI.  Attend  seriously  to  their 
INSTRUCTIONS  AND  ADMONITIONS,  and  improve  the  advantages  they  afford  you  for 
becoming  wise,  useful,  good,  and  happy  for  ever.  {IV.  E.  Channing,  D.D.)  And 
thou  Shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself. — Loving  our  neighbour: — I.  Who  is  our 
NEIGHBOUR?  U.  Thb  DUTY  OF  LOVING  ouB  NEIGHBOUR.  1.  This  Commandment 
evidently  means — that  we  should  not  injure  our  neighbour  in  his  person,  property, 
or  character ;  that  we  should  seek  to  do  him  good  ;  that  in  case  of  debt,  difference, 
or  debate,  we  should  do  what  is  right,  regarding  his  interest  as  much  as  our  own, 
that  in  order  to  benefit  him  we  should  practise  self-denial,  or  do  as  we  would  wish 
him  to  do  to  us  (Matt.  vii.  12).  2.  It  does  not  mean — that  the  love  of  ourselves, 
according  to  what  we  are,  or  according  to  truth,  is  improper  ;  that  I  am  to  neglect 
my  own  business  to  take  care  of  my  neighbour's  (1  Tim.  v.  8;  Titus  ii.  5).  (A. 
Barnes,  D.D.)  Love  thy  neighbour: — I.  The  command.  1.  Whom  am  I  to  love? 
Thy  neighbour  (1)  albeit  that  he  be  of  a  different  religion ;  (2)  although  iie  oppose 
thee  in  trade  ;  (3)  though  he  offend  thea  with  his  sin.  2.  What  am  I  to  do  to  my 
neighbour  ?  It  prohibits  all  rash  temper.  Then  do  not  neglect  him.  3.  How  we 
are  to  love  our  neighbour.  II.  Reasons  why  we  should  obey  this  command.  1. 
God  commands  it.  2.  Selfishness  itself  would  bid  yon  love  your  neighbour.  It  is 
the  short  way  to  make  yourself  happy.  3.  Because  that  will  be  the  way  to  do  good 
in  the  world.  4.  The  quiet  of  ns  all.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Our  neighbours: — A 
gentleman  once  said  to  Dr.  Skinner,  who  was  asking  aid  for  foreign  missions,  **I 
don't  believe  in  foreign  missions.  I  won't  give  anything  except  for  home  missions. 
I  want  what  I  give  to  benefit  my  neighbours."  "  Well,"  the  doctor  made  reply, 
••whom  do  you  regard  as  your  neighbours  ?  "  "Why,  those  around  me."  "Do 
you  mean  those  whose  land  joins  yours?"  "Yes."  "  Well,"  said  Dr.  Skinn»r, 
**how  much  land  do  you  own?"  "About  five  hundred  acres,"  was  the  reply, 
"  How  far  down  do  you  own  it  ?  "  inquired  Dr.  Skinner.  "  Why,  I  never  thought  of 
It  before,  but  I  suppose  I  am  half  way  through  ?  "  "  Exactly,"  said  the  doctor,  "  I 
suppose  you  do,  and  I  want  this  money  for  the  Chinese — the  men  whose  land  joins 

Jours  at  the  bottom."  Every  Christian  should  say  in  a  higher  sense  than  the 
eathen  poet,  "  I  am  a  man,  and  nothing  human  is  foreign  to  me."  To  a  believer 
in  Christ  all  men  are  neighbours.  Selfness  versus  selfishness  : — 1.  Christ  made 
a  change  from  selfishness  to  benevolence  the  very  marrow  of  religion.  Selfness  is 
to  become  a  mother  and  ministrant  of  true  benevolence — "as  thyself."  He  did 
not  put  His  hand  upon  slavery,  but  if  this  principle  could  be  secured  all  these  evils 
would  die  away.  2.  Religion,  both  in  the  individual  and  in  the  sects,  as  well  as  in 
theology,  is  to  be  tested  by  its  power  to  develop  benevolence.  3.  All  great  schemes 
of  reformation  will  fail  which  do  not  begin  with  releasing  men  from  animal  selfish- 
ness. {H.  W,  Beechrr.)  Social  evils  Tiot  removed  by  outward  means  : — Go  out 
in  early  June,  and  with  your  scythe  cut  the  May-weed  that  grows  dense  and  mal- 
odorous along  the  sides  of  the  road :  and  then  let  it  come  np  again,  not  destroying 
toot  nor  seed,  simply  cutting  it  off.  That  is  Nihilism.  It  proposes  to  cut  tc  the 
surface  of  the  ground  everything  that  has  been  developed  out  of  human  Ufa  and 
experience,  but  not  to  touch  the  root  out  of  which  they  have  selfishly  and  wrong- 
fully  developed.  It  leaves  men  just  as  they  were,  to  destroy  simply  these  accretion* 
of  oppr=3Ssion  and  wrong.  Some  good  will  be  done,  doubtless,  in  destroying  mul- 
titudes of  manners  and  customs,  even  by  revolutionary  evolutions — some  good  came 
from  the  red-hot  ploughshare  of  the  French  Revolution ;  but,  after  all,  as  a  philo. 
Mophical  method  of  correcting  the  evils  of  mankind  and  of  the  world,  a  child  could 
have  conceived  something  better  than  that.  To  destroy  the  outward  fonns  of 
human  society  and  to  leave  the  inward  causes  of  them,  is  to  attempt  to  dry  up  a 


4S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  na 

river,  and  let  alone  the  springs  from  which  it  is  fed.  Nihilism  is  contemptible, 
except  as  a  piteous  exposition  of  men's  suffering,  and  of  their  ignorance  of  how  to 
remedy  that  suffering.  It  is  not  the  king,  it  is  not  the  prince,  it  is  not  the 
inexorable  law ;  it  is  the  vital  selfishness  of  the  individual  and  the  collective  heart, 
that  makes  the  trouble  in  this  world.  It  is  the  fact  men  treat  each  other  as  animal* 
treat  each  other,  and  only  to  a  limited  degree  have  transformed  self- seeking  into  a 
form  of  benevolence  toward  others.  Just  in  the  proportion  in  which  it  is  trans- 
formed men  grow  happier  and  happier  in  society,  and  the  average  condition  is  better. 
(Ibid.)  Social  suffering  arising  from  selfishness  : — The  same  is  true  of  all  tl.« 
schemes  of  Fourier  and  Comte,  and  of  all  the  social  reconstructionists  that  are 
writiug  and  planning  to-day.  They  vitiate  the  result  that  they  seek,  by  leaving  out 
of  consideration  the  prime  factor  of  the  mischiefs  that  they  would  exterminate.  If 
a  man  takes  a  book  that  is  being  printed,  and  attempts  to  erase  in  each  proof-sheet 
a  misprinted  or  a  blotted  word,  but  does  not  correct  the  wrong  types  in  the  form, 
the  errors  will  reproduce  themselves  just  as  fast  as  they  are  erased.  All  the  forma 
of  suffering  in  human  society  have  causes  that  lie  in  the  animal  selfishness  of  the 
human  race ;  and  if  you  will  correct  them — except  for  a  moment,  as  it  were,  making 
a  temporary  correction,  others  developing  in  the  same  way — you  must  teach  men, 
being  born  again,  how  to  make  themselves  the  instruments,  not  of  selfishness,  but 
simply  of  benevolence  and  selfness.  All  the  efforts  which  are,  in  our  day,  being 
made  to  do  this  by  law — as  if  machinery  would  ever  correct  human  nature — are 
ineffectual.  (Ibid. )  The  effective  operation  of  the  law  oj  love  in  social  life  : — Faith. 
ful  and  uniform  obedience  to  this  royal  law  throughout  the  churches  of  Christ  would 
be  of  itself  an  evangelistic  power,  an  aggressive  spiritual  energy  far  transcending 
all  the  revival  meetings  ever  held.  Just  as  the  regular  action  ot  the  tides  doea 
more  to  purify  the  ocean  than  the  occasional  storms  that  sweep  over  its  surface,  so 
would  the  constant  operation  of  this  law  of  love  do  for  humanity  more  than  the 
occasional  excitements  that  sweep  over  the  surface  of  society.  (D.  Jackson.)  Th« 
ideal  the  true  object  of  love:—li  my  neighbour  be  an  evil-living  man,  who  is  not 
subject  to  the  law  of  Christ ;  or  if  he  be  a  proud,  overbearing  man,  oaring  only  to 
further  his  own  selfish  interests,  regardless  how  he  may  wound  the  feelings  of 
others,  and  cause  them  to  suffer  wrong — if,  I  say,  my  neighbour  be  such  a  man,  I 
cannot,  and  I  ought  not,  it  would  be  against  the  royal  law,  to  love  these  things  ia 
him,  just  as  it  would  be  wrong  to  love  them  in  myself.  (Ibid.)  The  law  of  self 
love: — It  is  very  dangerous  for  a  man  to  care  for  himself,  and  not  for  anybody  else; 
and  it  is  even  more  dangerous  for  a  man  to  expend  himself  on  other  persons,  and 
neglect  or  care  nothing  for  himself.  The  danger  is  as  great,  and,  if  possible,  greater 
when  the  law  of  self  is  paralyzed,  than  when  the  law  of  benevolence  itself  is  para 
lyzed.  These  two  laws  must  work  under  mutual  restraint.  They  are  antithetical 
They  are  counterparts.  They  are  complements  the  one  of  the  other.  To  care  foi 
yourself  is  an  indispensable  pre-requisite  of  caring  for  anybody  else.  If  this  be  so, 
then,  first,  to  rear  up  children  to  be  cared  for,  and  not  to  learn  to  care  for  them' 
selves,  is  to  make  them  self-indulgent,  soft,  worthless.  Secondly.  Any  method  ol 
charity  which  weakens  or  destroys  self-reliance  is  not  charitable,  but  is  cmeL 
Thirdly.  It  is  therefore  dangerous  to  interfere  with  the  law  of  suffering.  Suffering 
is  as  beneficent  as  enjoying.  Indeed  suffering  is  better  than  enjoying  under  certain 
circumstances.  If  a  man  have  a  diseased  brain,  and  the  whole  world  to  him 
sparkles  with  fantastic  visions  of  pleasure,  and  if,  in  order  to  restore  him  to  a 
healthful  and  normal  condition,  it  is  necessary  to  put  a  bUster  on  the  nape  of  his 
neck,  then  in  his  case  surgery,  with  all  its  attendant  suffering,  is  better  than  the 
pleasing  sights  and  sounds  that  he  sees  and  hears.  Charity  should  be  so  directed  as 
that  it  shall  inspire  men  to  avoid  the  reasons  of  suffering,  and  as  that  it  shall  make 
suffering,  when  it  cannot  be  avoided,  educate  men  to  bear  it  till  they  can  get  out 
of  it.  An  easy  relief  of  suffering  not  only  is  unwise  as  it  relates  to  humanity,  bat 
it  is  contrary  to  the  fundamental  principles  on  which  the  globe  has  been  organized. 
This  leads  me  to  say,  fourthly,  that  the  social  tendencies  and  theories  which  are 
beginning  to  be  preached  are  demoralizing  and  dangerous,  and  to  no  other  part  of 
the  community  so  much  as  to  those  who  are  seeking  to  better  their  condition  hj 
promalgatiug  them.     (U.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  23,  24.  That  a  rtch  man  shall  hardly  enter  Into  the  kingdom  of  beaTea. 
— Tlie  hindrances  and  temptations  of  the  rich  : — I.  Hindbano!:s.  1.  Riches  tend  tu 
obscure  faith  ;  to  make  one  trust  in  them,  instead  of  in  Ood.  2.  They  encourage 
their  possessot  to  love  the  world,  and  to  withhold  his  heart  from  Ood.     8.  Th«iy 


aan.  iix.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  437 

exclude  disinterested  love  and  goodwill  toward  others.    4.  They  hinder  hmnility. 
People  dare  not  tell  a  rich  man  of  his  faults,  bo  he  seldom  gets  an  opportunity  of 
mending  them.     5.  They  prevent  meekness.     6.  They  make  a  man  hard  and  un 
yielding,  difficult  to  convince  of  what  is  true,  unwilling  to  be  persuaded,  or  to  submit 
in  any  way  to  others.     II.  Temptations.     1.  To  atheism.    With  riches  a  man 
seems  dependent  on  no  one.    He  thinks  himself  his  own  master.     2.  To  idolatry. 
From  the  worship  of  no  God  there  is  an  easy  transition  to  the  worship  of  falsa 
gods.     He  who  loves  not  the  Creator  will  certainly  love  the  creature,  e.g.,  the  grati- 
fication of  the  outward  senses.   Not  necessarily  gluttony  and  drunkenness,  destroying 
the  body.     A  moderate  sensuality,  a  regular  kind  of  epicurism  will  be  quite  enoogh 
to  keep  the  soul  dead  to  God  and  all  true  religion.    3.  To  the  gratification  of  th« 
imagination — beautiful  houses,  elegant  furniture,  curious  pictmes,  delightful  gar- 
dens.    Innocent  in  themselves,  how  do  all  these  things  draw  off  the  mind  f  jom 
more  serious  pursuits  1     4.  To  self-inflation.     5.  Pride.     6.  Self-will.    7.  Conte  npt 
of  inferiors.     8.  Fretf ulness  and  peevishness.     A  gentleman  of  large  fortune,  w  iiile 
we  were  seriously  conversing,  ordered  a  servant  to  throw  some  coals  on  the  fire.    As 
he  did  so,  a  puff  of  smoke  came  out,  on  which  the  gentleman  threw  himself  bask 
in  his  chair  and  cried  out,  "Oh,  Mr.  Wesley,  these  are  the  crosses  which  I  meet 
with  every  dayl"    I  could  not  help  asking,  "Pray,  Sir  John,  are  these  the  heaviest 
crosses  you  meet  with?  "     Surely  these  crosses  would  not  have  fretted  him  so  much 
if  he  had  had  only  fifty  pounds  a  year,  instead  of  five  thousand.     {John  Wesley.) 
Danger  of  riches  : — It  is  hard  to  carry  a  full  cup  with  a  steady  hand.    High  placed 
are  dizzy  places,  and  full  many  have  fallen  to  their  eternal  ruin  through  climbing 
aloft  without  having  grace  to  look  up.    Trailing  robes  raise  a  dust,  and  gather  upon 
themselves  all  sorts  of  filthiness,  besides  beijag  subjected  to  needless  wear  and  tear. 
A  man  may  have  so  much  of  this  world  that  he  misses  the  next.     His  long  robe 
may  trip  him  up  in  the  race  for  the  heavenly  prize,  and  he  may  fall  a  victim  to  the 
w^ealth  he  idolized.    Alas,  for  the  poor  rich  !     Faring  sumptuously  every  day,  and 
yet  full  often  strangers  to  that  deep  and  peerless  joy  which  belongs  to  those  who,  in 
the  deep  waters  of  poverty,  find  a  boundless  bliss  in  trusting  God.     When  the  rick 
are  saved  they  should  count  it  a  miracle  of  grace,  and  feel  great  gratitude  to  Him 
who  "siables  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  notwithstanding  his  hump. 
(<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Beware  of  growing  covetous,  for  of  all  sins  this  is  one  of  the 
most  insidious.     It  is  like  the  silting  up  of  a  river.    As  the  stream  comes  down 
from  the  land  it  brings  with  it  sand  and  earth,  and  deposits  all  these  at  its  mouth, 
BO  that  by  degrees,  unless  the  conservators  catch  it  carefully,  it  will  block  itself  up, 
and  leave  no  channel  for  ships  of  great  burden.     By  daily  deposit  it  imperceptibly 
creates  a  bar  which  is  dangerous  to  navigation.    Many  a  man  when  he  begins  to 
accumulate  wealth  commences  at  the  same  moment  to  ruin  his  soul ;  and  the  more 
he  acquires,  the  more  closely  he  blocks  up  his  liberality,  which  is,  so  to  speak,  the 
very  mouth  of  spiritual  hfe.     Instead  of  doing  more  for  God,  he  does  less ;  the 
more  he  saves,  the  more  he  wants  ;  and  the  more  he  wants  of  this  world,  the  less 
he  cares  for  the  world  to  come.     (Ibid.)  Salvation  easier  for  hxiinhle  rank: — 

Pope  Adrian  VI.  said  that  nothing  befell  him  more  unhappy  in  all  his  life  than  that 
he  had  been  the  head  of  the  Church  and  monarch  of  the  Christian  commonwealth. 
Another  pope  said  that  when  he  first  entered  into  orders  he  had  some  good  hopes  of 
his  salvation  ;  when  he  became  a  cardinal  he  doubted  it ;  but  since  he  was  made 
pope  he  almost  despaired  of  it.  Small  threads  best  for  the  neediest  eye : — Let 
rich  men  often  ruminate  this  terrible  text,  and  take  heed.  Let  them  untwist  their 
cables,  that  is,  their  heart,  by  humiliation  (James  i.  10 ;  v.  1),  till  it  be  made  like 
small  threads,  as  it  must  be,  before  they  can  enter  into  the  eye  of  a  needle,  that  is, 
eternal  hft-.  {John  Trapp.)  The  tendency  of  wealth  to  produce  moral  insenn. 
bility  : — When  we  read  history,  whether  it  be  the  history  of  Dives  in  the  parable, 
or  of  Shylock  in  the  play,  we  see  how  hard  wealth  can  make  men — how  it  can  con- 
tract their  vision  and  dwarf  their  aspirations  and  extinguish  their  sympathies.  Nay, 
when  we  read  the  lives  of  our  fellow-men,  as  they  are  lived  alongside  of  us,  we  see 
how  wealth  can  benumb  the  conscience  and  brutalize  the  moral  sense,  so  that  a 
rich  man's  career  shall  remind  you  of  nothing  so  much  as  those  buccaneers  of  the 
Spanish  main  with  whom  might  made  right,  and  who  knew  no  law  but  the  law  of 
a  triumphant  audacity.  When  one  notes  these  things  and  sees  what  a  power  there 
IB  in  the  possession  of  wealth  to  stimulate  the  instincts  of  cruelty  and  a  petty  re 
▼enge,  and  to  extinguish  those  finer  traits  which  make  life  sweet  and  sunny — above 
all,  when  one  sees  how  riches  rear  a  dome  of  brass  over  so  many  human  lives,  and 
make  heaven  and  Christ  and  the  life  to  come  as  unlonged-for  and  unappreciated  a< 


iB8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

would  be  a  lock  of  a  dead  child's  hair  to  a  pawnbroker — then  one  can  at  least  under- 
stand  why  Christ  should  pronounce  the  solemn  words  wiiich  are  recorded  her«. 
{Bishop  H.  G.  Potter.)  The  difficulties  in  the  way  oj  salvation  for  a  rich  man 
are — I.  That  biches  enoboss  the  affections.  II,  Men  consider  wealth  as  tes 
CHIEF  oooD,  and  when  this  is  obtained  think  they  have  gained  all.  III.  They  are 
PEouD  OF  THEIR  WEALTH,  and  are  unwilling  to  be  numbered  with  the  poor  and 
despised  followers  of  Jesus.  IV.  Riches  engross  the  time,  fill  the  mind  with 
cares  and  anxieties,  and  leave  little  for  God.  V.  They  often  produce  luxitrt, 
dissipation,  and  vice.  VL  It  is  difficult  to  obtain  wealth  without  sin,  avarice, 
oovetousness,  fraud,  and  oppression  (1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10,  17;  James  v.  1-5 ;  Luke  xiL 
16-21,  xvi.  19-31).  All  these  may  be  overcome.  God  can  give  grace  to  do  it. 
Though  to  men  it  may  appear  impossible,  yet  it  is  easy  for  God  (ver.  26).  {A. 
Barnes,  D.D.)  The  pride  of  wealth : — Heaven  is  a  stately  palace,  with  a  narrow 
portal ;  there  must  be  both  stripping  and  straining  ere  one  can  get  through  this 
strait  gate.  The  greatest  wealth  is  ordinarily  tumoured  up  with  the  greatest  swelth 
of  rebellion  against  God.  Pride  breeds  in  wealth  as  the  worm  doth  in  the  ipii'r 
and  he  is  a  great  rich  man  indeed  and  greater  than  hia  riches,  that  doth  not  tbink 
himself  great  because  he  is  rich.  Have  them  we  may,  and  use  them  too;  but  mind 
them  we  may  not,  nor  Inve  them;  that  is  spiritual  harlotry,  such  as  God's  soul 
hateth,  and  He  smiteth  His  hands  at.  (John  Trapp.)  Danger  of  riches  : — Though 
we  may  not  be  exposed  to  this  danger,  thinking  of  it  may  free  us  from  envy.  There 
is  danger  in — I.  The  acquisition  :  fraud,  dc.,  heart  drawn  away  from  God.  II. 
The  possession  :  hoarded,  they  beget  covetousness ;  enjoyed,  lead  to  riot,  &o.,  may 
be  loved  inordinately ;  trusted  in,  may  lead  to  pride  and  contempt  of  the  poor. 
Learn — 1.  A  difficult  thing  to  get  wealth  rightly,  and  use  it  well.  2.  An  awful 
thing  to  die  a  rich  man  in  a  world  of  so  much  sorrow;  give  an  account  of  stewaid- 
ship.  3.  Do  not  envy  the  rich.  4.  Bemember  that  the  true  and  lasting  riches  may 
be  easily  got.  (TA«  Hii'e.)  The  dangers  of  wealth  : — The  danger  of  the  posses- 
sion of  wealth  being  admitted,  let  us  now  examine  a  few  of  the  causes  of  this 
danger.  1.  There  is  a  fascination  in  the  ownership  of  money,  for  it  represents 
much  of  this  world's  power;  there  are  few  worldly  things  it  cannot  purchase. 
Besides,  there  is  a  satisfaction  to  the  rich  man  in  counting  his  money,  in  the  quiet 
contemplation,  the  secret  consciousness  of  the  power  which  if  he  pleases  he  can 
wield  through  it.  2.  Money  takes  from  man  the  feeling  of  dependence  on  God.  Pos- 
sessing it,  he  is  apt  to  say  to  himself,  "Soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up  for  many 
years  " — why  then  should  he  trouble  about  possible  future  wants,  when  his  income 
IS  so  far  above  his  expenditure  ? — and  hence  his  state  of  mind  is  entirely  opposed 
to  the  spirit  in  which  we  are  taught  to  pray,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread." 
The  possession  of  wealth  is  therefore  destructive  of  humility,  of  dependence  upon 
God.  3.  Eiches  incline  a  man  in  all  ways  to  lean  upon  the  world,  which  provides 
him  with  too  much  in  which  he  dehghts,  to  make  this  world  his  home,  thus 
hindering  him  from  looking  up  ;  for  we  cannot  live  by  faith  and  eight  any  more 
than  we  can  serve  two  masters.  4.  The  possession  of  wealth  tempts  a  man  to  be 
self-indulgent ;  to  a  needless  display  of  magniticence  in  himself  and  his  surround- 
ings. Through  the  pleasures  his  wealth  creates  he  soon  gets  entangled,  and  the 
daily  cross  of  a  disciple  of  Christ  is  altogether  kept  out  of  sight ;  the  soid's  eye 
becomes  darkened,  the  affairs  of  time  seem  to  be  tho  only  reality,  those  of  eternity 
a  shadow,  a  dream  about  which  the  man  who  is  happy  need  not  trouble  himself. 
But  there  are  many  who  have  the  feeling  that  they  are  not  rich,  and  cannot  there- 
fore be  concerned  in  the  danger  which  the  possession  of  riches  brings.  This  may  be 
true  in  one  sense,  but  then  "riches"  is  a  word  having  different  meanings  to  different 
people.  Again,  many  who  have  not  money  look  upon  its  acquisition  as  the  aim 
of  life,  and  accept  success  in  gaining  it  as  the  measure  3f  happiness.  Many  suffer 
the  danger  of  the  rich,  because  their  thoughts  are  all  centred  on  becoming  ricli. 
Labour  being  the  ordinance  of  God,  we  ought  to  be  able  to  find  in  our  work  the 
path  allotted  to  us  by  His  will.  We  should  love  God,  not  self,  the  centre,  the  ulti- 
mate aim  of  our  toil.  But  not  one  of  us,  left  to  himself,  is  capable  of  efficiently 
dischaiging  the  responsibilities  entailed  by  the  pospession  of  wealth;  we  need  to  be 
sustained  by  God.  (Canon  Gregory.)  Wealth  a  hindrance  on  the  heavenly  way  : 
— When  a  man  is  to  travel  into  a  far  country,  a  great  burden  at  his  back  will  bet 
hinder  him  in  his  journey ;  one  staff  in  his  hand  may  comfortably  support  him, 
but  a  bundle  of  staves  would  trouble  him.  Thus  a  competency  of  these  outward 
things  may  happily  help  us  in  the  way  to  heaven,  whereas  abundance  may  be  hart 
tai,  and,  like  long  garments  to  a  man  that  walks  on  in  the  way,  will  trip  up  OS 


•KAP.  xn,]  BT.  MATTHEW.  %*9 

heela  too,  if  we  look  not  well  about  us.  {Sibbet.)  Riches  a  nest  of  evil: — Thomt 
are  the  shelter  for  serpents,  and  riches  the  den  of  many  sins.  Biches  is  a  warm 
nest  where  lust  securely  sits  to  hatch  all  her  uuclean  brood.  (Adams.)  Wealth 
hinders  soul  elevation: — Our  Saviour,  indeed,  doth  not  speak  of  an  impossibility, 
but  of  the  difficulty  of  it  and  the  rareness  of  it.  Job  unfolded  the  riddle,  and  got 
through  the  needle's  eye  with  three  thousand  camels.  But  it  is  hard  to  be  wealthy 
and  not  wanton  ;  too  often  are  riches,  like  birdlime,  hindering  the  soul  in  its  flight 
towards  heaven.  (Swinnock.)  The  world  in  the  heart : — A  man  in  the  very  prima 
of  life  was  lying  on  his  death-bed.  Paralysis  had  seized  upon  his  body.  It  wag 
creeping  up,  slowly  and  surely,  to  his  heart.  His  very  hours  were  numbered.  A 
faithful  minister  of  God  eat  beside  him,  showing  him  the  way  of  life.  He  was 
agonized  in  the  effort  to  listen,  to  comprehend,  but  the  old  habit  of  years  bound 
him  80  firmly  that  he  could  not  fix  his  mind  upon  what  his  friend  was  saying.  His 
life  had  been  spent  in  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  Honestly,  honourably  it  had  been 
gained.  There  was  no  stain  upon  it,  but  yet  it  proved  the  mUlstone  to  drag  him 
down.  "  Why,  why  1  "  he  exclaimed  in  a  voice  of  keenest  anguish,  ♦'  at  this  awful 
moment,  can  I  think  of  nothing  but  my  bank  stock  7  " 

Ver.  25.  Who,  then,  can  be  saved  7 — Who,  then,  can  be  saved  » — This  sounds  as 
if  there  were  some  great  difficulty  in  the  way  of  being  saved.  How  is  this,  is  not 
salvation  free?  Yes.  Then  where  is  the  difficulty?  Man's  restoration  is  not 
merely  legal,  but  moral,  and  in  the  latter  the  real  hindrance  will  be  found.  Men 
make  excuses,  &c.  I.  What  is  meant  by  being  saved  ?  In  the  narrative  connected 
with  the  text,  our  Saviour  calls  it  "  Entering  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The 
governing  power  of  true  religion  over  a  man.  Governed  by  love.  To  be  saved  is  to  be 
delivered  from  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  &c.  It  is  a  present  change.  Would  you  wish  to 
be  SAVED?  Or,  would  you  like  to  compromise  this  matter  in  the  way  of  postpone, 
ment?  Or,  would  you  wish  to  have  your  love  of  "  good  society,"  Ac,  mad< 
secondary  to  the  love  of  Christ  ?  Let  these  questions  sink  deep  into  your  hearts. 
The  Young  Euler.  II,  The  Holt  Ghost  can  deal,  and  does  deal,  with  this 
HOBAL  HiNDEAKCE  in  the  Way  of  man's  salvation  as  effectually  as  God  the  Son  has 
dealt  with  the  legal  hindrance  by  His  work  of  substitution  for  man.  There  is  hope 
for  us  all.  To  tou  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent.  Use  the  appointed  means, 
for  God  works  by  means,  &o.  (HughMcNeile,D.D.)  Who  can  be  saved  f — I.  To 
put  THE  question.  This  inquiry  sometimes  arises — 1.  From  partial  views  of  the 
character  of  God.  2.  It  is  often  suggested  by  correct  and  scriptural  views  of  the 
Divine  law.  3.  It  arises  from  ignorance  of  the  plan  of  human  redemption.  11.  To 
ANBWEB  THE  INQUIRY.  1.  ShaU  I  first  tell  you  who  cannot  ?  Not  the  ignorant, 
proud  worldling,  not  the  impure.  2.  Who,  then,  can  be  saved  ?  The  vilest  can. 
(Dr.  T.  Raffles.)  Who  can  be  saved  ? — I.  That  men  oiten  ebb  as  to  the  reai. 

difficulties  of  salvation,  that  they  are  prone  to  under-estimate  its  co^t,  effort, 
self-sacrifice,  and  demanded  pains.  Christ  never  deceived  anybody  as  to  the  real 
cost  of  discipleship.  Salvation  under  the  gospel  is  not  an  easy  thing.  II.  The 
disciples  were  left  to  derive  from  this  incident  the  lesson  that  moral  uprightness 
WAS  A  different  THING  FROM  GOSPEL  PIETY.  The  youug  man  had  kept  the  law. 
Christ  will  not  be  in  the  heart  except  He  have  absolute  dominion  there.  III.  Oob 
PARTicuiiAB  IMPEDIMENT  TO  SALVATION.  Eiches.  A  Wealthy  class  of  men  in  a  com- 
munity is  a  social  necessity.  Greed  to  be  avoided;  compassion  to  be  cultivated. 
IV.  A  practical  inference  is  that,  however  difficult  salvation  be,  it  is  never  impos- 
sible— at  least,  the  impossibility  is  only  relative.  With  man  it  is  imposbible ;  but 
with  God  it  is  possible  and  promised.    (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 

Vers.  27-30.  Behold,  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed  Thee  ;  what  shall  w« 
bave  therefore  7 — The  advantages  of  following  Christ: — I.  That  a  foi<loweb  o» 
Christ  possesses  a  character  of  high  and  essential  impobtancb.  Io  be  a  fol- 
lower of  Christ  we  must — 1.  Believe  the  testimony  which  the  Wori  cf  God  has 
given  as  to  His  character  and  office.  2.  From  this  principle  of  faith  emanates  all 
the  other  elements  which  compose  the  Christian  character.  S.  A  pnolic  profession 
of  His  name,  and  exertion  in  His  cause.  Do  you  believe,  &c.  ?  XL  Tjut  in  sus- 
taining   THIS    CHABACTEB    PAINFDL    SACRIFICES    MUST    FREQUENTLY    B«    MADE.       The 

disciples,  primitive  Christians,  Ac.  1.  Eemember  for  whom  these  sacrifices  are  to 
be  made.  2.  Eemember  for  what  these  sacrifices  are  to  be  made.  Are  you  deter- 
mined at  aU  costs  to  follow  Christ  ?  III.  That  oub  present  sacbifices  in  th« 
Saviour's  oaubb  shall  issue  in  a  globious  bswabd.    1.  Here  is  an  advantage  pro- 


<40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

nised  as  to  the  present  life.  2.  As  to  the  life  to  conie.  The  time  and  nature  of 
whe  recompense.  What  encouragement  does  tliis  subject  hold  out  to  the  followers 
of  Christ?  (A.  WeUon.)  The  reward  of  Christ's  followers  : — I.  The  evils  they 
renounee.  We  must  forsake  all  our  sinful  practices,  ungodly  associates,  unholy 
fttte^jhmentB.  II.  The  example  they  follow.  Christ,  as  our  Teacher,  Sovereign, 
Pattern.  III.  The  reward  they  anticipate.  Following  Christ  will  secure  our  per- 
sonal salvation,  our  temporal  interests  and  our  eternal  happiness.  {Sketches.) 
Christian  fidelity  and  its  rewards ; — I.  The  Christian  disciple  abandoning  thb 
woiLD  THE  BETTEB  TO  SERVE  Christ.  What  was  left?  (1)  A  home  that  was  dear  ; 
(2)  friends  of  the  old  time ;  (3)  a  familiar  occupation  ;  (4)  the  religion  of  fore- 
fathers. II.  The  Christian  disciple  ingaged  in  duties  of  Christian  profession. 
It  involved  (1)  being  thrust  out  of  synagogue  ;  (2)  ceaseless  combat  with  the  world 
— opinions,  fashions  ;  (3)  arduous  labours.  III.  The  Christian  disciple's  recom- 
PKNSE.  What  shall  we  have  ? — (1)  Present  peace  ;  (2)  joy  of  discipleship  ;  (3)  anti- 
cipation of  sharing  in  future  results  of  all  Christian  work  ;  (4)  the  final  rest  and 
reward.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  The  gain  greater  than  the  loss  : — We  must  understand 
the  requirements  of  religion;  and  not  over- value  the  things  which  we  are  obUged 
to  give  up.  Some  say  "  that  a  Christian  must  renounce  all  the  world,  all  its  gains, 
md  pleasure."  This  has  been  true  in  the  world's  history;  as  in  case  of  Xavier, 
Wesley,  and  missionaries.  These  exceptional  cases.  Then  some  people  think  that 
if  they  love  Jesus  Christ,  they  must  be  careful  not  to  love  wife  and  children  too 
much.  This  is  a  mistake.  God  has  made  the  family  and  cemented  it  with  love. 
It  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  to  love  God  more  that  he  love  family  less.  There  is  a 
difference  between  that  sacrifice  which  brings  everything  to  God,  to  be  regarded  as 
rUs,  and  that  slavery  which  dispossesses  of  all  worldly  goods  and  earthly  affections 
uv  order  to  appease  the  heart  of  the  infinite  Creator.  Love  of  God  intensifies  our 
hjme  aliections.  So  with  regard  to  worldly  possessions.  A  man  is  not  called  upon 
tO'  endanger  his  working  capital,  but  to  consecrate  it.  The  rules  of  the  gospel  bend 
to  wealth  ;  and  a  Christian  has  a  larger  expectancy  of  possessing  the  good  things 
of  this  life.  But  he  views  himself  as  the  steward  of  God,  and  does  not  allow  it  to 
ipiperil  his  soul's  salvation.  Then  comes  another  question :  If  I  am  a  follower  of 
Christ,  what  is  to  be  my  attitude  towards  the  world's  amusements  and  pleasures. 
Give  up  the  follies  of  the  world,  not  its  true  pleasures.  There  is  a  high  sense  in 
which  a  man  is  to  live  soberly  in  Christ  Jesus.  If  any  man  has  a  right  to  the  plea- 
sures of  the  earth,  it  is  His  disciple  ;  he  has  a  right  to  inherit  its  fruits,  blessings. 
Bt.e  has  the  joys  of  sense,  and  others  much  higher  and  richer  in  the  green  pastures, 
s  would  like  to  ask  the  Christian  if  he  really  thinks  that  he  gives  up  much  in  fol- 
1«  wing  Christ  ?  Our  sacrifices  have  been  joys  to  achieve  in  faith  and  love.  But 
tiiere  will  come  a  time  when  the  text  will  have  a  certain  literalness  about  it,  when 
t/iere  will  be  no  question  as  to  what  we  leave,  but  what  we  are  going  to  find  ?  The 
man  will  have  to  turn  his  back  upon  his  possessions.  All  will  have  forsaken  us. 
He  vill  then  fulfil  the  promise  of  eternal  life.  This  the  final  consummation.  We 
khall  not  then  in  the  eternal  sunshine  be  disposed  to  think  much  of  what  we  have 
given  up  to  follow  Christ.  {J.  R.  Day,  D.D.)  The  hundred-fold  recompense  : — 
This  reply  of  our  Lord  as  furnishing  guidance  for  us  in  our  endeavours  to  act  upon 
men  and  persuade  them  to  give  heed  to  religion.  It  will  not  do,  constituted  as  men 
are,  to  enlarge  to  them  abstractedly  on  the  beauty  of  holiness  and  on  the  satisfac- 
tion derivable  from  a  conscience  at  rest.  They  will  not  regard  virtue  as  its  own 
reward.  We  must  admit  that  religion  requires  great  sacrifices ;  but  we  contend 
that  even  in  this  life  they  are  more  than  counterbalanced  by  its  comforts,  and  that 
in  the  next  they  will  be  a  thousand-fold  recompensed.  I.  Take  the  case  of  the 
TOUNO.  You  are  reluctant  to  lose  the  pleasures  of  earth.  We  do  not  wish  to  depre- 
cate  these ;  all  your  senses  are  against  our  arguments.  Christ  did  not  tell  Peter 
that  his  boat  and  net  were  worth  but  little  at  the  most.  We  admit  the  extent  of 
the  sacrifice.  We  take  the  ground  of  recompense  more  than  equivalent  for  all  re- 
nounced. A  nobler  pursuit ;  reward  more  endurins^.  II.  It  is  the  apparent  con- 
flict between  duty  and  interest  which  causes  us  in  a  variety  of  cases  to  disobey  God 
and  withstand  the  pleadings  of  conscience.  The  conflict  is  only  apparent,  as  our 
true  interest  is  always  on  the  side  of  duty.  Here,  again,  we  must  magnify  the 
remunerative  power  of  Him  in  whose  cause  the  sacrifice  is  made,  rather  than 
depreciate  the  sacrifice  itself.  But  the  duty  is  clear,  and  the  difficulty  of  discharf;ing 
it  will  not  excuse  its  neglect.  A  man  says  he  must  sell  his  goods  on  the  Sabbath 
in  order  to  support  his  family,  his  interest  demands  it.  But  if  he  follows  duty  as 
against  apparent  interest,  we  assert  that  he  engages  on  his  side  all  the  aids  of  Pro 


OHAV.  xnc]  8T.  MATTHEW.  HI 

videnoe.  H  you  canaot  be  religions  but  through  bankruptcy,  let  not  your  name  in 
the  Gazette  scare  you  from  inscribing  it  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  We  remind 
you  of  the  inexbaustiblenesa  of  God ;  He  is  the  Proprietor  of  both  worlds.  To 
men  who  are  in  danger  of  being  engrossed  in  business,  as  well  as  those  who  are 
tempted  to  swerve  from  rectitude,  we  say,  dwell  on  the  word  "  hundred-fold  "  in  our 
text  as  suggestive  of  the  Divine  fulness  and  power.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  For- 
taking  all  to  follow  Christ: — I.  Christ  is  the  pre-eminent  object  and  the  boond- 
iiBss  80UBCB  OF  ALL  uoRAL  ATTRACTION  AND  INFLUENCE.  1.  He  is  the  pre-eminent 
object  of  moral  attraction.  He  is  the  centre  of  all  moral  power.  It  is  the  over- 
powering force  of  the  sun's  attraction  that  regulates  the  motion  of  the  planets;  it 
is  the  overwhelming  attraction  of  the  earth  that  neutralizes  the  mutual  attraction 
of  things  upon  its  surface,  and  prevents  them  from  inconveniently  clinging  together. 
So  is  Christ  the  centre  of  the  moral  world.  As  God,  He  claims  our  adoration  :  aa 
Man,  our  lively  affection.  He  is  the  realization  of  every  Divine  idea.  In  a  gallery 
of  paintings,  comprising  portraits,  allegories,  historic  scenes,  and  ideal  creations, 
one  grand  masterpiece,  long  concealed,  is  at  length  uncovered  and  disclosed  to 
view.  Immediately  all  others  are  forsaken  ;  the  admiring  gaze  is  directed  to  this. 
It  is  "  the  attraction,"  not  because  of  its  mere  novelty,  but  because  it  comprises  all 
the  subjects  and  all  the  excellences  of  every  other  work,  and  displays  them  with 
unrivallr'd  power.  He  is  the  way  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  soul's  everlasting  home. 
"  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father,  but  by  Me." 
A  wild  country  is  spread  before  us,  with  numerous  paths,  by-ways,  and  intersecting 
roads.  Many  of  these  tracks  are  toilsome,  but  supposed  to  lead  to  the  possession 
of  some  profit  and  gain ;  many  are  pleasant,  but  of  doubtful  issue;  many  are 
perilous  ;  many  are  evidently  ways  of  perdition.  But  at  length  a  bright  "  way  " 
appears,  and  it  is  seen  to  lead  upwards,  and  to  terminate  in  a  glorious  "city  ot 
habitation."  Shall  we  not  forsake  every  other  way  to  follow  this?  He  is  the  ful- 
ness of  all  good.  He  is  all  and  in  all.  Is  it  not  great  gain  to  forsake  all  and  to 
follow  Him  t  He  is  the  friend  beloved.  When  a  beloved  friend  arrives,  business 
and  pleasure  are  alike  abandoned,  for  the  joy  of  his  society.  Jesus  comes,  He  calls 
to  as;  He  announces  the  jojful  news  of  reconciliation  with  God,  Should  we  not 
forsake  all  to  follow  Him,  and  to  be  received  into  His  everlasting  friendship  ?  He 
is  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  The  bride  forsakes  her  father's  house,  her  country, 
her  early  associates  for  the  bridegroom.  2.  He  is  the  boundless  source  of  moral 
influence.  He  changes  the  earthly  into  the  heavenly.  No  teacher  nor  doctrine 
can  produce  a  transformation  like  this ;  the  all-powerful  influence  is  with  Christ 
alone.  If  we  desire  our  own  true  glory,  should  we  not  forsake  all  to  follow  Him  ? 
He  changes  the  corrupt  into  the  spiritual.  He  raises  the  spiritually  dead  into  a 
Divine  life.  This  reminds  ns  that  the  attraction  and  influence  of  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  can  only  be  savingly  experienced  through  the  instrumentality  of  faith.     XL 

To  FORSAKE  ALL  AND  TO   FOLLOW   ChRIST   IS  ALIKE   OUR   INDISPENSABLE   DUTY  AND  OUB 

TRUE  HAPPINESS.  1.  It  is  our  indispensable  duty  to  forsake  all  and  to  follow  Christ. 
It  is  not  by  abstract  considerations  we  usually  judge  of  duty,  but  by  contemplating 
actual  and  living  relations.  Now,  if  we  contemplate  the  actual  relations  Christ 
sustains  to  us,  and  of  the  reality  of  which  we  are  assured  by  Divine  testimony,  the 
eutireness  of  His  claims  will  become  immediately  evident.  As  the  Son  of  God,  He 
eiaims  supreme  homage  and  entire  obedience :  as  Mediator,  He  has  a  peculiar 
claim,  becaut-e  we  are  the  subjects  of  His  all-prevailiug  intercession.  This  impera- 
tive duty  is  sustained  by  every  conceivable  motive ;  it  is  also  indispensable.  It  is  thvi 
divinely  appointed  condition  of  salvation.  We  must  look  at  the  awful  alternative. 
We  are  all  under  the  most  sacred  obligation  to  hold  the  possession  of  earthly 
things  in  subservience  to  the  service  of  Christ.  2.  It  is  our  true  happiness  to  for- 
sake all  to  follow  Christ.  "  What  shall  we  have  therefore?  "  Is  it  not  true  happi- 
ness to  derive  present  and  everlasting  joy  in  the  contemplation  of  so  pre-eminent 
an  object  of  love  ;  to  experience  the  transforming  influence  of  His  Spirit  and  truth 
changing  us  into  His  likeness  ;  and  to  enter  into  living  and  effectual  relation  with 
Him,  all  whose  names  are  significant  of  unlimited  blessing  ?  "  What  shall  we 
have  therefore  ?  "  Exemption  from  eternal  death,  and  the  inheritance  of  everlasting 
life.  The  truth  of  Christ.  The  fellowship  of  the  saints.  An  in'inite  compensa- 
tion; a  blissful  result  of  self-denial.  "And  the  last  shall  be  first."  As  the  first  in 
their  own  and  in  the  world's  esteem  should  be  really  the  last,  so  the  last  shall  be 
first.  The  last  in  worldly  esteem.  The  last  in  social  conditions — Christians  are 
required  to  avoid  all  vain  display  and  ostentation.  The  last  in  their  own  esteem. 
•'  What  things  were  gain  to  them,  these  they  countedloss  for  Christ."  {J.  T,  B  irktw] 


«43  I  HE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  XA 

What  called  forth  this  question  7  An  event  had  just  taken  place  which  had  mada 
a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  disciples.  I.  Let  us  considee  the  spibit 
IN  WHICH  THOSE  WORDS  WERE  UTTEEED  BY  St,  Peter.  There  are  some  who  always 
seem  to  delight  in  putting  a  bad  construction  upon  the  actions  and  words  of  God's 
Baints.  We  have  no  sympathy  with  such  men.  They  judge  others  by  their  own 
standard  and  motives.  But  in  the  words  of  the  text  we  find  no  instance  of  human 
infirmity.  Whatever  St.  Peter's  faults  may  have  been,  certainly  he  was  the  last 
man  to  think  of  payment  for  service,  or  of  reward.  He  was  impetuous,  affectionate, 
generous.  Nor,  again,  can  we  admit  that  there  was  something  vain-glorious  in  the 
words.  What,  then,  led  St.  Peter  to  say,  "  What  shall  we  have  therefore?  "  It  was 
thankfulness.  He  was  thrilled  with  gratitude  at  the  thought  of  the  grace  which  had 
enabled  him  to  do  what  others  had  not  done.  But  further,  instead  of  pride  there 
was,  we  believe,  humility  in  this  utterance.  It  was  as  much  as  to  say,  "  What 
condesoension  that  thou  hast  chosen  us,  such  ae  we  are,  for  so  great  a  vocation  1  " 
They  felt  the  greatness  of  the  love  which  had  called  them,  and  their  own  unworthi- 
ness  of  the  dignity.  Lot  us  look  at  the  statements  which  are  made.  They  are  two. 
Christ  had  bidden  the  rich  youth  to  give  up  all,  and  St.  Peter  now  says,  "  We  have 
done  this — we  have  forsaken  all.  Yes,  it  was  not  much,  but  it  was  all,  and  the 
sacrifice  is  to  be  measured  not  by  the  amount  which  is  surrendered,  but  by 
the  love  which  prompted  it.  Again,  St.  Peter  adds,  "  We  have  followed  Thee." 
This  was  the  second  thing  which  our  Lord  demanded  of  the  rich  youth.  Perfect 
does  not  consist  in  the  mere  abandonment  of  external  goods.  St.  Peter  was  careful 
to  add  that  they  had  forsaken  all  with  a  definite  motive — that  of  following  Christ, 
and  of  being  like  Him  in  the  external  conditions  of  his  life.  It  is  not  merely 
world-surrender,  but  self-surrender  which  Christ  demands.  The  forsaking  is  the 
preliminary  of  the  following.  Detachment  from  the  creature  is  useless  unless  it 
leads  to  attachment  to  the  Creator.  Sin  consists  in  two  things — the  turning  away 
from  God,  and  the  turning  to  the  creature.  "  My  people  have  committed  two  evils ; 
they  have  forsaken  Me,  saith  the  Lord,  the  Fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hewed 
them  out  cisterns,  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  waters  "  (Jer.  ii.  13).  Holiness, 
on  the  other  hand,  requires  a  spirit  of  detachment  from  visible  things,  and  love  for 
God.  They  loved  Him.  It  was  a  progressive  love.  II.  Our  Lord's  reply  to  St. 
Peter's  question  was  an  encouraging  one.  He  did  not  find  fault  with  the 
question,  knowing  the  purity  of  motive  which  prompted  it.  But  He  was  careful  to 
elevate  their  thoughts.  They  should  have  some  great  honour,  some  mysterious 
union  with  Christ  in  His  exaltation,  as  they  now  had  fellowship  with  Him  on 
earth.  Christ  is  Judge  alone.  They  can  have  no  share  in  His  judiciary  authority. 
In  what  sense,  then,  will  the  Apostles  sit  with  Christ  and  judge  the  world?  By  the 
judgment  of  comparison.  They  will  be  examples  of  faithfulness  to  grace,  con- 
demning those  thereby  who  have  clung  to  earthly  things  and  forsaken  Christ.  And 
besides  this,  by  the  judgment  of  approbation.  They  will  be  Christ's  court.  His 
princes,  marked  out  from  others  by  special  glory  and  blessedness  as  the  recompense 
of  their  allegiance  to  Him.  Is  this  honour  to  be  confined  to  the  original  disciples  t 
We  are  not  called,  as  Apostles  were,  actually  to  forsake  all,  and  to  follow  Christ. 
But  all  Christians  must  share  their  spirit.  We  must  "  use  this  world,  as  not 
abusing  it  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  31).  The  outward  acta  of  religion,  necessary  as  they  are, 
will  not  compensate  for  a  worldly  spirit.  But  the  Christian  life  is  no  mere  negative 
thing — the  quenching  of  the  love  of  the  temporal ;  it  is  the  following  of  Christ. 
Try  by  meditation  to  gain  a  clearer  view  of  our  Lord's  example.  Nor  is  it  a  sordid 
movement  of  soul  to  desire  to  look  over  the  hills  of  time  into  the  glories  of  the 
eternal  world.  Love,  not  selfishness,  prompts  all  sacrifice  made  for  Christ.  But 
He  who  "  for  the  joy  which  was  set  before  Him  endured  the  cross,  despising  ths 
shame  "  {H«b.  xii.  2),  permits  the  inquiry  of  the  text  when  made  in  the  spirit  of 
hope  and  thankfulness.  "What  shall  we  have  therefore?"  It  is  not  merely 
happiness,  it  is  blessedness.  (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)  Hundredfold  reward  : — 
We  must  not  understand  this  of  an  hundredfold  in  specie,  but  in  value.  It  is — 1. 
Joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  peace  of  conscience,  the  sense  of  God's  love ;  so  as,  with 
the  Apostles,  they  shall  rejoice  that  they  are  thought  worthy  to  suffer  for  Christ. 
2.  Contentment.  They  shall  have  a  contented  frame  of  spirit  with  the  little  that 
is  left  to  them  ;  though  they  have  not  so  much  to  drink  as  they  had,  yet  they  shall 
have  less  thirst  (Phil.  iv.  11.  12).  3.  God  will  stir  up  the  hearts  of  others  to 
supply  their  wants,  and  that  supply  shall  be  sweeter  to  them  than  their  abundance 
was.  4.  God  sometimes  repays  them  in  this  life,  as  He  restored  Job  after  his  trial 
to  greater  riches.    {M.  Pool.)        The  Christian's  recompense : — The  man  who  for- 


CHAP.  IX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  44t 

Bakes  bis  possegsions  and  friends  for  Christ's  sake,  shall  find  that  Christ  will  take 
care  that  he  has  "a  hundred,"  i.e.,  very  many  others,  who  will  give  him  the  love 
and  help  of  brothers,  wives,  and  mothers,  with  far  more  exceeding  sweetness  and 
charity  ;  so  that  it  shall  not  seem  that  he  has  lost  his  own  possessions,  but  haa  only 
laid  them  down,  and  in  Christ's  providence  has  multiplied  them  with  great  usury. 
For  spiritual  affections  are  sweeter  than  natural  ones.  {Lapide.)  The  reward  of 
self-sacrifice : — This  implies — 1.  The  security  of  those  who  are  poor  for  the  goBpGl'g 
Bake.  2.  The  privilege  of  judging.  3.  Dignity  and  eminence  above  others.  4. 
The  nearest  place  to  Christ  and  most  perfect  union  with  Him.  5.  A  principality 
of  grace,  happiness,  and  glory,  that  inasmuch  as  they  are  princes  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  they  should  have  the  right  of  judging,  and  of  admitting  into  it  those  who 
are  worthy,  and  excluding  the  unworthy.  {Ibid.)  The  Christian's  possession  :— 
He  who  has  left  all  things  begins  to  possess  God ;  and  he  who  has  God  for  his 
portion  is  the  possessor  of  all  nature.  Instead  of  lands,  he  is  sufficient  to  himself, 
having  good  fruit  which  cannot  perish.  Instead  of  houses,  it  is  enough  for  him  that 
there  is  the  habitation  of  God,  and  the  temple  of  God,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more 
precious.  For  what  is  more  precious  than  God  ?  That  is  the  portion  which  no 
earthly  inheritance  can  equaL  What  is  more  magnificent  than  the  celestial  host? 
What  more  blessed  than  Divine  possession  ?  (Ambrose.)  The  joy  of  the  virtuoxu  : 
— ^If,  instead  of  the  perturbation  of  anger  and  fury,  you  weigh  the  perpetual  calm- 
ness of  the  mind ;  for  the  torment  of  anxiety  and  distraction,  the  quiet  of  security; 
for  the  fruitless  and  penal  sadness  of  the  world,  the  fruit  of  sorrow  unto  salvation  ; 
for  the  vanity  of  worldly  joy,  the  richness  of  spiritual  delight  : — you  will  perceive 
that  the  recompense  of  such  an  exchange  is  a  hundredfold.  (Cassian.)  The 
first  last : — This  is  an  awakening  sentence  to  the  best  of  men.  It  was  as  mnch  as 
to  say  to  the  Apostles,  "  Ton  have  forsaken  all  and  followed  Me  ;  but  you  had  need 
look  and  consider,  from  what  principle,  with  what  love,  and  to  what  end  you  have 
done  it ;  you  had  need  keep  a  watch  upon  yourselves,  and  see  that  you  hold  on,  and 
that  you  have  no  confidence  in  yourselves.  For  many  that  are  first  in  profession, 
first  in  the  opinion  of  others,  first  in  their  own  opinion  and  confidence,  at  the  Day  of 
Judgment  will  be  found  to  be  last  in  Mine  and  My  Father's  esteem  and  reckoning ; 
and  many  who  make  not  so  great  a  noise,  nor  have  so  great  a  name  and  repute  ia 
the  world,  and  who  have  the  lowest  and  meanest  opinion  of  themselves  will  be 
found  fii^t  and  highest  in  My  favour.  The  Day  of  Judgment  wiU  ixustrate  many 
expeotations,    (M.Fool.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Yebs.  1-16.  For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  Is  like  nnto  a  man  that  li  an  Iionss^ 
holder,  which  went  out  early  in  the  mornhig'  to  hire  labourers  Into  his  vineyard. 
— The  labourers  in  the  vineyard  ; — 1.  This  story  is  on  the  face  of  it  improbable.  It 
is  unusual  for  an  employer  to  give  as  much  remuneration  to  those  who  have  wrought 
one  hour  as  to  those  who  have  wrought  nine  or  twelve.  The  householder  was  a 
peculiar  character,  and  had  his  own  way  of  doing  things,  and  did  not  care  how 
people  regarded  him.  He  must  be  such  an  one  if  he  is  to  represent  God  and  His 
dealing  with  men.  ••  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,"  &c.  God's  kingdom  is 
not  of  this  world.  2.  The  act  of  the  householder  seems  to  be  unjust.  Some  think 
that  the  late-comers  did  as  much  work  in  one  hour  as  the  others  in  nine  ;  others 
that  the  late-comers  were  paid  with  a  brass  denarius,  the  others  with  a  silver  one, 
or  with  a  gold  one ;  so  they  say  one  heaven  for  all,  yet  of  varied  glory.  But  if  the 
early  workers  had  a  gold  denarius  they  would  not  have  complained.  We  have  to 
admit  the  inequality  of  the  treatment ;  it  is  explained  by  the  spirit  of  the  workers, 
of  which  earthly  employers  take  no  thought.  3.  The  difficulty  of  finding  spiritual 
analogues  for  each  of  the  particulars  in  the  parable.  The  grumbling  workers  are 
to  be  taken  as  the  impersonations  of  an  evil  principle  that  often  exists  in  Christian 
hearts  ;  they  correspond  to  the  elder  brother  in  the  parable.  There  is  much  of  the 
hirelmg  disposition  even  in  true  disciples.  Work  in  this  spirit,  however  great  it  may 
seem,  is  Sinall  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  "  perfect  "  and  the  "  chosen"  labour  foe 
love.  The  first  bargaiix^d  with  the  householder ;  the  last  trusted  to  his  generosity 
without  qnestion.  To  those  late  he  was  better  than  they  expected.  To  the  hire- 
ling  He  shows  Himself  a  hirer ;  to  the  trustful  worthy  of  oonfideuce.  The  bargaiuen 


i^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tm. 

dure  LijMl  with  dissatisfaction,  the  confiding  ones  with  joy.  The  parable  teaches  a 
ohange  ,i^  place  between  the  first  and  the  last ;  not  unusual.  There  will  be  firgt 
■who  shall  i'emain  first.  4.  This  view  does  not  approve  late  coming  into  the  vine- 
yard. Ser^ioe  is  not  determined  by  duration,  but  by  spirit.  Motive  gives  character 
to  work.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.I).)  The  worth  of  work  determined  by  the  spirituality 
of  it$  motive :  —  The  Church  is  composed,  indeed,  of  those  who  have  confessed 
ChAet ;  but  it  is  a  society,  existing  for  certain  puiposes,  and,  as  such,  it  has  its 
machinery  for  the  carrying  out  of  these  purposes,  hke  any  other  society  that  has 
been  formed  in  the  world.  Now,  the  keeping  of  any  part  of  that  machinery  in 
motion  is  in  itself  no  more  a  spiritual  work  than  the  carrying-on  of  any  other 
machinery  ;  and  if  it  is  not  done  with  a  spiritual  motive,  then,  even  though  it  be 
done  for  the  Church,  it  is  not  spiritual  work  such  as  God  can  value  and  reward. 
Thus,  in  a  missionary  society,  the  great  object  is  spiritual ;  but  it  has  to  be  sus- 
tained and  carried  on  like  any  other  business  society  ;  its  books  have  to  be  kept  like 
those  of  any  commercial  firm,  and  he  who  keeps  them  is  not  in  that  doing  a  spiritual 
work,  any  more  than  a  bookkeeper  in  a  mercantile  house  is  doing  a  sj  iritual  work. 
The  mercantile  bookkeeper  may  make  his  work  spiritual  by  doing  it  as  unto  the 
Lord ;  but  the  missionary  bookkeeper  will  make  his  secular  if  he  does  it  simply 
for  his  wages,  and  as  work.  So,  again,  in  the  office  of  the  ministry,  there  is  much 
in  common  with  ordinary  departments  of  life.  It  gratifies  literary  tastes ;  it  affords 
opportunities  for  stud/ ;  it  has  associated  with  it  a  certain  honour  and  esteem  in 
the  eyes  of  others  ;  it  furnishes  occasions  for  the  thrill  that  every  real  orator  feels 
in  the  delivery  of  a  message  to  his  fellow-men,  and  the  like.  Now,  if  a  man  is  in 
the  ministry  simply  for  tL^jse  kinds  of  enjoyment,  there  is  no  more  spirituality  in 
his  work,  than  there  is  in  that  of  the  litterateur,  or  the  political  orator.  Theirs 
may  be  spiritual,  indeed,  if  they  are  doing  it  out  of  love  to  God;  but  his  must  be 
merely  secular  if  he  does  it  oolyfrom  such  motives  as  have  place  in  ordinary  litera- 
ture or  eloquence.  (Ibid.)  God  Himself  the  best  reward: — Beautiful  exceedingly 
in  this  connection  is  the  story — mythical,  no  doubt,  in  form,  but  probably  true  in 
substance — that  is  told  concerning  Thomas  Aquinas.  Worshipping  one  day  in 
the  chapel  in  which  he  was  accustomed  to  perfoim  his  devotions,  it  is  said  that 
the  Saviour  thus  addressed  hhn  :  "  Thomas,  thou  hast  written  much  and  well 
coQ«erning  Me.  What  reward  fchall  I  give  thee  for  thy  work  ?  "  Whereupon  he 
answered,  "  Nihil  nisi  te,  Domine," — "  Nothing  but  Thyself,  0  Lord  1  "  And  in 
very  deed  He  is  Himself  the  best  of  all  His  gifts.  He  is  Himself  the  "  exceeding 
great  reward  "  of  all  His  people.  Let  the  spirit  of  the  angelic  Doctor,  as  enshrined 
in  this  simple  story,  fiU  our  hearts,  and  there  will  be  no  room  within  us  for  the 
hirehng's  selfishness.  {Ibid.)  Christian  condition  and  Christian  character: — 
The  eleventh-hour  workmen  are  made  to  feel  that  envy  is  worse  than  idleness.  One 
exposition  is  that  this  parable  refers  to  complete  Christians,  the  reckoning  at  night- 
fall being  taken  for  entrance  into  the  bliss  of  heaven.  Such  would  not  be  serious 
complainers ;  would  not  be  sent  away  with  humiliating  rebuke ;  they  would  not 
regard  eternal  life  as  a  compensation  for  work  done.  Some  say  that  its  design  is 
to  show  that  the  judgment  of  Chris-tian  character  does  not  depend  on  the  length  of 
service,  but  on  its  energy  and  spirit.  This  inadmissible ;  nothing  is  said  of  the 
one-hour  servants  working  with  more  energy  or  a  better  spirit.  Some  imagine  that 
our  Lord  teaches  here  that  all  eonls  in  heaven  will  be  equally  rewarded.  Inadmis- 
sible ;  though  every  labourer  take  his  penny,  some  take  it  grudgingly  and  others 
cheerfully,  some  with  envy  and  others  with  charity.  Some  among  the  ancient 
Pathers  suggest  that  Christ  alluded  by  the  several  hours  of  the  working  day, 
to  the  great  periods  in  the  world's  religious  progress.  Adam,  Noah,  Moses,  and 
the  Prophets  endured  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  world's  great  day.  No  exclusive 
application  to  the  Jews  ;  Adam,  Noah,  &c.,  were  not  murmurers  at  the  end  ;  their 
earthly  service  did  not  last  to  the  gathering  of  the  nations  about  the  cross.  Again 
it  has  been  said  that  these  hours  of  the  day  stand  for  the  different  stages  in  men's 
lives  when  they  make  answer  to  the  call  of  God.  This  fails  as  regards  the  judgoient, 
when  last  converts  serving  one  hour  will  not  enjoy  equal  reward  with  life-long 
Christians.  The  word  "  Christian  "  is  used  in  two  senses.  This  is  a  "  Christian  " 
land  :  1.  This  is  the  Christianity  of  condition.  It  in  the  visible  Christian  estate  or 
kingdom  that  Christ  has  set  up  on  the  earth ;  it  is  a  state  of  salvation.  The  heathen 
are  oatside  this.  2.  There  is  the  Christianity  of  character;  not  of  provision,  but 
of  poBsession.  We  get  it  by  the  channel  of  a  living  faith.  Thus  "  many  are  called, 
few  are  chosen."  "  Give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure." 
The  eall  of  Christ  is  impartial.     The  pight-fall  is  not  death  or  judgment ;  bat 


CHAP.  XX.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  Mf 

•imply  the  end  of  one  period  of  labour,  of  one  test  of  character — the  one  ultimata 
reckoning  lying  still  far  in  the  future.  The  early  and  late  workers  have  alike  the 
promised  penny,  the  common  and  open  privilege  of  the  gospel  and  Church.  But 
have  you  turned  the  Christianity  of  condition  and  privilege  into  the  personal 
Christianity  of  choice  and  character  ?  The  length  of  time  you  have  been  in  the 
Church  is  now  of  little  consequence ;  all  that  is  over.  Are  you  Christ's  men  ? 
What  are  your  feelings  toward  the  brother-souls  that  live  and  work  near  you  ?  The 
parable  strikes  a  blow  at  the  notion  that  any  works  of  ours  are  profitable  to  Gcd,  or 
even  to  our  salvation.  The  quality,  not  the  performance,  is  the  accepted  thing,  the 
heart  of  faith  and  love,  not  any  self-complacent  operations.  {Bishop  Huntington.) 
Septuagesima  Sunday : — I.  Grace,  in  its  movemknts  towabds  man.  1.  There  is 
the  constitution  of  a  vineyard  (Isa.  v.  1-7).  2.  Having  constituted  a  vineyard,  the 
next  movement  of  Divine  grace  is  to  call  and  engage  men  as  labourers  in  it.  3. 
Divine  grace  purposes  to  make  active  servants  and  labourers  of  men.  God  does  not 
save  men  without  effort ;  a  variety  of  work.  4.  Nor  is  it  a  bootless  service  to  which 
grace  calls  men.  The  householder  has  wages  for  every  labourer.  Godliness  is 
profitable  {1  Tim.  iv.  8).  11.  The  conduct  of  men  towards  it.  All  were  idlers  at 
the  commencement ;  man  has  endowments  for  work  which  ought  to  be  employed. 
Some  prefer  idleness  and  continue  in  it.  Many  have  entered  the  vineyard,  but  are 
Dot  all  satisfactory  labourers.  Some  however  are  good  and  faithful  servants.  1. 
Let  us  learn  to  admire  the  glorious  beneficence  of  God,  2.  There  is  something  for 
us  to  do.  3.  Let  us  move  forward  and  see  how  it  will  be  with  us  when  the  bustle 
of  this  world  is  over,  and  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  sends  His  steward  to  settle  up  onr 
earthly  accounts.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Diversity  of  reward  imaged  in  nature: — 
I  suppose  we  have  all  noticed  the  curious  diversity  of  the  seeds  we  sow  in  the  spring. 
There  are  some  that  shoot  out  and  grow  up  days  before  the  others  from  the  same 
paper,  sown  in  the  same  bed,  and  that  seemed  exactly  like  the  rest.  It  is  so  with 
a  number  of  fruit  trees  in  a  young  orchard.  Each  tree  may  get  an  equal  care,  and 
appear  to  have  the  same  natural  advantages,  but  one  will  spring  out  into  an  early 
fruitfulness,  while  another  holds  back,  summer  after  summer,  and  perhaps,  onlj 
when  the  husbandman  begins  to  despair  of  its  ever  doing  any  good,  it  bears  fruit. 
(R.  Colly er.)  The  labourers  in  the  vineyard: — May  we  not  then  draw  from  thin 
parable  the  lesflon,  that  God  takes  into  account  not  only  the  work  we  do,  but  also 
our  opportunities.  He  does  not  allow  us  to  be  discredited  with  Him  for  not  doing 
what  we  could  not  do,  if  only  we  show  the  disposition  to  do  it.  (J,  M.  Ludlow,  'J.D.) 
Similarity  of  reward  not  equality  : — So,  then,  we  do  the  work  without  any  reference 
to  the  reward.  You  who  came  to  Christ  full  fifty  years  ago  will  have  your  penny — 
as  well  the  dying  thief  that  had  to  bring  yesternight  only  one  foot  out  of  hell.  WUl 
you,  then,  be  placed  on  equal  terms?  It  never  can  be  bo.  Can  a  man  of  fine 
capacity  and  mind  go  along  any  road  and  have  as  the  result  of  his  walking  only 
that  which  the  common  clodhopper  has,  who  "  thought  the  moon  no  bigger  than 
his  father's  shield,  and  the  visual  line  that  girt  him  round  the  world's  extreme?" 
Have  they  both  equal  enjoyment  out  of  the  same  circumstances?  It  is  impossible. 
The  walk  to  the  philosopner  is  a  walk  in  church,  a  climbing  up  the  altar  stairs.  He 
sees  angels,  he  hears  voices,  he  is  touched  by  reverences,  he  is  in  the  presence  and 
sanctuary  of  God.  Yet  the  road  the  same,  the  day  the  same — the  road  through  a 
garden,  the  day  the  queeuliest  in  all  the  summer  itrain,  yet  in  that  walk  one  man 
found  Heaven,  the  other  only  a  convenient  road  to  a  place  to  sleep  in.  {Dr.  Parker.) 
The  vineyard  labourers: — I.  Idling.  Men  who  needed  work.  Whom  work  and 
its  rewards  would  benefit.  Waiting  according  to  custom  to  be  hired.  Important  to 
he  where  the  call  of  the  Master  may  meet  us.  There  are  many  idlers  in  the  world. 
II.  Calling.  God  calls  men  to  work  for  Him  in  His  vineyard.  Some  in  early 
life — Josiah,  &o.  He  continues  to  call  up  to  the  eleventh  hour.  This  call  He  sends 
in  various  ways.  He  confers  a  gre&t  honour  by  calhng.  The  honour  of  working 
for  Him  is  a  suflScient  reward.  Very  sinful  to  refuse  to  obey  (Pro v.  i.  24).  There 
will  be  a  last  call — we  know  not  how  soon — may  be  now.  III.  Working.  He 
calls  to  work.  1.  For  ourselves.  To  secure  and  work  out  our  salvation.  Follow 
after  holiness,  Ac.  2.  For  others.  We  must  do  good,  as  well  as  get  good.  This 
work  brings  comfort  to  the  worker.  IV.  Paying.  God  wiU  be  no  man's  debtor. 
He  will  give  what  He  has  promised.  More  than  we  deserve,  more  than  the  most 
sanguine  expect.  Learn — 1.  All  Uving  without  working  for  God,  is  but  idling.  2, 
Now  that  God  calls  us  to  work,  let  us  not  refuse.  3.  Our  best  works  wil-.  not 
deserve  heaven.  4.  We  all  need  the  work  of  Divine  grace  in  our  souls.  {J.  C. 
Qray.)        God'$  sovereign  grace : — Certainly  it  is  sovereign  grace  alone  which  lead* 


Ml  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crnt.  xx, 

the  Lord  God  to  engage  such  sorry  labourers  as  we  are.  Let  us  inquire — I.  Hovr 
MAT  THE  LoBD  BE  SAID  TO  GO  OUT  ?  1.  The  impulse  of  grace  comes,  before  we  think 
of  stirring  to  go  to  Him.  2.  In  times  of  revival,  He  goes  forth  by  the  power  of 
Bin  Spirit,  and  many  are  brought  in.  3.  There  are  times  of  personal  yisitation 
\rith  most  men,  when  they  are  specially  moved  to  holy  things.  II.  What  is  thb 
BOUB  HERE  MENTIONED  ?  It  represents  the  period  between  twenty-five  and  thirty-five 
years  of  age,  or  theieabouts.  1.  The  dew  of  youtb's  earliest  and  best  morning 
hour  is  gone.  2.  Habits  of  idleness  have  been  formed  by  standing  in  the  market- 
place so  long.  Harder  to  begin  at  third  hour  than  first.  Loiterers  are  usually 
epoilcd  by  tbeir  loafing  ways.  3.  Satan  is  ready  with  temptation  to  lure  them  to 
his  service.  4.  Their  sun  may  go  down  suddenly,  for  life  is  uncertain.  Many  a 
day  of  life  has  closed  at  its  third  hour.  5.  Fair  opportunity  for  work  yet  remains; 
bat  it  will  speedily  pass  away  as  the  hours  steal  round.  6-  A.3  yet  the  noblest  of 
all  work  has  nut  been  commenced ;  for  only  by  working  for  Christ  can  Ufe  be  made 
sublime.      III.  What  webe  they  doing  to  whom   He   spoke  ?      Standing  idle. 

1.  Many  ere  altogether  idling  in  a  literal  sense  ;  mere  loafers  with  nothing  to  do. 

2.  Many  are  idle  with  laborious  business — industrious  triflers,  wearied  with  toils 
which  accompUsh  nothing  of  real  worth.  3.  Many  are  idle  because  of  constant 
indecision.  4.  Many  are  idle  though  full  of  sanguine  intentions.  IV.  What  wobk 
wotJiJ)  the  Lord  have  them  do  ?  He  would  have  them  work  by  day  in  His  vine- 
yard. 1.  The  work  is  such  as  many  of  the  best  of  men  enjoy.  2.  The  work  is 
proper  and  fit  for  you.  3.  For  that  work  the  Lord  will  find  you  tools  and  strength. 
4.  Toti  shall  work  with  your  Lord,  and  so  be  ennobled.  5.  Tour  work  shall  be 
growingly  pleasant  to  yon.  6.  It  shall  be  gracioi»i<ly  rewarded  at  the  last.  V.  What 
DiDTHEY  DorNANflWEBToHiscALii  ?  "  Went  tbeir  Way."  May  you,  who  are  in  a 
similar  time  of  the  day,  imitate  them  !  1.  They  went  at  once.  Immediate  service. 
2.  They  worked  with  a  will.  3.  They  never  left  the  service,  but  remained  till 
night.  4.  They  received  the  full  reward  at  the  day's  end.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
Slothfulness  condemned : — I.  A  work  supposed.  (1)  Its  object  one  of  supreme  im- 
portance ;  (2)  Proposed  by  highest  authority ;  (H)  Kequires  long,  steady,  earnest 
applicatirn  ;  (4)  Certain  of  ultimate  success.  II.  A  state  condemned — idleness. 
(1)  By  limited  time — a  day ;  (2)  By  analogy  of  worldly  employments ;  (3)  By 
certainty  of  future  reckoning.  III.  A  question  urged:  Why?  (1)  Aversion  to 
work  ;  (2)  Indifference ;  (3)  Indecision  ;  (i)  Procrastination.  (J.  C,  Gray.)  The 
world  a  market-place : — I.  The  ordinary  walks  of  life  are  as  a  market-place  to  men 
whose  highest  aim  is  to  buy  and  sell  and  get  gain.  II.  Outside  this  market-place  is 
a  Tineyard,  which  the  great  Owner  of  the  world  and  Proprietor  of  human  life  would 
have  cultivated.  III.  All  hiring,  and  looking  out  for  hire,  is  biit  a  profitless  idling 
till  the  Master  calls  to  a  higher  work.  IV.  Call  a  man  to  labour  when  He  wiU,  He 
will  give  what  He  pleases  of  His  own  at  the  end  of  life's  day.  (Ibid.)  Labourers : — 
I.  Idleness  rebuked.  II.  Service  required.  III.  Toil  rewarded.  IV.  Discontent  mani- 
fested. V.  Murmuring  silenced.  VI.  Administration  vindicated.  (M.  Braithwaite.) 
I.  There  is  a  householder  who  has  a  vineyard.  The  householder — Jesus.  The  vineyard 
is  the  Church.  II.  The  householder  calls  labourers  into  his  vineyard  at  different 
hours  in  the  day.  III.  In  the  evening  the  labourers  are  called  to  receive  their  reward. 
IV.  The  early  labourers  murmur  against  the  householder.  V.  The  householder 
defends  his  conduct;  and  expostulates  with  the  murmurers.  VI.  The  parable  con- 
cludes with  an  awful  inference  to  the  Jewish  nation.  (J.  Edmonson.)  Work  and 
'.cages: — I.  The  Church  of  God  is  brought  before  us  as  a  place  of  work.  By  no 
means  the  ordinary  idea.  Members,  not  workers.  II.  There  is  much  work  to  be 
done,  and  many  kinds  of  work,  an  J,  therefore,  that  there  is  room  and  need  for 
many  workers  of  many  kinds.  III.  Tlmt  no  work  shall  be  left  without  wages.  IV. 
That  the  wnges  are  not  proportioned  to  the  work.  (Anon.)  I.  Called  to  work. 
1.  Who  calls?  2.  Who  are  called?  3.  When  called?  II.  HumiUty  in  work. 
Sho^'m  m  obedience,  hearty  service,  thankful  spirit.  III.  Reward  for  work.  To 
the  first.     To  the  last.     (G.  M.  Tait.)         The  labourers  in  the  vineyard : — I.  Ooa 

ATTENTION  18  CALLED   TO   AN   EXAMINATION   OF   THE   PARABLE.      1.    God   hires  labourers 

into  h'B  vineyard.  2.  At  different  periods  has  God  made  Himself  known  to  the 
children  of  men.     3.  Tbey  labour  until  the  evening  arrives.     II.  Enfobob  thb 

TRUTHS  WHICH  CONSIDERED   AS   A   WHOLE   THIS   PARABLE    WAS    INTENDED   TO   TEACH.      1. 

That  the  rewards  of  Christianity  being  rewards  of  grace,  and  not  of  works,  are 
regulated  only  by  the  beneficent  will  of  Him  who  is  debtor  to  no  man ;  and  that 
such  conduct  is  consistent  with  strict  eqiii^y.  2.  To  expose  the  hypocrisy  of  soma 
professon  of  leligion,  and  remind  us  of  iAe  frailty  which  attaches  even  to  thoM 


CHAP.  XX. J  8T.  MATTHEW.  Ul 

whose  sincerity  cannot  be  doubted.  3.  To  remind  ns  of  tbe  real  dignity  of  the 
work,  independently  of  the  reward  annexed  to  it.  4.  To  warn  us  of  the  perio.1  to 
our  exertiouB,  and  the  hour  of  final  reckoning — (1)  Payment ;  (2)  Disappointment; 
(3)  Gladness.  5.  To  instruct  us  in  t;ie  temper  of  real  Christianity.  (J.  StyUt, 
D.D.)  Love  makes  labour  light : — Two  young  girls  were  going  to  a  neighbouring 
town,  each  carrying  on  her  head  a  heavy  basket  of  fruit  to  sell.  One  of  them  wag 
murmuring  and  fretting  all  the  way,  and  complaining  of  the  weight  of  her  basket. 
The  other  went  along  smihng  and  singing,  and  seeming  to  be  very  happy.  At  last 
the  first  got  out  of  patience  with  her  companion,  and  said,  •'  How  can  you  go  on 
BO  merry  and  joyful  ?  your  basket  is  as  heavy  as  mine,  and  I  know  you  are  not  a 
bit  stronger  than  I  am.  I  don't  understand  it."  **  Oh,"  said  the  other,  "  it's  easy 
enough  to  undtrstand.  I  have  a  certain  little  plant  which  I  put  on  the  top  of  my 
load,  and  it  makes  it  so  light  I  hardly  feel  it."  '•  Indeed  1  that  must  be  %  very 
precious  little  plant.  I  wish  I  could  Hghten  my  load  with  it.  Where  does  it  grow? 
Tell  me.  What  do  you  call  it  ?  "  "  It  grows  wherever  you  plant  it,  and  give  it  a 
chance  to  take  root,  and  there's  no  knowmg  the  relief  it  gives.  Its  name  is,  love, 
the  love  of  Jesus.  I  have  found  out  that  Jesns  loved  me  so  much  that  He  died  to 
save  my  soul.  This  makes  me  love  Him.  Whatever  I  do,  whether  it  be  carrying 
this  basket  or  anything  else,  I  think  to  myself,  I  am  doing  this  for  Jesus,  to  show 
that  I  love  Him,  and  this  makes  everything  easy  and  pleasant."  {Bible  Jewels.) 
Disadvantage  of  Envy  : — The  benevolent  have  the  advantage  of  the  envious,  even 
in  this  present  life  ;  for  the  envious  is  tormented  not  only  by  all  the  ill  that  befalls 
himself,  but  by  all  the  good  that  happens  to  another ;  whereas  the  benevolent  man 
is  the  better  prepared  to  bear  his  own  calamities  unruffled,  from  the  complacency 
and  serenity  he  has  secured  from  contemplating  the  prosperity  of  all  around  him. 
(Coltan.)  Hired  late  in  the  day  : — By  these  labourers  that  were  hired  long  after 
the  morning,  we  are  to  understand  men  in  whom  nothing  appeared  that  should 
dispose  any  person  to  have  a  favourable  opinion  of  them,  or  who  were  at  least  desti- 
tute of  anything  truly  good,  whilst  others  made  a  figure  in  the  Church.  I.  Speak 
OF  OLD  6INNEBS  THAT  NEED  C0NVEK8I0N.  1.  There  are  some  who  have  never  thought 
seriously  about  the  state  of  their  souls  ;  or  their  serious  thoughts,  if  ever  any  ob- 
tained possession  of  their  minds,  have  left  no  impression.  2.  There  are  some  who 
entertain  a  groundless  opinion  of  the  goodness  of  their  state.  3.  There  are  some 
who  live  in  suspense  about  their  condition.  4.  There  are  some  too  well  en- 
lightened to  flatter  themselves  with  groundless  hopes.  II.  Show  that  old  simnem 
MAY  BE  CONVERTED.  1.  God  deals  with  them,  by  the  gospel,  as  well  as  with  sinners 
who  are  yet  in  the  days  of  their  youth.  2.  The  long-suffering  of  the  Lord  ia 
salvation  to  sinners.  God  spares  long,  to  give  space  for  obtaining  pardon  and  sal- 
vation. 3.  From  the  grace  of  God  bestowed  upon  transgressors  in  former  days,  it 
appears,  that  there  is  mercy  with  him  for  old  transgressors.  III.  Consider  the 
encouragement  given  to  old  sinners  to  repent.  The  gracious  reward  promised  to 
those  who  enter  into  the  vineyard  at  the  eleventh  hour,  must  have  a  powerful  effect 
npon  all  who  beUeve  the  promises  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {George  Lawson.) 
The  festive  evening  time  : — The  reward  which  the  Lord  will  ultimately  grant  to  Hiif 
servants.  I.  It  is  not  arbitrary,  but  in  accordance  with  the  strictest  justice.  1. 
He  rewards  only  His  labourers.  2.  He  rewards  all  His  labourers.  3.  He  gives  the  same 
reward  to  all  His  labourers  as  such.  The  equahty  of  the  penny  a  figure  of  the 
equality  of  God's  justice.  II.  It  is  not  limited,  but  free  and  rich,  according  to  the 
fulness  of  His  love.  III.  It  is  not  a  mtbterioos  and  silent  fate,  but  the  ways  of 
wisdom,  which  justify  themselves.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  God  a  good  paym/ister : — 
Consider  His  payments.  I.  An  easy  conscience.  II.  "The  comfort  we  have  in  doing 
something  for  Jesus.  III.  The  reward  in  watching  first  buddings  of  conviction  in 
a  soul,  IV.  The  joy  of  success.  V.  The  final  entrance  into  the  joy  of  our  Lord. 
JC.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Hiring  labourers  in  the  East: — The  most  conspicuous  building 
in  Hamadan  is  the  Mesjid  Jumah,  a  large  mosque,  now  falling  into  decay,  and  before 
it  a  meidan,  or  square,  which  serves  as  a  market-place.  Here  we  observed,  every 
morning  before  the  sun  rose,  that  a  numerous  body  of  peasants  were  collected  with 
ppades  in  their  hands,  waiting,  as  they  informed  me,  to  be  hired  for  the  day  to 
work  in  the  surrounding  fields.  This  custom  forcibly  struck  us  as  a  most  happy 
illustration  of  our  Saviour's  parable  of  the  labourers  in  the  vineyard  ;  particularly 
when,  passing  by  the  same  place  late  in  the  day,  we  still  found  others  standing  idle, 
and  remembered  His  words,  •*  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  f "  as  most 
appUcable  to  their  situation;  for  in  putting  the  very  same  question  to  them, 
they  answered  a%  "  Because  no  man  hath  hired  as."    {Mr.  Marier.)        During 


44S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x\ 

the  whole  Beason  when  vineyards  may  be  dug,  the  common  workmen  go  very  early 
in  the  morning  to  the  Sook,  or  market-place  of  the  village  or  city,  where  comentiblei 
are  sold.  While  waiting  to  be  hired,  they  take  their  morning  cup  of  coffee,  and  eat  a 
morsel  of  bread.  The  owners  of  vineyards  come  to  the  place  and  engage  the  number 
of  labourers  they  need.  These  immediately  go  to  the  vineyard  and  work  there  until 
a  little  while  before  the  sun  sets,  which,  according  to  Oriental  time,  is  twelve  o'clock, 
BO  that  the  "  eleventh  hour  "  means  one  hour  before  sunset.  We  have  often  f  aen 
men  stand  in  the  market-place  through  the  entire  day  without  finding  employment, 
and  have  repeatedly  engaged  them  ourselves  at  noon  for  half  a  day's  job,  and  later 
for  one  or  two  hours'  work  in  our  garden.  In  such  a  case  the  price  has  to  be  par. 
ticularly  bargained  for,  but  it  is  more  often  left  to  the  generosity  of  the  employer 
to  give  whatever  backshish  he  feels  disposed.      {Van  Lennep.)  God'i  bounty  t« 

those  who  trust : — He  promises  not  to  us,  as  to  tnose  first  labourers,  a  certain  hire. 
Even  while  He  would  wholly  restore  as  in  His  mercy.  He  would  keep  in  us  the 
humility  of  penitents.  He  seemeth  to  tell  us  thus,  that  we  have  forfeited  our  claim, 
that  we  must  labour  on  in  faith,  and  hope,  and  confiding  trust,  making  no  bargains, 
as  it  were,  with  Him,  looking  for  nothing  again,  but  what  He  of  His  free  bounty 
will  give  us.  But  so  will  He  give  us,  not  what  we  could  dare  to  ask  or  think, 
but  "what  is  right ; "  not "  right  "  with  regard  to  us,  or  any  poor  claims  or  demerit* 
of  ours,  but  right  in  His  sight  whose  mercy  is  over  all  His  works,  right  for  Him  wh* 
doth  what  He  will  with  His  own,  Who  is  not  stinted  to  any  measure  of  proportion, 
but  giving  us  out  of  the  largeness  of  His  love  ;  not  what  is  "  right "  for  U8»  but  for 
Fitn  in  whose  right  we  receive  what  we  deserve  not,  even  His,  Who  gave  up  that 
which  was  His  right  by  nature,  and  emptied  Himself,  that,  what  is  His  right,  wa 
might  receive.  This  is  our  very  hope,  and  trust,  and  gladness  in  our  toil,  that  wa 
labour,  not  with  any  calculating  spirit,  or  to  set  up  for  ourselves  any  claim  with 
God ;  the  rewards  of  desert  were  finite ;  the  reward  of  grace  is  infinite,  even  Him- 
self, WTio  hath  said,  "I  am  thine  exceeding  great  reward."  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
God's  persevering  activity  : — See  how  actively  the  householder  employs  himself. 
His  loving  heart  is  so  comprehensive  that  He  cannot  have  enough  labourers  in  Hia 
vineyard — not  enough  souls  with  which  He  can,  as  it  were,  share  the  joy  and  the 
glory  of  the  extension  of  His  kingdom.  How  many  a  human  being  who  has  been 
troubled  at  having  missed  the  first  appearance  of  the  householder  at  daybreak,  now 
rejoices  at  being  called  into  the  vineyard  before  the  sun  is  too  high  in  the  heavens. 
He  does  not  think  first  of  stipulating  about  his  hire  ;  the  word  of  the  Lord,  "What- 
soever is  right,  I  will  give  you,"  is  even  more  than  he  requires,  and  at  the  sixth 
hour  he  joyfully  enters  into  his  work  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  It  has  been  painful 
to  him  to  stand  idle  ;  to  gaze  for  half  a  day  upon  that  which  is  intended  for  working, 
and  yet  to  be  unable  to  work  at  it.  {R.  Rothe,  D.D.)  Idle ;— If  we,  with  the  eje 
of  God,  could  look  down  upon  the  proceedings  of  this  life,  how  startled  we  should  be 
at  the  host  of  idlers  in  the  midst  of  the  turmoil  of  life.  The  Lord  sees  clearly  that 
which  our  merely  human  understanding  can  also  perceive,  that  there  is  only  one 
activity  upon  earth  which  is  really  activity,  because  it  produces  a  real  result — 
activity  for  the  kingdom  of  God  and  in  His  service.  Every  other  effort  of  human 
strength,  if  it  has  not  a  decided  reference  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  finds  in  its 
Bonroe  as  well  as  its  aim,  is  only  a  busy  idleness,  a  sad  and  mournful  unreality, 
with  which  the  prince  of  this  world  detains  in  its  prison  those  who  have  fallen  into 
ita  unhappy  slavery.  Every  other  activity  which  does  not  buil  i,  only  destroys,  and  the 
more  noble  the  power  is  which  calls  it  forth,  the  more  destructive  is  its  working, 
until  at  last  it  destroys  itself.  {Ibid.)  Never  too  late  for  God's  grace  .-—An  old 
sailor,  who  was  very  ragged,  and  whose  white  head  spoke  the  lapse  of  many  years, 
was  leaning  against  a  post  in  conversation  with  another  sailor.  A  member  of  the 
Bethel  Union  spoke  to  them,  and  particularly  invited  the  old  man  to  attend  the 
prayer-meeting.  His  companion,  after  hearing  the  nature  of  the  invitation,  said, 
**  Thomas,  go  in  !  Come  1  come,  man  1  go  into  the  meeting ;  it  won't  hurt  you." 
♦•  Puh  I  puhl  "  cried  the  old  seaman,  "  I  should  not  know  what  to  do  with  myself. 
I  never  go  to  church  or  prayer-meetings ;  besides,  I  am  too  old.  I  am  upwards  of 
seventy,  and  I  am  very  wicked,  and  have  always  been  so ;  it  is  too  late  for  me  to 
begin,  it  is  of  no  use ;  all  is  over  with  me,  I  must  go  to  the  deviL"  After  a  moment'a 
pause,  the  member,  looking  with  pity  upon  the  old  veteran,  answered,  "  You  are  the 
very  man  the  prayer-meeting  is  held  for."  "  How  bo  f "  (with  much  surprise). 
••  Because  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  the  chief  of  sinners.  Wien 
young,  I  suppose,  you  were  tempted  to  think  it  would  be  time  enough  to  be  religious 
Wheq  YOU  came  to  be  old  r  "    "  Ah  1  that  I  did,"  rephed  the  sailor.     "  Now  you  are 


CHAS.  XX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  449 

old  yon  say  it  is  too  late.  Listen  no  longer  to  these  snggestions;  o&nie  with 
me :  uo  time  is  to  be  lost,  for  Jesus  is  waiting  to  save  you,  poor  sinner,  or  He 
would  have  sent  you  to  that  place  where  hope  never  comes,  before  this ;  your 
Bins  deserve  it."  His  companion  then  said,  "  Thomas,  go  to  the  prayer-meet- 
ing. You  have  need,  at  your  time  of  life,  to  prepare  to  die."  He  went,  and 
attended  regularly,  and  with  the  best  results.  Some  time  after  he  was  asked, 
"Well,  my  aged  friend,  do  yon  think  you  are  too  much  in  years  to  be  saved  ?  too 
old  in  sin  for  the  blood  of  Christ  to  cleanse  you  ?  "  "  No,  sir,"  said  he  ;  •♦  I  bless  God, 
I  do  feel  a  hope,  a  blessed  hope,  which  I  would  not  give  up  for  worlds  ;  a  hope  which 
encourages  me  to  think  that  God  will  be  merciful  to  me,  and  pardon  me,  old  sinner 
as  I  am."  The  grudqing  spirit .- — It  was  now  plain  that  the  early-hired  labourer 
had  little  interest  in  the  work,  and  that  it  was  no  satisfaction  to  him  to  have  been 
able  to  do  twelve  times  as  much  as  the  last  hired.  He  had  the  hireling's  spirit, 
and  had  been  longing  for  the  shadow  and  counting  his  wages  all  day  long.  English 
Bailors  have  been  known  to  be  filled  with  pity  for  their  comrades  whose  ships  only 
hove  in  sight  in  time  to  see  the  enemy's  flag  run  down,  or  to  fire  the  last  shot  in  a 
long  day's  engagement.  They  have  so  pitied  them  for  having  no  share  in  the 
excitement  and  glory  of  the  day,  that  they  would  willingly  give  them  as  a  eompen- 
eation  their  own  pay  and  prize  money.  And  the  true  follower  of  Christ,  who  has 
listened  to  the  earUest  call  of  his  Master,  and  has  revelled  in  the  glory  of  serving 
Him  throughout  life,  will  from  the  bottom  o£  his  heart  pity  the  man  who  has  only 
late  in  life  recognized  the  glory  of  His  service,  and  has  had  barely  time  to  pick  up 
his  tools  when  the  dusk  of  evening  falls  upon  him.  It  is  impossible  that  a  man 
whose  chief  desire  was  to  advance  his  Master's  work,  should  envy  another  labourer 
who  had  done  much  less  than  himself.  The  very  fact  that  a  man  envies  another 
his  reward,  is  enough  of  itself  to  convict  him  of  self-seeking  in  His  service.  (M. 
Dods,  D.D.)  Unto  this  last: — I.  The  work  to  which  all  were  called  ;  and  in  which 
the  first  bore  the  heat,  &c.  II.  The  reason  of  the  idleness  of  those  who  were  called 
at  the  eleventh  hour  IH.  The  Lord's  justification  of  His  ways.  (J.  B.  Brown, 
B.A.)  Mine  own: — We  have  here  :  I.  The  assertion  of  the  absolute  proprietor- 
ship. Both  the  whole  world  and  every  man  belong  to  God.  They  are  His  (1)  by 
creation;  (2)  by  providence;  (3)  by  grace.  II.  A  vindication  of  final  decisions 
based  on  this  absolute  right.  III.  A  censure  pronounced  on  all  criticisms  adverse 
to  these  decisions.  (J,  G.  Gray.)  Tlie  evil  eye: — 1.  I  have  been  good  in  that  I 
hired  you  at  all.  2.  Hired  you  before  you  had  shown  what  you  oould  do.  3.  I 
now  give  yon  all  I  promised,  without  criticising  your  work.  4.  In  being  good 
to  others  I  do  not  wrong  you.  Learn,  if  one  should  say — "  Since  I  shall  be 
no  better  off  in  the  end  than  those  who  began  late  to  work  for  God,  and  I  may 
therefore  delay,"  he  should  reflect  that  this  hour  may  be  his  eleventh.  (Ibid.) 
Waiting  to  he  called : — So,  then,  when  I  see  a  young  man  slow  and  backward,  and 
in  a  poor  place,  whose  soul  I  know  would  expand  in  the  sunshine  of  prosperity  and 
fill  a  better  place  :  or  a  woman,  waiting  with  her  unfulfilled  life  in  her  heart,  willing 
to  give  it  in  any  high,  pure  fashion  to  the  Lord,  if  He  will  but  come  and  take  it ;  or 
a  preacher,  with  a  mighty  power  to  preach  somewhere  in  his  nature,  if  he  could 
only  find  the  clue  to  it;  or  a  man  who  has  waited  through  his  lifetime  for  the 
Lord  to  show  him  the  true  church,  the  place  where  he  can  feel  that  the  religious 
heart  of  him  is  at  rest ; — if  in  these  things  or  in  any  of  them,  I  feel  I  have  found 
my  place,  and  am  doing  my  work,  I  must  feel  very  tenderly,  and  judge  very 
generously,  all  the  waiters  in  all  these  ways ;  must  call  up  this  picture  of  the  faces 
so  wistful  in  the  old  market-place,  watching  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord :  ••  Who 
has  made  me  to  differ,  who  has  called  me  at  the  first  hour,  why  do  I  succeed  where 
others  fail  ?  "  It  is  the  gift  of  God ;  it  is  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast. 
It  is  the  difference  between  the  seed  the  husbandman,  for  his  own  good  reason,  will 
leave  dark  and  still  in  the  granary,  and  the  seed  he  sows  which  can  spring  at  onoe 
to  the  sun  and  the  sweet  airs  of  the  summer.  It  is  the  difference  in  the  home,  in 
our  conduct  towards  our  children,  when  we  know  it  is  best  to  let  one  go  forward  in 
the  school  and  keep  another  backward.  (R.  Golly  er.)  The  call  of  nations: — This 
is  true,  finally  of  our  country.  England  and  Ge  many  begin  in  the  early  morning, 
and  in  the  wild  woods  of  Britain  and  Gaul,  to  earn  their  penny  ;  and  it  is  their  lot 
for  long  centuries  to  toil,  winning,  as  they  can,  this  and  that  from  the  wilderness, 
— trial  by  jury,  Magna  Charta,  free  speech,  free  ress,  fiee  pulpit, — and  when  many 
hours  are  past,  and  much  hard  work  is  done,  a  voice  comes  to  a  new  nation,  and 
tells  of  a  new  world,  and  says,  "Go  work  there  ;  '  and  when  the  old  world  looks  np, 
the  new  is  abreast  of  those  nations  that  have  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day, 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xx. 

and  will  have  its  penny.  And  in  this  new  world  itself,  there  are  men  living  here  in 
Chicago,  who  can  remember  very  well  when  our  great  prairies  lifted  their  faces 
wistfully  to  the  sun,  and  cried,  *'  No  man  hath  hired  us  ;  "  when  our  streets,  now 
BO  full  of  life,  sounded  only  to  the  voice  of  the  mighty  waters  and  the  cry  of  the 
savage.  Now  the  whole  civilized  world  has  to  come  and  see  what  has  been  done. 
Not  many  years  more  will  pass,  we  who  live  here  believe,  before  this  new  workei 
will  be  abreast  of  the  oldest,  and  will  win  her  penny.  {Ibid.)  Reward  given 
during  work  as  well  as  after  it  is  done : — I  think  the  most  heart-whole  man  I  ever 
knew,  was  a  man  who  had  waited  and  watched,  breaking  stones  through  all  weathers 
on  the  cold  shoulder  of  a  Yorkshire  hill,  and  he  could  hardly  see  the  stones  he  had 
to  break  he  was  so  sand  blind.  His  wife  was  dead  and  all  his  children ;  his  hut 
was  open  to  the  sky,  and  to  the  steel-cold  stars  in  winter  ;  but  when  once  one  said 
to  comfort  him,  "  Brother,  you  will  soon  be  in  heaven  1  "  he  cried  out  in  his 
rapture,  "  I  have  been  there  this  ten  years  1 "  And  so  when  at  last  the  angel  came 
to  take  him,  he  was  not  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon ;  mortality  was  swallowed  up 
of  life.     (Ibid.)  Disinterested  service: — Christ  nowhere  offers  us  heaven  as  a 

price  for  good  behaviour,  as  foolish  parents,  or  rather  wicked  parents,  lure  their 
children  to  obey  with  sweetmeats  and  toys.     It  is  in  no  such  sense  as  this  that  He 
engages  to  be  a  Rewarder  of  them  that  seek  Him.     The  very  passage  just  quoted 
discredits  such  a  thought ;  for  it  says,  "  If  ye  love  them  that  love  you,  what  reward 
have  ye  7  "     There  must  be  spontaneous  service.     The  heart  must  go  into  it,  ancal- 
culating  and  ungrudging.     You  must  love  your  enemies,  do  good  to  them  that  hate 
you,  and  bless  them  that  curse  you,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing  again.     Then 
yon  will  be  the  children  of  the  Highest ;  and,  precisely  because  you  expected  no 
reward   at  all,  verily  your  reward  shall  be  great.     There  is  a  striking  legend  of 
iaintly  old  Bishop  Ivo,  who  walked  with  God,  and  saw  through  the  self-seeking 
religionists  of  his  time,  and  longed  for  larger  faith.  He  describes  himseli  as  meeting 
one  day,  a  figure  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  of  a  sad,  earnest  aspect,  like  some 
prophetess  of  God,  who  carried  a  vessel  of  fire  in  one  hand,  and  of  water  in  the 
other.     He  asked  her  what  these  things  were  for.     She  answered,  the  fire  is  to 
bum  np  Paradise,  the  water  is  to  quench  Hell — that  men  may  henceforth  serve  their 
Maker,  not  from  the  selfish  hope  of  the  one,  nor  from  the  selfish  fear  of  the  other, 
but  for  love  of  Himself  alone.     God  does  not  consume  paradise,  nor  quench  hell. 
He  keeps  the  fountains  of  sweet  and  living  waters  leaping  and  flowing  in  the  one ; 
He  keeps  the  awful  fires  of  the  other  burning.     But  surely  all  this  promise  and 
penalty  do  not  mean  that  we  are  to  stop  in  their  discipline,  and  calculate  the  price 
of  our  obedience.     Oh,  no !  not  while  the  glorious  voice  of  the  apostle  rings  out 
over  the  centuries :  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  me ;  I  count  all  things  loss 
for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Him."     Not  while  the  Saviour  says  to  the 
aspiring  heart  of  the  world,  '*  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  per- 
fect; "  hoping  for  nothing  again.     {Bishop  Huntingdon.)        The  thought  of  reward 
does  not  enter  into  the  higher  aspects  of  service : — The  reward  is  in  doing  them ; 
in  the  inevitable  feeling  that  goes  along  with  them,  far  enough  from  being  set  about 
as  the  end,  but  interwoven  with  them  by  the  gracious  bounty  that  ever  surprises 
faithful  souls.     With  all  these  true  acts  and  emotions  of  the  really  spiritually- 
minded  man,  it  is  precisely  as  it  is  with  any  of  those  acts  of  common  life  that  the 
heart  goes  most  into.     You  cannot  speak  of  any  rewards  for  the  love  that  is  the 
bond  of  a  true  maniage,  without  insulting  those  to  whom  yea  speak.     You  cannot 
connect  the  notion  of  compensation,  pay,  with  the  affection  that  twines  a  child's 
arms  about  the  mother's  neck,  or  that  keeps  her  waiting  in  vigils  that  outwatch 
the  patient  stars,  over  the  child's  pain  or  sin,  without  profaning  that  affection. 
You  cannot  associate  the  prospect  of  a  reward  with  the  heroic  humanity  which 
keejis  the  friendly  vessels  hanging  close,  many  days  and  nights,  in  the  frightful 
companionship  of  a  common  peril,  to  take  off  the  passengers  of  the  imperilled  and 
sinking   ship ;    nor  with   any   generous    and   brave    rescue  or   sacrifice.      Now, 
to  any  spiritual  estimate,  the  services  of  daily  piety  are  as  full  of  the  charm  and 
fascination  and  glory  of  self-forgetting  devotion  as  any  of  these.     Christ  is  nearei 
than  wife  or  husband.     The  Father  in  heaven  is  more  real,  and  infinitely  holiei 
and  tenderer,  than  the  human  m  ther.     All  fellow-souls  in  moral  misery  or  sin 
need  help  more  urgently  than  the  shipwrecked  company.     And  so,  if  our  piety  it 
real,  like  Christ's  piety,  it  must  be  just  as  self-oblivious,  as  hearty,  as  spontaneotu 
and  free,  as  that.     Aiid  then  it  w  11  leave  a  more  unspeakable,  glorious,  infinite 
reward.    {Ibid.)      Cheerfulness  in    ork  : — "  Are  you  not  wearying  for  the  heavenly 
•<8t?"  said  Whitefield  to  an  old  minister.      "No,  certainly  not!"  he  replied. 


CHAT.  TX.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  Ul 

"Why  not?"  was  the  surprised  rejoinder.  "  Why,  my  good  brother,"  said  the 
Bgftd  saint,  •'  if  you  were  to  send  your  servant  into  the  fields  to  do  a  certain  portion 
of  work  for  you,  and  promised  to  give  him  rest  and  refreshment  in  the  evening, 
what  would  you  say  if  you  found  him  languid  and  discontented  in  the  middle  of  the 
day,  and  murmuring,  •  Would  to  God  it  were  evening  '  ?  Would  you  not  bid  him 
be  up  and  doing,  and  finish  his  work,  and  then  go  home  and  enjoy  the  promised 
rest  ?  Just  so  does  God  require  of  you  and  me,  that,  instead  of  looking  for  Saturday 
night,  we  do  our  day's  work  in  the  day."  The  eleventh  hour: — I.  The  time 
mentioned  may  represent  an  advanced  period  of  human  life.  II.  Men  are  to  be 
found  in  this  period,  inattentive  to  the  concerns  of  true  religion.  III.  They  who 
are  foaud  inatfentive  in  this  period,  are  involved  in  peculiar  perils.  Hardness  of 
heart,  &o.  IV.  Divine  grace  sometimes  displays  itself,  by  making  this  period  to  be 
one  of  true  and  saving  conversion.  (•/.  Parsons.)  Conversion  postponed  to  old 
age : — Many  men  put  off  their  conversion,  and  at  twenty  send  religion  afore  them 
to  thirty  ;  then  post  it  off  to  forty,  and  yet  not  pleased  to  overtake  it,  they  promise 
it  entertainment  at  threescore.  At  last  death  comes,  and  he  allows  not  one  hour. 
In  youth  men  resolve  to  afford  themselves  the  time  of  age  to  serve  God ;  in  age  they 
shulSe  it  off  to  sickness ;  when  sickness  comes,  care  lo  dispose  their  goods,  lothnesa 
to  die,  hope  to  escape,  martyrs  that  good  thought,  and  their  resolution  still  keeps 
before  them.  If  we  have  but  the  lease  of  a  farm  for  one-and-twenty  years,  we  make 
use  of  the  time,  and  gather  profit.  But  in  this  precious  farm  of  time  we  are  so  bad 
husbands  that  oar  lease  comes  out  before  we  are  one  pennyworth  of  grace  the  richer 
by  it.    (T.  Adams.) 

Ver.  6.  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  Idle  T — Spiritual  idlenesi : — I.  Thb  kvo, 

OKNSDEED.  Spiritual  idleness.  Often  accompanied  vrith  great  secular  activity,  and 
a  flaming  profession.  Consists  in  neglect — of  hfe's  mission ;  the  soul's  salvation 
and  sanctification  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13) ;  works  for  the  spiritual  benefit  of  others — 
Beeking  in  order  to  save  them  that  are  lost  (1  Cor.  x.  24).  This  neglect  is  highly 
criminal.  1.  As  injurious  to  one's  self.  Deteriorates  the  moral  nature.  2.  As 
Injurious  to  others.  3.  As  disobedience  to  the  Divine  summons,  "  Go  work,"  &o. 
Christ  came  to  do  the  Father's  will,  and  summons  us  to  follow  Him.     II.  Thb 

CONTINUANCE    AND    AQQBAVATION    OF   THE    EVIL.         "  All     the    day    idle,"    &Q.        Youth, 

nsanhc-od,  age.  The  reproach  increases  with  the  passing  months  and  years.  1. 
When  so  much  work  for  yourself  and  others  ought  to  have  been  done.  2.  When 
others  have  been  so  long  labouring.  3.  When  there  has  been  so  much  time  and 
opportunity — "eleventh  hour" — "market  place."  4.  When  the  working  day  ia 
drawing  to  a  close.  III.  The  excuses  offered  for  the  evU.  "  Why  stand  ye?" 
asks  the  Master,  and  what  are  the  usual  rephes  ? — 1.  We  have  not  been  invited  by 
the  minister,  &c.  Don't  wait  for  such  invitations — offer  your  services — "  I  must 
•work,"  &c.  2.  We  lack  the  necessary  qualifications,  &c.  3.  We  lack  opportunity, 
&o.  4.  We  give  money,  &c.  This  will  not  be  accepted  by  the  Master  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  personal  service.  You  cannot  do  this  work  by  proxy.  Work  for  Christ 
ig  personal,  and  cannot  be  delegated  to  others,  &c.  IV.  The  motives  to  abandon 
the  evil.  1.  The  urgency  of  the  work.  2.  The  activity  of  Satan  and  his  emissaries. 
8.  The  honour  and  pleasure  of  active  service.  Work  in  which  the  Son  of  Man  was 
sraployed  when  on  earth.  No  less  happy  than  honourable.  4.  The  assurance  of 
Divine  help.  May  be  difficulties  you  fear  to  meet,  but  God  will  strengthen  and 
direct,  &c.  5.  The  brevity  of  Ufe's  golden  opportunity.  Difficulty  increases  with 
delay.  Yon  will  get  accustomed  to  idleness  and  it  will  become  chronic.  Whether 
early  or  late  in  the  day,  begin  Now.  6.  The  promise  of  reward.  Present ;  future — 
in  and  for.  "  Whatsoever  is  right  th^t  shall  ye  receive."  "  They  that  turn,"  &o. 
{Alfred  Tucker.)  Standing  idle: — The  text  contains — I.  An  impucation — That 
there  is  work  to  be  done.  1.  Knowledge  to  acquire — of  God,  self,  <&o.  8.  Blessing, 
to  securt  Pardon,  <feo.  3.  Duties  to  discharge.  Notwithstanding,  many  are  idle. 
II.  An  expostulation.  Why  stand  ye  who  are  active,  rational,  responsible, 
rewardable  creatures?  Why  stand  ye  here  idle  ?  Here  on  a  theatre  of  action.  In 
this  the  day  of  your  probation.  In  this  state  of  uncertainty.  Why  stand  ye  f 
Standing  not  working.  HI,  An  inquiby?  "Why?"  Some  are  idle  because  they 
have  no  work.  Some  do  not  hke  the  master.  Some  do  not  love  the  work.  Some 
imagine  themselves  unable  to  work.  Some  do  not  like  the  wages.  Some  no  man 
hath  hired.  Does  not  the  Bible,  memory,  and  conscience  supply  instances  in  which 
He  would  have  hired  yon,  but  you  were  unwUling  to  have  your  old  Master  and 
desert  His  work,  (&c.    {W.  Atherton.)        Idlenesi  deteriorates  th4  moral  nature :— 


451  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

Here  lies  what  ^as  once  a  bar  of  iron,  but  the  joint  action  of  air  and  water  has 
reduced  it  to  a  bar  of  rust.  It  has  now  no  strength,  and  consequently  no  value. 
To  how  many  varied  and  useful  purposes  it  might  have  been  put  some  years  ago 
and  in  its  work  have  found  its  strength,  beauty,  and  preservation ;  but  it  is  too  lat« 
now ;  it  will  soon  be  blended  with  the  earth  upon  which  it  passively  lies,  a  striking 
emblem  of  the  man  who  through  sloth  and  love  of  ease  refuses  to  face  the  hammer 
and  anvil  of  active  life  and  honest  work  ;  who  flies  from  the  purifying  fire  of  life's 
adversities,  and  who  will  fight  no  battle  for  truth  and  the  higher  interests  of  hia 
BOuL  {Anon.)  Lazy  Chrutiatu : — A  lazy  Christian  shall  always  want  four 
things,  viz.,  comfort,  content,  confidence,  and  assurance.  God  hath  made  a 
separation  between  joy  and  idleness,  between  assurance  and  laziness,  and  therefore 
it  is  impossible  for  thee  to  bring  these  together.  (T.  Brooks.)  A  busy  man  is 
troubled  but  with  one  devil,  but  the  idle  man  with  a  thousand.  (A7ion.)  Idle- 
ness a  sin : — Idleness  is  a  sin,  for  it  involves  disobedience  to  Christ's  command, 
•'  Go  into  My  vineyard  and  work."  It  is  a  sin,  for  it  shows  an  utter  want  of 
sympathy  with  the  Master,  "who  went  about  doing  good,"  and  who  expected  His 
followers  "  to  do  good  to  all  as  they  have  opportunity."  It  is  a  sin,  lor  it  indicates 
a  selfish  love  of  ease ;  and  a  Divine  woe  is  pronounced  on  all  who  are  at  "  ease  in 
Zion."  It  is  a  sin,  for  it  reveals  a  callous  heart,  insensible  to  the  woes  of  a  lost 
world.  Every  idler  in  the  church  is  a  sinner,  for  to  him  that  '*  knoweth  to  do  good 
and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."  Alasl  how  many  sinners  are  found  in  Zion, 
and  what  must  be  their  doom  when  the  Master  cometh  to  judge  the  unfaithful 
servants  who  have  hid  their  talent  in  place  of  using  it  1  (W.  Durant.)  Busy 
about  nothing  : — The  bee  and  the  butterfly  are  both  busy  creatures ;  there  is  an 
activity  that  ends  in  nothing ;  there  are  lives  that  store  no  honey.  Working  and 
rusting : — Two  ploughshares  were  once  made  by  the  same  blacksmith,  in  the  same 
smithy,  from  the  same  kind  of  iron,  and  they  were  bought  by  the  same  farmer.  Ha 
took  them  home ;  one  he  took  into  instant  employment,  but  he  left  the  othei 
unemployed  for  twelve  months  in  a  barn,  till  the  poor  thing  got  covered  with  rust  : 
at  last  the  farmer  had  occasion  for  another  ploughshare,  so  he  drew  it  forth  from 
its  laziness  and  obscurity,  and  sent  it  into  the  field,  where  it  met  its  old  fellow- 
ploughshare.  •*  Why,"  said  the  lazy  one,  ♦'  what  has  kept  you  so  bright?  I  declare 
I  am  quite  ashamed  to  be  seen."  "Ah I  "said  the  bright  ploughshare,  "it  is 
labour  and  exercise  that  has  kept  me  bright.  Your  rest  and  idleness  has  been 
injurious  to  you ;  but  when  you  have  been  driven  a  few  times  through  the  earth, 
you  will  lose  your  rust  and  become  beautiful  and  bright  too."  (Blitid  Amos.) 
Busy  idleness  : — There  is  such  a  thing  as  laborious  idleness.  Busy  ?  So  wag  the 
shepherd  on  the  Alps,  mentioned  by  Dugald  Stewart,  who  spent  fifteen  years  of 
hfe  learning  to  balance  a  pole  on  his  chin  :  and  the  philosopher  sagely  remarks 
how  much  good,  had  they  been  directed  to  a  noble  object,  this  diligence  and  per- 
severance would  have  accomplished.  Busy  f  So  have  I  seen  the  miller's  wheel, 
which  went  round  and  round :  but  idly,  grinding  no  corn.  Busy  ?  So,  in  a  way, 
was  the  Russian  who,  facing  the  winter's  cold,  nor  regarding  the  cost  of  massive 
slabs  brought  at  great  labour  from  frozen  lake  and  river,  built  him  an  icy  palace, 
within  whose  glittering,  translucent  walls,  wrapped  in  furs  and  shining  in  jewels, 
rank  and  beauty  held  their  revelry,  and  the  bowl  and  the  laugh  and  the  song  went 
round.  But  with  soft  breath,  and  other  music,  and  opening  buds,  spring  returned  ; 
and  then  before  the  eyes  that  had  gazed  with  wonder  on  the  crystal  walls  of  that 
fairy  palace  as  they  gleamed  by  night  with  a  thousand  lights,  or  titvshed  with  the 
radiance  of  gems  in  the  bright  sunshine,  it  dissolved,  nor  left  '*  a  rack  behind ;  " 
its  pleasures,  "vanity;  "  its  expense,  "  vexation  of  spirit."  Busy?  So,  in  a  way, 
are  the  children  who,  when  the  tide  is  at  the  ebb,  with  merry  laughter  and  rosy 
cheeks  and  nimble  hands  build  a  castle  of  the  moist  sea  sand — the  thoughtless 
urchins,  types  of  lovers  of  pleasure  and  of  the  world  so  intent  on  their  work  as  not 
to  see  how  the  treacherous,  silent  tide  has  crept  around  them,  not  merely  to  sap 
and  undermine,  and  with  one  rude  blow  of  her  billow  demoUsh  the  work  of  their 
hands,  but  to  cut  off  their  retreat  to  the  distant  shore,  and  drown  their  frantio 
screams  and  cries  for  help  in  the  roar  of  its  remorseless  waves.  From  a  death-bed, 
where  all  he  toiled  and  sinned  and  sorrowed  for  is  slipping  from  his  grasp,  fading 
from  his  view,  such  will  his  life  seem  to  the  busiest  worldling  ;  he  spends  hia 
strength  for  naught,  and  his  labour  for  that  which  profiteth  not.  With  an  ey« 
that  pities  because  it  foresees  our  miserable  doom,  God  calls  us  from  such  busy 
trifling,  from  a  life  of  laborious  idleness,  to  a  service  which  is  as  pleasant  as  it  is 
profitable,  as  graceful  as  it  is  dutiful,  saying,  Work  oat  your  salvation — Work  whila 


CHAP.  xx.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  45S 

it  is  called  to-day,  seeing  that  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work.  (Dr. 
Guthrie.)  Standing  idle: — Have  you  never  thought  with  extreme  sadness  of  the 
many  men  and  women  upon  our  earth  whose  lives  are  useless  f  Have  you  never 
reflected  upon  the  millions  of  people  who  waste  in  nothingness  their  thoughts, 
affections,  energies,  all  their  powers,  which  frivolity  dissipates  as  the  sand  of  the 
desert  absorbs  the  water  which  is  sent  upon  it  from  the  sky  ?  These  beings  pass 
onward,  without  even  asking  themselves  toward  what  end  they  journey,  or  for 
what  reason  they  were  placed  here  below.  {Eugene  Bersier.)  Activity  out  of 
Christ  vain : — All  activity  out  of  Christ,  all  labour  that  is  not  labour  in  His  Church, 
is  in  His  sight  a  "  standing  idle."  (Archbishop  Trench.)  Proverbs  on  idleness  : — 
Evil  thoughts  intrude  in  an  unemployed  mind  as  naturally  as  worms  are  generated 
in  a  stagnant  pool.  No  pains,  no  gains.  No  sweat,  no  sweet.  No  mill,  no  meal. 
An  idle  brain  is  the  devil's  workshop.  He  that  would  eat  the  kernel,  must  crack 
the  nut.  Idleness  unprofitable : — It  would  be  thought  a  hard  government  that 
should  tax  its  people  one-tenth  part  of  their  time,  to  be  employed  in  its  service ; 
but  idleness  taxes  many  of  us  much  more.  Sloth,  by  bringing  on  disease,  abso> 
lutely  shortens  life.  Sloth,  like  rust,  consumes  faster  than  labour  wears  ;  while  the 
used  key  is  always  bright.  How  much  more  time  than  is  necessary  do  we  spend  in 
sleep,  forgetting  that  the  sleeping  fox  catches  no  poultry,  and  there  will  be  sleeping 
enough  in  the  gravel  (Franklin.)  Work  for  all  m  God's  vineyard: — A  good 
minister,  now  in  heaven,  once  preached  to  his  congregation  a  powerful  sermon, 
founded  upon  the  words,  "  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?  "  The  sermon  did 
good  to  many,  among  whom  was  a  lady  who  went  to  the  minister  the  next  day, 
and  said,  "  Doctor,  I  want  a  spade."  We  should  be  happy  to  put  spades  into  the 
hands  of  all  our  idle  friends.  There  are  Sunday-school  spades.  Mission-room 
spades,  Tract-distribution  spades,  Sick-visitation  spades,  &c.,  <fcc.  Who  will  apply 
for  them  ?  Idleneun : — Idleness  was  one  of  the  sins  of  Sodom,  and  it  is  often  the 
forerunner  of  temporal  and  eternal  ruin.  No  evil  is  more  common,  though  none  is 
more  dangerous.  I.  To  wbom  the  charge  of  idleness  is  applicable.  1.  It  will  in  a 
certain  sense  apply  to  all  unconverted  men,  who  with  respect  to  the  highest  interests 
of  life,  may  be  said  to  be  always  idle.  a.  They  are  content  to  do  nothing  at  all  for 
God  ;  nothing  that  He  approves,  nothing  that  He  will  accept,  b.  They  do  nothing 
for  their  own  souls,  any  more  than  for  the  glory  of  God.  c.  They  do  nothing  for 
their  generation,  according  to  the  will  of  God.  d.  They  do  nothing  to  any  good 
purpose,  or  that  will  turn  to  account  another  day.  2  It  will  apply  in  too  many 
instances,  even  to  Christians  themselves,  of  whom  there  are  but  few  who  can  be 
applauded  for  their  diligence  and  fidehty.  II.  Point  out  the  inexcusableness  of 
such  conduct.  1.  The  talents  committed  to  our  trust  require  to  be  occupied, 
and  must  be  finally  accounted  for.  2.  The  want  of  a  capacity  to  labour  in  the 
Lord's  vineyard  cannot  be  pleaded  with  success.  3.  We  are  placed  in  a  situation 
where  our  services  are  expected  and  required.  4.  We  have  lost  too  much  time 
already.  (B.  Beddome.)  Labourers:  not  loiterers. —  Jacob  saw  the  angels, 
some  ascending,  others  descending,  but  none  standing  still.  God  hath  made 
Behemoth  to  play  in  the  water,  not  so  men  ;  they  must  be  doing,  that  will 
keep  in  with  God.  (John  Trapp.)  The  inexcusable  idleness: — I.  Whyf  The 
vineyard  is  so  spacious.  II.  The  reward  is  so  liberal.  III.  The  Master  is  so 
kind.  IV.  The  hour  of  working  is  so  short.  (J.  J.  Van  Osberzee,  D.D.) 
Satan'g  work  and  wages: — While  the  Lord  of  heaven  is  employing  various 
means  and  instruments  to  engage  labourers  into  His  vineyard,  Satan  is  going 
through  the  earth,  with  the  pleasures  of  sin  in  one  hand,  and  the  allurements 
of  the  world  in  the  other,  to  engage  poor  deluded  souls  into  his  thorny  wilder- 
ness. Would  yon  startle  if  we  could  now  summon  forward  the  Prince  of  Hell, 
and  Isay,  "  Well,  Devil,  and  what  wilt  thou  give?"  Listen.  Hear  that  hoarse 
murmur  from  the  pit  :  "  I  will  find  them  work  that  they  love.  It  shall  please 
their  senses,  gratify  their  appetites,  indulge  their  passions,  and  delight  their  grossly 
carnal  hearts.  Every  one  shall  find  the  pleasure  for  which  he  lusts,  his  own 
besetting  sin ;  the  swine  shall  have  husks  and  mire."  "  And  what  more T"  "I 
will  exempt  them  from  the  persecutions  of  religion,  the  contempt  of  the  world,  the 
reproach  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  from  the  irksome  discharge  of  duty,  and  the  gloomy 
services  of  piety."  "  Go  on.  What  more  ?  "  "I  will  keep  them  in  the  fashion  ; 
find  them  abundance  of  associates:  for  wide  is  my  gate,  broad  is  my  way,  and 
many  there  are  that  enter  therein."  "  But  what  will  be  their  food  ?  "  "  The  chafl 
of  worldly  pleasure  and  deceitfulness  of  sin,  producing  disappointment  and  dis- 
latisfaotion."    "  What  their  drink  ?  "    "  The  gall  of  bitter  reflections,  tormenting 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  jx. 

passions,  reproaches  of  reason,  and  dread  anticipations."  "  Where  do  tliey  rest  ?  " 
"  Nowhere.  Like  a  troubled  Bea,  they  cannot  rest.  They  lie  down  in  sorrow." 
"  But  what  wages,  Devil,  wilt  thou  give  ?  "  "  Darkness,  outer-darkness,  blacknesa 
of  darkness."  A  bad  master,  hard  disgraceful  work,  and  tremendous  wages  I  Why 
stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle?  Set  to  work.  Have  you  sinned?  now  repent. 
Are  you  in  the  world?  come  out  and  be  separate.  Have  you  time?  use  it. 
Powsrs  ?  employ  them.  A  Bible  ?  read  it.  A  throne  of  grace  T  fall  down  before  it. 
Is  there  a  God  ?  serve  Him.  A  Saviour?  believe  in  him.  (W.  Atherton.)  Divint 
sovereignty  : — Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own  ?  We  shall 
divide  God's  gifts  into  five  classes : — I.  Gifts  Temporal.  What  a  difference  in  men 
personally  ;  one  is  born  like  Saul,  head  and  shoulders  taller  than  the  rest ;  another 
like  Zaccheus.  So  in  mental  gifts;  what  a  difference  exists  I  The  differences 
of  men's  conditions  in  this  world.  God  is  ruler  and  shall  He  not  do  as  He  will 
with  His  own.  Bless  God  that  thou  hast  more  than  others,  and  thank  Him  also 
that  He  has  given  thee  less  than  others  ;  for  th>u  hast  a  higher  burden.  II.  Gifts 
Saving.  1.  The  fallen  angels  not  redeemed.  2.  Note,  again,  God  chose  the 
Israelitish  race  and  left  the  Gentiles  for  years  in  darkness.  3.  Why  is  it  that  God 
has  sent  His  word  to  us,  while  a  multitude  of  people  are  still  without  it.  4.  Why 
do  some  listen  to  the  truth  and  others  not.  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord  alone.  III, 
Gifts  Honoobable.  1.  One  man  hath  the  gift  of  knowledge,  another  bath  littlo. 
2.  Office.  3.  Utterance.  IV.  Gifts  of  usbfdlness.  V.  Gifts  comfobtablx. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ter.  16.  So  the  la«t  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last. — TJie  elect  Christians : — 
It  is  not  a  question  of  calling,  but  of  moving  from  second  to  first  place,  or  falling 
back  from  first  to  second  place.  There  is  a  disparity  between  those  who  are  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  This  seen  in  Bible  history.  There  is  a  difference  between 
Abraham  and  Lot.  Look  at  several  passages  of  Scripture.  In  Exodns  xx.  4,  we  read 
that  Pharaoh's  chosen  captains  were  drowned  in  the  Eed  Sea.  This  does  not  mean 
that  tbey  were  favoured  captain-i,  but  that  they  had  distinguished  themselves  by  their 
bravery  (Judges  xx.  15, 16).  Of  the  26,000  Benjaminites  who  drew  the  sword,  there 
were  700  chosen  men,  left-handed.  All  the  26,000  men  called  to  be  soldiers,  but 
there  were  700  men  who,  in  addition  to  the  first  calling,  were  called  again  as  a  chosen 
band,  not  independent  of  any  fitness  in  themselves,  but  because  there  was  fitnesa 
in  them — they  could  sling  a  stone  at  a  hair  and  not  miss.  (G.  F.  Pentecost.) 
Nature's  chosen  are  few  : — Before  we  go  to  the  Scriptures  let  us  look  at  soma 
analof-'ies  around  us.  In  the  White  Mountains  there  are  many  peaks,  but  there  ia 
one  which  towers  above  the  others.  It  is  the  choice,  the  elect  peak.  There  are 
many  organists  in  the  world,  but  here  and  there  is  one  who  has  such  mastery  over 
the  instrument  that  all  who  hear  him  recognize  him  as  a  choice  organist.  All  the 
others  are  organists  ;  but  here  we  have  the  best,  the  choice  pla.-  era.  There  are  many 
business-men,  but  now  and  then  we  see  one  who,  by  singleness  of  aim,  by  untiring 
devotion  to  his  affairs,  rises  above  all  other  business-men.  He  is  the  chosen  one 
from  among  all.  In  the  orchard  are  many  apples.  Some  are  full,  rounded,  beautiful 
in  colour.  These  are  the  ones  that  find  their  way,  by  wonderful  unanimity,  to  the  top 
of  the  barrel  at  Washington  Market ;  but  the  gnarled,  worm-eaten,  sour  apple  is  an 
apple  just  as  much  as  the  pippin  and  bellfiower.  These  latter  are  among  apples  the 
chosen  ones.  I  think  it  will  be  found  eventually  that  all  Christians  are  the  called 
ones,  and  that  the  elect  are  tliose  who  from  among  Christians  are  selected  for  the 
higher  pomtions  in  the  kingdum  of  grace.  (Ibid.)  Order  reversed  : — Sir  Thomas 
Browne,  in  his  "  Christian  Morals,"  bids  himself  look  contentedly  upon  the  scattered 
differences  of  things,  and  not  expect  equality  in  lustre,  dignity,  or  perfection,  in 
regions  or  persons  here  below,  where  large  numbers  must  be  content  to  staud  like 
lacteus  or  nebulous  stars,  little  taken  notice  of,  or  dim  in  their  generations.  All 
which,  he  goes  on  to  say,  may  be  contentedly  allowable  in  the  affairs  and  ends  of 
this  world,  and  in  suspension  unto  what  will  be  in  the  order  of  things  hereafter,  and 
the  new  system  of  mankind  which  will  be  in  the  world  to  come  ;  when  "  the  last 
may  be  tlie  first,  and  the  first  the  last ;  when  Lazarus  may  sit  above  Cajsar,  and  the 
just  obscure  on  emth  shall  shine  like  the  sun  in  heaven,  when  personations  shall 
oease,  and  histrionism  of  happiness  be  over ;  when  reality  shall  rule,  and  all 
shall  be  as  they  shall  be  for  ever."  Divine  is  the  voice,  as  divine  the  strain,  whioli 
Dante  hears  and  records  in  "  II  Paradiso." 

•  But  lo  I  of  those 
Who  call,  '  Christ.  Christ,'  there  shall  be  many  fonnd. 


CHAF.  XX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  455 

In  judgment,  farther  off  from  Him  by  far, 

Tiiau  such  to  whom  His  name  was  never  known." 

Leslie,  the  painter,  tells  of  his  hearing  the  preference  expressed  by  Eogers  fof 
seats  in  churches  without  pews,  opposed  by  a  gentleman  who  preferred  pews,  and 
said,  "  If  there  were  seats  only,  I  might  find  myself  sitting  by  my  coachman." 
Rogers  replied,  "  And  perhaps  you  may  be  glad  to  find  yourself  beside  him  in  the 
next  world."  (F.  Jacox.)  The  reversal  of  human  judgment : — Such  is  the  solemn 
sentence  which  Scripture  has  inscribed  on  the  curtain  which  hangs  down  before  the 
judgment  seat.  The  secrets  of  the  txibuual  are  guarded,  and  yet  a  finger  points 
•which  seems  to  say,  "Beyond,  in  this  direction,  behind  this  veil,  things  are 
dirferent  from  what  you  will  have  looked  for."  Suppose,  e.g.,  any  supernatural 
judge  should  appear  in  the  world  now,  and  it  is  evident  that  the  scene  he  would 
create  would  be  one  to  startle  us  ;  we  should  not  soon  be  used  to  it ;  it  would  look 
strange ;  it  would  shock  and  appal ;  and  that  from  no  other  cause  than  simply  ita 
reductions ;  that  it  presented  characters  stripped  bare,  denuded  of  what  waa 
irrelevant  to  goodness,  and  only  with  their  moral  substance  left.  The  judge  would 
take  no  cognisance  of  a  rich  imagination,  power  of  language,  poetical  gifts,  and 
the  like,  in  themselves,  as  parts  of  goodness,  any  more  than  he  would  of  riches  and 
prosperity ;  and  the  moral  residuum  left  would  appear  perhaps  a  bare  result.  The 
first  look  of  Divine  justice  would  strike  ns  as  injustice ;  it  would  be  too  pure  a 
justice  for  us;  we  should  be  long  in  reconciling  ourselves  to  it.  Justice  would 
appear,  like  the  painter's  gaunt  skeleton  of  emblematic  meaning,  to  be  stalking 
through  the  world,  smiting  with  attenuation  luxuriating  forms  of  virtue.  Forms, 
changed  from  what  we  knew,  would  meet  us,  strange  unaccustomed  foims,  and  we 
should  have  to  ask  them  who  they  were :  "  You  were  flourishing  but  a  short  while 
ago,  what  has  happened  to  you  now  ?  "  And  the  answer,  if  it  spoke  the  truth, 
would  be — "  Nothing,  except  that  now,  much  which  lately  counted  as  goodness, 
counts  as  such  no  longer  ;  we  are  tried  by  a  new  moral  measure,  out  of  which  we 
issue  different  men  ;  gifts  which  have  figured  as  goodness  remain  as  gifts,  but  cease 
to  be  goodness."  Thus  would  the  large  sweep  made  of  human  canonisations  act 
like  blight  or  volcanic  fire  upon  some  rich  landscape,  converting  the  luxury  of  nature 
into  a  dried-up  scene  of  bare  stems  and  scorched  vegetation.  (J.  B.  Mozeley,  D.D.) 
Calling  and  election: — Noah  preached  the  coming  flood  to  the  old  world  for  a 
hundred  years  ;  but  only  eight  souls  were  saved  thereby.  To  the  cities  of  the  plain. 
Lot  preached  ;  but  only  three  souls  were  chosen  from  them.  Six  hundred  thousand 
men,  besides  women  and  children,  passed  through  the  Eed  Sea ;  but  only  two 
entered  the  promised  land.  Gideon  went  to  fight  the  Midianites  with  thirty-two 
thousand  men  ;  but  only  three  hundred  were  allowed  to  participate  in  the  victory. 
These  are  types  of  the  "  many  called,  but  few  chosen."  Called  .  .  .  chosen: — The 
expression  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  manner  in  which  the  ancients  selected  men 
for  recruiting  their  armies.  The  honour  of  being  chosen  was  esteemed  the  reward 
of  superiority  ;  and,  among  the  Romans,  was  as  follows : — The  consuls  summoned 
to  the  capital,  or  the  Campus  Martins,  all  citizens  capable  of  beariugarms,  between 
the  ages  of  seventeen  and  forty-five.  They  drew  up  by  tribes,  and  lots  were  drawn 
to  determine  in  what  order  every  tribe  should  present  its  soldiers.  That  which  was 
the  first  order  chose  the  first  four  citizens  who  were  judged  the  most  proper  to 
serve  in  the  war ;  and  the  six  tribunes  who  commanded  the  first  legion  selected  the 
one  of  these  four  whom  they  liked  best.  The  tribunes  of  the  second  and  third 
legions  likewise  made  their  choice  one  after  another ;  and  he  who  remained  entered 
into  the  fourth  legion.  A  new  tribe  presented  other  four  soldiers,  and  the  second 
legion  cho^'(■  four.  The  third  and  fourth  legions  had  the  same  advantage  in  their 
turns.  In  this  manner  each  tribe  successively  appointed  four  soldiers,  till  the 
legions  were  complete.  They  next  proceeded  to  the  creation  of  subaltern  officers, 
whom  the  tribunes  chose  from  among  the  soldiers  of  the  greatest  reputation.  When 
the  legions  were  thus  completed,  the  citizens  who  had  been  called,  but  not  cliosetit 
returned  to  their  respective  employments ,  and  served  their  country  in  other  capacities. 
(Townsend.)  L  That  God  in  communicating  His  benefits  to  men,  acts  in  a  sove- 
reign manner,  making  the  last  first,  and  the  first  last.  II.  That  in  bestowing  His 
rewards  on  mankind,  God  does  not  render  nnto  men  according  to  the  amount  of  the 
means  they  participate,  but  the  use  they  make  of  them.  IH.  That  the  bestowment 
of  rewards  on  this  principle  is  most  expressive  of  the  goodness  and  justice  of  God. 
{Sketches.)  Conversation  between  St.  Anthony  and  the  cobbler : — We  [Bishop  Lati- 
mer]  read  a  pretty  story  of  St.  Anthony,  wh« ,  being  in  the  wilderness,  led  there  • 


458  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  xx. 

very  hard  and  straight  life,  insomnch  that  none  at  that  time  did  the  like  ;  to  whom 
came  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  "  Anthony,  thou  art  not  so  perfect  as  is  a  cobbler 
that  dwelleth  at  Alexandria."  Anthony,  hearing  this,  rose  up  forthwith,  and  took 
his  staff,  and  went  till  he  came  to  Alexandria,  where  he  found  the  cobbler.  The 
cobbler  was  astonished  to  see  so  reverend  a  father  come  to  his  house.  Then  Anthony 
said  unto  him,  "  Come,  and  tell  me  thy  whole  conversation,  and  how  thou  speudest 
thy  time  ?  "  "  Sir,"  said  the  cobbler,  ••  as  for  me,  good  works  have  I  none,  for  my 
life  is  but  simple  and  slender.  I  am  but  a  poor  cobbler.  In  the  morning,  when  I 
rise,  I  pray  for  the  whole  city  wherein  I  dwell,  especially  for  all  such  neighbours  and 
poor  friends  as  I  have;  after  I  set  me  at  my  laboTir,  where  I  spend  the  whole  day 
in  getting  my  living ;  and  I  keep  me  from  all  falsehood,  for  I  hate  nothing  so  much 
as  I  do  deceitfulness ;  wherefore,  whan  I  make  to  any  man  a  promise,  I  keep  it  and 
perform  it  truly.  And  thus  I  spend  my  time  poorly  with  my  wife  and  children, 
whom  I  teach  and  instruct,  as  far  as  my  wit  will  serve  me,  to  fear  and  dread  God. 
And  tliis  is  the  sum  of  my  simple  hfe."  In  this  story  you  see  how  God  loveth 
those  that  follow  their  vocation,  and  hve  uprightly,  without  any  falsehood  in  their 
dealing.  Anthony  was  a  great  holy  man ;  yet  this  cobbler  was  as  much  esteemed 
before  God  as  he. 

Ver.  17.  And  Jesua  going  up  to  Jerusalem  took  the  twelve  disciples  apart  In 
the  'vray. — A  Palm  Sunday  discourse  : — Year  by  year  let  us  go  up  to  Jerusalem  on 
the  Palm  Sunday  with  Christ.  1.  Some  go  up  without  any  special  interest.  2. 
Others  are  moved  by  curiosity.  3.  There  are  those  who  hate  Him  and  His  servants. 
4^  Some  who  believe  in  Christ  but  fear  the  world.  5.  Some  are  in  dark  despair 
thinking  that  the  cause  of  religion  is  about  to  perish  because  of  organized  opposi- 
tion. 6.  Others,  a  faithful  few,  hke  the  small  group  around  the  cross,  (J/.  Dix, 
D.D.)  Christ  coming  to  Jerusalem  : — What  an  approach  !  The  cities  are  the 
strongholds  of  the  world — Babylon — Nineveh — Tyre,  the  centre  of  commerce.  To 
none  of  these  could  our  God  have  come  expecting  a  joyous  reception.  They  were 
of  the  world.  But  He  came  to  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  God,  the  centre  of  true 
religion  ;  a  beautiful  city  for  situation,  renowned  for  its  great  age  and  greater 
fiistory.  It  was  a  consecrated  city,  above  whose  roofs  arose,  day  by  day,  clouds  of 
t^moke  from  the  morning  and  evening  sacrifice  ;  an  awful  city,  in  which  God  had, 
•  rom  time  to  time,  appeared.  It  held  for  awhile  the  place  of  the  throne  of  the 
-Iving  God !  It  is  to  this  city  Jesus  approaches.  Surely  to  Him  the  gates  will 
.-pen  and  He  will  be  greeted  with  songs  of  joy.  (Ihid.)  Goinq  up  to  Jerusalem : — 
Vho  shall  hereafter  "  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  enter  in  through  the  gates 
tttto  the  city  "  (Psa,  xxiv.  3  and  Eev.  xxii.  14).  Those  whose  conduct  shows  that 
they  are  going  up  to  Jerusalem.  This  may  be  said  to  imply — I.  A  growth  and  an 
advancement  in  those  things  which  are  good.  Those  who  "  go  up  "  to  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem  gradually  increase  in  hoUness  by  a  diligent  use  of  the  appointed  means. 
II,  Another  evidence  that  we  are  "going  up  to  Jerusalem"  is  love  to  God,  III. 
If  our  faces  are  indeed  turned  to  Jerusalem,  like  travellers  who  have  a  long  journey 
to  accomplish,  we  shall  be  most  anxious  to  lay  aside  any  unnecessary  weight,  and 
to  overcome  the  corrupting  influence  of  our  besetting  sins.  We  cannot  be  going 
up  to  Jerusalem  if  our  affections  are  rooted  in  the  earth ;  we  must  be  conscious 
that  our  course  is  turned  thitherward.  Why  this  loitering  by  the  way.  Lot  us 
refresh  our  souls  with  spiritual  food.  Let  the  world  offer  what  attractions  it  may, 
our  purpose  is  firmly  fixed  "to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,"  (/,  H.  Norton.)  Jesus 
betrayed  and  condemned : — I.  The  language  of  the  text  is  the  testimony  of  our 
great  Prophet  concerning  His  own  sufferings.  You  see  it  is  a  prophecy ;  the 
event  had  not  yet  taken  place.  1.  His  suffering  was  substitutional.  2.  Acceptable, 
3.  Covenanted,  II,  The  hands  emploted,  1.  The  ruthless  traitor.  2.  The  infidel 
priesthood.  3.  The  far-famed  literary  men.  III.  The  end  accomplished.  "  They 
shall  condemn  Him  to  death."  (J.  Irons.)  How  the  faithfulness  of  Christ 
toward  His  disciples  appears  in  the  announcement  of  His  impending  sufferings. 
I,  It  is  seen  in  the  gradual  manner  in  which  He  makes  the  fact  known.  From  the 
first  He  had  intimated  that  His  path  was  one  of  suffering  ;  but,  while  putting  an 
end  to  their  spurious  hopes,  He  had  never  said  anything  to  cast  them  down,  XL 
He  now  set  it  before  them  in  all  its  terrors.  He  dealt  candidly  with  them.  Return 
was  still  possible  for  them,  though,  from  their  former  decision,  He  no  longer  asked 
them  whether  they  would  forsake  Him,      III,    He  placed  before  their  view  the 

Eromise  awaiting  them  at  the  end,  thus  establishing  and  encouraging  them  by  Ibis 
leased  prospect.     {J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)        Why  Christ  saw  His  cross  afar  off.     1. 


CHAP.  XX.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  457 

It  was  predetermined  from  the  beginning,  and  He  saw  it  everywhere  throughout 
His  course.  2.  From  the  first  He  prepared  for  it,  and  experienced  its  bitterness  in 
many  preliminary  trials.  3.  It  was  the  harbinger  of  His  exaltation,  and  ever  and 
snon  He  anticipated  His  coming  glory.  {Ibid.)  Communion  with  Jesus  : — I.  Thk 
PABT7 — Jesus  and  His  disciples.  The  great  Head  of  the  Church  and  His  members. 
1.  Their  interests  were  mutual.  2.  They  are  a  united  company,  3.  They  were 
distinct  from  the  world.  4,  Are  you  of  the  party  ?  II.  Theib  union  and  com- 
munion— Jesus  took  the  twelve  disciples  apart.  1.  We  sometimes  try  to  take 
Christ  apart,  it  is  better  that  Christ  should  take  us.  2.  This  communion  has  love 
for  its  origin.  3.  He  would  not  have  them  associated  with  the  world,  He  was  about 
to  toach  on  matters  He  wished  His  disciples  to  know.  4.  He  not  only  invites  His 
Church  apart  as  an  act  of  love,  but  every  grace  of  His  Holy  Spirit's  implanting  is 
then  called  into  exercise.  5.  He  took  them  apart  to  talk  about  the  atonement. 
in.  Mark  now  the  travelling  itself — '•  going  up  to  Jerusalem."  Ours  is  not  a 
stand- still  religion.  We  have  no  continuing  city.  We  are  in  company  with  Jesus. 
1.  Decision  is  implied.  2.  Progress  is  implied.  3.  There  was  expectation  as  they 
journeyed.  4.  Jesus  was  going  up  to  Jerusalem  for  the  accompli:>hment  of  redemp- 
tion ;  and  we  must  go  to  the  Jerusalem  above  in  order  to  fully  enjoy  them.  (J. 
Irons.)  Christ's  sufferings  and  ours  : — What  are  all  our  sufferings  to  His  ?  AJad 
yet  we  think  ourselves  undone  if  but  touched,  and  in  setting  forth  our  calamities 
we  add,  we  multiply,  we  rise  in  our  discourse,  like  him  in  the  poet,  "  I  am  thrice 
Hi  Iserable,  nay,  ten,  twenty,  an  hundred,  a  thousand  times  unhappy."  And  yet  all 
our  sufferings  are  but  as  the  slivers  and  chips  of  that  cross  upon  which  Christ,  nay, 
many  Christians,  have  suffered.  In  the  time  of  Adrian  the  emperor  ten  thousand 
naartyrs  are  said  to  have  been  crucified  in  the  Mount  of  Ararat,  crowned  with 
tiioms,  and  thrust  into  the  sides  with  sharp  darts,  after  the  example  of  the  Lord's 
pission.  {John  Trapp.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ : — He  wraps  up  the  gall  of 
the  passion  in  the  honey  of  the  resunection.  {Lapide.)  The  saddest  yet  happiest 
event  in  human  history  : — Our  Lord's  last  journey  to  Jerusalem.  The  prediction 
OH  the  sufferings  of  Christ  a  great  evidence  (1)  of  His  prophetical  cha)  acter ;  (2)  of 
Bis  willingness,  as  a  Priest,  to  offer  Himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin ;  (3)  of  His  confident 
ej:pectation  of  victory  as  a  King.  {J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  The  sufferings  of  Christ : — 
At  the  precious  stone  called  the  carbuncle  to  look  at  is  like  a  hot  burning  coal  of 
fiife,  shining  exceeding  brightly,  the  which  feeleth  no  fire,  neither  is  it  molten, 
changed,  or  mollified  therewith ;  if  thou  shalt  take  it,  and  close  it  fast  in  a  ring  of 
ktad,  and  cast  it  into  the  fire,  thou  shalt  see  the  lead  molten  and  consume  before 
tny  face,  but  the  carbuncle  remaining  sound  and  perfect  without  blemish  as  before, 
lor  the  fire  worketh  upon  the  lead,  but  upon  the  carbuncle  it  cannot  work ;  even  so 
Christ,  our  Saviour,  being  in  the  hot,  scorching  fire  of  His  torments,  suffered  and 
•  led  as  He  was  man,  but  as  He  was  God  He  neither  suffered  nor  died.  The  fire  of 
klis  afflictions  wrought,  then,  upon  His  manhood,  but  His  Divinity  ard  Godhead 
ioutinued  perfect  and  utterly  untouched.  {Cawdrny.)  Crucifixion  of  Christ: — 
*Jhe  cross  was  the  perfect  manifestation  of  (1)  the  guilt  of  the  world  ;  (t)  the  love 
of  Christ ;  (3)  His  obedience  ;  (4)  the  grace  of  God.  {J.  P.  Lange,  DJ).)  Christ's 
Bufferings  were  foreseen : — As  astronomers  know  when  none  others  think  M  it,  that 
travelling  through  the  heavens  the  vast  shadow  is  progres^;ing  towardr  the  sun 
which  ere  long  shall  clothe  it  and  hide  it,  so  Christ  knew  that  the  great  darkness 
which  was  to  overwhelm  Him  was  approaching.  (Beecher.)  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion : — His  resurrection  was  necessary  to  His  being  believed  in  as  a  Saviopr.  As 
Christ  by  His  death  paid  down  a  satisfaction  for  sin,  so  it  was  necesr^ary  that  it 
should  be  declared  to  the  world  by  such  arguments  as  might  found  a  rational  'relief 
of  it,  so  that  men's  unbelief  should  be  rendered  inexcusable.  But  how  could  the 
world  beheve  that  He  fully  had  satisfied  for  sin  so  long  as  they  saw  death  the 
known  wages  of  sin,  maintain  its  full  force  and  pcnver  over  Him,  holding  Him  Uke 
an  obnoxious  person  in  captivity  ?  When  a  man  is  once  imprisoned  for  debt  none 
can  conclude  the  debt  either  paid  by  him  or  forgiven  to  him  but  by  the  release  of 
his  person.  Who  coujd  believe  Christ  to  have  been  a  God  and  a  Saviour  while  He 
was  hanging  upon  the  tree?  A  dying,  crucified  God,  a  Saviour  of  the  world  who 
«oald  not  save  Himself  would  have  been  exploded  by  the  universal  consent  oi 
reason  as  a  horrible  paradox  and  absurdity.     (R.  South.) 

Vers.  20-28.  Then  came  to  Him  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  with  h9^ 
sons. — Nearest  to  Christ : — Christ  does  not  put  aside  the  granting  of  places  at  His 
eight  and  left  hand  as  not  being  within  His  province,  but  states  the  principles  &ud 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

conditions  on  which  He  does  make  such  a  grant.  Again,  our  Lord  does  not  put 
aside  the  prayer  of  His  apostles  aa  if  they  were  seeking  an  impossible  thing.  Ha 
does  not  say,  ♦'  You  are  asking  what  cannot  be."  He  does  say,  "  There  are  men 
for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  My  Father."  He  does  not  condemn  the  praver  ae  indi- 
cating a  wrong  state  of  mind.  He  did  not  rebuke  their  passion  for  reward.  They 
should  have  the  reward  if  they  fulfilled  the  conditions.     I.  The  principle,  that 

BOME    WILL    BE    NEARER    ChRIST    THAN    OTHERS    IN    THAT    HEAVENLY    KINOI>0M.         Varied 

degrees  of  reward  are  prepared  by  God,  They  asked  for  earth ;  Christ  answered 
for  heaven.  Heaven  is  a  place.  The  corporeality  of  our  future  life  is  eesential  to  the 
perfection  of  it.  Christ  wUl  wear  for  ever  a  humau  frame.  That  involves  locality, 
circuni  stances,  external  occupations.  But  if  we  stop  there  we  have  no  true  idea  of 
the  glory  that  makes  the  ble^isedness.  For  what  is  heaven  ?  Likeness  to  God  I 
Love,  purity,  fellowship  with  Him ;  the  condition  of  the  soul.  Hence  heaven  can 
be  no  dead  level.  All  will  be  lil;e  Jesus;  this  does  not  exclude  infinite  variety. 
Perfect  bliss  belongs  to  each;  but  the  capacity  to  receive  may  differ.  Does  not  the 
idea  of  endless  progress  involve  that  variety  in  degree.  There  are  those  for  whom 
it  is  prepai  ed  of  His  Father,  that  they  shall  sit  in  special  nearnes^s  to  Him.  II. 
These  words  rightly  understood  assfrt  the  truth,  which,  at  first  sight,  our  English 
rendering  s^ems  to  make  them  contradict,  viz.,  that  Christ  is  the  Giveb  to  each 
OF  these  various  degrees  of  glory  and  blessednhss.  "  It  is  not  mine  to  give, 
save  to  them  for  whom  it  is  prepared."  Then  it  is  thine  to  give  it  to  them. 
To  deny  this  is  to  destroy  all  the  foundations  upon  which  our  hopes  rest.  There  is 
nothing  within  the  compass  of  God's  love  to  bestow  of  which  Christ  is  not  the  Giver. 
We  read  that  He  is  the  Judge  of  the  whole  earth.  He  clothes  in  white  robes. 
Christ  is  the  bestower  of  the  royalties  of  heaven.     III.  These  glorious  places  akr 

NOT  GIVEN  TO  MERE  WISHING,  NOR  BY  MERE  ABBITBAUY  WILL,  but  a  piece  of  faVOUritism. 

There  are  conditions  which  must  precede  such  elevation.  Some  people  imagine  the 
desire  enough.  Our  wishes  are  meant  to  impel  us  to  the  appropriate  forms  of 
energy,  by  which  they  can  be  realized.  When  a  pauper  becomes  a  milUonaire  by 
wishing  that  he  were  rich,  when  ignorance  becomes  learning  by  standing  in  a 
library  and  wishing  that  all  the  contents  of  the  books  were  in  its  head,  there  will 
be  seme  hope  that  the  gates  of  heaven  will  fiy  open  to  your  desire.  Does  your  wish 
lead  you  to  the  conditions  ?  Some  of  heaven's  characteristics  attract  you.  You 
wish  to  escape  punishment  for  sin ;  you  would  like  rest  after  toil ;  do  you  wish  to 
be  pure  ?  The  happiuf ss  draws  you  ?  does  the  holiness  ?  Would  it  be  joyful  to 
be  near  Christ  ?  IV.  These  glorious  places  are  given  as  the  result  of  a  Divinb 
PREPARATION.  The  Diviuo  Father  and  Son  have  unity  of  will  arid  work  in  this 
respect.  There  is  a  twofold  preparation.  1.  That  is  the  eternal  counsel  of  the 
Divine  love  "  prepared  for  you  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  2.  The  reali- 
zation of  that  counsel  in  time.  His  death  and  entrance  into  heaven  made  ready 
for  us  the  eternal  mansions.  Faith  in  Christ  alone,  the  measure  of  our  faith,  and 
growing  Christ-likeness  here  will  be  the  measure  of  our  glory  hereafter.  (Dr 
McLaren.)  l^eann'ss  to  Christ  in  heaven : — As  in  the  heavens  there  be  planets 
that  roll  nearer  and  nearer  the  central  sun,  and  others  that  circle  further  out  from 
its  rays,  yet  each  keeps  its  course,  and  makes  music  as  it  moves,  as  well  as  planets 
whose  broader  disc  can  receive  and  reflect  more  of  the  light  than  the  smaller  sister 
spheres,  and  yet  each  blazes  over  its  whole  surface,  and  is  full  to  its  very  rim  with 
white  light ;  so  round  that  throne  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  shall  circle 
in  order  and  peace — every  one  blessed,  every  one  perfect,  every  one  like  Christ  to 
begin  with,  and  becoming  liker  through  every  moment  of  the  eternities.  Each 
perfected  soul  looking  in  his  brother's  shall  see  there  another  phase  of  the  on« 
perfectness  that  blessed  and  adorns  him  too,  and  all  taken  together  shall  make  up, 
in  80  far  as  finite  creatures  can  make  up,  the  reflection  and  manifestation  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ.  "Having  then  gifts  differing  according  to  the  grace  that  is 
given  to  us  "  is  the  law  for  the  incompleteness  of  earth,  "  Having  then  gifts 
differing  according  to  the  glory  that  is  given  to  us"  will  be  the  law  for  the 
perfection  of  the  heavens.  {Ibid.)  Nearness  to  Chriat  in  heaven  not  mere 
favouritism : — Nor  can  such  a  place  be  given  by  mere  arbitrary  will.  Christ  could 
not,  if  He  would,  take  a  man  to  His  right  hand  whose  heart  was  not  the  home  ol 
simple  trust  and  thankful  love,  whose  nature  and  desires  were  unprepared  for  that 
blessed  world.  It  would  be  like  taking  one  of  those  creatures — if  there  be  such — 
that  live  on  the  planet  whose  orbit  is  furthest  from  the  sun,  accustomed  to  cold, 
organized  for  darkness,  and  carrying  it  to  that  great  central  blaze,  with  all  ita 
fierce  flames  and  tongues  of  flery  gas  that  shoot  up  a  thousand  miles  in  a  moment. 


CHAP.  XX. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  459 


It  would  crnmble  and  disappear  before  its  blackness  could  be  seen  against  th« 
blaze.  (Ibid.)  The  Divine  'preparation  of  heaven  for  men : — As  one  who  precedes 
a  mighty  host,  provides  and  prepares  rest  for  their  weariness,  and  food  for  their 
hunger,  in  some  city  on  their  line  of  march,  and  having  made  all  things  ready,  is 
at  the  gates  to  welcome  their  travel -stained  ranks  when  they  arrive,  and  guide 
them  to  their  repose ;  so  He  has  gone  before,  our  forerunner,  to  order  all  things 
for  us  there.  It  may  be  that  unless  Christ  were  in  heaven,  our  brother  a*  well  as 
our  Lord,  it  were  no  place  for  mortals.  It  may  be  that  we  need  to  have  His 
glorified  bodily  presence  in  order  that  it  should  he  possible  for  human  spirits  to 
bear  the  light,  and  be  at  home  with  God.  Be  that  as  it  may,  this  we  know,  that 
the  Father  prepares  a  place  for  us  by  the  eternal  counsel  of  His  love,  and  by  the 
all-sufScient  work  of  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  access  to  the  Father.  And  as  His 
work  is  the  Father's  preparation  of  the  place  for  us  by  the  Son,  the  issue  of  His 
work  is  the  Father's  preparation  of  us  for  the  place,  through  the  Son,  by  the  Spirit. 
**  He  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self-same  thing  is  God."  (Ibid.)  Divine 
rewards : — Zebedee's  two  sons  are  following  Christ,  but  follo%ving  half  unconsciously 
for  a  personal  reward.  Christ's  answer  is  not  for  these  seekers  of  office  only,  not 
for  place-hunters  in  our  day  only,  but  for  all  men  who  would  think  of  being 
Christians  for  a  compensation,  in  whatever  form  we  give  that  compensation  shape. 
Christ's  answer  introduces  the  doctrine  of  Divine  rewards.  Is  not  one  of  the  main 
reasons  why  Christian  faith  exercises  such  an  imperfect  power  among  men  that 
they  misapprehend  the  sort  of  advantage  they  may  expect  to  get  from  it?  I. 
Thebe  appear  to  bb  three  principal  desires  which  direct  attention  to  bhligiotjs 
TRUTH — 1.  A  want  of  personal  comfort.  2.  The  want  of  moral  guidance,  or  a  rule  to 
act  by,  and  is  of  a  much  higher  grade  than  the  first.  3.  The  want  of  giving  and 
loving — of  giving  to  the  Lord  what  the  soul  feels  belongs  to  Him — affection  and 
gratitude,  &o.  It  is  a  spiritual  aspiration.  It  does  not  stop  to  inquire  aboat 
advantages.  It  is  the  desire  of  a  harmonious  and  affectionate  union  with  God  in 
the  reconciling  and  forgiving  spirit  of  the  Saviour.     II.  These  three  different  wants 

BPBINQ  UP  TROM  DIFTERENT  PLACES  OR  FACDLTIES  IN  OUR  NATURE.       1.   The  first  COmCS 

from  a  mixture  of  natural  instinct  and  shrewdness — seli-interest.  2.  The  second 
comes  from  the  region  of  the  conscience.  It  refers  to  a  law,  &c. — obedience  as 
obedience — duty  as  duty ;  second  only  to  the  life  of  love.  3.  The  third  originates 
in  the  soiil — its  love,  trust,  gratitude.  This  is  the  Christian  religion.  Out  of 
these  three  fountains  flow  three  sorts  of  religious  life,  as  distinct  from  one  another 
as  their  sources  are.     III.  The  rewards  God  promises  to  those  that  diliqemi.t 

SEEK   Him,  DEPEND,    IN   EACH   CASE,    ON   THE    MOTIVE   AND   SPIRIT  IN  WHICH   WE   8ER>B 

Him.  1.  Religion  will  never  yield  its  true  rewards  to  those  who  seek  it  for  the  sake 
of  its  rewards.  2.  If  sought  to  obtain  relief  from  sorrow,  &c. ,  God  may  lead  the 
soul  on,  through  this  half-selfish  state,  into  serving  Him  for  some  more  disin- 
terested affection.  But  such  will  fail  of  any  glorious  reward.  3.  God  will  reward 
every  man  *^ according  to  his  works" — in  the  line  of  his  works,  in  the  kind  of 
them — love  for  love,  &c.  (1)  In  this  honourable  quality  man's  Christian  service  is 
not  disconnected  from  his  best  acts  in  other  lines  of  life.  Legitimate  in  Chris- 
tianity. Its  universal  sentiment  is  love.  All  its  apparatus  is  to  educate  us  to  that 
mark.  This  is  the  distinctive  ministry  which  the  Christian  revelation  brings :  in 
Christ  this  is  embodied.  (2)  The  same  principle  must  be  applied  to  the  desire  of 
going  to  heaveii  as  a  motive  to  religious  endeavour.  (3)  We  come  up  at  last  to 
those  acts  of  true  religion  which  are  done  in  the  faith  of  the  heart ;  and  here  we 
reach  the  highest  view  of  the  Divine  rewards,  simply  because  God  has  made  these 
to  be  their  own  reward.  They  are  rewards  in  kind.  They  are  large  just  according 
to  the  spirituality  of  our  lives,  the  zeal  of  our  worship,  the  strength  of  our  faith. 
They  are  interior,  not  visible.  They  are  incidental,  not  sought.  They  are  of 
nobleness  rather  than  of  happiness.  He  rewards  us  sometimes  only  by  setting  us 
to  the  performance  of  larger  and  harder  tasks,  &o.  When  he  would  give  His 
greatest  reward.  He  gives  Himself,  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  His  Son.  The  brave  and 
lofty  hymn  of  Francis  Xavier :  "  My  God,  I  love  Thee,  not  because,"  <feo.  Of  our 
Christian  religion  the  badge  is  a  cross — even  as  self-forgetfulness  is  the  spirit,  love 
is  the  motive,  disinterestedness  is  the  principle,  faith  is  the  inmost  spring.  (Bishop 
Huntingdon,  D.D.)  Can  ye  drink  of  My  cup? — I.  Christ  had  a  cup  and  a. 
BAPTISM.  1.  Christ  had  a  cup.  This  cup  contained  the  death  which,  as  our 
Redeemer,  He  had  to  die.  Its  ingredients  were,  all  that  He  suffered.  The  time 
during  which  He  drank  it — His  lifetime.  2.  Christ  had  a  baptism.  The  baptism  of 
the  text  was  alluded  to,  when  He  said,  "  I  have  a  baptism,"  &o.    It  anointed  Him 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

and  set  Him  apart  to  His  priestly  and  kingly  offices.  II.  Believebs  p.\ktakjc  o» 
THE  CDP  AND  THE  BAPTISM  OF  Christ.  1.  In  many  particulars,  the  cup  and 
baptism  of  Christ  were  His  own — and  peculiar.  2.  Yet  the  experience  of  believers 
sufficiently  exhausts  these  words.  Scripture  testimony.  The  events  of  Providence. 
3.  The  sufferings  of  believers,  a  cup.  Because,  punishment  by  the  world.  Because, 
death  to  the  flesh.  4.  The  sufferings  of  believers  a  baptism.  Because,  they  are 
purifying.  Because,  they  are  qualifying.  5.  The  sufferings  of  beUevers  are  the 
cup  and  the  baptism  of  Christ.  In  many  particulars  —  the  same.  They  are 
inflicted  on  Christ — in  believers.  They  are  acknowledged  by  Christ.  6.  That, 
which  to  Christ  and  His  people  is  but  a  cup,  is  to  the  wicked  an  exhaustlest 
ocean.  IH.  The  offices  and  honours  of  Christ's  kingdom  are  dibtribdted 
BT  Himself.  1.  As  the  cup  and  baptism  of  Christ  were  succeeded  by  glory  to 
Him,  so  they  are  to  His  people.  2.  Some  of  the  moral  glory  of  heaven  visible 
even  amid  the  sufferings  of  earth.  3.  The  sufferings  endured  here  prepare  and 
fit  for  the  high  employments  of  heaven.  4.  The  fitness  having  been  acquired, 
the  dignities  are  given  by  Christ,  He  bestows  that  which  He  purchased.  6. 
This  fulfils  the  promise,  "He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,"  <feo,  IV. 
Christ  gives  the  honours  and  dignities  of  His  kingdom  to  those  fob  vhom 

THEY    HAVE    BEEN    APPOINTED    OF   THE    FaTHER.       1.    This    briugS    OUt   the    plaCO    OCCU- 

pied  by  Christ  in  the  arrangements  of  the  plan  of  redemption.  2.  It  brings  to 
light  the  original  source  of  redemption.  3.  It  shows  the  perfect  security  of 
the  believer.  4.  It  illustrates  the  order  of  God's  procedure.  5.  It  furnishes  a 
proof  of  the  unchangeableness  of  God.  Conclusion.  1.  If  you  are  believers,  you 
shall  drink  of  Christ's  cup,  and  be  baptised  with  His  baptism.  2.  But  you  shall 
not  suffer  till  prepared — fitness  for  suffering  provokes  persecution.  3.  Your  suffer- 
ings shall  be — (1)  Limited — a  cup.  (2)  Purifying — a  baptism.  (3)  Joyous — Christ's. 
(4)  Honourable — a  crown.  {J.  Stewart.)  Elevation: — Ambition  is  an  instinct 
of  our  nature,  and  capable  of  good.  The  request  of  Zebedee  was  right,  though  no 
doubt  mixed  with  ignorance.  Jesus  did  not  reprove  her  desire,  but  stated  the 
stern  conditions  upon  which  such  honours  were  to  be  attained.  Court  and  pray 
for  great  things.  1.  In  your  inner  life  and  personal  character.  2.  Take  a  high 
estimate  of  the  work  you  have  to  do  for  God  in  this  world.  3.  Do  not  think  it 
wrong  to  strive  for  a  high  place  in  heaven.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Salome' t 
petition  for  her  two  sons : — I.  It  had  reference  to  a  glurious  temporal  kingdom. 
This  request  showed  some  faith  in  Jesus,  for  He  had  announced  His  death.  We 
mast  not  indulge  dreams  of  worldly  honour.  II.  The  answer  which  Jesus  gave  to 
this  unseasonable  request — 1.  Our  Lord  declared  their  ignorance.  2.  As  Jesus 
knew  they  meant  the  end  without  the  means.  He  asked  them  about  their  fidelity. 
3.  They  answered  as  men  of  courage  without  hesitation  or  delay.  4.  The  final 
answer  Jesus  gave  to  their  ambitious  prayer.  5.  The  highest  place  in  heaven  is 
most  to  love  God.  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  ChrisVs  answer  to  Salome's  petition: — 
While  admitting  the  potency  of  the  prayer  of  faith,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
every  petition  which  may  be  presented  will  be  complied  with : — 1.  God  in  His 
Providence  ordinarily  acts  within  fixed  laws,  and  with  these  He  rarely  dispenses. 
A  high  place  in  the  kingdom  of  the  future  will  not  be  an  arbitrary  gift,  but  the 
result  of  the  course  pursued  here.  2.  The  important  thing  for  us  is  attention  to 
our  duty,  and  leave  the  rest  to  Providence.  3.  No  envious  speculations  can  assist 
our  progress  heavenward.      (H.  B.    Moffat,   M.A.)  lynorant  requests  : — Ye 

know  not  (1)  of  what  sort  My  kingdom  is — viz.,  a  spiritual  and  heavenly  one, 
not  carnal  and  earthly;  (2)  because  ye  are  asking  for  the  triumph  before  the 
victory  ;  (3)  because  ye  suppose  that  this  kingdom  is  given  by  right  of  blood 
to  those  who  seek  it,  whereas  it  is  given  only  to  those  who  deserve  and  strive. 
(Lapide.)  Right  and  wrong  prayers : — A  prayer  for  things  not  lawful  begs  nothing 
but  a  denial.  The  saints  have  their  prayers  out,  either  in  money  or  money's  worth,  pro- 
vided they  bring  lawful  petitions  and  honest  hearts.  {John  Trapp. )  Was  there  ever 
a  more  unseasonable  request,  than  for  them  to  be  suitors  for  great  places  to  Him, 
■when  He  had  but  now  told  them  He  was  going  to  be  spit  upon,  scourged,  condemned, 
crucified  ?  Yet  there  was  this  good  in  it ;  they  by  it  discovered  a  faith  in  Him,  that 
notwithstanding  all  this  He  should  be  exalted  and  have  a  kingdom.  But  how  carnal 
are  our  conceptions  of  spiritual  and  heavenly  things,  till  we  are  taught  by  God  a 
right  notion  of  them  I  (Matthew  Pool.)  Men  sometimes  know  not  what  they  ask: 
— I.  These  two  disciples  sought  the  place  of  the  two  malefactors.  IL  They  re- 
quested, BO  to  speak,  something  which  had  only  existence  in  their  own  imagination 
(worldly  honours  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ).     III.  They  sought  somethiog  which. 


«KAP.  XX,]  ST.  MATTHEW.  461 

In  its  higher  import,  had  ahready  been  given  away — ^perhaps  to  themselves,  perhaps 
to  others — viz.,  special  degrees  of  election.  {J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Like  Master, 
like  servant: — Christ,  like  a  good  and  wise  physician,  first  drank  the  draught  Him> 
self  which  He  was  preparing  for  His  owu.  He  underwent  His  passion  and  death, 
and  so  He  became  immortal  and  impassible ;  thus  teaching  His  own  how  they  might 
confidently  drink  the  draught  which  produces  soundness  and  life.  (St.  Bernard.) 
The  Church  sphere  : — It  shall  not  be  so  amongyoa.  The  Chutfih  and  the  world  have 
different  spheres.  As  every  other  association  or  body,  so  the  Church  has  its  appro- 
priate organisation,  corresponding  to  its  nature.  The  plant  would  die  if  it  were 
subject  to  the  conditions  of  the  crystal ;  the  animal,  if  to  those  of  the  plant ;  man, 
if  to  those  of  the  animal ;  and  the  Church,  if  to  those  of  the  world.  Or  rather, 
the  plant  has  burst  through  the  conditions  of  the  crystal,  and  passed  beyond  it,  &c, ; 
and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  through  the  conditions  and  forms  of  this  world.  (J, 
P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask : — There  is  a  heathen  story  which  tells 
that  once  a  man  asked  for  this  gift — not  to  die  ;  and  it  was  granted  to  him  by  the 
Fates.  He  was  to  live  on  for  ever.  But  he  had  forgotten  to  ask  that  his  youth  and 
and  health  and  strength  might  last  for  ever  also ;  and  so  he  Uved  on  till  age  and  its 
infirmities  and  weakness  were  weighing  him  down,  and  his  life  grew  to  be  a  weari- 
ness and  a  burden  to  him.  Existence  (for  it  could  hardly  be  called  life)  was  one 
long  torment  to  him ;  and  then  he  OTshed  to  die.  He  wished  to  die,  and  could  not. 
He  had  asked  for  a  thing  which  he  was  totally  unfit  to  enjoy,  but  he  had  to  take  the 
consequences  of  it  when  it  was  once  given.  It  was  a  curse  to  him,  not  a  blessing. 
The  law  of  rank  and  position  in  God's  kingdom : — The  notion  of  rank  in  the  world 
is  like  a  pyramid ;  the  higher  you  go  up,  the  fewer  are  there  who  have  to  serve  those 
above  them,  and  who  are  served  more  than  those  underneath  them.  All  who  ar« 
under  serve  those  who  are  above,  until  yon  come  to  the  apex,  and  there  stands  some 
one  who  has  to  do  no  service,  but  whom  all  the  others  have  to  serve.  Something 
like  that  is  the  notion  of  position — of  social  standing  and  rank.  And  if  it  be  so  in 
an  intellectual  way,  even — to  say  nothing  of  mere  bodily  service — if  any  man  works 
to  a  position  that  others  shall  all  look  up  to  him  and  that  he  may  have  to  look  up 
to  nobody,  he  has  just  put  himself  precisely  into  the  same  condition  as  the  people 
of  whom  our  Lord  speaks — as  those  who  exercise  dominion  and  authority,  and 
really  he  thinks  it  a  fine  thing  to  be  served.  But  it  is  not  so  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  The  figure  there  is  entirely  reversed.  As  you  may  see  a  pyramid  reflected 
in  the  water,  just  so,  in  a  reversed  way  altogether,  is  the  thing  to  be  found  in  the 
kingdom  of  God.  It  is  in  this  way :  the  Son  of  Man  lies  at  the  inverted  apex 
of  the  T^y  ramid ;  He  upholds,  and  serves,  and  ministers  unto  all,  and  they  who 
would  be  high  in  His  kingdom  must  go  near  to  Him  at  the  bottom,  to  uphold  and 
minister  to  all  that  they  may  or  can  uphold  and  minister  unto.  There  is  no  other 
law  of  precedence,  no  other  law  of  rank  and  position  in  God's  kingdom.  And, 
mind,  that  is  the  kingdom.  The  other  kingdom  passes  away — it  is  a  transitory, 
ephemeral,  passing,  bad  thing,  and  away  it  must  go.  It  is  only  there  on  sufferance, 
because  in  the  mind  of  God  even  that  which  is  bad  ministers  to  that  which  is  good; 
and  when  the  new  kingdom  is  built  the  old  kingdom  shall  pass  away.  But  the  man 
who  seeks  this  rank  of  which  I  have  spoken,  must  be  honest  to  follow  it.  It  will 
not  do  to  say,  "  I  want  to  be  great,  and  therefore  I  will  serve."  A  man  will  not  get 
at  it  so.  He  may  begin  so,  but  he  will  soon  find  that  that  will  not  do.  He  must 
seek  it  for  the  truth's  sake,  for  the  love  of  his  fellows,  for  the  worship  of  God,  for  the 
delight  in  what  is  good.  (Geo.  Macdonald,  M.A.)  Place-seeking  parents: — Mothers 
should  be  cautious  about  seeking  places  of  honour  for  their  sons.  Doing  this,  thej 
seldom  know  what  they  ask.  They  may  be  seeking  the  ruin  of  their  children.  It  is  not 
posts  of  honour  that  secure  happiness  or  salvation.  ...  As  the  purest  and  loveliest 
streams  often  flow  in  the  retired  grove,  far  from  the  thundering  cataract  or  the 
stormy  ocean,  so  is  the  sweet  peace  of  the  soul ;  it  dwells  oftenest  far  from  the 
bustle  of  public  life,  and  the  storms  and  tempests  of  ambition.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 
Ambition  insatiable  : — Ambition  is  like  the  sea  which  swallows  all  the  rivers  and  ia 
none  the  fuller ;  or  Uke  the  grave  whose  insatiable  maw  for  ever  craves  for  the 
bodies  of  men.  It  is  not  like  an  amphora,  which  being  full  receives  no  more,  but 
its  fulness  sweils  it  till  a  still  greater  vacuum  is  formed.  In  all  probabiUty  Napoleon 
never  longed  for  a  sceptre  till  he  had  gained  a  baton,  nor  dreamed  of  being  Emperor 
of  Europe  till  he  had  gained  the  crown  of  France.  Caligula,  with  the  world  at  his 
feet,  was  mad  with  a  longing  for  the  moon,  and  could  he  have  gained  it,  the  imperial 
lunatic  would  have  coveted  the  sun.  It  is  in  vain  to  feed  a  fire  which  grows  the 
more  vivaoions  the  more  it  is  supplied  with  fuel ;  he  who  lives  to  satisfy  his  ambitios 


463  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

has  before  him  the  labour  of  Sisyphus,  who  rolled  up  hill  an  ever  rebounding  stone, 
and  the  task  of  the  daughters  of  Danaus,  who  are  condemned  for  ever  to  attempt  (• 
fill  a  bottomless  vessel  with  buckets  full  of  holes.     (C.  if.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  26-28.  And  whosoever  •will  be  chief  among  yon,  let  him  be  your  servant. 
— True  greatness  : — Greatness  a  word  often  used,  and  people's  ideas  of  it  differ 
much.  Some  regard  it  as  consisting  in  wealth,  social  position,  physical  strength. 
Christ  places  it  in  service,  springing  from  love  in  the  heart.  Man's  true  greatness 
must  be  in  himself.  1.  The  importance  of  a  true  ideal  of  life.  2.  This  true  ideal 
can  be  realized  by  every  one  of  us.  No  life  need  be  a  failure.  {C.  0.  Bridgman, 
D.D.)  Greatness  measured  by  service  : — I.  Greatness  is  to  be  measured  by 
service.  No  man  lives  or  dies  to  himself.  Florence  Nightingale  moved  other 
women  most  when  she  herself  went  to  minister  on  battle  fields.  II.  The  greater 
men  are  in  intellect  and  culture,  the  more  imperative  it  is  that  they  become  leaders 
and  helpers.  If  a  man  has  power  to  do  good  and  refuses,  he  is  not  guiltless.  III. 
Those  who  thus  labour  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men  are  the  greatest.  Love  is 
the  greatest  power  on  the  earth.  (G.  Anderson,  D.D.)  Basis  of  true  greatness  : — 
1.  Our  Lord  does  uot  condemn  the  spirit  of  ambition,  but  simply  aims  to  point  out 
the  basis  of  real  greatness.  He  regarded  His  disciples,  in  a  certain  sense,  as  kings, 
but  He  would  have  them  establish  their  regal  right  in  a  different  manner  from  the 
princes  of  this  world.  2.  In  how  many  scriptural  promises  do  we  find  this  prin- 
ciple recognized.  They  that  turn  many  to  righteousness  "  shall  shine  as  the  stars 
forever  and  ever."  St.  Paul  says,  ••  There  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness," 
&o.  3.  Eank  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  will  be  measured  by  humility.  Condescen- 
sion is  the  measure  of  exaltation.  The  way  up  to  the  glory  of  the  Exalted  One 
is  through  humble,  sclf-deuying  love.  (R.  W.  Clark,  D.D.)  The  greatness  of 
being  useful : — Yet  what  has  the  patriot  made  himself  but  the  servant  of  his 
countrymen  ?  It  was  in  order  to  the  ministering  to  the  well-being  of  thousands, 
that  he  threw  himself  into  the  breach,  and  challenged  tyranny  to  the  battle.  It 
was  for  the  sake  of  securing  the  rights  of  those  who  trod  the  same  soil  with  him- 
self,  that  he  arose  as  the  champion  of  the  wretched  and  injured.  The  case  is  the 
same  with  the  philosopher  as  with  the  patriot.  Accordingly,  he  who  labours  in  the 
mine  of  truth,  and  presents  to  the  world  the  results  of  his  investigations,  furnishes 
his  fellow-men  with  new  principles  on  which  to  act  in  the  business  of  life,  and  thus 
equips  them  for  fresh  enterprises,  and  instructs  them  how  to  add  to  the  sum  total 
of  happiness.  "We  need  not  exemplify  this  in  particular  instances.  You  are  all 
aware  how  scientific  research  is  turned  to  account  in  everyday  life,  and  how  the 
very  lowest  of  our  people  enjoy,  in  one  way  or  another,  the  fi-uits  of  discoveries 
which  are  due  to  the  marvellous  sagacity,  and  the  repeated  experiments,  of  those 
who  rank  foremost  in  the  annals  of  philosophy.  And  thus  it  is  evident  that  the 
man  who  is  great  in  science,  is  great  in  the  power  of  serving  his  fellow-men,  and 
that  it  is  this  latter  greatness  which  insures  him  their  applauses.  If  his  discoveries 
were  of  no  benefit  to  the  many ;  if  they  opened  no  means  by  which  enjoyments 
might  be  multiplied,  toil  diminished,  or  danger  averted  ;  his  name  would  be  known 
only  within  a  limited  circle,  and  there  would  be  nothing  that  approached  to  a  general 
recognition  of  superiority.  The  individual  again  who  gains  renown  as  a  statesman, 
who  serves  his  country  in  the  senate  as  the  warrior  in  the  field,  is  the  miniatei  to 
all  classes,  so  that  the  very  lowest  have  the  profit  of  his  toils.  And  in  proportion 
as  the  service  wore  the  aspect  of  selfishness,  would  the  tribute  of  applause  be  dimi- 
nished :  we  should  be  less  and  less  disposed  to  allow,  that,  in  mating  himself  a 
servant,  he  had  made  himself  great,  if  we  had  increasing  cause  to  thmk  that  his 
main  design  was  the  serving  himself.  But  there  is  no  room  for  suspicions  of 
this  class,  when  the  exhibition  is  that  of  a  fine  Christian  philanthropy,  leading  a 
man  to  give  his  assiduity  to  the  sick-beds  of  the  poor,  or  the  prisons  of  ttie  criminaL 
Accordingly,  when  an  individual  is  manifestly  and  strongly  actuated  by  this  phi- 
laitthi'opy,  there  is  an  almost  universal  consent  in  awarding  him  the  appellation  of 
great :  even  those  who  would  be  amongst  the  last  to  imitate  are  amongst  the  first 
to  applaud.  [H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Pride  destroys  the  best  elements  of  character : — 
The  rebel  against  lawful  authority  cannot  be  truly  great :  the  slave  of  his  own 
passions  cannot  be  truly  great :  the  idolater  of  his  own  powers  cannot  be  truly 
great.  And  the  proud  man  is  this  rebel,  this  slave,  this  ido'ater ;  for  pride  spurns 
at  the  Divine  dominion,  gives  vigour  to  depraved  affeotionr,  and  exaggerates  all  our 
powers.  What,  then,  can  be  more  accurate  than  that  pride  destroys  the  chief 
eleinenta  of  which  a  great  character  is  compounded,  so  that  it  must  be  to  direct  a 


OSAP.  XX.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  4S9 

man  in  the  way  to  eminence,  to  prescribe  that  he  be  ••  clothed  with  humility  t " 
(Ibid.)  Christ  our  Redeeiner  because  our  servant: — But  if  Christ  thus  made 
Himself  servant  to  the  human  race,  it  is  this  very  fact  which  is  to  draw  to  Him 
finally  universal  homage.  Had  He  not  been  their  servant,  He  could  not  have  been 
their  Redeemer ;  and,  if  not  their  Redeemer,  then  at  His  name  would  not  every 
knee  have  bowed,  "  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the 
earth."  Thus  He  illustrates  His  own  precept :  He  became  great  through  redeeming ; 
but  since  He  redeemed  through  making  Himself  the  minister  to  a  lost  world.  He 
became  great  through  becoming  a  servant.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  28.  Even  as  the  Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered  nnto. — A  Divine 

mission : — I.  The  Son  of  Man.  Humility  combined  with  dignity.  Man  was  the 
offender,  man  must  suffer  the  penalty.  Not  a  fictitious  manhood,  but  real  like  our 
own.  This  ought  to  attract  us  to  Him,  for  He  is  akin  in  nature  and  sympathy. 
II.  He  came.  The  errand  unique  as  the  Person  who  undertook  it.  He  came  volun- 
tarily on  an  errand  of  mercy.  III.  Not  to  be  minisiebed  onto,  bdt  to  minister. 
He  had  not  a  selfish  thought  in  His  soul.  Does  He  want  servants  ?  Thousands 
of  angels  are  His  chariot.  He  served  in  the  workshop,  home,  amongst  His  disciples. 
As  the  Son  of  Man  in  heaven  He  continues  a  kind  of  service  to  His  people.  IV. 
And  to  give  His  life.  We  have  no  lives  to  give.  They  are  forfeited  to  Divine 
justice.  His  death  was  voluntary.  Christ  did  not  come  into  the  world  merely  to 
be  an  example,  or  merely  to  reveal  the  Godhead.  His  sacrifice  was  substitutionary. 
V.  A  BANSOM.  Every  male  person  among  the  Jews  belonged  to  God,  and  must  be 
redeemed.  The  price  was  the  ransom.  Jesus  redeems  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law.  VI.  Fob  MANY.  The  word  "for"  has  a  vicarious  meaning.  "He  gave  His 
life  instead  of  many."  1.  Man  is  not  redeemed  from  the  bondage  of  his  sins  with- 
out a  price.  No  one  goes  free  by  the  naked  mercy  of  God.  2.  That  price  most  be 
a  life.  Not  merely  a  character.  The  question  has  been  asked,  "  Who  receives  the 
ransom  ?  "  Not  Satan.  Satan  has  no  rights.  It  was  paid  to  the  Great  Judge. 
This  is  a  mystical  way  of  speaking.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  vindicate  the  law  and 
render  mercy  possible.  3.  What  is  the  result  of  this  ?  Man  is  redeemed.  He  is 
no  longer  a  slave.  Did  Jesus  Christ  redeem  you?  (C.  H.  Spurgecm.)  The 
Saviour's  character,  life,  and  death: — I.  His  chakacteb.  Christ  Divine.  This 
being  premised  we  can  bring  forward  two  satisfactory  reasons  why  He  called  Him- 
self the  Son  of  Man.  1.  Because  He  would  gradually  develop  Himself.  2. 
Because  our  concern  with  Him  principally  Ues  in  His  assuming  human  uatnre. 
n.  His  life.  •'  Came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,"  &c.  This  fills  us  with  aston- 
ishment, when  we  remember  the  place  from  which  He  descended.  Our  Saviour 
could  derive  nothing  from  external  appendages.  1.  Admire  His  condescension.  2. 
Resemble  Him  therein.  III.  His  death.  1.  Consider  Him  as  a  ransom.  I.  It  waa 
intentional.  3.  It  was  voluntary.  4.  It  regards  the  personal  esteem  He  has  for 
His  people.  5.  We  see  here  where  a  poor  burdened  conscience  can  alone  find  relief. 
6.  Let  the  love  of  Christ  strike  your  miuds,  7.  If  He  has  ransomed  you,  you  are 
not  your  own.  {W.Jay.)  A  ministering  Chrint : — I.  The  negative  object  o» 
Christ's  coming — "  Not  to  be  ministered  unto."  II.  The  positive  object  or  Hia 
COMING — "  To  minister,"  &c.  1.  The  scenes  of  His  private  life.  Christ  a  carpen- 
ter. 2.  The  scenes  of  His  public  life.  Wearisome  toils.  Lesson — (1)  Be  clothed  with 
humiUty ;  (2)  Gratitude  to  Christ  for  His  love  ;  (3)  Repentance.  {H.  L.  NicJwlson, 
B.A.)  Christ  the  servant  and  the  Saviour  of  His  people : — I.  The  service  He 
rendered  to  man  bt  His  life.  1.  He  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto  as  regards 
His  external  authority.  He  might  have  excited  the  admiration  of  the  world  by  His 
outward  show;  but  He  was  poor.  2.  He  came  to  minister  as  regarded  instruction. 
II.  The  blessing  He  effected  foe  man  by  His  death.  I.  The  blessing  procured. 
2.  The  means  by  which  this  blessing  was  procured.  "  He  gave  His  life,"  &c  3. 
The  number  for  whom  this  blessing  was  procured.  {J.  Sibree.)  True  greatnest 
the  result  of  personal  service  : — The  patriot  is  great,  but  he  has  served  his  country. 
The  philosopher  by  the  force  of  his  genius  has  enlarged  the  sphere  of  human 
knowledge,  thus  of  the  greatest  use  to  mankind.  The  same  true  in  religion.  Christ 
was  not  intioducing  a  strange  precept  when  He  said  that  the  men  who  are  the  most 
eminent  in  life  are  the  most  literally  the  servants  of  the  public.  1.  The  greatness  thus 
derived  from  usefulness  may  be  augmented  or  decreased  by  the  meanest  of  those 
you  employ.  2.  The  touching  reference  of  our  Lord  to  His  own  case.  {H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  Christian  humility  : — He  is  the  most  lovely  professor,  who  is  the  most 
lowly  professor.     As  incense  smells  the  sweetest  when  beaten  the  smallest,  so  saints 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  xs, 

iook  fairest  when  they  lie  lowest.  Arrogance  in  the  soul  resembles  the  spleen  in 
the  body,  which  growa  most,  while  other  parts  are  decaying.  God  will  not  suffer 
Buch  a  weed  to  grow  in  His  garden,  without  taking  some  course  to  root  it  up. 
(Archbishop  Seeker.)  Christ  stooping  to  save  : — The  mother,  wan  and  pale  with 
incessant  vigils  by  the  bedside  of  a  sick  child ; — the  fireman,  maimed  for  life  in 
bravely  rescuing  the  inmates  of  a  blazing  house; — the  300  Spartans  at  Ther- 
mopylae;— Howard,  dying  of  fever  caught  in  dungeons  where  he  was  fulfilling  hia 
noble  purpose  of  succouring  the  oppressed  and  remembering  the  forgotten ; — the 
Moravian  missionaries,  who  voluntarily  incarcerated  themselves  m  an  Africim  leper- 
house  (from  which  regress  into  the  healthy  world  was  impossible,  and  escape  only 
to  be  effected  through  the  gates  of  death),  in  order  that  they  might  preacli  the  glad 
tidings  to  the  lepers, — all  these,  and  many  other  glorious  instances  of  self-devotion, 
do  but  faintly  shadow  forth  the  love  of  Him  who  laid  aside  Divine  glory,  and 
humbled  Himself  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 

Vers.  29-34. — And,  behold,  two  blind  men  sitting  by  the  way  side,  when  they 
heard  that  Jesus  passed  by.— Jesus  of  Nazareth  passiiuj  by  : — The  time  of  this  trans- 
action was  critical.  He  never  was  to  come  that  way  again.  It  was  necessary 
for  these  blind  men  to  be  by  the  way  while  Jesus  was  passing.  Had  they  been  eh  e- 
where  they  could  not  have  received  their  sight.  They  caught  the  first  sound  of  t  le 
approaching  Saviour.  Some  men  are  too  buried  in  their  merchandize  to  know  tl  at 
He  is  passing.  It  is  not  enough  to  sit  idly  by  the  way  side.  These  men  made  jo 
demands  but  for  mercy.  1.  Their  earnestness.  They  felt  their  need.  2.  1  he 
difference  between  tlie  unfeeling  multitude  and  the  compassionate  Saviour.  I  »t 
thine  ear  to  the  gospel  and  listen.  "He  calleth  thee."  (E,  Griffin,  D.IK) 
Spirittuil  blindness: — I.  Men  are  blinded  by  reason  of  bin.  They  do  not  see  Ihe 
truths  of  religion,  II.  It  is  proper  in  this  state  of  blindness  to  call  upon  Jesos 
TO  OPEN  OCR  EYES.  If  we  evcr  see,  it  will  be  by  the  grace  of  God.  God  is  the  foe  n- 
tain  of  light,  and  those  in  darkness  should  seek  Him.  III.  Present  opportdnitj  es 
SHOULD  BE  improved.  This  was  the  first  time  that  Jesus  had  been  in  Jericho,  a  ad 
it  was  the  last  time  He  would  be  there.  He  was  passing  through  it  on  His  way  to 
Jerusalem.  So  He  passes  among  us  by  His  ordinances.  While  He  is  near  we  shoidd 
seek  Him.     IV.  "When  people  rebuke  us,  and  laogh  at  ds,  it  should  not  dei  bb 

OS  FROM  CAIjUNO  ON  THE  SaVIOUB.  V.  ThE  PERSEVERING  CRY  OF  THOSE  WHO  SEEK  letH 
SaVIODB  aright  will  not  BE  IN  VAIN.    VI.   SiNNERS  MUST  "  RISE  "  AND  COME  TO  JeS  58. 

Cast  away  every  tiling  that  hinders  their  coming.     VII.  Faith  is  the  only  channel 

through  which  we  t-HALL  RECEIVE  MKBCY.       VIII.  ThEY  WHO  ARE  RESTORED  TO  SIO  IT 

SHOULD  FOLLOW  Je3U8.  Wherever  He  leads — always — none  else.  He  cannot  le^d 
astray.  He  can  enlighten  our  goings  through  all  our  pilgrimage.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.) 
The  blind  taught  to  see: — Mr.  MacGregor,  in  his  recent  "Voyage,"  gives  a  mr«t 
interesting  account  of  Mr.  Mott's  mispion  to  the  blind  and  lame  at  Beirut.  He  says, 
•*  Only  in  February  last  that  poor  blind  fellow  who  sits  on  the  form  there  was  utterly 
ignorant.  See  how  his  delicate  fingers  run  over  the  raised  types  of  his  Bible,  and 
he  reads  aloud  and  blesses  God  in  his  heart  for  the  precious  news,  and  for  those  who 
gave  him  the  avenue  for  truth  to  his  heart.  •  Jesus  Christ  will  be  the  first  person 
I  shall  ever  see,'  he  says,  *  for  my  eyos  will  be  opened  in  heaven.'  Thus  even  this 
man  becomes  a  missionury.  ...  At  the  annual  examination  of  this  school,  one  of 
the  scholars  said,  •  I  am  a  little  blind  boy.  Once  I  could  see  ;  but  then  I  fell  asleep 
— a  long,  long  sleep.  I  thought  I  should  never  wake.  And  I  slept  till  a  kind  gentle- 
man called  Mr.  Mott  came  and  opened  my  eyes — not  these  eyes,'  pointing  to  his 
sightless  eyeballs,  '  but  these,'  lifting  up  his  tiny  fingers — *  these  eyea  ;  aud  oh  f  they 
see  such  sweet  words  of  Jesus,  and  how  He  loved  the  blind.' "  Hearing  of  Christ: — 
Happy  it  was  for  these  two  blind  beggars  that,  though  blind,  they  were  not  deal. 
They  had  heard  of  Christ  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  that  satisfied  them  not, 
unless  their  eyes  also  might  see  Him.  They  waylay,  therefore,  the  Lord  of  Light, 
who  gives  them  upon  their  suit  both  sight  and  light,  irradiates  both  organ  and  ob- 

1'ect,  cures  them  of  both  outward  and  inward  ophthaJmies  at  once.  .  .  .  Few  such 
mowing  blind  beggars  nowadays.  They  are  commonly  more  blind  in  mind  than 
body,  loose  and  lawless  vagrants  ;  such  as  are  neitber  of  any  church  or  common- 
wealth ;  but  as  the  baser  sort  of  people  in  Swethland,  who  do  always  break  th« 
Sabbath,  saying,  that  it  is  only  for  gentlemen  to  sanctify  it;  or  rather,  as  the  poo( 
Brazilians,  who  are  said  to  be  without  any  government,  law,  or  religion.  {John 
Trapp.)  iiecestiti)u.s    men  : — Here    we    have — I.    Such    persons    making    the 

beat  of  their  opportunities — Christ  was  passing  by.    II.  One  class  of  such  fail* 


•HAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  46S 

ing  to  sympathise  with  another — the  multitude  rebuked.  III.  Founding  their 
appoal  on  the  right  ground — mercy.  IV.  Presenting  a  right  condition  of  will — 
♦•  what  will  ye,"  as  if  all  things  were  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  right  will. 
{J,  Parker,  D.D.)  Keep  in  the  icay  of  blessing  : — Be  still  in  the  King's  highway, 
in  the  use  of  the  means,  for  though  the  natural  use  of  the  means  and  God's  saving 
grace  have  no  connection,  yet  there  is  far  lees  a  connection  betwixt  that  grace  and 
the  neglect  of  means.  The  poor  beggar,  that  needs  an  alms  from  the  king,  goes  to 
the  king's  highway,  where  he  passes  ;  and  surely  he  is  nearer  to  his  purpose  than  it 
he  should  go  to  the  top  of  a  mountain  where  the  king  never  comes ;  so,  b«  you  still 
in  the  use  of  means,  in  the  Lord's  way.  (Erskine. )  A  wise  use  of  the  means  of 
salvation : — Those  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  in  the  use  of  the  means  and 
ordinances,  they  hereby  spread  their  sails,  and  are  ready  for  the  Spirit's  motions, 
which  bloweth  where  it  listeth.  There  is  more  hope  of  these  than  of  such  who  lie 
aground,  neglecting  the  means  of  grace,  which  are  both  as  sail  and  tackling.  The 
two  blind  men  could  not  open  their  own  eyes ;  that  was  beyond  their  power,  but 
they  could  get  into  the  way  where  Jesus  passed,  and  they  could  cry  to  Him  for 
eight,  who  only  could  recover  it.  Those  that  are  diligent  in  the  use  of  means  and 
ordinances,  may  sit  in  the  way  where  Jesus  passes  by,  wiio  uses  not  to  rejeo4  tboM 
that  cry  onto  Kim.    (Clarkson.) 


CHAPTER  XXL 


Yem.  1>11.  And  when  they  drew  nlg^h  unto  Jemsaltm,  and  were  come  toBeth- 

phage. — Sixth  Sunday  in  Lent : — I.  It  prerents  an  itiLusTRATiox  of  the  belation 
OF  Christ  to  the  belioioos  feelino  of  mankind.  We  are  religious  beings.  Our 
very  nature  is  grained  with  sensibilities  for  the  sacred  and  the  Divine.  This  scene 
shows  how  it  is  affected  by  Christ.  1.  He  rouses  it  to  activity.  The  multitude  wag 
deeply  moved.  Not  merely  patriotism  or  earthly  emotion,  but  earnest  spiritual  feel- 
ing. From  Jesus  streamed  all  this  awakening  power.  2.  He  inspires  it  with  glad- 
ness. There  was  holy  rejoicing.  There  is  a  moral  awakening  which  has  no  joy 
in  it.  The  natural  man  is  afraid  of  God.  Jesus  takes  away  these  terrors.  3.  He 
also  encourages  the  expression  of  religious  emotions  and  convictions.  Christ  would 
have  His  people  speak  their  joys.  II.  An  earnest  of  the  Saviour's  olobiods  kinghood. 
The  symptoms  of  glorious  consummation  are  visiblein  the  scene  before  us.  1.  We  here 
Bee  the  world  serving  Him.  He  commands  both  men  and  beasts,  and  causes  them 
to  obey  His  will.  2.  We  see  here  the  whole  multitude  of  His  disciples  filled  with 
joyous  exultation.  All  sorrows  were  for  the  hour  quite  swallowed  up  in  the  abound- 
ing blessedness.  3.  We  here  see  the  most  unlikely  prophecies  touching  His  king- 
hood  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.  4.  The  sorrowful  hopelessness  of  Christ's  enemies 
when  He  begins  to  let  His  royal  majesty  forth.  III.  The  text  suggests  important 
IDEAS  TOUCHIN3  Christ's  PERPETUAL  COMING  TO  Hi8  Chubch.  1.  He  comes  with  the 
illuminations  of  His  Spirit.  2.  He  comes  to  His  Church  except  when  it  is  made 
impossible  by  the  unbelief  of  men.  3.  The  way  to  enjoy  Hira  in  His  Church  is  clearly 
indiaated.  We  must  welcome  Him  as  the  Son  of  God.  IV.  As  Jerus  entered  into 
Jerusalem,  so  He  strivbth  now  fob  entbanck  into  kveby  heart.  1.  He  approaches 
all  of  us  as  He  approached  the  holy  city.  He  comes  to  us  as  a  King,  as  the  pro- 
mised One.  2.  But  fur  His  coming  to  bo  a  blessing  we  must  do  as  did  the  happy 
ones  in  the  text.  3.  Great  is  the  blessedness  of  those  who  thus  receive  the  Lord 
Jesus.  V.  This  entby  of  the  Saviodb  into  the  Holt  City  calls  up  oub  public 
■NTBY  INTO  the  SPIRITUAL  CITY,  OF  WHICH  JERUSALEM  WAS  A  TYPE.  Christ  entered  to 
be  condemned ;  we  to  be  absolved :  He  to  die ;  we  to  live.  1.  Like  His  yours  is  a 
triumphal  entry.  2.  Like  His,  however,  your  entry  is  not  full  triumph  yet.  3.  It 
needs  to  be  marked  with  meekness  and  courage.  4.  It  shall  soon  be  crowned  with 
everlasting  victory.     {J.  A.  Sei^s.)         The  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem  : — I.  Bt 

THUS  RIDING  THBOUQH  THE  STREETS  IN  STATE  ChKIST  CLAIMED  TO  BE  A  KINO.    This  Claim 

had  been  kept  in  the  background  till  now ;  but  in  the  hour  of  detp  humiliation  He 
makes  an  open  claim.  He  was  a  spiritual  King,  therefore  He  went  not  to  the  palace 
temporal,  but  to  the  palace  spiritual ;  He  rides  to  the  temple.  H.  What  bobt  of  a 
King  Ha  might  have  been  if  He  had  pleased,  and  what  sort  of  a  King  ELk  mighi 
Ba  now,  if  Hx  willed  it.    If  Christ  chose  He  might  make  His  Ghorob  rich  and 

80 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

powerfnl,  and  religion  magnificent ;  but  He  does  not  care  for  this  world's  glory 
in.  What  kind  of  a  King  He  is,  and  what  kind  op  a  King  He  claimed  to  be. 
Different  from  other  kingdoms.  1.  It  is  a  kingdom  in  which  the  disciples  are  cour- 
tiers. Here  discipleship  is  the  highest  degree.  2.  It  is  a  kingdom  in  which  the 
king's  laws  are  none  of  them  written  upon  paper  ;  they  are  written  upon  the  heart. 
3.  It  was  a  kingdom  in  which  riches  were  no  part  whatever  of  its  glory.  It  waa 
poverty's  own  temple.  4.  It  was  a  kingdom  without  armed  force.  5.  It  was  a 
strange  kingdom  because  it  was  without  any  pomp.  6.  He  came  to  establish  a  kingdom 
without  taxations.  All  its  gifts  are  of  love.  7.  It  was  a  kingdom  in  which  all  cre^ 
tures  were  considered.  8.  It  was  a  kingdom  of  joy.  IV.  The  practical  objects  o» 
THIS  KINGDOM.  1.  That  the  whole  city  was  moved.  Everybody  had  something  to 
say  about  it.  Some  would  say  that  "the  whole  thing  was  contemptible."  Many 
say  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  ridiculous.  They  want  more  pomp.  Others  in 
Jerusalem  were  no  doubt  filled  with  curiosity.  Some  looked  on  with  envy.  Soma 
were  moved  to  rejoice.  Christ  is  sure  to  make  a  stir.  2.  That  Christ  went  to  the 
temple.  He  drives  out  selfishness,  and  purifies  religion.  3.  He  held  a  grand  levee,  of 
all  whom  Hehad  healed  and  blessed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Another  royal  procession  :-— 
I.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  has  even  now  bright  and  glorioos  dais  of  special  mani- 
festation IN  His  Church.  1.  They  usually  occur  after  the  Lord  has  visited  His 
beloved  and  quickened  them.  He  came  into  Jerusalem  after  He  had  raised  Lazarua 
from  the  dead.  2.  When  His  disciples  were  obedient  to  Him.  He  told  His  dis- 
ciples to  go  and  they  went.  Disobedience  hinders  the  advance  of  the  gospel.  3. 
Another  indication  of  glory-days  will  be  found  in  the  prompt  and  cheerful  obedience 
■whick  His  disciples  will  make.  4.  The  glory  of  Christ  is  seen  when  He  is  publicly 
proclaimed  as  king.  We  must  desire  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  to  be  widely  made 
known  and  extended.  5.  On  such  days,  one  part  of  the  glory  consists  in  many  going 
forth  to  meet  Christ.  Pray  that  there  may  come  a  great  wave  of  religious  thought 
over  the  minds  of  people.  6.  Another  sign  is  prevailing  enthusiasm.  7.  There  was 
inquiry.  8.  His  enemies  were  quiet.  Such  are  the  marks  of  the  glorious  days  of 
Christ.  II.  That  on  these  glort-davs  of  Jesus  Christ  in  His  Church  likk 
HONOURS  ABE  PAID  TO  HiM  NOW  AS  THEN.  1.  He  is  at  this  time  as  loudly  praised  and 
as  greatly  rejoiced  in  among  His  people  as  He  was  then.  2.  He  received  then  as 
now  homage  from  all  kinds  of  people.  3.  The  little  ones  were  conspicuous.  HI. 
Christ  executes  the  same  deeds  as  He  did  then.  1.  Compassion  for  souls  is 
prominent.  He  wept  over  the  city.  2.  Judgment.  "  Now  they  are  hid  from  thine 
eyes."  3.  He  purged  the  temple.  4.  He  healed  the  sick  who  came  to  Him,  in 
the  temple.  5.  His  foes  were  all  confounded.  IV.  When  Christ  came  into  Jerusalem, 
ALL  WAS  NOT  GOLD  THAT  GLITTERED.  "  Hosanua  "  was  changed  into  •'  Crucify." 
When  hearts  are  impressed  with  the  gospel,  we  must  not  expect  all  to  be  steadfast 
to  Christ.  {Ibid.)  An  exciting  inquiry  : — "  Who  is  this?  "  I.  What  will  stib 
London  ?  A  reigning  Saviour  riding  in  triumph.  The  shout  of  a  king  is  not  in 
the  Church  ;  the  ancient  glory  has  departed.  The  world  cares  little  about  the 
Church  80  long  as  Christ  does  not  reign  in  her  palaces.  II.  We  must  be  able  to 
ANSWER  THE  QUESTION.  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer,"  &c.  You  must  have 
a  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  answer  should  be  clear  and  distinct.  [Ibid.) 
True  and  counti'rfeit  enthusiasm  : — I.  To-day,  as  long  ago,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true 
object  of  the  enthusiasm  of  mankind.  II.  There  may  be  outward  devotion  to  Christ 
while  the  heart  remains  a  stranger  to  His  nature.  His  claims,  and  His  love.  What 
are  our  religions  protestations  worth?  III.  Beware  of  regarding  emotional  excitement 
as  identical  with  religious  feelings  and  states  of  mind  and  heart.  The  religion  of  some 
people  exhausts  itself  in  hallelujahs;  they  possess  no  constant  principle.  {J.  R. 
Bailey.)        Christ's  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem: — I.  A  sorrowing  Saviour  and 

A  BEJOICINO  MULTITUDE.      II.  A   FIRM  SaVIOUB  AND  A  FICKLE    MULTITUDE.      Why    WaS 

this  multitude  so  fickle?  1.  Because  they  had  no  true  and  deep  understanding  of 
what  they  were  shouting  about  on  Sunday.  2.  Because  an  influence  from  a  different 
quarter  and  of  a  different  kind  was  brought  to  bear  upon  them  on  Friday.  III.  Thb 
Saviour  advancing  to  the  most  glorious  deed  of  all  history.  The  multitude 
advancing  to  the  most  atrocious  deed  of  all  history.  1.  Here  is  a  word  of  caution, 
2.  Here  Is  a  word  of  exhortation.  (IF.  Jones.)  Entire  consecration: — I.  Tna 
Lord  has  need  of  you.  1.  Your  prayers.  2.  Your  praises.  8.  Your  talents.  4. 
He  may  need  your  most  cherished  one,  that  which  your  heart  holds  fastest.  XL 
Natube's  beplies  to  this  claim.  1.  Unbelief  denies  the  claim.  2.  Weaknesi 
hesitates  till  the  opportunity  is  pa  3.  Simulation  seems  to  do  it,  but  does  not» 
4>  Selfishness  hugs  her  own.     6.      ow  much  affliction  passes  over  «  man  before  b« 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  467 

is  willing  to  comply  with  the  just  demauds  of  his  Creator.     {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Christ's  entry  into  the  world : — I.  Who  comes  ?    No  temporal  deliverer.     A  Divine 
King.     The  Son  of  God.     God  the  Son.     Upon  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  divinity 
depend  the  truth  of  His  teaching,  the  perfection  of  His  example,  and  the  infinite 
value  of  His  sacrifice.     II.  To  whom  does  He  come  ?     1.  To  a  world  needing  a 
Redeemer.    2.  To  humanity  wanting  a  Ruler.     3.  To  individual  souls  seeking  a 
king.     To  be  "  thy  King,"  He  must  reign  in  thy  heart,  over  thy  thoughts  and  affec- 
tions,    The  will  must  be  surrendered  to  Him.     III.  In  what  manneb  does  He 
COME  t     1.  Meek.     2.  Lowly.     Twin   graces  are  these.     We  need   them.     Pride 
was  the  principle  of  our  ruin.     Through  pride  Adam  fell.     Pride  is  a  false  imitation 
of  God — the  imitation  of  His  independency  ;  but  He  has  said,  "  My  glory  will  I  not 
give  to  another."    The  two  deepest  movements  of  the  human  soul  are  desire  and 
anger ;  meekness  and  lowliness  are  the  correctives  of  both.    IV.  How  crsHi  we 
TO  PREPABE  TO  EECEivE  HiM  ?    We  must  go  forth  to  meet  Him — (1)  by  a  holy  de6ix3 
and  longing  for  His  presence  ;  (2)  by  putting  away  our  sinful  habits  and  desires ;  (3) 
bjr  imitating  His  virtues  ;  (4)  by  obeying  His  laws ;  (5)  by  praying  for  a  loving,  for- 
giving spirit.    Blessed  Jesus,  reign  within  us;  cast  down  every  imagination  and 
svery  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  Thyself,  and  bring 
every  thought  into  captivity  to  Thy  holy  will.     Reign  within  us,  till  Thou  hast  put 
every  enemy,  every  movement  of  our  corrupt  nature  or  the  remnants  of  it,  under 
Thy  feet.    Reign  within  us  by  Thy  grace  here,  and  so  transform  us  that  we  may 
become  like  unto  Thee  in  Thy  glory  hereafter  1     (IF.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.)      Popular 
attractions  : — Here  is  a  multitude :  (1)  Attracted  by  marvellous  intelligence  ;  (2) 
Following  the  example  of  the  few ;  (3)  Rendering  regal  honour  to  the  son  of  a  car- 
penter ;  (4)  Looking  for  material  aggrandisement ;  (5)  In  a  little  while  exchanging 
"Hosanna"  for  "Crucify  Him."   (F.  Wagstaff.)      The  lowly  errand: — I.  This  history 
as  it  regards  our  Lobd.  Christ  really  prophesied,  and  events  proved  His  prophecy  truth. 
There  is  accuracy  of  detail,  most  wonderful.    There  was  miracle  as  well  as  prophecy  ; 
miracle  wrought  upon  mind;  poor  men  were  made  willing  to  give  up  their  property 
at  the  bidding  of  strangers.     A  striking  exhibition  of  power  appropriate  as  striking. 
It  taught  the  disciples  that  Christ's  presence  was  not  necessary  to  His  guardian- 
ship, that  He  could  act  on  their  enemies  as  well  from  a  distance  as  when  near ;  that 
His  knowledge  and  power  extended  to  minute  and  mean  things.     II.  Tub  conduct 
OF  THE  DISCIPLES.    They  obeyed  the  command  without  hesitation.    It  seemed  a 
wild  errand ;  looked   like  robbery,  improbable  of  result.     We  should  do  well  to 
imitate  their  obedience ;  a  readiness  to  fill  the  lower  offices.    We  are  active  enough 
in  great  enterprises,  but  have  no  taste  for  the  humbler  duties.     All  employment  for 
Christ  is  noble.     III.  The    conduct   of   the    owners  of  the  ass  and  the  colt. 
We  do  not  know  the  circumstances  and  character  of  these  men.     Whatever  their 
acquaintance  with   Christ  they  acted  as  stewards  of  their  property ;  not  as  pro- 
prietors.    It  will  be  a  new  era  in  the  Church  when  to  show  that  "  the  Lord  hath 
need  "  of  this  or  that  thing  shall  suffice  to  secure  its  chserful  bestowment.     It  is 
thus  with  children  and  friends,  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them."    In  a  thousand 
ways  God  is  saying  that  He  has  need  of  our  time,  talents,  property.     Let  us  yield 
cheerfully.     1.  The  vast  honour  given  to  humble  individuals  in  that  they  were 
allowed  to  contribute  to  the  progress  of  the  Saviour  when  accomplishing  an  ancient 
prediction.      We  may  all  do   something  towards  the  sublime  consummation  for 
which  the  Church  prays.     2.  When  He  comes  in  triumph  He  will  acknowledge  the 
services  rendered  Him.     (U.  Melvill,  B.D.)        The  Lord's  need : — He  speaks  as  a 
man  of  need.     He  who  could  see  all  things  and  foretell  all  things  confesses  to  His 
personal  necessity.     The  head  that  carried  all  knowledge  had  not  where  to  sleep,  of 
its  own  right  and  title.     And  again  in  that  very  self-same  sentence  He  used  a  word 
which  throws  the  term  need  into  striking  contrast — Lord.     Such  strange  mixture 
do  we  find  in  the  talk  of  this  Man.    Lord  and  need  in  the  same  sentence.     He  does 
not  give  up  His  royalty  because  of  His  necessity,  nor  does  His  royalty  and  lordship 
save  Him  from  need.      And  yet  what  need  could  He    have  who  had  but  to 
express  the  wish  and  it  was  instantly  complied  with  ?    It  was  a  sweet  necessity,  it 
was  the  pain  of  that  hunger  which  had  wherewith  to  satisfy  itself.    (Dr.  Parker.) 
Fulfilment  of  prophecy : — A  prophecy  may  be  said  to  be  fulfilled  four  ways.     I. 
When  the  self-same  thing  oomes  to  pass  which   was  literally  delivered   in  the 
prophecy.     II.  When  the  thing  allegorically  signified  is  fulfilled.     III.  When  as 
neither  the  thing  literally  nor  allegorically  meant,  bat  some  other  like  is  done.    IV. 
When  as  it  is  daily  more  and  more  fulfilled.     (John  Boys.)       Clothea  to  tread  on:— 
Plutaioh  mentions  it  as  a  drcumstance  of  respect  shown  to  Cato  the  Youngei 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  xxl 

opon  a  particular  occasion  by  the  soldiery,  that  they  laid  their  garments  for  him 
to  tread  upon  as  he  marched.  (C.  Buckley.)  The  city  moved  : — The  silence 
and  obscurity  of  Christ  never  troubles  the  world  ;  He  may  be  an  underling,  without 
any  stir  ;  but  if  He  do  but  put  forth  Himself  never  so  little  to  bear  the  least  sway 
amongst  men,  now  their  blood  is  up,  the  whole  city  is  moved.  Neither  is  it  tther. 
wise  in  the  private  economy  of  the  soul.  0  Saviour,  while  Thou  dost,  as  it  were, 
hide  Thyself,  and  lie  still  in  the  heart,  and  takest  all  terms  contentedly  from  us,  we 
entertain  Thee  with  no  other  than  a  friendly  welcome  ;  but  when  Thou  once  beginuest 
to  rufSe  with  our  corruptions,  and  to  exercise  Thy  spiritual  power  in  the  subjugation 
of  our  vile  affections,  now  all  is  in  a  secret  uproar,  all  the  angles  of  the  heart  are 
moved.  {Bishop  Hall.)  Christ  a  King  : — When  Mr.  Dawson  was  preaching  in 
South  Lamb<*th  on  the  offices  of  Christ,  he  presented  Him  as  prophet,  and  priest,  and 
then  as  the  King  of  Saints.  He  marshalled  patriarchs,  kings,  prophets,  and  apostles, 
martyrs  and  confessors  of  every  age  and  clime,  to  place  the  insignia  of  royalty 
upon  the  head  of  the  King  of  Kings.  The  audience  were  wrought  up  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  excitement,  and,  as  if  waiting  to  hear  the  anthem  peal  out  the  coronation 
hymn,  the  preacher  commenced  singing  "  All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  Name." 
The  audience,  rising  as  one  man,  eang  the  hymn  as  perhaps  it  was  never  sung 
before.    {Foiter, 

Vers.  12-14.    And  Jesus  went  Into  the  temple  of  Ood,  and  cart  out  all  them 

that  sold. — The  purification  of  the  temple  : — I.  This  act  shows  the  mind  of  Jesus 
concerning  the  reverence  which  is  due  to  the  house  of  God.  He  regarded  it  not  so 
much  as  the  temple  of  the  Jews  as  the  temple  of  God ;  He  revered  it  more  than  they 
did.  Their  reverence  was  formal,  pompous,  selfish  ;  His  was  spiritual,  looking  with 
solemn  eyes  on  the  meaning  of  its  name,  and  the  hohuess  of  its  purpose.  It  was 
sacred  to  the  holiest  hopes  of  man.  The  place  where  human  souls  held  communion 
with  the  Father  cannot  be  common.  II.  The  purification  of  the  temple  seems  to 
be  a  striking  intimation  of  the  great  purpose  of  His  ministry,  to  purify  God's  wor- 
ship everywhere,  in  the  outward  and  inward  temple,  in  the  house,  the  heart,  the 
life.  III.  We  may  behold  in  this  act  of  our  Saviour  one  of  the  primary  expressions 
of  the  universal  and  impartial  philanthropy  of  His  gospel ;  that  noble  principle 
which,  regardless  of  prejudice  or  artificial  distinction,  gathers  in  the  whole  family 
into  one  equal  brotherhood,  one  worshipping  assembly,  under  the  roof  of  one  undi- 
vided sanctuai-y.  The  desecrated  portion  was  the  court  of  the  Gentiles.  All  is 
holy.  The  rights  of  Gentiles  are  to  Jesus  as  sacred  as  those  of  the  Jews.  The 
temple  was  His  Father's  house.      {F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  Thieves  in  the 

temple : — What  is  that  which  we  must  labour  to  destroy  ?  What  weeds  be  those 
which  we  must  endeavour  to  root  out  ?  We  read  here,  that  our  Saviour  did  cast 
buyers  and  sellers  out  of  the  temple,  terming  them  "  thieves."  For  although  to 
buy  and  sell  be  actions  in  themselves  lawful  and  honest,  yet  the  time  and  place, 
with  other  circumstances,  may  so  change  their  quaUty,  that  he  which  buyeth  shall 
be  as  one  that  robbeth,  and  he  that  selleth  as  one  that  stealeth.  They  bought  and 
gold  in  tJu  temple ;  this  Christ  condemneth.  Yet  behold  what  a  beautiful  colour 
they  had  set  upon  their  wicked  practices,  to  make  them  seem  allowable  before  men  I 
For  of  the  judgment  of  God  they  made  no  account.  It  is  written  in  the  law  (Dent, 
xiv.  23-26).  Under  the  pretence  of  providing  that,  according  to  this  law,  men  which 
dwelt  far  off  might  always,  at  their  coming  to  the  temple,  have  sacrifices  there,  and 
offerings  in  a  readiness  to  present  before  the  Lord;  their  covetous  humour  fed 
itself  upon  the  people  without  all  fear  of  God,  without  any  reverence  at  all 
oi  His  sanctuary.  May  they  not  justly  be  termed  "thieves."  who,  pretending 
thus  to  serve  the  Lord  in  His  sacrifices,  robbed  and  spoiled  Him  in  His  saints? 
No  doubt  Jerusalem,  had  she  known  the  things  which  belonged  to  her  peace,  would 
have  blessed  the  hour  wherein  the  Lord  of  the  house  came  to  ease  that  holy  place 
of  so  intolerable  burthens,  to  rid  His  temple  of  so  noisome  filth.  (Archbishop 
Sandys.)  Den  of  thieves : — An  expression  that  was  protiably  used  by  our  Lord  in 
allusion  to  the  rocky  caves  and  dens  iu  the  mountainous  parts  of  Judnea,  which  were 
often  the  receptacles  of  thieves  and  robbers.  {G.  Buckley.)  The  temple  of  Ood: 
— The  relation  we  have  by  the  EvangeUst  of  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  came  out- 
wardly to  His  temple  may  suggest  to  us  His  coming  to  the  temple  of  the  human 
heart;  for  we  are  told  the  soul  of  every  Christian  is  a  temple.  The  stones  of  the 
temple  on  Mount  Morinh  were  common  stones  tUl  they  were  consecrated  for  God'i 
house  and  service.  So  the  talents,  the  capabilities,  the  powers,  and,  above  all,  tb« 
affections,  become  by  conversion  and  regeneration  a  dwelling-place  for  Jesus.     H( 


CHAP,  xsi.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  469 

refines  and  purifies  tbem,  and  the  figure  of  the  legal  consecration  becomes  in  the 
gospel  scheme  a  real  and  vital  holiness.  Let  us  recollect  that  the  sheep  and  oxen, 
the  doves,  and  the  tables  of  the  money-changers,  were  all  in  theviselves  needful  and 
right.  It  was  bringing  these  things  even  into  the  outer  court  of  the  temple  that 
defiled  it.  So  it  is  with  the  temple  of  the  heart.  How  does  selfishness,  how  do 
selfish  schemes  gradually  creep  into  Chiistian  hearts— nay,  how  do  they  sometimes 
at  last  find  a  footing  in  the  inmost  shrine  1  The  Christian  whose  heart  has  once 
been  purged  from  his  old  sins  is  not  in  a  position  of  absolute  security  because  he  ia 
in  Christ,  but  only  if  he  abide  in  Christ,  and  is  bringing  forth  really  good  fruit. 
The  Lord's  choicest  earthly  blessings  misused  become,  if  not  idols,  yet  like  the 
doves,  not  occupying  the  right  place.  And  our  Lord's  action  warns  those  who,  on 
whatever  pretext,  use  His  outward  visible  Church  for  unholy  purposes.  (R.  Bar- 
clay. )  Cherislied  evils  : — I  recollect  when  m  Pompeii  I  saw,  in  what  two  thou- 
sand years  ago  was  a  large  and  splendid  house,  a  shrine  or  temple  where  the  Lares 
and  Penates  were  placed ;  and  its  shape  and  form  are  still  in  existence,  in  pro- 
fessedly Christian  lands,  under  a  Christian  guise.  Is  there  not  sometimes  something 
which  has  a  resemblance  to  this  in  Christian  hearts,  or  in  Christian  families — 
relics  of  the  old  nature,  things  not  quite  sanctioned  by  our  conscience,  dis-positions 
of  mind  not  quite  in  accordance  with  the  mind  that  was  in  Chiist  Jesus,  which  have 
nevertheless  been  entertained  until  we  are  almost  unconscious  of  our  danger? 
{Ibid.)  Christ  cleansing  the  temple  : — We  have  a  similar  record  to  this  in  each  of 
the  four  Gospels.  I.  The  place  at  which  this  event  occurred.  Jesus  went  into  Die 
temple  of  God.  1.  The  appliances  and  construction  of  the  temple  in  our  Lord's  time 
indicated  a  process  of  development  in  the  system  of  Judaism.  2.  It  was  into  the 
capacious  court  of  the  Gentiles  that  our  Lord  entered,  and  in  which  He  found  these 
desecrations.  That  the  Jew  should  have  done  tuis,  marked  a  want  of  reverence 
and  a  proper  spiritual  feeling  with  regard  to  God's  worship  that  was  most  strange 
when  contrasted  with  all  the  holy  traditions  of  that  sacred  place.  II.  The  timk 
AND  THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THIS  occDKRKNCE.  The  chrouology  of  the  first  three 
Sospels  differ  considerably  from  that  of  the  fourth.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying 
that  this  act  was  done  twice — that  it  did  occur  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of 
His  ministry.  I  can  see  a  considerable  difference  in  the  circumstances  at  each 
period.  We  may  interpret  the  first  doing  of  fhis  act,  as  recorded  by  John,  as  done 
almost  exclusively,  certainly  pre-eminently,  as  Jesus  the  prophet — as  a  reformer, 
as  one  belonging  to  the  old  dispensation,  and  speaking  in  the  spirit  of  it.  But  at 
the  end  of  His  ministry  the  act  had  a  deeper  significance  and  a  wider  meaning : 
"  My  house  ^hall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations."  That  which  is  pol- 
luted and  degenerate,  let  it  pass  away.  Let  a  new  age  come.  Let  a  new  dispensa- 
tion be  established,  and  let  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  welcomed,  &c.  He  did  this 
second  action  more  emphatically  in  His  character  as  Messiah.  In  each  separate  act 
there  was  a  deep  significance,  and  both  teach  their  peculiar  lessons.  III.  Some  of 
the  GENEEAL  LESSONS  of  instruction  which  we  may  gather  from  them.  (T.  Binney.) 
The  cleansing  of  the  temjile : — Jesus  Christ  (1)  did  not  connive  at  abuses  for  the 
sake  of  securing  popular  favour ;  (2)  did  not  allow  abuses  to  be  continued  on  the 
ground  that  the  circumstances  were  temporary ;  He  knew  the  temple  would  soon 
be  destroyed ;  (3)  showed  that  man's  convenience  was  to  be  subordinated  to  God's 
right ;  (4)  showed  in  this,  as  in  all  other  cases,  that  the  right  one  is  morally 
stronger  than  the  wicked  many.      (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Varied  worshippers: — 

The  temple  itself  is  full  of  vacant  worship.  It  resounds  with  rash  vows  and 
babbling  voices.  It  is  the  house  of  God  ;  but  man  has  made  it  a  nest  of  triflers,  a 
lair  of  vanity,  a  den  of  thieves.  Some  come  to  it  as  reckless  and  irreverent  as  if 
they  were  tuepping  into  a  neighbour's  house.  Some  come  to  it,  and  feel  as  if  they 
had  laid  the  Most  High  under  obligation,  because  they  bring  a  sheaf  of  corn  or 
a  pair  of  pigeons ;  whilst  they  never  listen  to  God's  word,  nor  strive  after  that 
obedience  which  is  better  than  sacrifice.  Some  come  and  rattle  over  empty  forms 
of  devotions,  as  if  they  would  be  heard  because  of  their  much  speaking.  And  some, 
in  a  fit  of  fervour,  utter  vows  which  they  forget  to  pay ;  and,  when  reminded  of 
their  promise,  they  protest  that  there  must  be  some  mistake ;  they  repudiate  the 
vow,  and  say  it  was  an  error.  {Dr.  J.  Hamilton.)  A  worshipping  spirit : — It  was 
•aid  of  Sir  William  Cecil,  sometime  Lord  Treasurer  of  England,  that  when  he  went 
to  bed  he  would  throw  off  his  gown  and  say,  ••  Lie  there.  Lord  Treasurer,"  as 
bidding  adieu  to  all  State  affairs,  that  he  might  the  more  quietly  repose  himself : 
BC  when  we  go  to  any  religious  duty,  we  should  say,  "  Lie  by,  world ;  lie  by,  all 
Mcular  cares,  all  household  affairs,  sdl  pleasures,  ail  traffic,  all  thoughts  of  gain  i 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxj, 

lie  by  all ;  adieu  all!  "  The  blind  and  the  lame; — physical  infirmities  typical  of 
moral  defects  : — It  demands  but  little  acquaintance  with  Holy  Scripture  to  be  aware 
that  either  of  these  two  forms  of  bodily  ailment  is  the  common,  as  well  as  the 
obvious  emblem  of  a  corresponding  moral  defect  (Isa.  xlii.  7  ;  ix.  2  ;  xxxv.  6).  To 
these  two  classes  of  cures  Christ  Himself  refers  as  evidence  of  His  Messiahship 
(Matt.  xi.  4,  5).  A  subject  is  thus  set  before  us  in  which  we  find  our  place  without 
difficulty.  We  are  reminded  of  our  own  great  spiritual  infirmities  ;  of  our  need  o( 
His  Almighty  aid  who  poured  the  light  of  day  on  sightless  eyes,  and  gave  those 
ankle-bones  strength  which  before  were  powerless  in  Israel.  I.  For  surely  the  life 
of  many  of  us — our  own  life,  in  too  mant  kespects,  is  the  lite  of  the  blind. 
We  grope  our  way  in  self-reliance,  and  we  often  Jose  it.  We  stumble  and  fall.  Wa 
feel  after,  and  we  find  not ;  we  reach  forth,  and  we  grasp  not.  1.  We  read  God's 
Holy  Word,  yet  we  see  nothing,  or  very  little,  of  the  many  wonders  which  it  con- 
tdiJns.  The  veil  is  upon  our  hearts  while  we  read.  2.  We  look  abroad  on  the 
Miracles  of  Love  which  surround  our  dwelling  ;  we  look  within,  on  the  mystery  of 
Divine  goodness  in  which  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being ;  yet  we  recognize 
little  or  nothing  of  the  hand  of  God  either  within  or  without  us.  II.  Who,  again, 
does  not  see  in  the  helplessness  of  the  lame  a  lively  ttpb  of  his  own  con- 
dition which,  60  far  from  ^^  running  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments,"  knows 
not  how  to  "  walk  with  God  "  for  a  single  hour?  1.  Reluctant  to  begin  what  we 
know  to  be  holy.  2.  Unwilling  to  persevere  in  good  courses  begun.  3.  Sluggish 
in  spiritual  growth.  4.  Kemisa  in  prayer,  regarding  it  as  a  task  instead  of  a  recrea- 
tion.     (J.  W.  Burgon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Tlie  children  crying  In  the  temple. — The  blessedness  of  children'' $ 
•piety : — It  is  upon  the  child  that  this  sarcastic  question  still  falls.  Some  hardly 
think  the  children  can  be  converted.  The  Saviour's  answer  is  splendid  when  He 
said,  "  Have  you  never  read  ?  "  Never  caught  the  inner  sense,  never  read  so  as 
to  understand,  &c.  I.  Children  are  capable  of  vert  deep  piety.  1.  They  are 
capable  of  that  early  grace  with  which  true  religion  usually  begins — a  deep  repent- 
ance. 2.  No  one  who  has  seen  converted  children  will  ever  doubt  their  capacity 
for  faith,  in  some  respects  greater  than  that  of  the  adult.  Their  faith  is  more  easy, 
vivid,  effective.  3.  When  they  come  to  love  our  Lord,  they  do  love.  4.  I  have 
noticed  in  children  other  virtues — courage,  patience,  great  understanding  of  the 
fear  of  God.  II.  Children  are  capable  of  EENi.EBiNO»  in  the  hands  of  God, 
good  service.  1.  They  convey  healing  messages  to  those  about  them.  The  little 
maid  who  waited  upon  Naaman's  wife.  Often  guide  blind  souls  to  the  light.  Often 
guide  strong  men  to  some  great  action.  2.  They  serve  the  Lord  wonderfully  by 
their  prayers.  III.  The  children's  piety  and  the  children's  service  abk 
peculiarly  oloriftinq  to  God.  1.  Nothing  seems  to  me  to  glorify  God  so  much 
as  His  condescension  when  He  takes  a  little  child  and  instructs  it,  and  manifests 
Himself  to  the  child.  And  what  power  is  there  in  the  conversion  of  a  child.  If 
you  have  any  doubt  try  it  yourself.  2.  They  glorify  God  hecause  they  do  so  rebuke 
His  enemies.  Who  can  see  what  some  of  us  have  seen  in  children,  and  not  feel 
ashamed  we  have  lived  so  long,  and  yet  never  yielded  to  the  Redeemer's  love  ? 
3.  They  sometimes  rebuke  God's  own  people  and  so  glorify  Him.  Those  who 
have  never  made  confession  of  faith,  &c.  Sunday-school  teachers,  you  are  engaged 
in  a  most  blessed  work — persevere.  (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  Children  and  missions  : — 
It  is  not  well  to  overlook  the  influence  of  children,  or  to  neglect  them  in  making 
our  efforts  for  the  universal  diffusion  of  the  gospel.  Let  us :  I.  Ascertain  what 
IS  requisite  in  children  if  they  would  promote  the  cause  of  Jbsus.  That 
they  should  have  (1)  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  heathen ;  (2)  just  views 
of  the  gospel  as  adapted  to  save  them  ;  (3)  right  conceptions  of  the  value  of  im- 
mortal souls  ;  (4)  experimental  knowledge  of  the  love  of  Christ.   II.  What  children 

MAY  DO  FOB  CARRYINO   ON   THE    BLESSED    CAUSE    OF    JeSUS  IN  THE  WORLD.       They  Can — 

(1)  contribute  of  their  means ;  (2)  collect  from  others ;  (3)  pray  for  God's  blessing 
to  attend  their  efforts  and  give  success;  (4)  some  children  might  seek  gifts  and 
talents  for  missionary  work.  III.  What  should  induce  children  thus  to  feei. 
AND  work  in  the  CAUSE  OP  Chbist  ?  1.  Gratitude  to  God  for  His  goodness  to 
them.  2.  God's  command.  3.  Their  own  happiness.  (/.  Burns,  LL.D.) 
Christ's  praise  shouted  by  children  in  the  temple : — I.  The  doctbine  or  the  text. 
Christ  here  refers  to  a  composition  of  David  in  which  he  exalts  the  excellence  of 
God's  power.  In  this  verse  He  illustrates  His  power  by  giving  an  instance  of  it, 
that  God  makes  the  weakest  of  His  creatures  instruments  who  were  able  to  subdue 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  471 

♦he  greatest  powers  of  the  world.  1.  The  sovereignty  of  God.  2,  The  PuflBcienoy 
of  God's  strength.  3.  The  perfection  of  praise.  II.  The  cieoomstances  con- 
KBCTED  WITH  THE  TEXT.     Our  Lord  was  making  His  last  entry  into  Jerusalem. 

1.  A  token  of  love.  2.  A  sign  of  hatred.  (1)  God  is  never  more  glorified  than  in  the 
religion  of  the  young.  (2)  All  who  acknowledge  Christ  are  bound  to  promote  this 
well-pleasing  tribute  to  the  glory  of  God.  {W.  Harrison,  31. A.)  The  children'i 
Divine  Friend: — I.  The  memobable  events  in  the  text.  1.  The  Saviour's 
wonders.  The  wonders  wrought  by  Christ  were  diversified  in  character,  compre- 
hensive in  extent,  and  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  the  times.  The  scene  of 
the  miracles  is  the  temple  of  God.  On  the  one  part,  He  cast  out  (vers.  12,  13) ; 
and  on  the  other,  He  healed  (ver.  14).  What  could  have  been  better  timed  than 
following  up  the  miracle  of  majesty  with  that  of  mercy  ?  2.  The  children's  praises. 
(1)  The  object  of  the  praise,  "The  Son  of  David."  (2)  The  character  of  the 
praise.  (3)  The  parties  engaged  in  rendering  the  praise.  U.  The  offence 
occABioNBD.  1.  The  persons  who  were  the  subjects  of  this  uneasiness.  2.  The 
height  to  which  their  anger  rose.  3.  The  way  in  which  their  displeasure  was 
manifested.  III.  The  concise  but  satispactobt  vindication.  IV.  The  ample 
instruction  derivable  from  the  scenes  and  wonders  that  distinguish  this  eventful 
season.     1.  They  show  the  Saviour  in  the  true  dignity  and  glory  of  His  character. 

2.  They  show  the  glorious  triumphs  of  the  reign  of  grace,  in  the  perfecting  of  the 
praise  of  babes.  3.  Encouragement  to  parents  to  bring  their  children  to  Jesus  and 
to  His  temple.  {J.  Gray.)  God  glorified  in  little  children: — God  is  glorious  in 
the  smallest  as  in  the  greatest  of  "Eii  works ;  the  least  flower  awakens  admiration 
in  an  equal  degree  with  suns.  I.  It  is  to  the  glory  op  God  that  there  is  such 
A  state  as  that  of  infancy  and  childhood.  The  infant  mind  is  spread  out  to 
receive  the  impress  of  Christ.  He  has  perfected  praise  in  forming  a  period  of 
human  existence  so  capable  of  right  impression.  II.  God  glorifies  Himself  in 
little  children  by  often  making  them  powerful  instruments  of  good  to  others. 
These  will  not  defraud  Him  of  praise.  III.  God  again  perfects  His  praise 
IN  children  in  making  them  capable  of  receiving  and  reflecting  the  image 
OF  Christ.  IV.  It  is  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God  that  infants  and  chil- 
dren ARE  BO  much  the  OBJECTS  OF  His  CARE.  V.  But  especially  does  God  glorify 
Himself  in  the  removal  of  so  many  little  children  at  an  early  age.  VI.  But 
it  is  especially  in  the  assurances  that  the  souls  of  departed  children  are  happy  in 
heaven,  that  God's  name  is  to  be  glorified.  (IF.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  Children 
glorify  God  by  being  useful  to  others  : — Often,  too,  have  little  ones  been  the  mes- 
sengers of  strength  and  consolation  to  believers.  In  one  of  the  darkest  periods  of 
the  Reformation,  when  Luther,  Melancthon,  and  others  were  assembled  under 
great  dejection  of  spirit,  to  consult  upon  what  should  be  done,  Melancthon  retired 
from  the  council  in  the  deepest  depression  of  spirit,  but  in  a  few  moments  returned 
again  with  a  countenance  beaming  with  confidence  and  joy ;  and  when  all  were 
surprised  at  the  change,  he  told  them  that  he  had  just  seen  a  sight  which  assured 
him  of  success — he  had  seen  some  Uttle  children  engaged  in  prayer  for  the  Eefor- 
mation,  whom  their  mothers,  who  were  assembled  for  the  same  purpose,  had 
brought  together,  and  he  was  assured  such  prayers  would  be  heard  of  God.  Courage 
in  the  needful  hour,  for  the  greatest  work  ever  accompUshed  by  uninspired  men, 
was  thus  breathed  into  the  soul  through  infants'  prayers.  (Ibid.)  Children  in 
the  temple  praising  the  Redeemer : — 1.  We  see  here  that  real  piety  is  not  confined 
to  men  of  years  or  learning.  2.  That  religion  in  its  main  substance  is  adapted  to 
the  capacity  of  the  young.  3.  From  the  example  before  us  we  learn  that  great 
benefit  may  accrue  to  youth,  from  a  stated  attendance  on  Divine  institutions. 
Public  worship  is  as  much  an  ordinance  of  God'  under  the  gospel,  as  was  the  Pass- 
over under  the  Law.  The  example  of  Jews  bringing  their  children  to  the  temple 
reproves  the  neglect  of  many  Christians.  4.  The  young  are  under  special  obliga- 
tions to  acknowledge  and  praise  the  Redeemer.  True  religion  will  operate  in  pious 
affections  and  exercises  of  heart  toward  Christ.  5.  That  youthful  piety  is  peculiarly 
pleasing  to  Christ.  {J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  Witnessing  children: — I.  The  children 
BEE,  whilst  others  are  blind.  They  see  what  scribe  and  priest,  with  all  their  learn- 
ing, see  not — the  Son  of  David.  Pride  does  not  hinder  their  sight.  There  ia 
fitness  between  the  mind  of  youth  and  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  II.  The  children 
BiNG,  although  others  are  silent.  UI.  The  children  receive  the  blessing  which  others 
lose.  {J.  M.  L.)  Christ's  encouragement  and  vindication  of  young  disciples  : — 
I.  Ths  childben's  acclamation.  "Hosannah  to  the  Son  of  David."  This  con- 
ndered  as  the  language  (1)  of  faith  and  trust  in  Christ ;  (2)  of  desire  and  good  will ; 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

(3)  of  praiBe ;  (4)  of  triumphant  joy.  Bemarks — 1.  Bebold  the  power  of  God'a 
grace  on  young  people  1  2.  How  lovely  and  delightful  is  it  to  see  "Buch  effects  of  it 
upon  them  1  3.  How  should  this  awaken  a  concern  for  the  youth  of  our  day  I  II, 
The  offence  taken  at  these  acclamations.  1.  The  persons  who  took  the  offence. 
2.  The  matter  of  their  offence.  3.  The  reasons  of  it.  Eemarks — 1.  Behold  the 
necessity  of  a  supernatural  work  upon  the  heart  to  bring  it  over  to  Christ !  2.  How 
vile  a  part  do  they  act,  who  go  about  to  discountenance  and  destroy  the  good  dis- 
positions of  young  people  toward  Christ  and  religion.  3.  Let  uotany  %oung  people 
be  discouraged  by  what  others  may  do  or  say,  to  turn  them  aside  from  Christ  and 
His  wayb.  III.  Odb  Lord's  vindication  of  those  young  ones  in  what  they  were 
doing.  1.  He  took  notice  of  them.  2.  The  high  account  He  made  of  what  they 
did.  3.  The  reproof  He  gave  to  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  for  objecting  againsi 
it.  Inferences — 1.  That  it  should  be  our  great  concern  to  own  and  honour  Christ. 
2.  That  the  earlier  we  begin  to  owu  and  honour  Him,  the  more  God's  praise  is 
thereby  advanced.  3.  That  He  will  own  and  honour  the  young  ones,  who  are 
brought  to  own  and  honour  Him.  (John  Ginjse.)  Children's  piety  : — How  much 
better  is  it  to  see  boys  and  girls  showing  a  serious  concern  about  Christ,  about  an 
interest  in  His  favour  and  love,  and  in  the  benefits  of  His  redemption,  and  about 
His  honour  and  glory  ;  and  to  see  our  sons  and  daughters  preferring  Him  to  all 
things  else,  and  devoting  themselves  to  His  service ;  than  to  see  them  lavish  away 
the  sprightly  parts  of  life  in  lightness  and  vanity,  in  rudeness  and  wickedness,  and 
in  thoughtless  neglect,  not  to  say  contempt,  of  God  and  our  Saviour,  of  religion, 
and  everything  that  relates  to  their  own  real  and  eternal  welfare  1  [Ihid.)  Praise 
and  help  from  children: — In  describing  his  early  persecutions  in  Moorfields,  White- 
field  says :  ••  Several  little  boys  and  girls,  who  were  fond  of  sitting  round  me  on 
the  pulpit  while  I  preached,  and  handed  to  me  people's  notes — though  they  were 
often  pelted  with  eggs,  dirt,  Ac,  thrown  at  me — never  once  gave  way,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  every  time  I  was  struck,  turned  up  their  weeping  eyes,  and  seemed  to 
wish  they  could  receive  the  blows  for  me.  God  made  them,  in  their  tender  years, 
great  and  living  martyrs  for  Him."  (<7.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Little  things  do  the  perfect- 
ing : — How  frequently  are  small  things  those  which  jjerfect  anything !  For 
instance:  it  is  the  bloom  of  the  plum  which  perfects  it,  the  scent  in  the  flower,  the 
cut  of  the  nostril,  or  the  dimples  in  a  countenance,  the  short  strings  in  a  harp,  the 
delicate  finishing  touches  in  a  picture.  What  perfects  a  fireside  but  the  children 
links?  what  perfects  a  cathedral  choir  but  the  children's  notes?  and  what 
perfects  God's  praise  but  the  "mouth  of  babes  and  suckUngs  "?  (W.  J.  Bolton.) 
Children  capable  of  deep  repentance  : — I  cannot  help  remembering  when  the  Lord 
dealt  with  me  as  a  child.  If  there  was  a  child  who  knew  the  power  of  sin  I  did. 
Tenderly  cared  for,  and  kept  from  all  sorts  of  evil  company,  yet  there  seemed  in  me 
as  if  the  great  deeps  within  my  nature  were  broken  up  in  vast  masf^es  of  sin  and 
rebellion  against  God.  I  have  met  with  hundreds  of  persons  every  day  in  riper 
years  who  I  am  sure  never  felt  the  hundredth  part  of  what  I  felt  when  I  was  as  a 
child,  under  God's  Spirit,  feeling  a  hatred  of  myself  because  I  had  not  lived  to  God 
and  loved  and  served  Him.  I  am  sure  I  speak  here  what  I  do  know,  aud  testify 
what  I  have  seen  in  scores  of  children,  that  their  repentance  has  been  true,  thorough, 
deep,  intelligent,  and  lasting,  and  they  have  known  their  way  to  the  foot  of  the 
cross,  and  seen  the  great  sacrifice,  and  have  wept  all  the  more  to  think  they  sh.ould 
have  offended  against  love  so  infinite  which  redeemed  them  and  made  them  free. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Children  capable  of  a  high  degree  of  faith  : — For  there  seema 
to  me  to  be  something  so  chaste  and  beautiful,  like  the  early  dew  glistening  in  the 
rising  sun-light,  about  this  blessed  faith  of  the  children.  They  may  teach  some  of 
us  how  to  believe  in  God,  There  is  a  story  of  a  child  who  went  to  a  prayer  meet- 
ing summoned  that  they  might  pray  for  rain,  and  she  took  her  umbrella  with  her. 
We  pray,  but  we  do  not  take  our  umbrellas.  That  is  the  very  essence  of  faith — 
to  expect  a  blessing  and  to  be  prepared  for  it.  Children  often  in  that  way  show  to 
ns  that  faith  is  not  to  be  a  show-thing,  a  pious  thing  to  talk  about,  but  a  thing  to 
act  upon  in  ordinary  concerns  of  everyday  life.  (Ibid.)  Courage  in  children  : — 
We  don't  always  look  for  that  in  children,  yet  have  they  shown  it.  The  martyr 
Laurence,  who  was  burnt  at  Colchester,  was  so  tortured  in  gaol  that  he  had  to  be 
<!arried  to  the  stake  in  a  chair,  and  all  the  grown-up  people,  afraid  that  they  might 
be  burnt  too,  forsook  him.  But  a  child  came  up  aud  said,  "  Lord,  strengthen  Thy 
gervant."  When  one  was  burnt  in  Smithfield  a  boy  was  seen  going  home  after  the 
burning.  Some  one  said,  "  Boy,  why  were  you  there?  "  He  said,  "  Sir,  I  wont  to 
learn  the  way.'     It  may  be  said,  "  Oh,  that  was  in  the  old  days."    But  vLoy  wU-J 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  473 

children  like  ours.  A  friend  once  said  to  the  widow  of  a  martyr,  "  Will  yoa  not 
urge  your  boy  to  forsake  his  faith?"  "  I  have  had  many  children,"  she  said, 
*•  but  I  never  had  one  so  well  bestowed  as  this  dear  boy,  though  he  is  to  be  burnt 
to  death. "  He  cheered  his  elder  companion,  and  stood  back  to  back  with  him  in 
the  flames.  They  have  taken  their  fair  share  of  suffering  in  martyr  days.  (Ibid.) 
Children  understand  the  fear  of  God: — It  has  been  my  pleasure  lately  to  admit  to 
the  church  a  large  number  of  little  children,  and  I  can  say  of  each  of  them  as  I 
have  talked  with  them — and  I  put  many  rather  difficult  questions  to  them  about 
the  things  of  God — and  whenever  the  question  has  been  vital,  there  has  never  been 
any  hesitancy  as  to  the  answer.  I  had  years  ago  a  good  brother  who  felt  it  nec3S- 
sary  to  put  questions  to  young  children  which  I  did  not  like.  He  asked  cne  child, 
"  Have  you  given  your  heart  to  the  Lord?"  The  little  boy  said,  "  Yes,  sir." 
•«  Oh,"  my  friend  said,  "  you  see  his  ignorance."  I  said,  "Has  the  Lord  given 
you  a  new  heart?  "  "  Tes,  sir,  the  Lord  Jesus  gave  me  a  new  heart  when  I  believed 
in  Him,  and  I  know  it  was  a  good  one."  My  friend  was  shut  up»  and  he  did  not 
ask  any  more  questions  ol  children  for  a  great  time.  Perhaps  what  they  know  ia 
truer  wisdom  sometimes  than  what  the  elders  know.  I  read  some  time  ago  that 
the  Jews  permit  children  to  read  the  Scriptures  when  they  are  five  years  old, 
but  not  the  Talmud  till  they  are  fifteen.  God  help  me  to  keep  on  reading  the 
Scriptures  and  never  get  to  the  Talmud  at  all.  Some  will  get  so  old  that  it  is  all 
l^almud  with  them — very  little  Bible.  With  the  children  there  is  no  Talmud ; 
they  just  keep  to  the  smooth  road.  What  they  know  is  worth  the  knowing, 
l?hereas  much  that  we  know  is  worse  than  nothing,  and  it  would  be  a  great 
blessing  if  we  forget  it.  Children  can  be  quick  in  understanding  in  the  fear 
o(  the  Lord,  {Ibid.)  Children  are  capable  of  great  service: — I  heard  of  a 
iittle  child  whose  father  was  wont  to  curse  and  swear,  and  when  the  father  was 
indulging  in  some  horrible  language  she  went  behind  the  door.  The  father  said, 
*^' What  are  you  doing  there?  Come  out."  Her  eyes  were  red  with  weeping. 
•^  What  are  you  crying  for  f  "  •'  Because,  dear  father,  I  could  not  bear  to  hear 
yt>u  talk  like  that. "  "  Well,  you  shall  never  hear  me  talk  like  that  again." 
{Ibid)  A  child's  simple  trust : — A  Little  girl,  who  had  long  nursed  a  sick  sister, 
was  getting  worn  out  One  morning,  as  she  trudged  along  to  procure  medicine,  she 
Ihought  how  hard  it  was  to  be  always  waiting  on  the  invalid  when  the  other  children 
were  at  play,  and  when  she  thought  also  how  likely  it  was  her  sister  would  die, 
between  weariness  and  grief  she  began  to  weep  bitterly.  But  a  sudden  thought 
•rossed  her  mind.  The  verse  came  to  her  memory,  "  I  know,  0  Lord,  that  Thy 
jidgments  are  right,  and  that  Thou  in  faithfulness  hast  afHicted  me."  Day  and 
tight  henceforward  she  never  wearied  in  her  attendance  on  the  invalid.  Her 
•heerful  countenance  did  more  good  than  the  medicines ;  and  ere  long  she  had  her 
reward,  for  her  sister  recovered.  A  boy's  prayer: — An  American  writer  says,  *•  A 
boy,  thirteen  years  of  age,  who  attended  one  of  our  mission  Sunday  schools,  waa 
hopefully  converted.  His  father  was  a  dissipated,  wicked  man,  who  kept  a  drink- 
il  ig  saloon,  and  thus  not  only  got  diunk  himself,  but  caused  others  to  do  so.  Thia 
dear  boy  asked  his  Sunday-school  teacher  what  he  should  do,  for  his  father  would 
make  him  wait  on  the  customers,  handing  out  the  poison  to  them ;  and  if  he  had 
not  better  leave  home.  His  teacher  told  him  not  to  leave  home,  but  begin  at  ouca 
to  pray  for  his  father,  and  she  would  pray  for  him,  and  for  his  father  too  ;  and  they 
both  commenced  to  pray  for  that  father.  In  a  few  weeks  he  left  off  drinking,  and 
Boon  after  left  off  selling,  too,  and  went  to  to  work  earn  an  honest  living ;  '  for,' 
eaidhe,  with  tears  running  down  his  face,  'something  has  been  the  matter  with  my 
dear  boy  for  sometime ;  and  the  other  day  I  heard  a  noise  in  the  room  where  he  sleeps ; 
it  was  a  kind  of  a  mournful  noise,  and  I  listened ;  and  don't  you  think  he  was 
praying  for  me  1  He  prayed  that  I  would  quit  selling — for  I  had  quit  drinking 
some  time  before  ;  and  I  felt  I  was  doing  wrong,  and  I  have  quit  it  all ;  and  the  next 
time  you  have  a  meeting  I  am  coming  with  my  boy. '  "  The  weak  made  to  perfect 
the  praise  of  God: — We  do  not  wonder  to  see  a  man  of  strong  constitution,  who 
eats  his  bread  heartily,  and  sleeps  soundly,  hve  ;  but  for  a  crazy  body,  full  of  ail- 
ments and  infirmities,  to  be  so  patched  and  shored  up  by  the  physician's  art,  that 
he  stands  to  old  age,  this  begets  some  wonder  in  the  beholders.  It  may  be  thou 
art  a  poor  trembling  soul,  thy  faith  is  weak,  and  thy  assaults  from  Satan  strong,  thy 
corruptions  stirring  and  active,  and  thy  mortifying  strength  little,  so  that  in  thy 
opinion  they  rather  gain  ground  on  thy  grace  than  give  ground  to  it ;  ever  and 
anon  thou  art  ready  to  think  thou  sha  t  be  cast  as  a  wreck  upon  the  devil's  shore : 
and  yet  to  this  day  thy  grace  Uvei ,  though  full  of  leaks  ;  now  is  it  not  worth  the 


4T«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  to. 


stepping  aside  to  see  this  strange  sight  ?  A  broken  ship  with  tiasts  and  hull  rent 
aud  torn,  thus  towed  along  by  Almisrhty  power,  through  an  angrj  sea,  and  armadat 
of  sins  and  devils,  safely  into  His  harbour.  To  see  a  poor  dilling  or  rush 
candle  in  the  face  of  the  boisterous  winds  and  not  blown  out :  in  a  word,  to  see  a 
weak  stripling  in  grace  held  np  in  God's  arms  till  he  beats  the  devil  craven :  this 
God  is  doing  in  upholding  thee ;  thou  art  one  of  these  babes,  out  of  w  ose  mouth 
God  is  perfecting  His  praise,  by  ordaining  such  strength  for  thee,  that  thoa,  a  babe 
in  grace,  shalt  yet  foil  a  giant  in  wrath  and  power.    \W.  Gurnal.) 

Ver.  17.  And  he  lodged  there. — The  value  of  domestic  happinent : — Domestic  lifa^ 
like  all  other  external  goods,  is  not  necessarily,  and  of  itself,  but  only  under  certain 
c  mditions,  in  particular  circumstances,  a  real  advantage,  and  a  source  of  true 
felicity.  Only  there  where  wisdom  and  virtue  dwell,  where  intelligent  well-meaning 
persons  hve  together,  only  there  dwell  peace,  satisfaction,  and  joy.  Wherever  do- 
mestic happiness  is  found,  it  shows  us  persons  who  are  connected  together  by  real, 
intrinsic  love  and  friendship,  who  live  entirely  by  each  other,  and  who  seektheir  happi- 
ness, their  honour,  and  their  force,  in  the  mutual  union  of  their  hearts.  Domestic 
happiness  supposes  a  taste  for  truth,  for  nature,  for  graceful  simplicity,  for  serene  re» 
puse,  as  they  are  in  contrast  with  error  and  art,  studied  and  forced  pleasures,  and  the 
more  ostentatious  and  poignant  diversions.  1.  The  comfort  of  domestic  hfe  is  the 
most  agreeable  relief  from  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  and  its  frequently  tiresome 
business.  2.  The  happinesa  of  domestic  life  is  quiet,  peaceful  self-enjoyment ;  a 
self -enjoyment  that  is  multiplied  and  ennobled  by  the  intimate  participation  in  all 
the  concernments  of  this  trusty  society.  3.  The  happiness  of  domestic  life  is  the 
delightful,  free,  and  intimate  association  between  harmonious  and  mutually  loving 
souls.  4.  The  happiness  of  domestic  life  is  inexhaustible.  It  renews  itself  daily, 
it  multiplies  itself  without  end.  6.  The  happiness  of  domestic  life  compensates 
the  want  of  any  other ;  but  no  other  can  compensate  the  want  of  that.  6.  The 
enjoyment  of  domestic  happiness  is  always  not  less  edifying  and  useful  than  pleasant. 
7.  To  the  enjoyment  of  domestic  happiness,  no  troublesome,  no  expensive  preparatory 
provisions  and  arrangements  are  needful.  8.  The  enjoyment  of  it  is  never  attended 
by  satiety  or  disgust,  by  sorrow  or  remorse.  9.  The  happiness  of  domestic  Ufe  is 
restricted  to  no  class  of  men.  It  is  attached  neither  to  station,  nor  to  opulence, 
nor  to  elevation  and  power ;  confined  neither  to  the  palace  nor  to  the  cottage.  (C  J. 
Zollikofer.)  The  ddighu  of  home: — If  you  would  enjoy  pleasure,  innocent, 
pure,  daily-renewing,  never  disgracing,  never  cloying  ;  delights  worthy  of  the  man 
and  the  Christian,  seek  them  not  at  a  distance  from  you,  since  they  lie  at  home  ; 
seek  them  not  in  things  which  are  not  in  your  power  ;  but  in  what  is  more  your 
own  ;  seek  them  in  the  happiness  of  domestic  life.  If  you  may  venture  to  expect 
them  anywhere,  it  is  certainly  there  they  must  be  found !    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  17-21.    And  when  He  saw  a  flg-tree  in  the  way.  He  came  to  It,  and  fonnd 

nothing  thereon. — The  barren  fig-tree : — I.  The  destruction  of  this  tree  was  not  an 
ACT  of  injustice.  People  find  it  difficult  to  understand  the  propriety  of  punishing 
an  inanimate  object  for  defects  which  are  only  possible  in  higher  existences.  They 
argue  that,  since  the  fig-tree  did  not  possess  freewill,  but  was  simply  obeying  the 
law  of  its  kind,  our  Lord's  act  was  capricious.  But  observe — 1.  The  supposed  force 
of  this  objection  is  due  to  our  treating  a  metaphorical  expression  as  if  it  were  the 
language  of  reality.  We  speak  of  "  doing  justice  "  to  a  picture,  when  we  mean 
justice  to  the  artist  who  painted  it.  The  picture  itself  cannot  possibly  be  treated 
justly  or  unjustly,  although  we  may  form  a  true  or  a  false  estimate  of  its  merits. 
Justice  and  injustice  pre-suppose  rights  to  be  respected  or  violated;  and  rights 
belong  only  to  a  person.  In  the  vegetable  world  there  is  no  such  thing  as  person- 
ality :  and  no  such  thing  as  "rights."  To  talk,  therefore,  of .  "injustice "  in 
blasting  or  cutting  down  a  tree,  is  good  English  if  we  are  in  the  realms  of  poetry, 
but  nonsense  if  in  those  of  moral  truth.  The  tree  is  there  to  be  made  the  most  of 
by  man.  No  one  has  yet  maintained  that  in  using  it  to  furnish  our  houses,  or 
brighten  our  hearths,  we  sin  against  any  law  of  natural  justice.  Surely,  then,  if 
by  its  sudden  destruction  the  tree  can  do  more,  much  more,  than  minister  to  our 
bodily  comfort — if  in  its  way  it  can  be  made  to  teach  us  a  moral  lesson  of  the  first 
importance — there  is  no  room  for  any  question  of  injustice.  What  is  merely 
material  must  always  be  subordinated  to  the  moral  and  spiritual ;  and  if  a  tree  can 
be  made,  by  its  destruction,  to  illustrate  a  moral  or  spiritual  truth,  a  high  honoox 
iBsnt  upon  it,  a  noble  work  given  it  to  do.     II    There  was  mo  unusual  betebiti 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  47f 

IN  THIS  ACT.  The  tmest  mercy  always  sacrifices  the  lower  to  the  higher.  It  is  not 
more  crael  to  destroy  a  plant  in  order  to  teach  a  great  moral  truth,  than  to  destroy 
a  plant  in  order  to  eat  it.  If  by  its  destruction  the  plant  does  our  soul  a  service 
there  is  quite  as  good  a  reason  for  putting  it  to  some  sort  of  distress,  in  the 
process  of  destroying  it,  as  there  is  if  it  is  wanted  to  support  our  bodies.  {Canon 
Liddon.)  Parabolic  and  prophetic  elements  in  the  destruction  of  the  Jig-tree  : — This 
incident  is,  from  first  to  last,  an  acted  parable.  It  would,  perhaps,  be  truer  to  say, 
that  it  is  an  acted  prophecy.  In  the  East  action  was,  and  still  is,  often  a  more 
vivid  and  effective  way  of  communicating  truth  than  language.  WTien  a  prophet 
of  Israel  sat  in  sackcloth,  with  dust  on  his  hf  ad,  by  the  side  of  the  road  along 
which  the  royal  chariot  would  pass,  his  action  was  a  much  more  powerful  rebuke 
to  the  monarch  for  neglect  of  duty  than  a  sermon  would  have  been — even  though 
it  had  an  introduction,  three  arguments,  and  a  conclusion.  The  East,  as  I  have 
Baid,  is  traditionally  the  home  of  eloquent  action ;  but  in  all  countries  and  ages 
human  action  is  a  kind  of  human  language,  and  it  is  often  much  more  impressive 
than  words  which  fall  upon  the  ear.  In  our  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  in 
our  worship  of  God,  action  expresses  thought  and  feeling  in  a  condensed  way  which 
often  could  onlv  be  put  into  very  cumbrous  and  awkward  language ;  and  our  Lord 
on  this  occasion  was  teaching — teaching  in  the  main  by  action.  He  was  acting  a 
parable,  and  no  objection  can  be  urged  against  His  action  to  which  teaching  by 
parable — that  is  to  say,  by  putting  forward  an  imaginary  story  as  if  it  were  literally 
true — is  not  always  open.  What,  then,  was  the  lesson  which  on  this  occasion  He 
desired  to  teach  t  Was  it  simply  the  shame  and  guilt  in  every  responsible  creature 
of  God's  hand,  of  moral  unfruitfulness  ?  Did  He  cause  the  tree  to  wither  because 
it  was  the  symbol  of  nations  and  of  men  who  do  notliing  for  His  glory  and  nothing 
for  their  fellows  ?  That  He  does  punish  such  unfruitfulness  is  certain  ;  but  this  ia 
not  the  lesson  He  would  teach  us  here.  The  time  of  figs  was  not  yet.  To  use 
figurative  language,  the  tree  did  not  sin  by  not  producing  figs  at  a  time  of  the 
year  when  they  could  only  have  been  produced  in  the  open  air  by  what  we  call  a 
freak  of  nature,  or,  rather,  in  despite  of  her  ordinary  rules.  The  tree  was  a  symbol 
of  that  which,  in  man,  is  worse  sin  than  a  merely  fruitless  life.  It  had  leaves,  you 
will  observe,  though  it  had  no  fruit.  That  was  the  distinction  of  this  particular 
tree  among  its  fellows  ranged  along  the  road,  with  their  bare,  leafless,  unpromising 
branches.  They  held  out  hopes  of  nothing  beyond  what  met  the  eye.  This  tree, 
with  its  abundant  leaves,  gave  promise  of  fruit  that  might  be  well-nigh  ripe ;  and 
thus  it  was  a  symbol  of  moral  or  of  religious  pretentiousness.  Not  simply  as  nn- 
fruitful,  but  because,  being  unfruitful,  it  was  covered  with  leaves,  it  was  a  fitting 
symbol  of  that  want  of  correspondence  between  profession  and  practice — between 
claims  and  reality — between  the  surface  appearances  of  life  and  its  real  direction 
and  purpose — which  our  Lord  condemned  so  often  and  so  sternly  in  the  men  of  Hia 
time.  And,  as  representing  this,  it  was  condemned  too.  {Ibid.)  Applica- 
tion of  this  acted  parable : — I.  The  fig-tree  represented  immediately,  we  cannot 
doubt,  in  our  Lord's  intention,  the  actual  state  of  the  Jewish  peoplb.  The 
heathen  nations,  judged  from  a  Divine  point  of  view,  were  barren  enough.  Israel 
was  barren  also,  but  then  Israel  was  also  pretentious  and  false.  Israel  was  covered 
with  leaves.  The  letter  of  the  law — the  memories,  the  sepulchres  of  the  prophets — 
the  ancient  sacrifices — the  accredited  teachers — all  were  in  high  consideration. 
Israel  was,  to  all  appearance,  profoundly  religious.  But  the  searching  eye  of  our 
Lord  found  no  fruit  upon  this  tree  beneath  the  leaves — no  true  soul-controlling 
behef  even  in  the  promises  of  the  Messiah,  of  which  they  made  so  much — no  true 
sense  of  their  obligation  and  of  their  incapacity  to  please  God.  The  tree  by  the 
roadside  was  a  visible  symbol  of  the  moral  condition  of  Israel  as  it  presented  itself 
to  the  eye  of  Christ,  and  there  was  no  longer  any  reason  for  suspending  the  judg- 
ment which  had  been  foretold  in  the  Saviour's  parable.  "  No  man  eat  fruit  of  thee 
hereafter  for  ever."  If  humanity  needed  light,  strength,  peace,  consolations,  Israel 
could  no  longer  give  them.  Israel  was  hereafter  to  be  a  blasted  and  withered  tree 
on  the  wayside  of  history.     II.  The  parable  applies  with  equal  force  to  nations  ob 

TO   CHURCHES   IN    ChBISTENDOM    WHICH    MAKE    GHEAT    PRETENSIONS    AND    DO    LITTLE    Ok 

NOTEiNQ  o»  REAL  VALUE  TO  MANKrND.  FoT  a  time  the  tree  waves  its  leaves  in  the 
wind.  It  lives  on,  sustained  by  the  traditional  habits  and  reverence  of  ages.  Men 
admire  the  symbol  of  so  many  blessings — of  so  much  activity  and  Ufe.  There  is 
nothing  to  raise  a  question  as  to  the  true  state  of  the  case.  But,  at  His  own  time, 
Christ  passes  along  the  highway — passes  to  inquire  and  to  judge :  some  unforeseen 
calamity,  some  public  anxiety,  some  shock  to  general  confidence,  lifts  the  leaves  of 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

that  tree  and  discovers  its  real  fruitlessness.  III.  To  evert  iNDivmuAL  Chkistiau 
THIS  PARABLE  IS  FULL  OF  WARNING.  The  religious  activity  of  the  human  soul  may 
be  divided,  roughly,  into  leaves  and  fruit — showy  forms  of  religious  activity  and 
interest  on  the  one  side,  and  the  direct  produce  of  religious  conviction  on  the  other. 
It  is  much  easier  to  grow  leaves  than  to  grow  fruit ;  and  many  a  man's  life 
veils  the  absence  of  fruit  by  the  abundance  of  leaves.  To  take  an  interest  in 
religious  questions  and  discussions  is  better  than  to  be  totally  indifferent  to  them  ; 
but  mere  acquaiutance  with,  and  interest  in,  such  proves  nothing  as  to  the  condi- 
tion of  the  conscience — the  real  tenor  of  the  heart — the  deepest  movements  of  the 
inmost  hfe — the  soul's  state  before  God,  and  its  prospects  for  eternity.  An  anxioua 
question  for  all  is,  whether  the  foliage  of  our  Christian  life  is  the  covering  of  fruit 
beneath  that  is  ripening  for  heaven,  or  only  a  thing  of  precocious  and  unnatural 
growth  which  has  drained  awaj'  the  tree's  best  sap  before  its  time,  and  made  good 
fruit  almost  impossible.  No  show  of  leaves,  no  fervour  of  language,  no  glow  of 
feeling,  no  splendour  of  outward  achievements  for  Christ's  cause  and  kingdom,  will 
eompensate,  in  His  sight,  for  the  absence  of  the  fruits  of  the  spirit.  (Ibid.) 
Promise  and  performance  :  —  This  parable  from  history  teaches  us  the  worth- 
lessness  of  religious  promises  that  are  never  fulfilled,  and  the  guilt  of  appear- 
ing to  be  fruit- bearers  when  the  eye  of  God  sees  nothing  but  leaves.  There  is  no 
sin  in  promises.  Clierry-trees  must  issue  their  white  and  fragrant  "promissory- 
notes  "  in  May,  or  there  would  be  no  payment  in  delicious  fruit  at  the  end  of  the 
allotted  sixty  days.  God  makes  precious  promises  to  us;  and  a  converted  heart  is 
only  in  the  line  of  duty  when  it  makes  a  solemn  promise  or  covenant  to  the  church 
and  its  head,  Christ  Jesus.  There  is  no  sin  in  a  church-covenant  honestly  made. 
The  sin  is  in  breaking  it.  How  full  of  leaves  was  the  plausible  fig-tree  on  the  way 
to  Bethany  !  How  profuse  of  promises  is  many  a  young  professor  as  he  stands  up 
laden  with  the  foliage  on  .which  the  dew-drops  of  hope  are  glistening  1  How  mucJi 
his  pastor  expects  from  him.  He  makes  no  reserve  w'nen  he  covenants  to  consecrate 
himself,  all  that  he  is,  and  all  that  he  has,  to  the  service  of  his  Redeemer.  For  a 
time  the  glossy  leaves  of  profession  make  a  fair  show.  But  when  the  novelty  of 
the  new  position  has  worn  off,  and  the  times  of  reaction  come,  then  the  yoke  begins 
to  gall  the  conscience,  and  every  religious  duty  becomes  an  irksome  drudgery. 
The  cross  loses  its  charm ;  prayer  loses  its  power ;  the  Word  of  God  ceases  to 
attract ;  the  very  name  of  Jesus  no  longer  possesses  a  charm ;  and  church- 
membership  has  become  a  hateful  mask,  which  its  owner  is  ashamed  to  wear,  and 
yet  afraid  to  fling  away.  Before  the  world  tbe  fig-tree  still  bears  leaves ;  but 
beneath  them  is  utter  barrenness.  {T,  L.  Cuyler,  D.I).)  Cursing  of  the  fruitless 
fig-tree: — I.  The  doom  of  things  which  do  not  meet  the  wants  of  the  time.  II. 
The  terrific  prospect  of  meeting  a  disappointed  Christ,  III.  The  perfect  dominion 
of  the  spiritual  over  the  material.  IV.  Tne  vast  possibilities  of  undoubting  prayer. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  Jig-tree  cursed: — I.  The  fig-tree  flourishing.  1.  Ita 
nature,  not  a  common  tbistle,  from  which  men  do  not  think  to  gather  figs  (Matt.  vii. 
16).  But  a  fruit-bearing  tree.  2.  Its  situation.  By  the  wayside,  provoking  atten- 
tion, and  inviting  inspection.  Such  human  trees  are  often  more  anxious  to  be 
noticed  than  the  really  fruitful.  3.  Its  appearance.  Covered  with  leaves.  Theie- 
fore  (ver.  19)  fruit  might  be  reasonably  expected.  It  made  a  fair  show  and  a  bold 
promise.      Do  we  in  any  wise  resemble  this  tree  ?     II.  The  fig-tree  examined. 

1.  The  Lord  was  hungry — He  needed  fruit.  He  needs  our  fruitfuluess.  2.  It  waa 
seasonable  as  respects  the  tree.  It  outrivalled  and  surpassed  the  rest  in  forward- 
ness—its  time  of  figs  had  come.  3.  It  was  carefully  conducted ;  not  a  casual  and 
distant  glance.  He  knew  without  going,  but  went  to  show  His  care  and  awaken 
thought.  III.  The  fio-tree  withered.  1.  Its  leaves  did  not  save  it.  Profession 
without  reality  there  may  be  ;  but  there  will  not  long  be  reahty  without  profession. 

2,  The  Lord  cursed  it  to  show  how  hypocrisy  deserves  to  be  treated,  By  such  the 
world  is  apt  to  be  deceived,  touching  the  nature  of  religion.  Many  have  the  form 
of  godliness  who  deny  the  power.  Their  end  is  nigh.  3.  Those  who  persevere  in 
hypocrisy  may  be  bereft  of  the  power  of  producing  fruit.  Hypocritical  and 
perfunctory  habits  destroy  this  power.  Thus  spiritual  life  withers  away. 
Learn : — 1.  To  be  thankful  that  we  are  fruit-trees,  not  thistles.  2.  To  be 
anxious  to  be  fruitful  fruit-trees  (Gal.  v.  22  ;  Eph.  v.  9).  3.  It  is  time  foi 
fruit  directly  the  leaves  begin  to  spring.  With  us  now.  (J.  C.  Oray.)  Self, 
/orgetfulness  of  Christ: — Our  Lord's  work  lay  chiefly  in  the  city ;  thither,  there- 
fore. He  repairs  betimes,  and  forgot,  for  haste,  to  take  His  breakfast,  as  it 
may  seem,  for  ere  He  came  to  the  city  He  was  hungry,  though  it  was  but  »  atef 


OTAP    ixi.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  477 

thither.  A  good  man's  heart  is  where  his  calling  is :  such  an  one,  when  he  ia 
Tisiting  friends  or  so,  is  hke  a  fish  in  the  air  ;  whereunto  if  it  leap  for  recreation 
or  necessity,  yet  it  soon  returns  to  its  own  element.  (John  Trapp.)  A  fruit- 
ful profession  : — It  is  said  of  Kev.  Dr.  Franklin  that  he  had  a  passion  for  fruitf ul- 
ness.  His  signet-ring  had,  for  a  device,  a  fruit-bearing  tree,  with  the  motto  from 
Psalm  i.  3.  And  when  near  his  end,  being  asked  by  his  son  and  pastoral  suceeasor 
for  some  word  of  condensed  wisdom  to  be  treasured  up  as  a  remembrance  and  a 
prompter,  he  breathed  into  his  ear  the  word,  •'  Fruitful. "  The  hunger  of  Christ : — 
Thou,  that  givest  food  to  all  things  living,  art  Thyself  hungry.  Martha,  Mary,  and 
Lazarus,  kept  not  so  poor  a  house  but  that  Thou  mightest  have  eaten  somethinc^  at 
Bethany.  Whether  Thy  haste  outran  Thine  appetite,  or  whether  on  purpose  Thou 
forbearest  repast,  to  give  opportunity  to  Thine  ensuing  miracle,  I  neither  ask  nor 
resolve.  This  was  not  the  first  time  that  Thou  wast  hungry.  As  Thou  wouldst  be 
a  man,  so  Thou  wouldst  suffer  those  infirmities  that  belong  to  humanity.  Thou 
camfst  to  be  our  High  Priest;  it  was  Thy  act  and  intention,  not  only  to  intercede 
for  Thy  people,  but  to  transfer  unto  Thyself,  as  their  sins,  so  their  weaknesses  and 
complaints.  But  what  shall  we  say  to  this  Thine  early  hunger  ?  The  morning,  as 
it  is  privileged  from  excess,  so  from  need ;  the  stomach  is  not  wont  to  rise  with  the 
body.  Surely,  as  Thy  occasions  were,  no  season  was  exempted  from  Thy  want. 
Thou  hadst  spent  the  day  before  in  the  holy  labour  of  Thy  reformation :  after  a 
Bupperless  departure,  Thou  spentest  the  night  in  prayer :  no  meal  refreshed  Thy 
toil.  What  do  we  think  much,  to  forbear  a  morsel,  or  to  break  a  sleep  for  Thee, 
who  didst  thus  neglect  Thyself  for  us?  {Bishop  Hall.)  Withering  of  the  fruit- 
less fig-tree: — I.  Thb  occukrence  which  the  evangelist  describes.  1.  The 
Saviour's  hunger.  2.  The  disappointment  He  met  with.  3.  The  doom  He  pro- 
nounced.  11.  The  coiiaiENX  made  upon  it  by  the  disciples.  "  How  soon  is  the 
fig-tree  withered  away,"  &c.  1.  When  this  exclamation  was  uttered.  2.  The  feel- 
ing with  which  it  was  uttered.  III.  The  reply  which  this  remark  called  forth 
FROM  OUR  Lord.  1.  A  wonderful  assertion.  "If  ye  have  faith,"  &c.  An  en- 
couraging promise.  "And  all  things  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,"  «fec. 
(Expository  Outlines.)  Profession  : — It  is  no  good  sign  when  all  the  sap  goes  up 
the  leaves,  and  is  spent  that  way ;  nor  in  a  Christian,  when  all  his  grace  shoots  up 
into  woods,  a  verbal  goodness;  no  reality  at  all.  (Adams.)  Profession: — When 
the  Interpreter  had  done,  he  takes  them  out  into  his  garden  again,  and  led  them 
to  a  tree,  whose  inside  was  all  rotten  and  gone,  and  yet  it  grew  and  had  leaves. 
Then  said  Mercy,  "  What  means  this?  "  "  This  tree,"  said  he,  "  whose  outside  ia 
fair,  and  whose  inside  is  rotten,  is  it  to  which  many  may  be  compared  that  are  in 
the  garden  of  God  ;  who  with  their  mouths  speak  high  in  behalf  of  God,  but  in 
deed  will  do  nothing  for  Him  ;  whose  leaves  are  fair,  but  their  heart  good  for  nothing 
but  to  be  tinder  to  the  devil's  tinder-box.  (Bunyan.)  Profession  : — Our  profes- 
sion without  practice  is  but  hypocritical,  making  us  resemble  the  stony  ground 
which  brought  forth  a  green  blade,  but  no  fruit  to  due  maturity ;  like  the  fig-tree, 
which,  having  leaves  but  no  figs,  was  accursed ;  like  the  tree  in  the  garden,  which, 
cumbering  the  ground  with  its  fruitless  presence,  was  threatened  to  be  cut  down ; 
like  glow-worms,  which  have  some  lustre  but  no  heat — seeing  such  professors  shine 
with  some  light  of  knowledge,  but  without  all  warmth  of  Chxistian  oharity. 
iX)owname.) 

Ver.  22.  And  all  thlngrs  whatsoever  ye  ask  In  prayer  believing. — Faith  m 
prayer : — Alexander  the  Great  Lad  a  famous  but  indigent  philosopher  in  his  court. 
This  adept  in  science  was  once  particularly  straitened  in  his  circumstances.  To 
whom  should  he  ai)ply,  but  to  his  patron,  the  conqueror  of  the  world.  He  no 
sooner  made  his  request  than  it  was  granted.  Alexander  gave  him  a  commission 
to  receive  of  his  treasury  whatever  he  wanted.  He  immediately  demanded,  in  his 
sovereign's  name,  ten  thousand  pounds.  The  treasurer,  surprised  at  so  large  a 
demand,  refused  to  comply  ;  but  waited  upon  the  king,  and  told  him  of  the  request, 
remarking  how  unreasonable  he  thought  the  petition,  and  how  exorbitant  the 
■am.  Alexander  heard  him  with  patience ;  but,  as  soon  as  he  had  ended  hie 
remonstrance,  replied,  •*  Let  the  money  be  instantly  paid.  I  am  delighted  with 
this  philosopher's  way  of  thinking;  he  has  done  me  a  singular  honour;  by  the 
largeness  of  his  request  be  shows  the  high  idea  he  has  conceived  both  of  my 
superior  wealth  and  my  royal  munificence."  We  cannot  honour  God  more  than  by 
believing  what  He  says,  and  acting  upon  hat  faith  in  all  our  requests  at  His  throne. 
Prayer  based  on  Ood's  promise : — Prayer  is  the  bow.  the  promise  is  the  arrow ;  fiitli 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

is  the  hand  which  draws  the  bow,  and  sends  the  arrow  with  the  heart's  message  to 
heayen.  The  bow  without  the  arrow  is  of  no  use,  and  the  arrow  without  the  bow 
is  of  little  worth,  and  both  without  the  strength  of  the  hand  are  to  no  purpose. 
Neither  the  promise  without  prayer,  ntr  prayer  without  the  promise,  nor  both 
without  faith  avail  tlie  Christian  anything.  WhaJ;  was  said  of  the  Israelites, 
*'  They  could  not  enter  in,  because  of  unbelief,"  the  same  may  be  said  of  many  of 
our  prayers ;  they  cannot  enter  heaven,  because  they  are  not  put  up  in  faith. 
{Slater.)  Literal  answer  to  prayer : — Some  fifty  years  ago,  one  bitter  January 
night,  the  inhabitants  of  the  old  town  of  Schleswig  were  thrown  into  the  greatest 
distress  and  terror.  A  hostile  army  was  marching  down  upon  them,  and  new  and 
fearful  reports  of  the  conduct  of  the  lawless  soldiery  were  hourly  reaching  the 
place.  In  one  large,  commodious  cottage  dwelt  an  aged  woman  with  her  -yidow 
daughter  and  a  grandson.  Wliile  all  hearts  quaked  with  fear,  this  saintly  soul 
passed  her  time  in  crying  out  to  God  that  He  would  "  build  a  wall  of  defence  round 
about  them,"  quoting  the  words  of  an  aucieut  hymn.  Her  grandson  asked  why 
ehe  prayed  for  a  thing  so  entirely  impossible  as  that  God  should  build  a  wall  about 
their  house,  which  should  hide  it ;  but  she  explained  that  her  meaning  only  waa 
that  God  should  protect  them  in  whatever  way  seemed  to  Him  best.  At  midnight 
the  dreaded  tramp  was  heard,  and  the  enemy  came  pouring  in  at  every  avenue, 
filling  the  houses  to  overflowing.  But,  while  most  fearful  sounds  were  heard  on 
every  side,  not  even  a  knock  came  to  their  door ;  at  which  they  were  grtatly  sur- 
prised. The  morning  light  cleared  up  the  mystery  ;  for,  just  beyond  the  house,  the 
drifted  snow  had  reared  such  a  massive  wall  that  it  was  impossible  to  get  over 
it  to  them.  "  There  1  "  said  the  good  woman,  triumphantly  ;  "  do  you  not  see, 
my  son,  that  God  could  raise  up  a  wall  around  us  ?  "  The  infiuence  of  believing 
prayer  lias  a  good  analogy  in  the  daguerrotijpe : — By  means  of  this  process  the 
features  of  natural  objects  are  thrown  upon  a  sensitive  sheet  through  a  lens 
and  leave  their  impression  upon  that  sheet.  So  when  the  character  of  God  is,  by 
means  of  prayer,  brought  to  bear  upon  the  mind  of  the  believer — the  mind  being 
rendered  sensitive  by  the  Holy  Sinril — it  impresses  there  the  Divine  image.  In  this 
manner  the  image  of  Christ  is  formed  in  the  soul,  the  existence  of  which  the 
Scriptures  represent  as  inspiring  the  believer  with  the  hope  of  glory.  (Walker.) 
The  true  theory  of  Christian  prayer  as  the  Object,  tlie  Medium,  the  Agent: — This 
theory  has  its  analogy  in  the  worsiiip  of  the  Jewish  economy,  and  in  tlie  worship 
of  all  religions.  It  is  also  in  an  liogy  with  the  general  practice  in  petitioning  or 
asking  as  b.tween  people  and  their  rulers,  children  and  parents,  servants  and 
masters.  The  principle  involved  in  this  doctrine  of  Christian  worship  has  its  illus- 
trations in  science.  Let  one  sullice.  An  astronomer,  for  instance,  has  an  impres- 
sion that  there  is  in  a  certain  part  of  the  heavens  a  star  which  ho  wants  to  discover. 
Now  what  is  comprehended  in  his  discovery  of  this  star?  The  lirst  necessary 
condition  is  the  spiiit  of  the  science.  This  gives  him  the  impression.  By  the 
influences  of  this  spirit  he  has  resort  to  the  use  of  his  glass.  He  relies  on  this  as 
being  sufficient  for  his  purpose.  He  adjusts  his  glass  between  himself  and  the 
heavens.  For  days  or  weeks  he  may  be  in  search  of  the  star.  At  last  his  glass 
brings  the  object  of  his  search  to  his  sight.  Observe  the  process  of  this  discovery. 
Through  the  telescope,  by  the  spirit  of  astronomy  in  him,  he  has  found  the  star. 
Had  he  possessed  the  spirit  without  the  glass,  he  could  not  have  found  the  star ; 
or  had  he  podsesoed  the  glass  without  the  spirit  moving  him  to  use  it,  he  would  net 
have  found  it.  And  observe,  even  with  the  spirit  and  the  glass  looking  at  the  star, 
after  its  discovery,  he  sees  not  the  star  itself,  but  only  its  reflection  through  the 
glass.  Thus  no  one  prays  without  the  spirit  of  prayer ;  and  even  with  the  spirit 
of  prayer,  he  caunot  come  to  God  but  through  the  Mediator,  Jesus ;  and  then  aa 
he  comes  thr<<ugh  Jesus  he  only  speaks  to  God  through  Him,  and  receives 
answers  through  Him.  God  and  Christ  without  the  Spirit  are  incomplete. 
The  Spirit  and  Christ  without  God  are  insuflieient.  But  God  as  the  Object 
whom  we  seek,  Christ  as  the  Mediator  through  whom  we  seek,  and  the  Spirit  as 
the  Agent  by  whom  we  seek,  coMiplete  the  scheme  of  prayer.  (.7.  Bate.)  Object 
and  nature  of  true  prayer: — I.  The  object  of  prayer.  II.  The  nature  of  it. 
III.  The  obligations  we  are  under  to  pray.  IV.  The  great  importance  of  faith  in 
this  holy  exercise.  Prayer  is  the  unfeigned  language  of  the  heart.  What  we  ask 
in  prayer  should  be  according  to  the  Divine  will.  We  must  ask  all  in  the  name  and 
lor  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ.  (John  Townsend.)  Believing  prayer : — The  word 
believing  is  the  key  to  any  difficulty  in  accepting  this  declaration  literally.  W« 
eannot  believe  whatever  wo  please.     It  is  only  the  Spirit  of  God  who  o&u  enable  • 


OHAK.  XXI.]  ST,  MATTHEW.  478 

man  to  believe  that  God  will  answer  his  prayer.  Then  He  will  grant  the  petition. 
Here  it  is  necessary  to  notice  that  faith  in  Christ  as  your  Saviour  is  one  thing, 
while  faith  in  the  favourable  answer  of  a  particular  prayer  is  another  and  distinct 
thing.  You  may  have  a  firm  faith  in  your  Saviour,  and  yet  not  be  able  to  "  aak  in 
faith,  nothing  wavering,"  when  you  offer  up  a  particular  petition,  because  yon  arc  not 
Bure  that  it  is  according  to  the  will  of  God.  When  God  has  absolutely  promised  any 
blessing,  you  ought  to  believe  without  doubting  that  the  answer  is  certain.  But  we 
are  wanted  to  pray  in  other  cases  when  we  have  no  specific  promise  to  plead.  "la 
all  things  make  your  requests  known  uuto  God."  Your  child  may  be  dying  ;  you 
pray  for  it ;  but  have  no  specific  promise  that  it  will  recover.  Yet,  '•  If  thou  canst 
believe,  all  things  are  possible,"  &o.  But  there  is  no  promise  that  this  kind  of  faith 
will  be  given.  It  may  please  God  for  the  best  of  reasons  to  withhold  it.  Jesus 
Christ  is  God  ;  He  is  King  of  Kings ;  He  governs  the  universe.  We  must  be  in 
training  with  Him  before  we  can  be  blessed.  To  this  infinite  spiritual  Power  and 
Presence  we  are  invited  to  pray.  By  sense  we  perceive  the  visible  world  ;  by  faith, 
the  invisible.  To  our  completeness  faith  is  not  less  necessary  than  sight.  It  is 
even  more  necessary  ;  for  a  blind  man,  by  faith,  may  live  a  glorious  life  even  on 
earth,  where  his  bodily  eyes  are  closed.  And  do  we  not  all  see  in  our  dreams, 
when  we  are  asleep,  things  far  more  beautiful  than  we  ever  see  when  we  are  awake  ? 
This  is  significant,  surely.  Every  time  we  go  to  sleep  we  enter  upon  the  confines 
of  a  spiritual  world  which  our  outward  eyes  cannot  see.  When  we  dream,  we  are 
consciously  moving  in  a  border-land,  a  wonder-land,  where  we  see  with  other  eyea 
than  those  of  our  visible  bodies.  So  faith  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  vision.  As  Chris- 
tians "  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight  "  merely.  Moreover,  faith  is  an  inspiration 
and  a  power.  It  is  mighty  through  God  to  the  pulling  down  of  our  enemy's  strong- 
holds. Faith  in  God — faith  in  Christ  as  God — faith  in  the  promises — faith  in  the 
eflScaoy  of  prayer — this  it  is  that  enables  the  joyful  disciple  to  look  down  upon  the 
distinctions  which  the  world  values  most,  as  a  full-grown  man  looks  upon  the 
painted  toys  of  Uttle  children.  Faith  is  not  superstition.  Faith  in  the  invisible 
part  of  the  Divine  scheme,  is  the  God-given  function  of  every  healthy  soul.  This 
implies  confidence  in  God  as  the  Hearer  and  Answerer  of  prayer — the  God  of 
truth  whose  promises  not  one  word  can  fail.  When  He  gives  a  petitioner  faith  in 
the  success  of  His  petition,  then  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  He  intends  to 
auswer.    (J.  Aberigh-Mackay,  M.A.) 

Ver.  28-32.  A  certain  man  had  two  sons ;  and  he  came  to  the  first,  and  said, 
Bon,  go  work  to-day. — Christian  sonship  and  service: — I.  Christian  sonship  fur- 
nishes the  best  possible  motives  for  Christian  service.  H.  It  furnishes  the  best 
possible  facilities  for  Christian  service.  III.  It  makes  Christian  service  imperative. 
{A.  H.  Stoate.)        A  bad  promise  well  broken;  a  good  promise  sacrificed: — I.  Thosb 

WHO  OPENLY  AND  ABOVB    BOARD   REJECT   THB   ChBISTI^LN   RELIGION.      I    hke    a    pOSitlTO 

man,  and  not  one  half  and  half.  If  he  turns  he  will  be  positive  in  the  other  direc- 
tion. Break  the  infatuation  now.  Eepent  and  go.  II.  Those  who  have  been 
promising  to  become  Christians,  but  all  the  time  breaking  their  promises.  When 
did  you  first  promise?  In  sickness;  in  time  of  religious  awakening.  (Dr.  Talmage.) 
Determined  sinners  have  repented : — Let  it  be  recorded  of  you  as  was  recorded  of  this 
young  man  in  the  text.  He  said :  •'  I  will  not,  but  afterward  he  repented  and 
went."  Let  me  tell  you,  my  brothers,  that  there  have  been  men  just  as  much  set 
against  religion  as  you  are,  and  yet  they  surrendered  to  Christ.  Do  you  know  the 
story  of  John  Bunyan,  declaring  that  he  would  not  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God 
With  an  oath  so  horrid  that  even  the  abandoned  people  in  the  street  tried  to  hnsh 
him  up,  and  yet,  in  a  little  while  dreaming  a  dream  of  heaven  so  sweet  that  the 
mere  recital  of  it  has  enchanted  all  Christendom  ?  Mr.  Madden  went  to  scoff  at 
John  Wesley  while  he  preached,  and  the  mere  announcement  of  the  text :  •'  Prepare 
to  meet  thy  God,"  converted  him.  Only  a  few  months  ago,  in  New  York  City,  a 
man  in  indignation  leaped  with  both  feet  upon  the  Bible,  so  did  he  hate  it ;  yet  in 
a  lew  weeks  after,  he  held  that  very  Bible  on  his  lap  reading  with  tearful  eyes  the 
glorious  promises.  Some  time  ago,  when  we  were  worshipping  in  the  Academy  of 
Music,  there  came  in  three  young  men  and  three  young  ladies,  evidently  to  make 
sport  of  the  reUgious  solemnities.  In  the  early  part  of  the  services,  they  wrote 
notes,  and  laughed,  and  jeered.  In  t  e  midst  of  the  sermon,  they  bowed  their 
heads.  At  the  close  of  the  services,  all  six  rose  up  with  tearful  eyes,  begging  fox 
the  prayers  of  God's  people.  Oh,  it  is  a  mighty  gospel,  charged  with  the  invitation* 
and  the  condemnations  of  hell.    {Ibid.)        Address  to  young  men: — L  What  God 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XXI. 

looks  for  in  all  of  ns — work.  1.  Inward.  2.  Outward,  II.  The  danger  of  a  falla- 
cious promise  is  greater  than  the  danger  of  a  hasty  refusal.  The  son  who  said,  *'  I 
go,  sir,"  was  the  one  who  went  not.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  two  sons: — 1.  Our 
Lord  does  not  intend  to  approve  of  the  conduct  of  the  first  son  in  every  respect,  "I 
will  not."  True  there  was  no  hypocrisy  about  him ;  still  he  was  disobedient  with 
bU  his  frankness.  Some  seem  to  imagine  they  will  be  forgiven  for  being  sinnera 
because  they  have  never  pretended  to  be  saints.  Is  a  man  less  the  enemy  of  God 
because  he  is  outspoken  ?  2.  That  our  Lord  does  not  approve  of  this  son's  conduct 
as  a  whole,  as  if  it  were  the  only  proper  way  of  meeting  God's  command.  It  was 
well  that  he  repented ;  but  would  have  been  better  if  he  had  not  refused.  It  is  best 
to  save  the  reflection  of  a  wasted  past.  3.  Our  Lord  does  not  design  to  condemn 
the  making  of  a  promise  to  God  when  that  is  done  sincerely  and  performed  earnestly. 

L   The  NATDBE  OF  THE  COMMAND  WHICH  GoD  MAKES  ON  EVERY  ONE  TO  WHOM  THE  GOSPKL 

^OMES.  *'  Go  work,"  «S;c.  1.  The  test  of  sincerity  is  in  deeds.  Words  are  valuable 
only  as  the  expression  of  an  inward  spirit.  Works  are  the  manifestation  of  our 
love  to  God ;  not  the  means  of  procuring  His  love  for  us.  2.  The  peculiar  nature 
of  the  work  by  which  our  love  and  life  are  to  be  manifested,  "  Go  work  in  my  vine- 
yard." Cultivate  all  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  3.  The  promptitude  of  the  obedienoe 
which  is  required — "  to-day. "  4.  The  tender  nature  of  the  appeal  which  God  makes-  - 
"  son."  Souship  is  not  incompatible  with  service.  It  only  transmutes  that  servitie 
into  joy.  II.  The  danger  op  making  an  insincere  confession  of  God.  To  the 
chief  priests  and  scribes  our  Lord  said,  "  The  publicans  and  harlots  go  into  the 
kingdom  before  you."  Their  difficulties  were  subjective.  The  insincere  state  of 
soul  makes  it  harder  for  priests  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  than  for  harlots  to 
repent  of  their  sins.  Besides  self-complacency  which  is  produced  by  insincerity, 
there  is  also  a  hardening  influence  connected  with  it.  It  dims  the  moral  percep- 
tions. III.  In  this  pabable  Chbist  meant  to  encourage  sinners  of  the  vilest 
DESCRIPTION  TO  REPENT  AND  BELIEVE  THE  GOSPEL.  *'  The  publicans  and  harlots  enter 
the  kingdom."  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  <S:c.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Swift  tongue ;  slow  foot : — I.  The  first  characteristic  of  the  swift  tongue  and  slow 
foot  is  UNBELIEF.  "  I  go,  sir."  Notions  constitute  their  religion  ;  there  is  no  opera- 
tive  faith.  No  mere  notion  will  ever  aflect  a  character.  II.  Another  characteristic 
of  the  swift  tongue  and  slow  foot  is  indifference.  Truth  must  be  interesting  to  us 
to  be  impressive..  III.  Another  impediment  is  in  the  manifoldness  of  intellbo- 
TTJAL  OBJECTS — wit,  learning,  and  imagination  may  impede  the  man  who  says,  "  I 
go,  sir."  His  attention  may  be  diverted  from  the  main  object ;  he  is  wise,  but  net 
unto  salvation.  IV.  Every  man  has  one  load  to  carry  which  retards  him  in  his 
journey.  One  besetting  sin.  V.  Keligion  will  only  become  the  law  of  life  when  it 
too  becomes  a  ruling  passion.  "  Oh,  how  love  I  Thy  law,"  &0.  This  wiU  unite 
our  connections  to  our  actions.  {E,  Paxton  Hood.)  Occasional  goodness : — Some 
people  seem  to  take  out  their  religion  once  a  week  to  give  it  an  airing ;  or,  it  is  like 
a  ticket  taken  at  a  station,  put  into  the  pocket  until  the  end  of  the  journey.  Visit 
Versailles,  near  Paris ;  all  its  magnificent  fountains  on  the  week  day  are  dry  and 
repulsive,  grass-grown,  weed-covered.  Visit  them  on  the  Sabbath  day  (on  which 
day  I  beg  to  say  I  have  never  seen  them)  and  they  are  tossing  all  their  glorious 
waters  high  in  the  air;  every  Neptune,  triton,  or  nymph  flashing  forth  in  the  splen- 
dotir  of  the  magnificent  water  shower — a  fair  sad  picture  of  Sabbath  religion.  How 
diilerent  from  the  flowing  river,  always  pouring  its  musical,  fertile,  and  irrigating 
stream  I  Some  faiths  are  technical,  temporary,  and  occasional ;  they  are  like  the 
waterworks,  or  the  fonntain  on  a  fete  day ;  then  the  bolts  are  turned,  and  the  foun- 
tains cease  to  play.  Ou  certain  great  occasions,  or  in  certain  public  forms,  we  are 
saying,  "  I  go,  sir,"  and  the  largest  portion  of  other  times  is  showing  that  we  go  not. 
We  enter  not,  because  of  unbelief.  {Ibid.)  A  hasty  refusal  and  a  wise  re 
tractation : — I.  The  important  command  issued.  The  nature  of  the  work  to  which 
the  gospel  calls.  It  is  extensive,  important,  arduous,  delightful,  profitable.  It  may 
be  divided  into — 1.  That  wliich  respects  Go  .  2.  Tliat  which  regards  ourselves. 
8.  That  which  concerns  others.  II.  The  hasty  refusal  given.  "I  will  not.** 
1.  The  natural  aversion  of  the  heart.  2.  The  sinful  love  of  ea-se.  8.  Their  occu- 
pation in  other  pursuits.  III.  The  wise  retractation  made.  1.  The  change  stated 
(I)  Its  nature,  "He  repented."  (2)  Its  fruit,  "And  went."  (3)  Its  period, 
"Afterward."  2.  The  wisdom  it  evinces.  It  is  wise  to  retract:  refusal  is  (1) 
Against  your  best  interests.  (2)  Betrays  the  greatest  ingratitude  to  God.  (3)  Issue* 
in  eternal  min.  Address — 1.  Those  who  have  complied  with  the  command.^  i. 
Those  who  are  xefasing.     8.  Those   who  haye  complied  only   io  profession. 


CHAP,  xxi.l  ST.  MATTHEW.  481 

{E.  Temple).  Truth  to  rule  the  life  mtiat  awaken  pergonal  interest: — All  truth 
is  true,  but  what  if  it  be  uninteresting?  it  becomes  uniniprebsive  and  useless. 
Truth  we  apprehend  to  be  necessary  to  our  well-being ;  what  a  dill'erence  11 
I  should  strike  a  man  on  the  shoulder,  and  say,  "  The  three  angles  of  a 
triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles ;  "  or  if  I  should  say  to  him,  "  Your  house 
is  on  lirel"  "Your  child  has  just  been  run  over  and  killed!  "  Truth  is  truth; 
but  if  men  are  not  interested  in  it,  it  will  not  influence  the  life.  What  a  differ- 
ence there  is  between  furniture  in  the  lumber-room,  or  auctioneer's  shop,  and 
furniture  in  the  household  room  1  It  is  not  enough  that  we  apprehend  truth  to  be 
good  and  valuable,  if  it  do  not  influence  the  will  and  the  affections.  {Ihid.)  Man 
organized  with  a  principle  of  instantaneity  : — We  have  received,  happily,  a  consti- 
tution which  is  adapted  to  the  exigencies  of  human  life.  Men's  miuds  do  not  act 
as  printer's  types  do,  every  letter  being  selected,  and  every  sentence  being  spelt 
out,  and,  when  it  is  stamped,  being  stamped  complete.  Men,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  bo  organized  that  they  have  in  every  part  of  their  nature  an  element  of 
what  may  be  called  instantaneity — the  instantaneous  effusion  of  feeling ;  the 
immediate  perception  of  what  is  best  or  not  best ;  a  recognition  of  what  is 
good  or  what  is  bad,  what  is  right  or  what  is  wrong,  what  is  safe  or  what 
is  dangerous  —  instantaneousne^s  of  purpnse.  This  element  or  principle  of 
instantaneity  of  course  varies.  The  dull  and  lethargic  are  slow;  the  intermediate 
are  faster  than  this  extreme,  and  less  rapid  than  the  other  extreme  ;  and  the  more 
finely  organized,  the  higher,  natures  have  it  so  that  it  flashes  and  plays  without 
any  perceptible  pause  between  the  impulses  and  the  result.  But  all  have  it ;  with- 
out  it  life  would  be  impossible.  When  men  walk  the  very  body  has  it.  II  a  man 
Bhould  be  obliged,  as  one  that  is  just  getting  out  from  an  attack  of  inflammatory 
rheumatism,  or  as  one  who  is  in  the  last  stages  of  lumbago  (and  I  speak  feehngly), 
to  pick  his  way  as  he  walks,  and  think,  "  That  brick  is  set  a  Uttle  sidewise,"  and  to 
calculate  and  say,  "  How  many  inches  must  I  lift  my  foot,  to  step  over  it  ?  "  how 
long  do  you  think  it  would  take  him  to  walk  from  Brooklyn  to  New  York?  Going 
and  coming  back  would  consume  almost  the  whole  day,  and  the  errands  of  life 
would  be  neglected.  But  a  man  in  health  is  not  obliged  to  do  this.  The  foot  itself 
does  the  calculating.  The  foot  sees  without  your  thmking  or  seeing.  It  rises  and 
lowers  of  its  own  accord.  You  instinctively  avoid  the  slough.  You  leap  the  little 
gulfs.  You  know  the  best  way  to  accommodate  your  whole  body  to  the  ten  thou- 
sand varying  conditions  of  matter.  The  law  of  gravitation,  of  light,  of  heat,  of 
magnetism,  of  liquidity  or  solidity,  of  things  sharp  or  blunt — all  these  the  body, 
without  any  care  on  your  part,  attends  to.  No  man  walks  into  a  mortar-bed.  No 
man  stumbles  over  a  sand-heap.  Men  jump,  not  on  iron  fences,  but  on  feather- 
beds  ;  and  having  jumped,  they  never  get  up  and  eay,  "  Ah  I  what  if  we  had  not 
thought  of  that  1  How  lucky  it  was  1 "  Suppose  a  man  were  obliged,  for  all  the 
operations  of  the  body,  to  have  a  little  monitor  in  his  mind  that  should  be  on  the 
look-out  for  him,  and  he  should  say,  '*  If  I  lift  my  hand  so  and  so,  or  do  bo  and  so 
with  it,  I  shall  have  rheumatism  in  the  shoulder,  and  therefore  I  won't  do  it  t " 
What  if  such  calculation  as  that  had  to  be  made  before  every  movement  of  the 
body?  (H.  fV.  Beecher.)  The  benefit  of  momentary  illumination : — When,  after  long, 
long  days  of  sailing  during  which  no  reckoning  has  been  taken  by  the  lost  mariner, 
there  opens,  for  half  an  hour,  a  rift  in  the  cloud,  he  gets  a  view  of  the  sun,  and 
instantly  he  takes  an  observation ;  and  then  the  cloud  shuts  again.  Ah !  but  he 
has  hadun  observation.  The  days  are  dark,  and  the  storm  coutinues;  but  he  hag 
had  an  observation,  and  that  is  of  great  advantage.  But  how  much  better  it  would 
have  been  if  the  storm  had  cleared  away  and  given  him  a  calm  sea  and  an  unob- 
Bcured  sky  I  Yet  a  momentary  observation  was  better  than  nothing.  {Ibid.) 
Culture  the  faint  impulse  to  a  nobler  life : — Therefore  I  say  to  every  man  in  my 
presence :  Do  not  neglect  the  impulses  to  a  nobler  life.  Do  not  put  them  away 
from  you.  Do  not  prove  dishonest  and  tricky  with  any  of  those  movements  in 
yourself  which  indicate  that  the  germ  of  Divine  life  is  in  you.  '*  A  child  is  drowned! 
a  child  is  drowned  1 "  this  is  the  cry  that  goes  through  the  whole  village ;  and  the 
mother,  well-nigh  bereft  of  reason,  dashes  wildly  out  as  they  are  bearing  the  limp, 
helpless  body,  with  long  streaming  hair,  by  her  door.  The  physician  is  sped  for, 
and  the  neighbours  are  there.  "  She's  dead  1  she's  dead !  she's  dead  !  "  cries  thfl 
mother,  "  she's  dead  !  she's  dead  !  she's  dead  !  My  only  child  1  my  only  child  1  my 
only  child  I  "  They  would  comfort  her,  and  they  say,  "  Oh,  do  not  be  so  despon- 
dent— do  not  be  so  despondent."  "  Dead !  dead  1  Those  eyes  will  never  see  ma 
•gain.    She's  dead  1  she's  dead  I "    And  still  the  workers  wiU  not  give  over.    Bait 


«8«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

Rt  last  they  say,  "  Yes,  she  U  dead."  Then,  with  a  strange  fantasy  of  opposition, 
the  mother  cries  again,  "  She  is  not  dead ;  she  cannot  be  dead  ;  she  shall  not  be 
dead."  And  she  lays  hands  upon  her,  and  says,  "I  know  she  is  not  dead."  And 
ehe  gazes  in  anguish,  until  a  little  quiver  is  seen  upon  the  lip,  "  Oh,  my  God  I  she 
is  not  dead."  The  eyes  do  not  see,  the  ears  do  not  hear,  the  hands  do  not  move, 
the  heart  cannot  be  felt ;  but  there  is  that  little  quiver  of  the  lip.  "  There's  life  there! 
there's  life  there !  there's  life  there  1 "  Yes,  there  is  life  there  ;  and  now  they  come 
again,  and  remedies  are  applied,  and  the  still  form  quickens,  and  the  mother's  faith 
is  rewarded,  and  she  takes  the  living  child  back  to  her  bosom.  0  thou  that  hast 
in  thee  but  the  quiver  of  the  lip,  but  the  trembling  of  the  eye,  but  the  faintest  pul- 
sation of  the  heart,  God,  thine  Everlasting  Father,  beholds  it ;  and  He  will  not 
break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  fl  ix,  till  He  bring  forth  judgment 
unto  victory.  There  is  victory  fir  you ;  there  is  hope  for  you ;  there  is  salvation  for 
you.  Oh,  despise  not  the  striving  of  the  Spirit.  Begin,  accept,  hold  fast,  and  thoa 
shalt  be  saved.  {Ibid.)  Say  well  and  do  well : — Work  of  God  in  world  not  done 
yet.  His  vineyard  still  needs  digging  and  tending,  pruning  and  cultivating.  I. 
Evert  man  has  a  mission  from  God.  Cannot  discharge  himself  of  responsibility  by 
openly  professing  not  to  obey.  God's  claim  proportionate  to  our  ability  and  oppor- 
tunity.  II.  This  mission  is  "  work."  God  says,  '*  Gome,"  before  He  says,  "  Go  ; " 
"  Love  Me,"  before  "  Work  for  Me."  He  seeks  not  enforced  toil  of  slaves,  but 
cheerful  obedience  of  sons.  God's  vineyard  is  not  a  playground  in  which  to  take 
our  ease.  III.  The  scene  op  this  "work  "  is  God's  vineyabd.  We  are  to  make 
our  own  lives,  and  those  of  our  fellows,  as  faithful  as  we  can.  For  what  spiritual 
sphere  then  does  this  figure  stand  ?  1.  Our  own  hearts.  2.  Our  own  households. 
8.  Scenes  of  daily  life.  4.  Church  and  its  institutions.  Wherever  you  can  labour 
for  God,  that  is  the  part  of  the  vineyard  to  which  He  calls  you.  And  whatever  yon 
can  do  for  Him,  that  is  the  work  He  bids  you  do.  IV.  The  *'  work  "  is  pbessino 
and  uboent — to  be  done  "  to-day."  V.  How  men  treat  the  command.  1.  Some 
profess  to  obey,  but  really  disobey.  StUl  call  themselves  Christians.  Would 
shrink  from  renouncing  their  profession.  Not  hypocrites.  When  they  said  they 
would  go,  they  meant  it.  But  imperceptibly  religion  has  dwindled  down  with  them 
from  its  grand  and  beautiful  reaUty  to  a  mere  soul-saving  apparatus.  2.  Others 
refuse  at  first,  but  afterwards  obey.  No  justification  here  of  first  refusal.  The 
son  who  repented  and  went  is  approved,  not  wholly,  but  by  contrast  with  his  brother. 
Nor  could  even  he  do  all  his  father  bade.  For  already  the  sun  had  climbed  high 
into  the  heavens,  and  part  of  the  precious  day  was  gone.  We  cannot  recall  misused 
past.  Waste  no  longer  the  golden  hours.  (J.  R.  Bailey.)  Work  for  Ood : — We 
are  all  ready  to  say  that  work  for  God  is  a  noble  thing.  What  we  need  is  to  see 
that  we  ourselves  may  all  do  work  for  God  if  we  try.  There  are  some  who  complain 
that  they  can  do  nothing.  "  I  am  wearing  away  my  life  in  business ;  I  have  to  toil 
for  my  family ;  my  life  is  frittered  away  in  such  trifling  every-day  tasks.  I,  at 
least,  shall  have  nothing  to  show  in  the  end  for  my  life."  Nay,  but  that  very  com- 
monplace  work  of  yours  is  work  for  God.  It  must  be  done ;  you  have  to  do  it ;  and, 
therefore,  God  Himself,  who  placed  you  where  you  are,  gave  you  that  work  to  do. 
I.  Offer  each  day's  work  to  God.  Ask  Him  to  help  you  to  do  it  well  and  diligently, 
because  it  is  His.  Make  your  daily  act  of  self-dedication,  II,  Be  on  the  watch 
roB  opportdnities.  Make  it  your  aim  and  desire  to  be  gathering  with  God,  rooting 
r.p  evil  whore  you  can,  fostering  the  growth  of  good  where  possible ;  shedding  the 
light  around  you  which  may  win  souls  to  safety.  III.  Be  content  to  do  little 
THINGS  WELL.  Yotir  work  for  God  may  consist  whoUy  in  very  little  things.  The 
poor  lone  woman  whose  home  was  on  the  cliff  in  the  dangerous  coast,  knew  of  but 
one  good  thing  she  could  do.  She  could  keep  her  little  candle  burning  in  her  window 
to  warn  off  those  who  came  near  the  danger.  It  was  but  a  little  thing ;  it  may  have 
cheered  a  few,  it  may  even  have  saved  one  or  two.  Who  doubts  but  that  her  little 
loving  effort  was  a  glorious  brightness  in  the  Master's  sight?  {R.  H.  Parr,  M.A.) 
Promptness  in  work  : — We  should  aim  at  being  too  active  to  stagnate,  too  busy  to 
freeze.  We  should  endeavour  to  be  like  Cromwell,  who  not  only  struck  while  the 
iron  was  hot,  but  made  it  hot  by  striking — like  the  missionary  who  said,  "  If  there 
be  happiness  on  earth,  it  is  in  labouring  in  the  service  of  Christ — like  the  blessed 
Redeemer  Himself,  whose  meat  and  drink  it  was  to  do  the  will  of  God.  The  vine- 
yard must  be  cultivated ;  and  the  command  is  that  we  enter  it  and  work.  (Christian 
Treasury.)  He  repented:  change  of  mind  for  the  better  unustial: — There  are  bat 
few  who  turn  and  do  their  duty  after  having  once  refused.  Men  will  be  as  big  ai 
their  words,  though  they  die  for  it,  lest  they  should  be  accounted  inconsistent. 


OHA».  XX u]  ST.  MATTHEW.  488 

These  are  niggardly  of  their  reputation,  but  prodigal  of  their  souls.  {John  Trapp.) 
The  two  sons;  a  contrast: — I.  The  rude  but  obedient  son:  1.  What  he  said,  "I 
■will  not."  This  very  rude,  very  unfilial.  A  reasonable  request  unreasonably 
rejected.  2.  What  he  did,  "repented."  Thought  of  Ida  father's  kindness,  and  hia 
duty.  Did  not  go  and  tell  his  father  he  was  sorry  for  what  he  had  said,  but  by  hia 
conduct  proved  his  sorrow.  This  is  true  repentance.  II.  The  polite  but  di8« 
OBEDIENT  SOS.  1.  What  he  said,  "  I  go,  sir."  This  right,  pleasing  to  the  father, 
becoming  in  a  Bon.  2,  What  he  did,  "  went  not."  His  obedience  mere  profession 
and  words,  not  real.  "  Leaves,"  but  not  fruit.  Learn :  Many,  like  the  rude  son, 
have  said  they  would  not  serve  God,  but  afterwards  have  repented.  You  have  said 
the  former;  have  you  done  the  latter?  Many,  like  the  polite  son,  have  shown  the 
piomise  of  goodness  that  you  have  never  kept.  Will  you  keep  it  now,  by  working 
to-day  in  the  vineyard?  {The  Hive.)  Profession  and  practice: — I.  Dissect  the 
characters  here  contrasted.  The  second  well-meaning,  good-iutentioned,  emotional, 
Bhallow,  flippant,  great  in  promising.  The  first,  rude,  dissolute,  hardened,  profli- 
gate. II.  Review  their  couduct.  The  second  saying,  not  doing;  the  father's  disap- 
pointment; men  by  action  seem  to  say,  "I  go,"  but  remain  where  they  are.  The 
first  became  thoughtful,  wondered  that  auch  a  son  as  he  should  be  asked  by  the 
father  to  do  anything  :  "  repented  and  went."  III.  Enforce  the  inquiry.  Obeying 
God  lies  in  doing  His  will,  not  in  mere  empty  promises  of  amendment.  {Anon.) 
The  parable  of  the  two  sons : — I.  As  holding  fokth  the  command  of  God  to  His 
Creatures.  His  command  is  distinguished  by  three  characters.  1.  It  is  aSeo- 
tionate, '*  My  son."  2.  It  is  practical,  "Work."  3.  It  is  urgent,  "  To-day."  II, 
The  manner  in  which  it  is  beoarded.  1.  One  proves  better  than  he  promises. 
2,  One  promises  better  than  he  proves.  Are  you  saying,  "  I  will  not  "  ?  What 
nonsense,  what  madness  !  Are  you  saying,  *•  I  go,  sir."  Beware  of  insincerity. 
{W.  Jay.)  I.  The  manner  op  the  address.  1.  It  denotes  authority.  3.  li 
is  the  voice  of  affection.  II.  The  oenebaii  requisition  which  is  made — "  Go 
work."  1.  There  are  difficulties  which  must  be  conquered.  2.  There  are  duties 
which  must  be  performed.  3.  The  great  design  of  heaven  cannot  be  accomplished 
without  labour.  III.  Thb  scene  allotted  fob  labour.  1.  You  are  to  be  regu. 
lated  in  all  your  labours  by  your  Father's  revealed  will.  2.  Cultivation  is  suggested 
by  the  text.  IV.  The  promptitude  op  attention  is  required.  1.  Go  work  to- 
day. 2.  To-morrow  may  be  too  late.  3.  The  responsibility  which  is  attached  to 
the  use  of  present  advantages.  4.  There  is  a  great  danger  of  losing  religious 
impressions.  5.  What  effect  has  the  command  in  the  text  produced  upon  you  ? 
6.  Encouragement  to  labour.  7.  You  mU  not  be  left  to  yourselves.  {R.  Winter^ 
D.D.)  The  two  sons  : — I.  Who  promised  not,  and  went?  Did  not  promise,  but 
rudely  refused.  This  wrong.  He  repented.  How  many  refuse  who  never  repent  I 
To  be  inconsistent  with  rash  vows  and  wicked  resolutions  is  the  highest  consistency 
— what  many  call  consistency  is  often  only  stubbornness  and  hardness  of  heart. 
What  induced  this  repentance  ?  The  great  goodness  of  his  father ;  his  own  ingrati- 
tude ;  the  importance  of  the  work.  Have  we  ever  thought  of  these  things  t 
Without  repenting.  II.  Who  promised,  and  went  not.  Very  ready  with  words 
—right  words  too.  Spoken  to  obtain  present  rest — to  put  the  father  off,  &o.  How 
aaany  patronise  religion,  and  speak  fair  1  How  many  intend  to  be  religious  I  How 
iou^  and  how  often  have  we  promised  thus  I  Do  we  ever  intend  to  keep  our  word  ? 
When  ?  III.  Who  obeyed.  The  first.  To  one  of  the  two  classes  represented  by 
thi'^e  SOD  8  we  very  likely  belong.  We  have  all  been  called  to  work.  We  have  met  the 
call  either  by  a  bold  refusal,  or  by  a  fair  promise.  How  have  we  ended  ?  May  God 
give  us  grace  to  do  His  will.  {J.  C.  Gray.)  Our  work : — I.  The  vineyard.  1. 
This  vineyard  is  the  property  of  God.  2.  The  cultivation  of  this  vineyard  is  com- 
mitted to  r  ■;  Church.  8,  The  Church  has  neglected  her  duty  in  reference  to  this 
vineyard.  >-.  The  work.  Ill,  The  workmen.  Their  qualifications :  1.  Ardent 
piety.  2.  Fixed  religious  principles.  3.  Accurate  information.  4.  A  liberal 
spirit.  5.  Prayer,  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  The  two  sons  : — 1.  The  argument  of  the 
appeal  lay  upon  the  sonship.  2.  A  call  to  grace  is  a  call  to  work.  3.  There  is  the 
instantaneou«:ness  of  the  obedience,  "To-day."  The  reception,  "I  wiU  not." 
Why  that  son  will  not  work  in  his  father's  vineyard.  1.  He  did  not  really  know 
or  love  hia  father.  2.  He  liked  the  imaginary  independence  which  he  felt  in 
being  his  own  master  outside.  3.  Doubtless  the  labour  inside  contrasted  unfavourably 
in  his  mind  with  the  gaiety  outside.  4.  The  urgency  of  the  demand  little  suited  hia 
desultory  and  procrastinating  mind.  5.  Perhaps  some  foolish  windings  of  en- 
tangled thought  had  got  into  his  mind,  "  I  can't  command  my  wilL"    But  ht 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxi, 

changed  and  went.  His  Father's  will  was  still  echoing  in  his  heart.  The  vineyard 
appeared  in  happier  aspect.  His  sentiments  towards  His  Father  changed.  WTien 
he  went  he  probably  proved  himself  a  better  worker  than  if  he  went  at  first.  This 
parable  teaches — 1.  That  there  is  a  free  will  in  you  for  which  you  are  responsible. 
2.  God's  patience  is  perfectly  marvellous.  3.  The  garden  of  the  Lord,  His  Church, 
is  ready  for  you.  4.  God  and  angels  are  working  there.  5.  Many  are  now  working 
there  in  liberty  and  gladness  who  once  said,  "  I  will  not."  (/.  Vaughan,  M.A. 
The  moral  nature  injured  by  the  stimulation  of  unfulfilled  impulse: — Then  what  was 
the  matter  with  them  ?  Why  did  they  act  so  ?  It  was  because  they  were  under 
the  influence  of  an  exterior  pressure.  While  there  was  a  mind  interpreting  there 
the  truth  to  them,  they  accepted  it ;  but,  the  moment  that  influence  ceased  to  be 
exerted  upon  them,  they  fell  back  into  themselves.  There  was  no  root  of  that 
thing  in  them.  At  the  first  opportunity,  all  their  under-nature  wurked  again,  just 
as  it  had  worked  before.  That  is  the  reason  why  so  many  persons  listen,  resolve, 
feebly  try,  and  fail  miserably.  So  that  I  sometimes  think  going  to  church  hurts 
people.  I  know  that  going  to  church  hurts  some  people.  There  are  persons  who 
go  into  church,  and  are  stimulated  and  lifted  up,  and  then  they  go  out  again,  and 
fall  back  into  their  own  old  nature,  and  act  ]ust  as  if  they  had  not  been  stimulated; 
and  they  go  in  again,  and  are  stimulated  and  lifted  up  a^ain,  and  then  they  go  out, 
and  fall  back  again.  Their  nature  accommodates  itself  to  the  different  circum- 
stances, and  they  get  used  to  them.  Being  lifted  up  and  lowered,  lifted  up  and 
lowered,  the  operative  capacity  of  their  sensibihties  is  lost  out,  and  they  get  into  a 
sort  of  medium  condition,  in  which  they  remain  all  the  rest  of  their  lives,  no 
longer  competent  to  carry  out  any  generous  impulse  which  they  may  have.  A 
moral  enamel  comes  over  them ;  so  that,  though  they  feel  somewhat,  there  is  a 
disconnection  between  feeling  and  willing — between  feeUng  as  a  moral  emotion, 
and  willing  organized  as  a  power  of  action — between  transient  feeling  and  the 
embodiment  of  feeling  into  character,  which  is  the  great  end  and  drift  of  education 
in  human  life.  This  power  of  turning  a  momentary  emotion  to  a  permanent 
benefit  they  tiave  lost ;  and  when  they  have  lost  that,  they  have  lost  all  nerve. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Aids  to  weak  impulses: — Where  persons  have  good  impulses, 
but  are  feeble  in  carrying  them  out,  we  see  the  wisdom  of  the  Divine  ordination  of 
business,  of  society,  of  the  family,  and  of  the  Church  ;  for  there  are  persons  who 
are  like  pea-vines  that  need  to  be  staked,  in  order  that  they  may  stand  up.  They 
have  not  strength  enough  to  support  themselves.  If  they  had  not  something  to 
lean  upon  they  would  be  beaten  to  the  ground  by  every  rain.  Many  and  many  a 
feeble  nature  has  power  to  stand  in  alliance  with  a  stronger  nature,  and  to  climb  on 
a  stronger  nature,  and  so  to  be  saved  instead  of  being  lost.  Even  the  household 
does  that  for  the  individual  which  he  could  not  do  for  himself.  So  it  comes  to 
pass  that  persons  are  not  only  virtuous,  but  high-minded  when  at  home,  who,  when 
public  duty  takes  them  to  Washington  or  Albany,  sink  into  the  mire.  About  n'ne 
men  in  every  ten  cannot  afford  to  leave  home.  Their  coarseness,  their  temper, 
their  passions,  which  at  home  are  restrained  by  duty,  by  love,  by  various 
influences,  spring  forth  when  they  are  abroad.  The  restraints  from  vice  and  the 
inspiration  of  excellence  being  taken  away,  having  no  root  in  themselves,  they 
fall.  {Ibid.)  Impulsive  goodness  may  conceal  craft : — When  a  farmer  wants 
to  catch  wild  turkeys,  building  his  pen  in  the  woods,  and  digging  his  trench,  he 
strews  com  along.  He  must  be  a  miser  who  would  grudge  enough  corn  to  catch  a 
dozen  turkeys ;  and  crafty  men  must  be  mean  and  selfish  indeed  if  they  cannot 
spare  enough  disinterestedness  to  catch  you  with.  And  so  they  bait  themselves 
with  good  nature,  with  joUit}',  and  with  wit ;  and  people  say  of  them,  oftentimes, 
"  Now  that  man  hat  a  great  deal  that  is  good  about  him."  Yes,  it  is  about  him. 
There  are  men  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  Oh,  well,  a  man  had  better  look  out  for  him  in 
the  end,  but  still  he  has  very  good  qualities."  He  is  a  pleasant  fellow ;  but  under 
all  his  pleasantness  there  is  craft.  I  have  seen  mosquitoes.  They  are  very  deli- 
cately organized  creatures.  They  have  beautiful  wings,  looked  at  through  the 
microscope  ;  they  sing  a  very  sweet  tenor  ;  and  if  you  notice  how  they  sit  down  on 
you  nothing  is  more  graceful.  Lighting,  they  hush  their  song ;  and  it  ii  not  until 
they  have  found  the  right  place  that  they  commence  sucking  your  blood,  ijid 
there  are  men  in  the  world  that  are  just  like  them.  Blood  is  what  they  want. 
That  is  the  reason  of  their  gauzy  flight  and  their  singing  about  you.  Since  it  is 
blood  they  want  they  take  the  way  to  get  it.  (Ibid.)  A  resurrection  of  dead 
renolutions : — If  men  are  afraid  to  go  by  graveyards,  for  fear  that  here  and  there 
some  sheeted  ghost  will  peer  over  the  wall  and  chatter  at  them,  what  would  they 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  485 

think  if,  out  of  every  sepulchre,  there  should  come  up  a  peering,  gibbering  ghost, 
and  the  yard  should  be  full  of  pallid  spectres  ?  Who  would  go  past  it  under  such 
circumstances  7  And  if  God  Almighty  should  give  resurrection  to  all  the  times  in 
which  you  have  most  solemnly  enteiiained  and  enfranchised  noble  resolutions,  and 
then  buried  them  ignominiously ;  if  He  should  call  up  to  your  memory  all  the 
virtues,  all  the  soul-fruits,  which  have  been  drawn  out  of  you  by  the  Sun  of 
Eighteousness,  and  which  you  have  trampled  under  foot,  who  of  you  could  stand  in 
your  own  presence,  or  in  the  presence  of  any  congregation.  {Ibid.)  The  two 
tons : — I.  The  case  which  is  here  presented.  1.  An  important  command.  (1) 
What  is  required — work.  (2)  The  sphere  of  labour.  (3)  The  period  specified.  2. 
The  manner  in  which  it  was  treated.  (1)  A  rude  refiwal,  followed  by  an  agreeable 
change.  (2)  A  ready  and  respectful  assent,  but  the  promise  so  promptly  made  was 
shamefully  broken.  II.  The  application  which  is  here  made.  1.  The  question 
proposed,  "  Whether  of  them  twain,"  &c.  Far  preferable  to  be  a  late  penitent  than 
a  confirmed  formalist.  2.  The  startling  truth  declared,  "  Publicans  and  harlots  go 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  you. "  How  fearless  and  faithful  his  address. 
3.  The  solemn  charge  substantiated,  "For  John  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of 
righteousness,"  &c.  {Expository  Outlines.)  The  parable  of  the  two  sons  : — I. 
Show  tou  whence  it  is  that  some  persons  do  make  present  promises  touchino 
FUTURE  FAITH  AND  HOLINESS.  They  make  these  present  promises  from  these 
common  convictions  and  illuminations  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.  1.  These 
may  be  convinced  by  the  law  of  God  that  sin  is  a  great  evil.  2.  They  may  see  that 
if  they  die  in  this  condition  they  are  undone  for  ever.  3.  They  may  make  these 
promises  from  the  nature  of  an  accusing  conscience.  4.  They  may  be  the  effect  of 
Bin,  affliction,  or  judgment.  II.  Why  do  these  promises  seldom  end  in  real 
PERFORMANCES  ?  1.  It  is  fiom  the  grand  agent  that  stirs  them  up  to  make  these 
promises,  which  is  the  devil.  Satan  cares  not  what  promises  sinners  make  to 
become  good,  if  he  can  hinder  them  from  closing  in  with  Christ  at  present.  2. 
Present  promises  and  resolutions  touching  future  faith  seldom  end  in  real  perform- 
ance. (1)  Because  it  is  they  design  to  be  wicked  at  the  present.  (2)  Because  they 
have  but  a  partial  work  upon  their  hearts,  their  hearts  are  divided,  though  their 
judgments  be  enlightened  their  wills  are  not  bowed.  (3)  Because  they  are  made  in 
opposition  to  the  Divine  command,  "To-day."  God  will  not  assist  a  man  to 
perform  such  promises  that  are  made  in  contempt  of  His  authority.  (4)  Because 
Buch  promises  are  made  only  in  the  strength  of  the  creatures.  {B.  Reach.)  Im- 
mediate  obedience  wise  : — Because  moral  indisposition  to  close  with  Christ  may  be 
more  increased  to-morrow  than  it  is  to-day ;  sin  is  of  a  hardening  nature ;  if  a 
man,  as  soon  as  taken  sick,  looks  out  for,  or  sends  for  a  physician,  there  may  be 
more  hopes  he  may  be  cured,  than  if  he  should  neglect  any  means  until  this  dis- 
temper hath  got  greater  power,  and  his  natural  strength  is  wasted.  It  is  easier  to 
break  a  colt  and  bring  him  to  the  saddle,  than  it  is  an  old  horse  that  runs  wild  in 
the  wilderness ;  a  young  plant  is  sooner  plucked  up  than  an  old  tree.  To  speak 
after  the  manner  of  men,  all  know  that  these  things  are  so,  though  it  is  true  God 
can  as  soon  subject  the  rebellious  will  of  an  old  sinner  as  one  that  is  young ;  yet 
fiince  this  is  the  Lord's  time,  viz.,  even  to-day,  from  what  I  have  said,  you  may 
learn  wisdom.  (Ibid.)  Chi-istian  diligence  : — An  eminent  divine  was  suffering 
under  chronic  disease,  and  consulted  three  physicians.  They  declared,  on  being 
questioned  by  the  sick  man,  that  his  disease  would  be  followed  by  death  in  a  shorter 
or  longer  time,  according  to  the  manner  in  which  he  lived ;  but  they  unanimously 
advised  him  to  give  up  his  office,  because,  in  his  situation,  mental  agitation  would 
be  fatal  to  him.  "  If,"  inquired  the  divine,  "  I  give  myself  up  to  repose,  how  long, 
gentlemen,  will  you  guarantee  my  hfe?"  "Probably  six  years,"  answered  the 
doctors.  "And  if  I  continue  in  office?"  "Three  years  at  most."  "Tour 
servant,  gentlemen,"  he  replied,  "  I  should  prefer  living  two  or  three  years  in 
doing  some  good,  to  living  six  years  in  idleness."  Work  for  Jesus: — I.  The 
character  under  which  it  calls  us.  II.  The  service  to  which  the  Lord  calla  us, 
"  Go  work."  III.  The  time,  "  To-day."  IV.  The  place  where  the  Lord  calls  us 
to  work,  "  In  my  vineyard."  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Lost  opportunities  : — A  dying 
soldier,  who  had  enlisted  as  a  Christian,  but  had  for  three  years,  though  a  man  of 
nprightness  and  integrity,  done  nothing  to  make  known  the  name  of  Christ,  said, 
"I  die  as  a  Christian  ;  and  I  die  contented;  but  oh,  if  I  could  have  died  as  a 
Christian  worker  1 "  "I  am  peaceful  and  assured  in  view  of  death,"  he  said 
again,  "  but  I  am  not  joyful  and  glad ;  those  three  lost  years  keep  coming  back 
npon  me."    Then,  lying  a  moment  quiet  with  closed  eyes,  he  added, ' '  ChaplaiA, 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

do  yon  suppose  we  shall  be  able  to  forfjet  anything  after  death  ?    If  so,  I  shonld  like 
to  forget   those    bree  years  1"         Opportuintiis  neglected: — A  prisoner  is  under 
sentence  of  death.     The  fatal  hour  of  execution  is  concealed  from  him,  but  be  ia 
told  that  if  before  it  strikes  he  petitions  the  governor,  his  life  will  be  spared.     He 
says,   *'  I'll  send  to-morrow,"  aud  when  to-morrow  comes  he  says  again,  "  Oh, 
there's  time  enough  yet;  I'll  wait  a  little  longer."     SuHdenly  his  dungeon  doora 
open,  and  behold  the  sheriff  and  the  executioners  I     "  Oh,  wait,  and  I'll  sign  the 
petition."     "No,"  they  say,  "the  clock  has  struck;  it's  too  late — you  must  die." 
The  opportunity  has  been  lost.     "  You   are  almost  through  this  world,"  said  % 
chaplain  to  a  soldier,  once  a  Sabbath  scholar,  who  was  in  the  last  stages  ol  disease. 
♦•  Am  I?"  said  he.     "Yes,  and  I  hope  you   are  ready  for  the  next."     "No,  I  am 
not — not  ready,  not  ready."      "Well,  my  dear  friend,  Jesus  is  all  ready,  and 
•waitii'g  right  here.     Come,  now.     Shall  I  pray?"     "  Oh, no,  no  ;  it  is  too  late,  too 
late  I     I  ought  to  have  come  long  ago."    And  then  he  told  the  chaplain,  as  calmly 
as  he  could,  of  the  time  when  he  was  "  almost  a  Christian,"  and  decided  to  let  it 
pass  till  another  winter.     "  That  was  the  time,  I  might  have  come  then,  why  didn't 
I  ?  why  didn't  I  ?  "  and,  pulling  the  blanket  over  his  face,  he  sobbed  aloud.     It  was 
in  vain  that  the  visitor  sought  to  reason  him  out  of  his  horrid  despair,  he  onh  mo- 
tioned Lim  away,  crying,  "  Don't  talk  to  me  any  more — it's  too  late,  I  can't  bear  it." 
General  drift  of  the  parable: — As  a  whole,  this  parable  shows  us  how  God  is  served 
bv  men,  and  shows  us  especially  that  though  there  are  greater  and  less  degrees  of 
disobedience  and  impenitence,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  consistent  uniform  obedi- 
ence.    The  best  that  God  gets  from  earth  is  the  obedience  of  repentance.     Men 
must  still,  each  for  himself,  try  their  own  way,  and  only  when  this  is  found  to  be 
quite  foolish  and  hurtful  and  hopeless,  do  they  try  God's  way.     No  one  can  take 
God's  word  for  it  that  such  and  such  are  the  things  to  be  done  ;  such  aud  such 
others  to  be  avoided.     We  must  for  ourselves  know  good  and  evil,  we  must  be  as 
gods  making  choice  between  the  good  that  sin  brings  and  its  evil,  and  if  then  God'a 
judgment  about  sin  tallies  with  our  own  we  accept  it.     Such  a  thing  as  simple, 
peipetual  acceptance  of  God's  commands  from  first  to  last  is  not  to  be  found  ;  and 
repentance,  though  certainly  to  be  rejoiced  over,  is,  after  all,  only  the  second-best 
thing.     Apology,  however  sincere,  is  at  all  times  a  very  poor  substitute  for  conduct 
that  needs  none.    And  yet  you  will  often  see  that  a  man  considers  that  a  graceful 
apoloKy,  wht  ther  to  God  or  men,  more  than  repairs  the  wrong  he  has  done.     It  is, 
no  doubt,  right  to  be  convinced  we  have  been  wrong  ;  it  is  light  to  turn  in  to  God'a 
vineyard,  even  though  it  be  afier  refusing  to  do  so  ;  but  that  complacency  should 
mingle  with  our  repentance  is  surely  a  triumph  of  duplicity.     To  make  our  very 
confession  of  total  unprofitableness  matter  of  self-gratulation  is  surely  the  extreme 
of  even  religious  self-deception.     {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)         The  neces.nty  of  work: — 
The  vineyard  yields  us  spontaneous  fxuit.     Man  must  work,  and  he  must  work  in 
the  line  of  God's  laws — obser\'ing  the  demands  of  the  plant,  supplying  the  condi- 
tions of  atmosphere  and  soil — or  else  no  rich  vintage  will  gladden  the  hills  or 
reward  his  toil.     And  so  in  the  culture  of  the  souL     It  is  not  through  rest,  but 
through  action — not  in  seclusion,  but  by  brave  labour  out  in  the  open  field,  under 
the  noontide  and  under  the  dew — that  its  powei's  are  to  be  developed  and  its 
highest  possibilities  attained.     You  must  not  suppose,  however,  that  in  insisting 
upon  the  great  truth  that  the  proper  issue  and  the  proof  of  a  real  Christianity  are 
in  action  and  work,  in  the  doing  by  each  one  of  ub  of  his  Father's  business  in  the 
world,  I  would  put  dishonour  upon  the  subjective  side  of  the  religious  life.     This, 
too,   with  its  seasons  of  retirement,  of  quiet  meditation,  of  self-recollection,  of 
eommunion  with  God  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all  power,  is  necessary.     Nay,  more 
than  this :  it  is  the  condition  precedent  and  absolutely  essential  to  the  highest  life 
and  best  action  of  the  soul.     It  is  here  in  the  life  of  the  soul  as  in  the  life  of  the 
material  universe.     Nature  has  her  seas^ons  of  apparent  rest  when  she  gathers  her 
energies  in  secret  chambers  and  in  silent  ways.     I3ut  these  gathered  energies  only 
reveal  their  value  and  reach  their  proper  end  when  they  pass  out  into  action  and 
clothe  the  world  with  bloom  aud  fruit  and  beauty  for  the  use  and  service  of  men. 
And  this  great  truth,  like  every  other  great  moral  and  sijirituiil  truth,  finds  illustra- 
tion in  the  life  of  Christ.     He  retires  again  and  again  from  the  multitude  to  the 
secret  oratories  of  the  desert  and  the  mountain-top.     But  the  full  meani)ig  and 
purpose  of  His  retirement  are  made  manifest  when  He  comes  forth  apain,  with  all 
His  spiritual  energies  refreshed,  to  labour  and  suffer  more  devotedly  for  men,  and 
BO  to  do  His  Father's  work  in  the  world.     The  danger  against  which  I  would  wAm 
you  is  the  belief  that  Christianity  is  simply  a  doctrine  or  a  sentiment.    It  is  these ; 


CHA».  xn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  481 

_ — J 

but  above  all  it  is,  as  the  fruition  of  these,  a  life  and  a  work.  What  the  world 
needs  to-day,  but  what,  alas  I  our  saintliness  not  seldom  fails  to  give,  is  this  living, 
loving,  labouring  piety.  What  in  this  hour  our  religion  lacks  especially  is  red 
blood.  It  wants,  in  place  of  its  too  often  sickly  complexion — the  paleness,  as  it 
were,  of  the  cloisters — the  rich  tan  of  a  vigorous  health,  which  comes  only  from 
brave  and  devoted  labour  under  all  the  changing  skies.  And  so  the  command 
comes  to  you  and  to  me,  "  Son,  daughter,  go  out  and  work."  It  bids  us  leave  our 
shaded  hermit-eaves  in  the  valley,  come  down  from  our  high  peaks  of  mere  religious 
Bentiment  or  rhapsody,  and  go,  each  one  of  us,  to  his  own  proper  field  along  the 
hot  and  stony  hillsides  of  our  Ufe,  toiling  there  with  energy  and  patience  and  devo« 
tion  until  the  whole  landscape  shall  bang  thick  -vsith  the  burdened  vines.  (IF. 
Budder,  D.D.)  God^s  vineyard  everytvhere : — Am  I  wrong  in  saying  that  when 
this  command  reaches  us,  the  common  interpretation  of  it  is  that  we  are  thua 
bidden  to  enter  upon  distinctly  religious  exercises  and  observances,  and  that  the 
command  goes  no  further  ?  Church,  prayers,  sacraments,  eiiiritual  exercises — these 
cover  and  limit  the  vineyard  of  God.  And  then  the  assumption  is  that  as  this 
enclosure  is  God's  vineyard,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  so-called  world  and  the  life 
in  the  world  are  each  man's  personal  property,  to  do  with  as  seems  to  him  best. 
When,  e.g.,  you  go  to-morrow  fiom  the  services  of  to-day,  or  from  the  devotions  of 
your  closets,  to  your  evils  or  to  your  pleasures,  you  leave  one  territory  and  enter 
upon  another.  But  there  is  no  such  separation  or  distinction  in  the  command. 
God,  be  assured,  does  not  limit  His  vinevard  by  the  boundaries  of  Church  or  sacra- 
ment or  prayer.  He  sends  out  His  voice  into  the  very  thick  of  the  crowd  to-morrow, 
and  that  voice  follows  you  wherever  you  may  be,  in  the  street  or  the  office  or  the 
Btudy,  in  the  counting-house  or  ttie  workshop,  on  the  large  and  public  arena  or  in  any 
narrowest  corner  where  some  poor  woman  endures  and  labours  patiently  for  love 
and  God's  dear  sake.  Here  is  my  vineyard  ;  here  work  out  your  salvation  ;  here, 
amid  these  seemingly  most  unfavourable  conditions,  gather  sweetness  and  beauty, 
strength  and  glory  into  your  souls  ;  here  prove  yourselves  true  sons  and  daughters 
of  God,  and  know  that  in  all  your  ways,  the  hardest  and  darkest,  your  steps  are 
directed  by  a  Father's  care,  and  over  all  is  His  unsleeping  love.  How  this  truth 
brightens  and  ennobles  all  our  life — lightening  labour  and  sorrow  by  love  and  the 
consciousness  of  being  loved,  and  changing  the  meanest  drudgeries  to  worship 
and    praise  1      (Ibid.)  To-day:  — "  To-day  1  "      It    is    our    privilege,    our 

opportunity,  our  responsibility.  "  To-day  ! "  It  is  the  flower  of  all  the  past,  it 
contains  within  itself  all  the  possibilities  of  the  future.  And  this  priceless  treasure 
is  in  the  hands  of  every  one  of  us,  the  poorest  and  the  humblest.  But,  "  to- 
morrow !  "  It  stands  behind  the  curtain  of  the  midnight,  under  the  seal  of  all  the 
Btars.  The  richest  man  in  all  this  rich  England,  who  owns  vast  landed  estates, 
who  owns  rich  ships  coming  homeward  across  all  the  tossing  seas,  owns  not  one 
second  of  to-morrow.      (Ihid.)  Pwligious  profession  : — The   second   son   gives 

his  answer  in  the  one  word  "  I,"  as  if  he  meant,  *'  Oh  1  you  need  have  no  doubt 
about  me.  I  am  ready.  I  am  at  your  service.  My  brother  is  a  shameless  fellow, 
but  as  for  me  you  have  only  to  command  me."  This  son  takes  it  for  granted  he  is 
the  dutiful  eon ;  he  puts  no  pressure  on  himself  to  secure  obedience ;  be  is  conscious 
of  no  necessity  to  guard  against  temptations  to  forgetfulness,  indolence,  selfishness. 
He  takes  for  granted  tha*  no  deficiency  will  be  found  in  him,  and  his  complacency 
is  his  ruin.  We  all  know  this  kind  of  man :  the  tradesman  to  whom  you  give 
elaborate  instructions,  and  who  assures  you  he  will  send  an  article  precisely  to 
your  mind,  but  actually  sends  you  what  is  quite  useless  for  your  purposes ;  the 
friend  who  bids  you  leave  the  matter  to  him,  but  who  has  no  sooner  turned  the 
comer  of  the  street  than  he  meets  some  one  whose  conversation  puts  you  and  your 
affairs  qiiit  o  out  of  his  mind.  If  promising  had  been  all  that  was  wanted  no  com- 
munity could  have  been  more  godly  than  Jerusalem.  These  priests  and  elders 
spent  their  lives  in  professing  to  be  God's  people.  Their  day  was  filled  with 
religious  services.  They  had  no  secular  business  at  all ;  they  were  identified  with 
religion  ;  their  whole  life  was  a  proclamation  that  they  were  God's  servants,  and  a 
profession  of  their  willingness  to  obey.  And  yet  they  failed  to  do  the  one  thing 
they  were  there  to  do— to  prepare  for  and  receive  the  Messiah.  Their  whole  pro- 
fession collapsed  like  a  burst  bubble  ;  they  were  proved  to  be  shams,  to  be  dealing 
In  mere  words  with  no  idea  of  realities.  {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  Ready  to  promise, 
but  $low  to  perform : — Hypocrites  purpose  oft,  and  promise  fair  to  do  better,  but 
drive  off  and  fail  in  the  performance ;  their  morning  cloud  is  soon  dispersed,  theii 
evly  dew  is  quickly  dried  up,  their  heartless  essays  come  to  nothing.     The  philo* 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

sopher  liked  not  snch  as  are  always  abont  to  live  better,  but  never  begin.     A  divinn 
complains  that  the  goodness  of  many  is  like  the  poftness  of  a  plum,  soon  crushed; 
but  their  wickedness  is  like  the  stone  in  the  plum,  hard  and  inflexible.     [John 
Trapp.)        Doing  God's  -will : — This  is  plain  ;  for  what  was  the  will  of  the  father, 
but  that  they  should  do  the  work  He  had  set  them  to  do  ?    This  the  latter  did  not. 
The  father's  will  was  not  only  that  the  son  should  give  him  a  cap  and  a  kuee  and 
compliment  him,  but  that  he  should  go  to  work  in  the  vineyard.     It  is  the  least 
part  of  God's  will  that  men  should  give  Him  good  words,  be  a  little  complimental 
and  ceremonious  toward  Him  ;  but  that  they  should  repent  and  believe  and  obey 
His  Gospel.     This  some  publicans  and  harlots  did ;  the  generality  of  the  Pharisees 
refused.    It  is  a  hard  thing  to  convince  a  moral,  righteous,  civil  man,  that  he  lacks 
anything  to  salvation ;  and  hence  it  is  that  profane  persons  many  times  repent, 
believe,   and  are  saved,  when  others  perish  in  their  impenitency  and  imbelief 
because  they  think  they  have  no  need  of  repentance,  or  any  further  righteousnesa 
than  they  are  possessed  of.     (Matthew  Pool.)        Go,  work  to-day: — Work  and  give, 
for  the  night  cometh : — A  missionary  in  the  West  Indies  having  called  on  the 
people  fur  a  little  help  in  spreading  the  gospel,  a  negro  came  forward,  and  putting 
his  hand  in  one  pocket  pulled  out  some  silver,  saying,  "  That  for  me,  massa ;  "  and 
another  parcel  from  another  pocket,  "  That's  for  my  wife,  massa ;  "  and  another 
Btill,  making  in  all  upwards  of  twelve  dollars,  "  "That's  for  my  child,  massa." 
When  asked  if  he  was  not  giving  too  much,  he  said,  "  God's  work  must  be  done, 
massa,  and  I  may  be  dead,"     Let  us  do  and  let  us  give  what  we  can.      God's 
work   must  be   done,   and  we  may  be   deadl         Well-wishing  not  well-doing: — 
The   second  son    appears   the  more  amiable  at    first    than  the  other,   though 
he  was  worse.      The   first  son   seems  to  have  been  one  of  those  men  who  are 
rough  externally,   with   a    good  heart   inwardly,   who    speak   rudely,  but  make 
it  up  in  activity  afterwards.      Their  tongue  is  hard,  hasty,  perverse;   but  their 
heart  rebukes  the  hardness  of  the  tongue,  and  rises  up  to  repair  by  kindneea 
the  rude  utterance.     The  second  son  was  one  of  those  compliant  creatures  who 
promise  everything  and  perform  nothing.     They  are  subjects  of  universal  impreg 
gibUity.     They  feel  the  slightest  influence,  and  yield  to  it  a  certain  way,  but  onlj 
In  a  certain  degree,  and  that  this  side  of  any  profit.     They  never  convert  impres- 
ittons  to  ideas.      They  never  ripen  impulses  to  purposes.      They  never  change 
emotions  to  principles,  nor  principles  to  fixed  habits.     They  cry  easily,  they  love 
easily,  they  give  up  easily,  they  fall  back  easily,  but  like  an  aspen  leaf  that  is 
Mioving  the  whole  day,  they  are  at  the  same  place  at  night  as  in  the  morning.  They 
♦tBiver  but  do  not  change,  and  for  ever  moviug,  and  for  ever  stationary.     A  large 
fciass  of  men,  in  every  community,  are  di'awn  to  the  church  who  are  of  this  kind, 
lind    may  be    called  well-wishers    to    religion,   but    not  well-doers  in  religion. 
(H.  Ward  Beecher.)         Wishing  and  willing: — To  wish  and  to   will  are  very 
different  things.  There  are  a  thousand  men  who  wish,  where  there  is  one  who  wiUs. 
fVishing  is  but  a  faint  state  of  desire.     Willing  is  a  state  of  the  reason,  and  of  th« 
affections,  and  of  the  will,  in  activity,  to  secure  what  one  desires.     A  man  may 
wish  and  yet  reject  aU  the  steps  and  instruments  by  which  that  wish  can  be  carried 
into  effect.   No  man  wills  until  he  has  made  up  his  mind  not  only  to  have  the  end, 
but  to  have  all  the  steps  intermediately  by  which  that  end  is  to  be  secured.     Doing 
requiies  concentration  of  purpose.     Doing  has  both  hands  and  feet,  and  uses  them. 
Wishing  has  neither,  or  else,  having  them,  puts  neither  of  them  to  use.     (Ibid.) 
A  mist  of  well-wishing : — As  a  cloud  of  silvery  mist  drops  down  over  a  ship  and 
shuts  it  in,  so  that  it  cannot  go  any  further,  but  casts  anchor  and  waits,  so  con- 
science,  when  it  begins  to  be  troublous,  is  shut  down  in  the  midst  of  this  silvery 
mist  of  well-wishing.     So  that  a  well-wisher  is  one  of  those  persons  who  bid  fair 
to  wear  out  the  influence  of  appeals  of  the  gospel  in  the  sanctuary.    HJs  tempera- 
ment is  one  that  lasts  better  and  longer  than  any  other.     (Ibid.)        Self-conceit  in 
morals: — The  corruptions  of  the  passions  are  more  likely  to  be  healed   than  ia 
spiritual  conceit.     The  passage  teaches,  not  the  safety  of  passional  corruption,  but 
the  danger  of  self-righteousness.     A  man  in  the  almost  hopeless  state  of  passional 
corruption  may  recover ;  but  for  the  recovery  of  a  man  that  is  in  the  hopeless  state 
of  spiritual  corruption  and  conceit,  there  is  scarcely  a  chance.     The  value  and 
excellence  of  the  photographer's  plate  which  is  hidden  within  the  camera  does  not 
consist  in  what  it  is,  but  upon  its  susceptibility  when  the  object-glass  of  the  camera 
is  open  to  that  light  which  streams  upon  it.     If  it  is  unprepared,  and  is  like  the 
common  glass  all  beauty  might  sit  before  it,  and  no  change  would  be  produced  by 
the  streaming  af  light.    The  glass  might  be  as  good  in  the  first  case  as  in  the 


CHAP,  jcxi.]  ST   MATTHEW.  469 

second,  with  the  exception  that,  when  it  is  prepared,  the  photographer's  glass  re- 
veals the  impression  of  beauty  made  upon  it  by  the  light.  The  criterion  of  hope- 
fulness in  a  man,  then,  is  not  that  he  has  gone  so  high  in  moral  excellence.  A 
man's  hopefulness  consists  in  the  fact  that  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God.  It  consists 
in  the  mixing,  as  it  were,  the  Divine  nature  with  ours,  and  the  breathing  into  us 
of  the  spirit  of  God's  love.  The  criterion  of  hopefulness  is  the  openness  of  a  man's 
soul  to  the  Divine  influence,  and  its  susceptibility  under  the  Divine  shining.  (Ibid.) 
Basilar  and  coronal  corruption: — Conuptions  through  the  passions;  or  through  the 
iDoral  sentiments.  At  the  recent  great  flood  at  Albany,  where  those  warehouses 
were  undermined  and  thrown  down,  one  man  was  in  the  base  and  the  other  in  the 
attic.  The  man  at  the  base,  being  right  where  the  danger  was,  saw  the  pressure  and 
the  wearing,  and  heard  the  grinding.  He  saw  brick  after  brick,  and  stone  after 
stone  ground  out  by  the  sawing  ice.  And  seeing  and  knowing  these  things,  as  the 
danger  came  on  he  could  flee;  but  the  man  in  his  office  in  the  attic  neither  saw  the 
danger  nor  believed  that  there  was  any  danger,  and  went  on  summing  up  his 
profits,  and  laying  out  his  plans.  Which  of  these  men  had  the  best  chance  of 
escape,  the  man  at  the  bottom  who  saw  the  danger,  or  the  man  at  the  top  who  saw 
nothing  and  heard  nothing ?  (Ibid.)  Our  most  real  danger: — Do  not  think  that 
your  danger  lies  in  outbreaking  sin.  In  some  cases  the  danger  lies  there ;  but  in 
some  cases  the  danger  lies  in  an  intense  spiritual  conceit;  in  an  arrogant  morality, 
in  an  overweening  estimate  of  your  own  goodness  and  safety.  You  do  not  feel  that  you 
need  a  physician,  and  therefore  you  will  die  in  your  sins.  You  do  not  feel  that  you 
need  a  Deliverer,  and  therefore  Christ  is  nothing  to  you.  You  are  not  conscious 
that  you  need  biead,  and  therefore  the  bread  of  life  is  not  brought  to  you.  You  say, 
*"  [  am  not  blind — I  see;  I  am  not  naked — I  am  clothed;  I  am  not  hungry — I  am 
fei;"  and  yet  you  are  blind,  and  naked,  and  hungry;  and  so  you  will  perish, 
though  there  is  salvation  proffered  to  such  as  you  are.  (Ibid.)  Obedience  forced 
and  natural: — Compel  yourself  to  all  duties  now,  and  soon  you  will  like  the  duties 
that  are  now  distasteful.  The  man  that  is  drawn  out  of  the  water  half-drowned 
can  only  be  restored  by  artificial  re-piration,  but  if  this  is  persevered  in  the  natural 
b>  eathing  at  last  begins,  and  the  functions  of  healthy  unforced  respiration  super- 
cedes the  artificial  means.  And  thus  God  educates  us  to  ease  and  naturalness  in 
ail  duty.  Under  cover  of  the  outward  conduct  the  new  spirit  grows  and  grows  to 
such  strength,  that  at  last  it  maintains  the  outward  conduct  as  its  natural  fruit. 
(Marcus  Dods.)  Small  value  of  promises: — Says  Socrates  to  his  friends,  in 
t)ie  Phsedo,  "If  you  take  care  of  yourselves  everj-tbing  will  go  well  with  you, 
w  hether  you  make  me  any  promises  about  the  matter  or  not ;  but  if  hereafter  you 
si  all  neglect,  and  be  unwilling  to  govern  yourselves  by  the  rules  I  have  laid  down, 
though  you  make  me  ever  so  many  promises,  you  wiJl  be  never  the  better  for  them." 
3  nnci  is  obedience : — The  question  is.  What  have  you  done  f  The  passer-by,  who 
B»  w  the  one  son  stripped  and  hard  at  work  under  the  sun  among  the  vines,  while 
tlie  other  lounged  whnnperingly  on  the  road,  telling  people  what  an  admirable  man 
his  father  was,  and  what  a  pleasure  it  was  to  work  for  him,  and  how  much  he  hoped 
the  vintage  would  be  abundant — I  say,  the  passer-by  would  not  have  the  slightest 
difficulty  in  forming  a  judgment  of  the  two  sons.  Do  not  believe  in  your  purpose 
to  serve  God  better  until  you  do  s.^rve  Him  better.  Give  no  credit  to  yourself  for 
anything  which  is  not  actually  accomplished.  (Marcus  Dods.)  Two  sons: — It  is 
important  to  observe  the  historical  connections  of  our  Lord's  teachings,  because  all 
His  words  had  immediate  applications,  and  through,  and  by  means  of  the  first 
references,  the  deeper  and  the  more  general  are  found.  This  parable  was  spoken 
during  the  last  visit  to  Jerusalem,  when  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  seeking  to  find 
accusation  against  Him.  He  bafQed  them,  and  even  humiliated  them  by  putting 
searching  questions  to  them.  Here  the  son  who  refused  and  repented  represents 
the  Publican  class;  and  the  son  who  promised  and  neglected  represents  the  Pharisee 
class.  Whatever  men's  professions  may  be,  the  test  of  what  they  will  do  presently 
oomes  to  them.  Profession  alone  is  without  moral  value;  profession  may  indeed 
put  a  man  at  disadvantage  in  entering  God's  kingdom.  The  openly  ungodly 
man  may  be  more  readily  humbled  than  the  man  who  is  fenced  about  with  eelf- 
righteousness.  The  general  truth  suggested  maybe  thus  stated:  I.  Tliis  is  a  world 
of  change.  That  setms  to  be  a  sad  thing.  It  really  is  a  most  hopeful,  a  most 
merciful  thing.  The  unchangeable  will  never  do  for  us  while  we  are  sinners. 
II.  We  may  change  for  the  worse,  as  one  of  these  sons  did.  Illustrate  from  David, 
Judas,  Demas,  &c.  III.  We  may  change  for  the  better,  as  the  other  son  did.  Very 
«ad  is  young  manhood  stained  with  vice  ;  but  there  may  be  a  change.     Very  sad  i» 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xn. 

manhood  disgraced  with  eelf-indulgence ;  but  there  may  be  a  change.  The  most 
wilful  may  repent  and  obey.  There  is  no  security  in  mere  profession.  There  is  no 
hopelessness  in  present  refusal.  We  can  turn,  lepent,  and  live.  This,  lor  qb. 
Almighty  Grace  can  do.     (R.  Tuck.) 

Vers.  33-41.  There  was  a  certain  householder,  •which  planted  a  vineyard. — The 
wicked  husbandmen  : — I.  A  bepresbntation  of  the  Jewish  Church  as  regards  its 
PBiviLBGES  AND  OBLIGATIONS.  "  There  was  a  certain  householder,  which  planted  a 
vine.\ard,  &c.  1.  The  comparison  employed.  Palestine  abounded  in  vineyards. 
This  was  planted ;  there  was  not  one  on  the  spot  previously.  He  had  to  expend 
capital  to  bring  it  under  cultivation.  2.  The  engagement  entered  into — "  Let  it 
out  to  husbandmen."     3.  The  returns  anticipated — "  Keceive  the  fruits  of  it.'-     II. 

TfEIB    unprincipled   disposition  and  the   monstrous   brutality  THET  MANIEBSIED. 

1.  The  messengers  sent  to  them,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  were  treated.  2. 
The  crowning  act  of  clemency  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  cruelty  on  the  other.  IIL 
The  awful  betribdtion  with  which  their  abominable  conduct  was  at  lenoih 
VISITED.  1.  A  striking  prediction  quoted — "  Jesus  saith  unto  them.  Did  ye  never 
read  in  the  Scripturi's,"  <fec.  2.  The  important  inference  declared — "  Therefore  I 
say  unto  you,  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from  you,"  <feo.  3.  A  solemn 
warning  uttered — "And  whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone,"  &c.  (Expository  Out- 
lines.) The  wicki'd  husbandmen  • — 1.  The  greatest  privilege  a  man  can  enjoy  is 
to  have  the  kingdom  of  God  entrusted  to  him.  2.  The  greatest  sin  a  man  can 
commit  is  to  reject  Christ.  3.  The  darkest  doom  is  tbat  of  those  who  are  guilty 
of  this  greatest  sin.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  wicked  husbandmen: — I.  Theib 
MERCIES.  1.  They  were  in  the  vineyard — Israel — and  in  no  heathen  land.  No 
small  mercy  that  we  live  in  a  Christian  country.  2  Tbey  were  husbandmen — men 
of  office  and  influence,  entrusted  with  an  honourable  work  under  a  wi^e  and  good 
master.  A  great  mercy  to  be  not  only  in  the  vineyard,  but  called  to  work  for  God 
there.  3.  They  were  paid  for  their  work.  4.  Though  unfaithful,  they  had  been 
long  borne  with.  Divine  forbearance  a  great  mercy.  6  Special  messengers  were 
sent  to  them  from  time  to  time  to  stimulate  and  encourage  them,  &c.  II.  Theib 
conduct.  1.  They  neglected  their  work.  2.  They  missed  the  purport  of  their 
office,  which  was  spiritual.  3.  They  had  killed  the  messengers.  4.  At  last  they 
filled  op  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  by  killing  the  heir.  Being  servants,  they 
had  come  to  regard  themselves  as  the  owners  and  lords  of  God's  heritage.  Under 
their  husbandry  the  vineyard  had  become  a  scene  of  moral  ruin.  III.  Theib 
punishment.  1.  God,  though  merciful,  was  not  unobservant  of  their  conduct.  2. 
He  had  often  inflicted  minor  and  temporal  punishments  on  themselves  and  the 
nation.  3.  Now  th(;y  were  to  be  wholly  extinguished.  4.  The  pnnishment  was 
unexpected ;  they  despised  its  cause.  6.  It  was  complete.  They  lost  their  place 
and  nation,  and  were  scattered  abroad.  Learn — 1.  To  consider  and  value  God's 
mercies  (Psa.  cvi.  12-14 ;  Romans  xii.  1).  2.  To  study  our  reception  and  use  o£ 
them.  3.  To  reflect  specially  on  the  greatest  of  all  (2  Cor.  ix.  15).  4.  To  remember 
that  we  too  must  give  account.  (J.  <7.  Gray.)  The  Son  of  God  must  be  reverenced : — 
What  is  said  of  Israel  may  be  said  of  men  in  all  ages — "  It  might  have  been  pre- 
sumed that  they  would  treat  kindly  the  Son  of  God."  From  (1)  the  divinity  and 
glory  of  His  nature  ;  (2)  the  perfect  excellence  of  His  character  as  a  man  ;  (3)  the 
reasonableness  of  His  claims  ;  (4)  the  condescending  kindness  of  His  intentions ; 
(5)  His  known  ahihty  to  save;  (6)  His  ability  to  destroy  as  well  as  to 
save ;  (7)  their  necessities.  Conclusion  —  1.  The  sinner's  fijaal  ruin  is  un- 
necessary. 2.  His  ruin  will  be  self-induced.  3.  Wanton.  (D.  A.  Clark, 
A.M.)  The  figure    of   letting  out    the    vineyard: — I.    Show   what    "letting 

out "  doth  imply  or  denote.  1.  Negatively.  This  letting  the  vineyard  duth  not 
denote  that  any  people  have  a  lease  sealed  to  them  of  their  church  state,  church 
ordinances,  and  church  privileges :  no,  all  are  but  tenants  at  will.  We  hold  all 
our  spiritual  privileges  at  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  who  may  give 
ns  warning  and  turn  us  out  of  all  when  He  pleaseth.  And  it  doth  not  imply  that 
any  people  buy  and  pay  for  any  spiritual  blessings  and  good  things  which  they 
possess ;  no,  we  have  all  freely,  church  and  church  privileges,  the  gospel, 
ordinances,  and  promise?,  without  money  and  without  price.  We  have  no  rent, 
no  tribute  to  pay,  but  tlie  tribute  of  praise,  thanksgiving,  and  fruitfnlness  unto 
God.  2.  Negntively.  a.  Letting  denotes  God's  entrusting  a  people  with  the  great 
blessing  of  the  legal  Church.  6.  Letting  implies  that  a  Church,  the  Word  of  God, 
and  ordinances,  are  not  man's  own  proper  or  natural  right  or  inheritance.    We  ar« 


BHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  401 

but  stewards  entmstsd  with  these  things,  c.  Letting  ont  to  husbandmen  signifies 
a  mighty  trust  is  committed  to  such.  d.  Letting  out  implies  that  if  men  do  not  bring 
forth  unto  God  that  holy  fruit  which  Ha  expeeteth,  they  must  be  called  to  an 
account  for  it.  II.  To  whom  may  the  Church  or  vineyard  of  Christ  be  said  to  be 
let  ?  1.  Principally  to  the  pastors,  teachers,  and  such  who  are,  or  ought  to  be, 
helps  of  government.  2.  In  some  eeuso  it  may  be  said  to  be  let  also  to  every 
member ;  for  every  member  is  a  hired  servant  of  Christ,  and  all  have  their  proper 
work  appointed  by  Him.  3.  In  a  remote  sense  it  is  let  to  all  that  accept  the  inrita- 
tions  of  the  gospel.  III.  What  fniit  is  it  that  God  expeeteth  ?  1.  The  fruit  of 
faith  and  conversion.  2.  The  fruit  of  good  works.  3.  Friiits  good  in  quality  and 
quantity.  4.  Fmit  according  to  the  cost  and  pains  God  hath  been  at.  5.  Fruit 
accortUng  to  the  time  of  the  vineyard  being  planted.  6.  Fruit  in  due  season.  7. 
Fruit  according  to  gifts  and  grace  received.  8.  Fruit  according  to  the  places  and 
stations  wherein  God  hath  set  us.     (Btrj.  Keach.) 

Ver.  42.  The  stonewhlch  the  builders  rejected. — Redemption  a  marvellouii  worh: — 
L  It  is  God's  work.  1.  Contrary  to  intentions  or  acts  of  the  builders.  8.  No  one 
else  competent  to  perform  it.  H.  It  is  a  marvellous  work.  1.  From  extent  of 
agency  employed.  2.  Divine  attributes  dispiKyed.  3.  Demerit  of  its  objects.  4. 
Number  and  extent  of  its  benefits — (a)  wrath  removed ;  (6)  reconciliation  and 
peace;  (c)  access  to  God;  (d)  adoption;  (c)  sanctified  nature;  (/)  eternal  life. 
Learn — (1)  this  work  challenges  our  trust ;  (2)  requires  thought ;  (8)  Demands 
unceasing  praise,  (rreac)icr^s  Portfolio.)  It  will  grind  him  topowder: — Penalty 
of  unbellf: — I  remember,  away  up  in  a  lonely  Highland  valley,  where  beneath  a 
tall  black  cliff,  all  weather-worn  and  cracked  and  seamed,  there  lies  at  the  foot, 
resting  on  the  green  sward  that  creeps  round  its  base,  a  huge  rock  that  has  fallen 
from  the  face  of  the  precipice.  A  shepherd  was  passing  bentath  it,  and  sixddeuly, 
when  the  finger  of  God's  will  touched  it,  and  rent  it  from  its  bed  in  the  everlasting 
rock,  it  came  d'wn,  leaping  and  bounding  from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle,  and  it  fell ; 
and  the  man  who  was  beneath  it  is  there  now  1  "  It  will  grind  him  to  powder." 
.  .  .  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  since  all  that  stand  against  Him  shall  become  "  as  the 
chafi  of  the  summer  threshing-floor,"  and  be  swept  utterly  away,  make  Him  the 
foundation  on  which  you  build,  and  when  the  stoi  ua  sweeps  away  every  ref ng^-"  of 
lies  you  will  be  safe  and  serene,  builded  upon  the  Kock  of  Ages.  (Dr.  McLart'n.) 
Judgment  and  viercy  : — I.  The  greatest  judoment  which  can  ever  befall  a  people  is 
taking  the  kingdom  of  God  from  them.  The  kingdom  of  G^d  was  taken  by  the 
Jews  themselves  for  somepccuhar  and  temporal  blessings  which  those  who  enjoyed 
it  had  above  all  other  people.  It  was  taken  by  our  Saviour  for  a  clearer  manifesta- 
tion of  the  will  of  God  to  the  world,  and  the  consequence  of  that  in  the  hearts  of 
good  men,  and  all  the  spiritual  blessings  which  do  attend  it.  So  that  the  taking 
Bway  the  kingdom  of  God  from  them  must  needs  be  the  heaviest  judgment  which 
could  befall  a  ijec'ple,  since  it  implies  in  it  the  taking  away  all  the  greatest  temporal 
and  spiritual  blessings.  Jews  make  the  lingiiom  of  God  to  consist  (1)  in  a 
deliverance  of  them  from  their  enemies  ;  (2)  in  the  flourishing  of  their  state,  or 
that  polity  which  God  established  among  them ;  (3)  in  the  solemn  worship  of  Him 
at  the  temple.  All  these  were  taken  away.  Take  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  sense 
our  Saviour  meant — the  power  of  the  gospel — and  the  judgment  is  yet  more  evident. 
L  It  is  acknowledged  by  the  Jews  themselves  that  these  great  calamities  have  hap- 
pened  to  them  for  some  extraordinary  sins.  2.  The  sin  ought  to  be  looked  on  as  so 
much  greater  by  how  much  heavier  and  longer  this  punishment  hath  been  than 
any  inflicted  on  them  before.  3.  The  Jews  have  not  sufJered  these  calamities  for 
the  same  sins  for  which  they  suffered  before.  4.  It  must  be  some  sin  which  their 
fathers  committed,  and  which  continues  yet  unrepented  of  by  them  to  this  day. 
There  were  these  remarkable  forerunners  of  desolation  in  the  Jewish  state  which  I 
ftm  afraid  we  are  tuo  much  concerned  in.  1.  A  strange  degeneracy  of  all  sorts  of 
men  from  the  virtues  of  their  ancestors.  2.  A  general  stupidity  and  inappre- 
hensiveness  of  common  danger.  3.  An  atheistical  contempt  of  religion.  4^ 
Spiritual  pride,  II.  The  greatest  mercy  that  can  ever  be  vouchsafed  to  a  nation 
is  God's  giving  His  kingdom  to  it.  (Bishop  Stillingfleet.)  The  head  stone  of  the 
comer: — The  Jews  were  the  first  builders  to  whom  God  gave  the  privilege  to  build 
His  Church.  Three  things  the  corner-stone  is  to  the  builder's  work — 1.  The 
Btructnre  ranges  up  to  the  corner-stone.  All  else  is  below,  that  it  maybe  high; 
all  ministers  to  it.  Abase  yourself  that  Christ  may  be  exalted.  2.  The  whole 
fabric  holds  up  the  head  of  the  corner  to  the  view  of  men  that  it  may  be  admired. 


492  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv 

Take  care  that  the  aspect  which  your  religion  wearg  to  every  man  is  not  yourself,  but 
Christ.  3.  Let  Christ,  as  the  stone  does  the  comer,  bind  everything.  He  is  the 
one  cementing  all  that  is  true.  Whatever  is  in  Christ,  though  it  be  repugnant 
to  your  feelings,  do  not  send  it  away  from  you.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  stone 
of  stumbling  : — The  two  clauses  of  the  text  figuratively  point  to  two  different  classes 
of  operation — in  the  one  case  the  stone  is  represented  as  passive,  lying  quiet ;  in 
the  other,  it  has  got  motion.  In  the  one  case,  it  is  a  self-inflicted,  remedial  injury ; 
in  the  other,  it  is  total  and  judicial.  I.  Every  man  has  some  kind  of  connection 
WITH  Chkist.  The  gospel  must  influence  every  man  somehow  ;  it  is  an  element  in 
our  present  civilization.  Christ  does  something  to  every  one  of  us.  He  is  either 
the  rock  on  which  I  build  or  a  stone  of  stumbling.  II.  The  immediate  issue  ok 
EEJECTioN  of  Him  IS  LOSS  AND  MAIMING — "  Whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone  shall 
be  broken."  The  positive  harm.  No  man  ever  yet  passively  rejected  Christ;  there 
is  always  a  slight  struggle  with  right  before  living  away.  So  that  every  man  who 
rejects  Christ  wounds  his  own  conscience,  hardens  his  own  heart,  makes  himself  a 
worse  man.  By  the  natural  result  of  his  unbelief  his  nature  '•  shall  be  broken." 
I  need  not  dwell  on  the  negative  evil  results  of  unbelief ;  we  fail  to  possess  the  great 
love  of  God  by  which  only  we  are  made  what  we  ought  to  be.  Not  only  by  the  act 
of  rejection  of  Christ  do  we  maim  ourselves,  but  also  all  attempts  of  opposition  to 
the  gospel  as  a  system  stand  self-convicted — "  Whosoever  falls  on  this  stone  shall 
be  broken."  III.  The  ultimate  issue  of  unbelief  is  irkemediable  desteoction 
WHEN  Christ  begins  to  move.  The  former  clause  has  spoken  about  the  passive 
operation  of  unbelief  whilst  the  gospel  is  being  preached  ;  this  about  the  active 
agency  of  Christ,  "  It  shaU  grind  him  to  powder."     (4.  McLaren^  D.D.) 

Vers.  45, 46.  They  feared  the  multitude,  because  they  took  Him  for  a  prophet. — 

The  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  the  circumstances  of  the  poor : — "The  multitude" 
were  pleased  with  Christ  and  took  Him  for  a  prophet.  The  pleasure  which  our 
text  indicates  may  be  referred  to  wrong  motives  ;  they  were  glad  to  see  others 
humbled  and  rebuked.  We  often  repine  at  the  superiority  of  those  above  us,  and 
are  gratified  when  any  wound  is  inflicted  on  their  vanity.  Not  that  Christ  desired 
by  artful  means  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  inferior  orders.  Often  in  theological  con- 
troversy men  applaud  not  from  love  of  the  truth,  but  because  some  one  has  been 
repulsed.  We  take  the  supposition  that  the  pleasure  of  the  multitude,  in  part  at 
least,  was  produced  by  the  general  tenor  of  Christ's  preachiug,  and  not  by  a 
triumphant  exposure  of  the  sins  of  their  rulers.  Let  us  examine  into  the  causes 
from  which  it  came  to  pass  that  discourses  which  were  distasteful  to  the  great 
amongst  the  Jews  found  acceptance  with  the  multitude.  No  doubt  reasons  could  be 
derived  from  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  Jewish  nation ;  their  expectation  of  a 
temporal  prince,  which  was  stronger  in  the  higher  classes  than  m  the  lower.  Had 
the  lower  classes  been  left  to  themselves,  it  is  probable  that  the  Christ  who  healed 
their  sick  would  have  been  accepted.  Bat  this  is  true  of  our  own  day — the  mul- 
titudes, as  distinguished  from  others,  have  an  interest  in  hearing  the  gospel.  It 
gains  a  hold  on  them  which  makes  them  "take  Christ  for  a  prophet."  Here  it  is 
that  the  Almighty  has  introduced  one  of  those  counterpoises  which  cause  good  and 
evil  to  be  distributed  with  considerable  equality  notwithstanding  the  marked  dif- 
ference in  human  conditions.  Wealth  and  learning  are  great  advantages  viewed  in 
reference  to  the  present  life  ;  but  in  regard  to  the  other  life  the  circumstances  of 
th'jir  life  facilitate  their  eternal  good.  The  poor  man  has  little  to  attach  him  to 
earth  ;  the  rich  is  surrounded  by  things  that  fascinate  him,  also  there  are  prejudices 
against  the  gospel  peculiar  to  the  rich  which  the  illiterate  cannot  share.  The  gospel 
sets  the  poor  amongst  princes  ;  the  rich  and  great  cling  to  artificial  distinctions. 
The  poverty  of  Christ  was  an  offence  to  the  rich  ;  it  was  an  attraction  to  the  poor. 
The  gospel  cannot  reach  the  heart  without  supernatural  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
but  if  we  take  the  doctrines  of  Christianity — the  mediatorial  work — imputation  of 
righteousness — we  might  contend  that  the  common  people  are  in  a  better  position 
than  others  to  admit  them.  In  the  outcasts  of  society  there  is  not  found  that 
haughty  self-reliance ;  the  gospel  is  more  welcome  to  them.  The  Bible  seems  to 
have  been  composed  with  express  reference  to  the  poor.  But  we  must  not  over- 
look the  fact  that  those  who  took  Christ  for  a  prophet  finally  rejected  and  crucified 
Hira.    **  Se  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only."    (if.  Melvill^  B.D.) 


eBAP.  xm.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  493 


CHAPTER  XXn. 

Vebs.  1-10.  Tbe  kingdom  of  heaven  Is  like  unto  a  certain  king  which  made  a 
marriage  for  his  son. — Making  light  of  gospel  invitations: — I.  When  ob  how  kkn 
BLIGHT  THB  INVITATIONS  OP  THB  GOSPEL.  1.  When  they  neglsct  the  Word  of  God, 
which  is  full  of  them,  and  which  authoritatively  announces  them  to  the  world.  2. 
When  they  absent  themselves  from  the  sanctuary,  when  they  are  proclaimed  by 
God's  own  ambassadors.  3.  When  they  fail  to  give  heed  to  the  Divine  message, 
when  it  is  personally  and  solemnly  addressed  to  them.  4.  When  Sabbath  after 
Sabbath  they  refuse  to  accept  the  invitation  to  come  to  the  feast  of  love  spread  for 
them.  No  greater  slight  can  be  conceived  when  we  consider — (1)  who  gives  the  invi- 
tation ;  (2)  the  character  and  condition  of  those  to  whom  it  is  made ;  (3)  the  honour 
and  infinite  good  involved  in  the  invitation.  II.  The  danoeb  of  suohtino  thksb 
INVITATIONS.  1.  It  cannot  fail  to  provoke  the  anger  of  God.  "  The  king  was  wrath." 
8.  It  inevitably  forfeits  all  the  blessings  of  Christ's  meditation  and  sacrifice.  3.  It 
shuts  the  door  of  mercy  against  the  sinner.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  marriage 
of  the  king's  son: — I.  A  monarch's  celebration  of  an  interestinq  event.  1. 
The  king  here  referred  to  is  evidently  the  Most  High.  The  human  kingship  is  really 
but  a  lower  form  of  the  heavenly.  2.  The  king  had  a  son  who  had  taken  to  himself 
a  bride.  3.  On  the  occasion  of  his  marriage  a  splendid  banquet  was  provided.  Royal 
feasts  are  sumptuous  and  abundant.  II.  The  mdniticence  despised  by  His  dk- 
GEATEFCL  SUBJECTS.  1.  The  invitation  he  sent,  and  the  way  in  which  it  was 
responded  to.  2.  The  causes  of  their  rejecting  so  kind  an  offer.  (1)  Indisposition. 
"Tney  would  not  come."  (2)  Love  of  the  world.  "One  to  his  farm,"  &c.  (3) 
Open  malignity.  3.  The  consequences  that  ensued.  III.  The  botal  bounty  at 
LENGTH  appreciated.  1.  The  messengers  were  entrusted  with  a  fresh  commission 
to  a  totally  different  class.  2.  The  response  which  their  message  received.  IV. 
The  assembled  company  inspected,  and  the  consequences  that  ensued.  1.  The 
spectacle  which  was  beheld  :  "He  saw  there  a  man  which  had  not  on  a  wedding  gar- 
ment." 2.  The  question  proposed.  3.  The  doom  pronounced.  (Expository  Out- 
lines.) The  royal  marriage  feast : — Four  different  ways  of  treating  God's  invitations 
in  the  gospel  are  here  set  before  us.  1.  We  have  it  complacently  ignored  by  those 
who  went  their  ways  to  their  farms  and  to  their  merchandise.  2.  We  have  the 
gospel  offer  violently  rejected.  There  is  still  a  violent  rejection  of  the  gospel  by 
open  infidels.  3.  The  inconsistency  and  insolence  of  the  man  who  professed  to 
accept  the  invitation,  and  yet  failed  to  comply  with  the  conditions  on  which  alone 
true  acceptance  of  it  was  possible.  He  pushed  into  the  festive  hall  without  having 
on  a  wedding  garment.  4.  We  have  the  gospel  invitation  sincerely  and  heartily 
accepted.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  parable  of  the  wedding  feast : — I.  A  magni- 
ficent banquet  with  a  grand  object  in  view.  The  person  is  Divine.  The  occasion 
a  subject  of  delight  to  us  personally ;  it  is  a  marriage  with  our  nature ;  not  with 
angels.     The  royal  descent  of  the  Bridegroom.     His  character  ;  His  achievements- 

II.  Here  is  a  gbacious  method  of  accomplishing  the  design.  1.  A  feast  for  joy.  i. 
A  feast  for  fulness.  3.  A  feast  for  fellowship.  4.  All  the  expense  lies  with  Him.  5. 
How  honourable  is  the  gospel  to  those  who  receive  it.    A  monarch's  entertainment. 

III.  The  serious  hindrance.      1.  They  were  disloyal.     2.  They  slighted  the  king. 

IV.  The  gracious  bejoinder.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  As  dangerous  to  slight  the  gospel 
as  to  reject  it : — If  I  were  in  a  boat  on  the  river  in  the  rapids,  it  would  not  be  neces- 
sary, to  insure  my  destruction,  that  I  should  enter  into  violent  controversy  with  those 
who  would  urge  me  from  the  shore,  to  take  heed  and  come  to  land:  alll  should  have 
to  do  would  be  to  shut  my  ears  to  their  entreaty,  and  leave  myself  alone ;  the  current 
would  do  the  rest.  Neglect  of  the  gospel  is  thus  just  as  perilous  as  the  open  rejec- 
tion of  it.  Indeed,  half  the  evils  of  our  daily  life  in  temporal  things  are  caused  by 
neglect ;  and  countless  are  the  souls  who  are  lost  for  this  same  cause.  Leave  your 
farm  for  a  little,  then ;  let  your  merchandise  alone  for  a  season ;  settle  first,  and 
before  all  things  else,  what  you  will  do  with  this  invitation  which  God  has  given 
you  to  the  gospel  banquet :  then,  that  accepted,  your  farm  will  become  to  you  a 
section  of  God's  vineyard,  and  your  business  will  be  a  means  of  glorifying  Him. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  wedding  of  the  prince  : — I.  The  false  hope  indulged. 
The  man  without  the  wedding  garment  represents  the  person  who  believes  that  he 
is  reconciled  to  God,  who  has  not  God's  righteousness.  This  hope  may  be  desig- 
nated— 1.  A  self-righteous  hope.  2.  An  impenitent  hope.  II.  The  soul  stbipfbb 
OF  its  hope  and  its  pbetensions.    1.  Here  is  the  dumbness  of  true  couvictioiu 


f9i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxa 

No  excuse.  8.  The  speechlessness  of  amazement.  Amazed  that  all  hia  efforts  are 
of  no  avail.  8.  The  dumbness  of  awe  and  terror.  He  has  met  his  Maker.  4.  The 
speechlessness  expresses  despair.  Leiirn :  1.  The  first  duty  of  every  one  is  to 
determine  what  is  a  suitable  preparation  for  heaven.  2.  Sincere  ignorance  will 
save  no  man.  3.  Now  is  the  time  tor  self-scrutiny.  {E.  N.  Kirk,  D.D.)  The  king 
punishing  his  barbarous  subjects  : — 1.  From  the  whole  of  our  Saviour's  parables  and 
precictions  relative  to  the  Jews,  we  may  infer  both  His  prophetio  wisdom  and 
singular  humanity.  2.  That  the  Jews  were  under  a  peculiar  economy  of  Divine 
providence,  and  were  more  directly,  immediately,  and  judicially  rewarded  with 
national  prosperity,  or  punishtd  with  natioual  calamity  and  ruin,  in  proportion  to 
their  piety  aud  virtue,  or  impiety  and  wickedness,  than  any  other  nation.  3.  That 
the  spirit  of  prida,  malice,  and  revenge,  with  which  the  Jews  were  possessed  and 
instigated  to  their  own  destruction,  is  the  worst  that  can  possess  the  human  breast, 
most  injurious  to  society  and  pernicious  to  them  who  are  actuated  by  it.  4.  That 
we  ought  to  congratulate  ourselves,  and  be  thankful  to  the  providence  of  God  that 
we  live  in  an  age  and  nation  wherein  this  malignant  spirit,  which  has  been  seen  to 
prevail  so  much,  and  produce  such  terrible  effects,  not  only  amongst  Jews,  but 
Christians  also,  is  happily  abated,  though  not  entirely  extinguished.  (S,  Brown.) 
Gospel  feast : — Doctrine — the  gospel  is  a  large  feast,  stored  with  all  kinds  of  spiritual 
provision  in  it.  Consider — 1.  Wherein  the  resemblance  of  the  gospel  to  a  feast 
appears.  2  In  what  respect  it  is  a  large  feast.  8.  What  things  we  have  need  of 
against  this  feast.  4.  What  is  the  bill  of  faro?  5.  What  excellent  properties 
there  are  in  the  provisions  of  the  great  supper.  6.  What  suitableness  from  God 
appears  in  them  to  the  case  of  man.  7.  Wfjy  it  is  a  feast  with  all  things  in  it. 
8.  What  hindrances  do  make  it  to  many  ineffectual.  {Joseph  Hussey.)  Gospel 
invitation  : — Doctrine — that  God  makes  an  invitation  to  sinners  in  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  to  come  in  to  this  feast.  (1)  It  was  a  gracious  ;  (2)  a  free ;  (3)  a  sove- 
reign ;  (4)  a  clear;  (5)  a  commanding;  (6)  an  open ;  (7)  a  large  and  comprehensive  ; 
(8)  a  pressing  and  e.irnest;  (9)  a  seasonable  ;  (10)  an  effectual  and  saving  invi- 
tation. (Ibid.)  Causes  of  refusal  to  accept  Christ : — 1.  Worldly  cares,  incum- 
brances, secular  business,  or  the  concernments  of  this  life,  in  providing  earthly 
things.  2.  The  riches,  or  love  of  wealth,  or  earthly  honour.  3.  But  it  appears 
that  sensual  satisfaction,  or  the  inordinate  love  of  pleasures,  is  that  which  hath  the 
greatest  power  over  men,  and  which  drowns  and  swallows  up  the  spirit  and  soul  of 
mortals :  for  this  sort  says,  "  they  cannot  come."  {Benjamin  Kcach.)  The  gospel 
banquet : — History  tells  of  a  banquet  given  by  Henry  VIII.  to  the  French  ambaa- 
Badors.  The  best  cooks  in  all  the  laud  were  engaged.  Privateers  went  through  all 
the  country  to  gather  all  the  costliest  viands,  and  when  the  day  arrived  the  guests 
were  kept  hunting  in  the  park  so  that  their  ajopetites  might  be  keen,  and  then,  at 
the  right  moment,  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpeters,  they  entered  the  hall,  and  sat 
down  to  the  table,  aglertm  with  imperial  plate  aud  ablush  with  the  costliest  wines, 
with  gold  candles  with  a  liuudred  tapers  as  large  as  torches.  But  I  have  to  tell  yoa 
to-day  of  a  more  wonderful  entertainment.  Tiie  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  banqueter; 
the  angels  of  God  are  the  cup-bearers ;  pardon,  and  peace,  and  life,  and  heaven  are 
the  viands;  palaces  hung  with  gardens  of  eternal  beauty  are  the  banqueting  place; 
the  chalices  of  God  are  the  plates ;  and  I  am  one  of  His  servants,  and  I  come  out 
with  the  invitation  to  all  the  people — a  written  invitation  to  every  man,  woman, 
and  child  in  all  this  audience.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Making  light  of  the  gospel 
call : — A  celebrated  preacher  of  the  seventeenth  century  in  a  sermon  to  a  crowded 
audience,  described  the  terrors  of  the  Last  Judgment  with  such  eloquence,  pathos, 
and  furce  of  action,  that  some  of  his  audience  not  only  burst  into  tears,  but  sent 
forth  piercing  cries,  as  if  the  Judge  Himself  had  been  present,  and  was  about  to 
pass  upon  them  their  final  sentence.  In  the  height  of  this  commotion  the  preacher 
called  upon  them  to  dry  their  tears  And  cease  their  cries,  as  he  was  about  to  add 
something  still  more  awful  and  astonishing  than  anything  he  had  yet  brought 
before  them.  Silence  being  obtained,  he,  with  an  agitated  countenance  and  solemn 
voice,  acdressed  them  thus :  "  In  one  quarter  of  an  hour  from  thi-<  time  the 
emotions  which  you  have  just  now  exhibited  will  be  stifled;  the  remembrance  of 
the  fearful  truths  wliich  excited  them  will  vanish ;  you  will  return  to  your  carnal 
occupations,  or  sinful  pleasures,  with  your  usual  avidity,  and  you  vrill  treat  all  you 
have  heard  *  as  a  tale  that  is  told  I '  "  {Cheever.)  God's  anger  against  those  wJio 
refute  the  gospel  invitation: — Another  proof  of  the  earnestness  of  God  in  His  invi- 
tation is  His  wrath  against  the  murderers  who  had  refused  it.  You  are  not  much 
offended  at  one  who  refuses  an  invitation  you  have  given  in  jest,  or,  forform't  sake, 


fHAP.  rsn.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  495 

hall  hoping  it  would  not  be  accepted.  God  is  angry  because  you  have  treated  in 
jest  and  made  light  of  what  has  been  most  earnest  to  Him ;  because  you  have 
crossed  Him  in  the  sincerest  purpose  to  bless  you ;  because  after  He  has  at  the 
greatest  expense,  not  only  of  wealth  and  exertion,  but  of  life,  provided  what  He 
knows  you  need,  you  act  towards  Him  as  if  He  had  done  nothing  that  deserves  the 
least  consideration.  This  acceptance  or  rejection  of  God's  offers  that  we  come  and 
talk  o^er,  often  as  if  the  whole  matter  were  in  our  hands,  and  we  might  deal  with 
it  as  we  arrange  for  a  journey  or  an  evening's  amusement,  is  to  God  the  most 
earnest  matter.  If  God  is  in  earnest  about  anything,  it  is  about  this ;  if  the  whole 
force  of  His  nature  concentrates  on  any  one  matter  it  is  on  this ;  if  anywhere  the 
amplitude  and  intensity  of  Divine  earnestness,  to  which  the  most  impassioned 
human  eiirnebtness  is  as  the  idle  vacant  sighing  of  the  summer  air,  if  these  are 
anywhere  in  action,  it  is  in  the  tenderness  and  sincerity  with  which  He  invites  you 
to  Himself.  ...  To  save  sinners  from  destruction  is  His  grand  purpose,  and 
BOCcesB  in  other  parts  of  EQs  government  does  not  repay  Him  for  failure  here. 
And  to  make  light  of  such  an  earnpstness  as  this,  an  earnestness  so  wise,  so  called 
for,  so  loving,  pure,  and  long-suffering,  so  Divine,  is  terrible  indeed.  To  have 
been  the  object  of  such  earnest  love,  to  have  had  all  the  Divine  attributes  and 
resources  set  in  motion  to  secure  my  eternal  bliss,  and  to  know  myself  capable 
of  making  light  of  such  earnestness  as  this,  is  surely  to  be  in  the  most  forlorn 
and  abject  condition  that  any  creature  can  reach,  {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.) 
The  gospel  feast : — L  The  natoeb  of  gospel  blessings.  1.  They  are  of  God's 
own  providing.  2.  They  are  rich  and  valuable  as  well  as  Divine.  3.  These  blessings 
are  suitable.  4.  They  are  abundant.  II.  The  invitation  given  to  pabxakk  09 
THESE  BLESSINGS.  1.  A  feast  SO  rich  is  designed  for  numerous  guests.  2.  The 
gospel  is  made  known  to  mankind.  3.  This  invitation  is  free  and  gracious.  4.  It 
is  earnest  and  authoritative.  HI.  The  reception  which  the  invitation  meets  with, 

AND   the   rOLLT,  GUILT,  AND  DANOEE  of  REJECTING  IT.       1.    The  JewS  to  whom  it  WaS 

first  sent  refused  to  come.  2.  Some  make  hght  of  the  gospel  from  the  love  of 
worldly  pleasures.  3.  That  the  generality  of  those  who  hear  it  make  light  of  it  is 
evident  from  their  conduct.  4.  The  folly  to  prefer  the  world  to  God  who  is  the 
Supreme  Good.  5.  The  guilt  ol  to-day  is  in  proportion  to  the  freeness  and  suitable- 
ness of  the  blessings  oilered,  6.  The  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  as  necessary  to 
your  pre  lent  as  to  your  future  happiness.  {R.  Fletcher.)  The  marriage : — L 
The  HISTORY  of  the  marriage.  1.  The  marriage  purposed.  2.  The  prehminary 
arrangements.  3.  The  servants  sent  out.  4.  The  message.  5.  The  advent  of  the 
king.  6.  The  inspection.  II.  Torn  to  Revelation  xix.  In  ver.  7  it  i»  no 
longer  a  purpose,  but  an  accomplisumeut.  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  eome. 
In  the  parable  we  saw  "all  things  are  ready,"  and  the  wedding  garment  w»« 
offered  without  money.  Now  in  the  Revelation  we  read,  "  And  to  her  was  granted 
that  she  should  be  arrayed  in  fine  Unen,"  &c.  In  the  parable  the  servants  were 
told  to  go  and  invite  men  (ver.  9).  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called 
to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  The  King  came  to  see  the  guests  (ver, 
11).  "His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."  (Gapel  Molyneux,  B.A.)  The  marriage 
of  the  king's  son : — I.  The  glorious  banquet.  1.  The  giver  of  it.  The  greal 
king.  He  had  provided  a  banquet  of  beauty  and  wisdom  in  creation  for  the  mind 
of  man — of  goodness  in  providence  for  the  physical  need  of  man.  These  did  not 
supply  the  whole  of  man's  need.  Hence  this  feast  of  redeeming  love.  In  giving 
it  He  was  moved  by  love,  wisdom,  grace.     2.  The  occasion  of  it.    3.  The  chi^ 

Sarties  in  it.  The  Divine  Father.  The  equally  Divine  Son,  our  Saviour.  The 
Iride,  the  Church — all  who,  being  penitent,  truly  believe.  4.  The  hallowed  joy 
that  marked  it.  The  Church  rejoicing  in  the  love  and  grace  of  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom.  6.  The  sanctified  provisions  of  it — mercy,  love,  &c.,  &o. ;  abundant, 
suitable,  seasonable,  &o.  II.  The  wide  invitation.  1.  Proclaimed  by  many 
tongues.  2.  Urged  on  all  people.  3.  Enforced  by  many  arguments.  4.  Accom- 
panied with  gifts.  A  dress  for  each  to  wear  offered.  A  new  heart,  &o,  UL  Tux 
x>EBS0NAL  inspection.  1.  A  royal  inspection.  2.  A  general  inspection.  8.  A  dis- 
eriminating  inspection.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  The  marriage  of  Christ  to  His  Church : — 
L  How  this  union  takes  place.  1.  The  first  mover  is  Christ  Himself ;  but  by  Hia 
sweet  constraints  we  begin  to  love  Him.  2.  In  the  presence  of  witnesses  the 
covenant  of  marriage  must  be  ratified.  Angels  and  the  Church  look  on  when  Christ 
oonfesses  you  to  be  His.  II.  The  consequence.  1.  Into  Christ  you  have  merged 
yonr  property,  right,  name,  being,  and  all.  2.  They  do  wrong  who  weaken  the 
bonds,  chill  the  feelings,  ox  lower  the  rale  of  married  life.    8.  As  Christ  has  doiM 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

BO  much  for  yon,  you  mnst  be  faithful  to  Him.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  royal 
banquet: — I.  Ixvitationb  of  oosPEii  bepeatedly  given.  God  calls  (1)  ia  every 
stage  of  life ;  (2)  by  many  voices.  II.  Provisions  of  gospel  fully  completed. 
(1)  Various ;  (2)  abundant.  III.  Proffers  of  gospel  basely  rejected  by — (I) 
The  proud ;  (2)  the  worldly.  IV.  Messengers  of  gospel  crdelly  treated.  (1) 
Unlawful  seizure;  (2)  cruel  treatment;  (3)  unnatural  murder.  V.  Rejectors  o» 
aosPEL  JOBTLY  punished.  They — (1)  Excite  God's  anger;  (2)  provoke  His  ven- 
geance ;  (3)  incur  His  punishment.  VI.  Proclamation  of  gospel  DNivEfiSAixr 
COMMANDED.  Th  618  are — (1)  No  bounds  fixed — highways;  (2)  no  conditions.  VH. 
Success  of  gospel  ultimately  certain.  VIII.  Professors  of  gospel  will  bb 
personally  EXAMINED.  {J.  T.  WoocUiome.)  Guests  for  the  weddin'/ -feast: — Oui 
Lord  Jesus  has  espoused  His  Church,  and  there  must  be  a  feast  at  the  wedding.  A 
feast  would  be  a  failure  if  none  came  to  it,  and  therefore  the  present  need  is  that  the 
wedciing  be  "furnished  with  guests."  I.  The  first  invitation  was  a  failure. 
This  is  seen  in  Jewish  history.  Among  Gentiles,  those  to  whom  the  gospel  invita- 
tion specially  comes  are,  as  a  rule,  unwilling  to  accept  it.  Up  to  this  hour,  chil- 
dren of  godly  parents,  and  hearers  of  the  word,  many  of  them  refuse  the  invitation 
for  reasons  of  their  own.  The  invitation  was  refused — (1)  Not  because  it  involved 
suffering,  for  it  was  a  wedding-feast  to  which  they  were  bidden ;  (2)  nor  because 
there  were  no  adequate  preparations — "  The  wedding  is  ready  " ;  (3)  nor  because 
the  invitations  were  not  delivered,  or  were  misunderatood — they  "were  bidden  "  ; 
(4)  but  because  they  were  not  fit  for  the  high  joy  ;  (a)  they  were  not  loyal  to  their 
king  ;  (b)  they  were  not  attached  to  his  royal  son  ;  (c)  they  were  not  pleased  with 
his  noble  marri:ige ;  (d)  they  were  wrapt  up  in  self-interest ;  («)  they  were  cruel  to 
well-intentioned  messengers;  (5)  thereiore  they  were  punished  wiLh  fire  and  sword 
But  love  must  reign;  mercy  must  be  glorious;  Chiist  must  reveal  His  grace; 
otherwise  He  has  no  joy  of  His  union  with  mankind.  Therefore— II.  Thb  coM- 
MissoN  WAS  enlarged.  1.  Disappointment  must  arouse  activity  and  enterprise — 
"Goye."     2.  Disappointment  suggests  change  of  sphere — "Into  the  highways.'* 

3.  A  keen  invitation  is  to  be  tried  — "  As  many  as  ye  shall  find,  bid."  4.  A  keen 
outlook  is  to  be  kept — "  As  many  as  ye  shall  find."  5.  Publicity  is  to  be  courted 
— "  Went  out  into  the  highways."  6.  Small  numbers,  ones  and  twos,  are  to  be 
pressed  in.  III.  The  new  mission  was  fulfilled.  1.  The  former  servants  who 
had  escaped  death  went  out  again.  2.  Other  servants,  who  had  not  gone  at  first, 
entered  zealously  into  the  joyful  but  needful  service.  8.  They  went  in  many  direc- 
tions— "  Into  the  highways."  4.  They  went  out  at  once.  Not  an  hour  could  be 
left  unused.  5.  They  pointed  all  they  met  to  one  centre.  6.  They  welcomed  all 
sorts  of  characters — "  As  many  as  they  found."  7.  They  found  them  willing  t» 
come.  He  who  sent  the  messengers  inclined  the  guests ;  none  seem  to  have 
refused.  IV.  The  great  design  was  accomplished.  1.  The  king's  bounty  was 
displayed  before  the  world.  2.  His  provision  was  used.  Think  of  grace  and 
pardon  unused.     3.  The  happiness  of  men  was  promoted ;  they  feasted  to  the  full. 

4.  The  grateful  praise  was  evoked.  All  the  guests  were  joyful  in  their  king,  aa 
they  feasted  at  his  table.  5.  The  marriage  was  graced.  6.  The  slight  put  upoa 
the  king's  son  by  the  churls  who  refused  to  come  was  more  than  removed.  7. 
The  quality  of  the  guests  most  fully  displayed  the  wisdom,  grace,  and  condescen- 
sion of  tne  Host.     (C.  //,  Spurgeoii.) 

Ver.  5.  But  they  made  light  of  It. — Making  light  of  Christ : — I.  What  it  is  thai 

THE  oiNNEF.s  MAKK  LiGnx  OF.  1.  Of  the  messenger  who  brings  them  the  news  that 
the  marriage  supper  is  prepared.  2.  These  people  despise  the  feast.  3.  They 
make  light  of  the  King's  Son.  4.  They  make  light  also  of  the  King.  5.  Thou 
art  making  light  of  the  great  solemnities  of  eternity.  II.  How  is  it  that  meh 
KAKE  light  of  it?  L  When  men  go  to  hear  and  yet  do  not  attend-  2.  When  they 
attend  to  something  else  with  it.  3.  Who  makes  a  profession  of  religion,  but  does 
not  Uve  up  to  it.  III.  Why  they  make  light  of  it.  1.  Because  ignorant.  9, 
Because  of  pride.  3.  Because  they  did  not  believe  the  messenger.  4.  Because 
they  were  so  worldly.  5.  Because  altogether  thoughtless.  6.  Out  of  sheer  pre- 
sumption. 7.  Because  of  the  commonness  of  the  gospel.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 
Indifference  to  the  go'pel  invitation: — I.  The  causes.  1.  Ignorance.  2.  Insensi- 
bility. 3.  Indisposition.  4.  Worldly-mindedness.  5.  All  these  excuses  wwe 
derived  from  things  that  were  lawful  in  themselves.  IL  Substantiate  the  pboofo. 
Must  not  bring  such  a  charge  without  the  clearest  evidence ;  that  you  make  Ught  of 
the  gospel  proved — L  From  yoor  thoughts.     2.  From  your  words.    3.  From  yoor 


CHAP,  xxn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  497 

actions.  4.  From  your  anxieties.  III.  Expose  this  evil.  1.  Consider  the  con- 
duct of  other  beings.  The  devil,  angels,  saints  do  not  make  light  of  it.  2.  Con- 
sider the  truth  of  the  subject.  3.  The  importance  of  the  subject.  4.  The  guilt 
you  contract.  IV.  Eejoicb  in  the  C0BE  of  this  indiffeeence,  (W.  Jay.) 
Trifling  with  the  gospel: — I.  With  whom  do  they  trifle?  II.  With  what  do 
MEN  TBiFLE  ?  1.  With  the  soul,  2.  With  Jesus  Christ.  3.  With  eternity.  IV. 
Undeb  what  oibcumstances  do  men  thus  dare  to  trifle?  1.  While  yon  thus 
trifle  all  beside  you  are  in  earnest.  2.  While  you  thus  trifle  opportunities  are  pass- 
ing away.  {T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  Levity:  Subjects  often  made  light  of : — I.  Life, 
with  the  faculties  and  powers  we  possess.  II.  Time,  with  the  opport"nities  which 
it  offers.  III.  Duty,  with  self-denial  which  it  iuTolves.  IV.  Sin,  wha  the  misery 
which  it  entails.  V.  Salvation,  with  the  joys  which  it  brings.  VI.  Death,  with  the  un- 
certainty  which  attends  it.  VII.  Judgment,  with  the  solemnity  that  surrounds  it 
{Seeds  and  Saplings.)  Making  light  of  salvation  : — I.  Men  are  apt  to  remembei 
and  affectionately  think  of  things  they  highly  esteem  ;  but  as  for  those  which  thev 
disregard,  they  can  easily  forget  them,  and  live  daily  without  a  single  thought  ol 
them.     II.  The  things  that  men  value  will  be  the  theme  of  frequent  conversation. 

III.  Things  only  talked  about,  and  not  reduced  to  practice,  are  made  light  of. 

IV.  We  take  pains  anl  labour  to  secure  the  things  we  value.  V.  Things  that  men 
highly  esteem  deeply  and  tenderly  affect  them.  VI.  Our  estimate  of  things  may 
be  discovered  by  the  diligence  and  earnestness  of  our  endeavours  after  them.  VII. 
That  which  we  highly  value  we  think  it  impossible  to  buy  too  dearly.  VIII.  Those 
things  we  highly  value  we  shall  help  our  friends  to  obtain.  1.  Those  who 
make  light  of  the  Saviour,  make  light  of  Him  who  did  not  make  light  of  them. 

2.  They  make  light  of  matters  of  the  greatest  excellency  and  importance.  3.  Con- 
sider whose  salvation  it  is  you  make  light  of — your  own.  4.  This  sin  is  aggravated 
by  professing  to  believe  that  gospel  you  make  light  of.  5.  Consider  what  things 
those  are  which  you  prefer  to  the  neglect  of  these.  6.  Making  light  of  Christ  and 
salvation  is  a  certain  evidence  of  no  interest  in  them,  7.  The  time  is  hastening 
when  none  will  make  light  of  these  things.  (President  Davies.)  Levity  : — 1. 
They  made  light  of  their  advantages.     2.  They  made  light  of  their  opportunities. 

3.  They  made  light  of  human  life.  4.  They  made  light  of  duty.  5.  They  made 
ight  of  sin.     6.  They  made  light  of  the  gospel.     {Dean  Vaughan.) 

Vers.  11-13.  He  saw  there  a  man  wMch  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment — 
The  invitation  itself  is  in  vers,  3,  4.  There  is  a  double  call.  God  will  no4 
«,ke  the  first  repulse,  but  will  try  again  before  He  will  quit  a  people.  More  par- 
ticularly the  first  call  was  by  the  prophets,  the  second  by  the  apostles.  All  things 
are  ready,  if  we  are  ready,  II.  The  success  of  this  invitation  or  offer  of  grace. 
Some  slighted  it,  others  rejected  it  with  malice.  Excusing  is  refusing.  III.  The 
issue  {ver.  7).  "  When  the  king  heard  thereof,"  Ac.  Contempt  of  the  gospel, 
joined  with  persecution  of  the  preachers  of  it,  bringeth  utter  ruin  and  devastation. 
The  next  part  of  the  parable  (ver.  9,  10).  I.  The  chabob  to  invite.  II.  Thk 
BEBVANTs'  OBEDIENCE  AND  THEIR  SUCCESS.  A  pcoplc  may  Want  God,  but  God  cannot 
want  a  people  to  serve  Him.  All  that  give  their  names  to  God  are  not  found ; 
there  is  a  mixture  of  good  and  bad.  So  sometimes  the  church  is  full,  but  heaven 
never  the  fuller ;  for  though  they  receive  the  gospel,  they  do  not  receive  it  in  full 
power  and  efficacy.  III.  You  have  the  cabeiagk  of  the  king  towaeds  the  hypo- 
CBiTiCAL  guests.  I.  The  discoveby.  All  that  receive  the  gospel  must  look  to  have 
their  sincerity  tried,  for  the  King  will  visit  and  observe  the  guests  (ver.  14).  The 
meaning  is,  that  in  the  throng  and  multitude  of  converts,  if  there  be  but  one 
that  is  insincere,  God  can  espy  him,  and  find  him  out.  Repent-  n  e  and  reforma- 
tion of  life  is  the  new  garment  of  the  soul ;  that  only  will  become  the  gospel  feast, 
II.  The  EXPOSTULATION,  God  loveth  to  make  the  sinner  convinced  and  condemned 
in  his  own  conscience,  that  He  may  be  clear  when  He  judgeth,  and  justified  in  all 
His  proceedings  with  Him.  The  man  was  speechless.  They  that  embrace  the 
gospel  and  live  in  an  nnmortified  and  impe  itent  manner  can  have  nothing  to 
plead  by  way  of  excuse.  III.  The  doom  and  sentence  (ver.  13).  Conscience  in 
hell  will  have  a  special  kind  of  accusing,  and  self-tormenting  in  our  reflecting  on 
the  refusal  of  the  remedy,  Christ  will  pronounce  a  heavier  doom  if  we  obey  not 
the  gospel,  to  which  we  profess  to  submit.  It  dangerous  to  come  to  God's  feast 
without  a  wedding  garment.  I.  What  is  God's  feast?  In  the  gospel  all  kinds  of 
comforts  and  spiritual  gifts  and  graces  are  ready  prepared,  and  freely  offered  to  ns. 
Ood  hath  made  excellent  provision  for  the  entertainment  of  His  own  family.    Thia 

82 


igS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn, 

feast  servetb  for  two  uses.  1.  For  the  honour  of  God,  to  show  His  maguifieencf 
and  royalty,  and  the  glory  of  His  exceeding  great  grace  and  mercy  in  Jesua  Christ 
(as  Esther  i.  3,  4),  the  choicest  blessings.  Love  is  gone  to  the  utmost;  beyond 
God  there  is  nothino; ;  God  reconciled  s.nd  God  enjoyed  are  the  chiefest  blessings 
yre  can  enjoy.  2,  For  the  comfort  and  refreshment  of  sinful  man.  There  is  in  it 
all  we  can  expect  in  a  feast.  (1)  Ample  satisfaction  to  every  soul  that  is  epiritually 
hungry  and  thirsty  (Psa.  xxxvi.  8 ;  xxii.  26).  There  is  no  defect  or  want  in  God'a 
feast.  But  many  prefer  husks  before  the  fatted  calf.  Swinish  pleasures  before 
these  chaste  delights.  These  besot  the  heart  awhile,  but  they  cannot  satisfy  it. 
(2)  Joy,  pleasure,  delight.  What  will  cheer  the  heart  and  conscience?  The 
pardon  of  sin  is  the  true  reviving  thing  (Matt.  ix.  2).  (3)  God  useth  na  as  friends. 
We  may  sit  down  at  His  table.  But  what  an  honour  it  is  to  sit  down  at  the  feast 
of  the  King  of  Kiu^s  !  It  is  a  token  of  our  reconciliation  with  Him,  for  eating 
together  is  an  act  of  friendship.  II.  What  is  coming  to  this  fkast  ?  It  is  to 
profess  ourselves  Christians,  and  using  the  ordinances  which  belong  thereunto. 
III.  What  is  the  wedding  garment  ?  It  is  usual  in  Scripture  to  set  forth  sin  by 
nakedness,  and  grace  by  a  garment  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18).  Graces  are  a  beautiful  orna- 
ment  to  the  soul  as  gar.nents  are  to  the  body.  It  is  such  a  garment  as  becometh 
the  Bolemnity  of  the  maiTiage-feast  of  the  king's  son  ;  the  wedding  garment  is  that 
new  array  which  becometh  such  a  solemnity.  As  it  is  a  royal  feast,  it  must  be 
something  more  than  ordinary  exc-llency  that  is  required  of  ns  ;  a  spiritual  feast, 
a  spiritual  excellency.  Therefore  the  wedding  garment  is  holiness,  habitual  and 
actual,  which  is  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  beauty  of  God  and  His  people  (Eev.  xix. 
8).  I  must  now  represent  the  danger  of  entering  upon  the  profession  of  the  gospel, 
or  coming  to  this  feast  without  such  a  wedding  garment.  IV.  The  odiousness  or 
THE  SIX  IN  these  considerations.  1.  Tour  profession  is  partial ;  there  is  a  twofold 
profession  in  word  and  deed.  In  word  when  we  own  Christ,  in  whom  we  have 
believed  :  in  deed,  when  we  walk  answerably.  2.  One  part  of  the  profession  con- 
demneth  the  other ;  if  we  own  a  God  and  do  not  live  answerably  our  beUef 
condemneth  our  practice  (Tit.  i.  16).  So  while  they  own  Christ  they  do  but  mock 
Him  ;  they  profess  to  honour  Christ  by  coming  to  His  feast,  but  they  dishonour 
Him  and  affront  Him  while  they  come  in  their  own  and  ordinary  apparel.  The 
ungodly  lives  of  Christians  are  a  reproach  to  Christianity.  You  should  adorn,  but 
you  disgrace  the  gospel  (Tit.  ii.  10).  Keligion  as  visibly  acted  and  expressed  by 
you  should  be  found  a  beautiful  thing.  3.  One  part  of  your  profession  is  abused  to 
corrupt  and  destroy  the  other ;  and  the  Christian  name  is  only  taken  on  to  patronize 
unchristian  practices  (Jude  iv.).  They  come  to  the  gospel  feast  that  they  may  the 
more  securelj'  live  in  their  sins.  V.  The  cisrtainty  of  discovekt.  1.  When  you 
come  as  guests  to  the  marria-;e-feast  your  business  lieth  not  with  men,  but  with 
God.  The  king  cometh  to  see  the  guests.  You  may  have  a  garment  to  cover  you 
before  men,  but  not  before  God.  But  when  the  Lord  looketh  to  the  guests.  He  is 
the  party  with  whom  you  have  to  do.  How  will  you  do  to  escape  His  eye  and 
eearch?  (Gal.  vi.  7).  2.  God  loveth  to  uncase  hypocrites  (Prov.  xxvi.  26;.  Hia 
anger  is  more  kindled  against  tliem  because  they  profess  such  a  nearness  to  Him. 
8.  Hypocrisy  is  hateful  to  God  in  anything,  but  especially  in  coming  to  the  gospel 
feast.  For  that  is  a  kind  of  daring  of  God,  or  a  putting  it  to  the  trial  whether  He 
will  discover  you  or  no.  4.  Tliere  are  certain  times  when  God  cometh  in  a  more 
especial  manner  to  discover  those  that  are  unsound  in  the  profession  of  the  gospel. 
God  doth  always  see  their  hearts,  but  there  are  certain  seasons  when  they  shall 
know  that  He  seeth  them.  1.  By  trying  judgments.  WTien  the  tree  is  shaken  the 
rotten  apples  fall.  2.  Sometimes  by  offences  (1  Cor.  ii.  10).  3.  At  death  a  man 
should  always  be  provided  for  that  hour.  We  carry  nothing  out  of  the  world  but 
a  winding-sheet  and  a  wedding  garment — the  one  for  the  soul,  the  other  for  the 
body.  4.  In  the  Day  of  Judgment.  When  all  the  world  is  arraigned  before  Christ, 
and  He  distinguisheth  the  sheep  from  the  goats,  then  will  He  expostulate  with  you. 
Where  is  your  wedding  garment  ?  6.  The  doom  and  punishment.  (1)  They  are 
not  permitted  to  taste  of  the  feast.  God  denieth  them  grace,  and  so  they  have 
but  an  empty  ordinance.  (2)  They  incur  eternal  wrath  (Matt.  xxiv.  61) ;  they  are 
excluded  the  feast,  and  cast  into  the  dungeon.  U$e.  To  persuade  us  to  get  this 
wedding  garment.  I.  Then  you  are  welcome  and  acceptable  to  God.  You  are  not 
intruders,  but  welcome  guests.  II.  Then  you  may  be  bold,  and  will  not  be  dashed 
out  of  countenance.  III.  This  showeth  you  were  real  friends  to  the  Bridegroom, 
that  you  mean  to  honour  Him  with  such  a  conversation  as  floweth  from  faith  and 
love  to  Christ  (Gal.  v.  6).    IV.  Nothing  doth  more  concern  you  than  that  yon 


OHAP.  XXII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  499 

should  not  be  Christians  in  vain,  and  profess  Christ  to  your  loss.  What  remaineth^ 
then,  but  that  we  look  after  the  \\eddirig  garment.  I.  Determine  what  it  is.  An 
holy  conversation  coming  out  of  a  renewed  heart  is  this  wedding  garment  (Matt.  xii. 
34).  II.  Get  this  wedding  garment  out  of  the  King's  wardrobe.  God  delights  in 
the  graces  of  His  own  Spirit.  No  man  is  born  clothed ;  we  have  it  from  God.  III. 
Wear  your  wedding  garment.  Not  only  get  grace,  but  exercise  it  in  all  duties 
towards  God  and  man  (Eev.  xvi.  15).  IV.  Keep  your  garments  undefiled,  and  un- 
spotted from  the  world  (Rev.  iii.  4).  V.  Wash  your  garments  often  in  the  blood  ol 
the  Lamb  (Kev.  vii.  14).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  wedding  garment : — We  must 
consider  what  we  are  to  understand.  I.  Bx  the  wedding  garment.  It  is  the 
costume  or  spiritual  dress  necessary  for  the  enjoyment  of  heaven — holiness  often 
described  as  a  garment  (Job  xxix.  14 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  10 ;  Psa.  xlv.  13 ;  Eev,  iii.  18 ;  vii. 
9).  II.  The  solemn  scrutiny.  1.  Was  Divine.  2.  Was  personal.  ReUgion  is  a 
personal  concern.  III.  The  awful  detection.  We  may  form  three  conjectures  as 
to  this  robeless  character.  1.  It  might  have  resulted  from  carelessness.  He  did 
not  attend  to  the  requirements  of  the  king,  &c.  How  many  like  him,  &c.  2. 
From  procrastination.  How  many  such  are  always  in  God's  house.  3.  From 
proud  and  wicked  preference.  Perhaps  thought  it  not  essential;  bad  other  views; 
would  trust  in  the  mercy  of  the  king,  or  his  own  beautiful  habiliments.  How 
many  of  this  class  are  there  1  IV.  The  awful  investigation.  1.  It  was  public. 
Before  all  the  guests.  The  enemies  of  Christ  will  be  publicly  confounded  at  the 
last  day;  clothed  with  shame  and  contempt.  2.  It  was  reasonable.  It  gave  an 
opportunity  for  the  exhibition  of  righteousness.  God  will  allow  the  sinner  to 
plead.  3.  It  was  overwhelming.  He  had  no  reason  to  assign,  hence  he  was 
confounded.  V.  The  dreadful  punishment.  1.  The  removal.  2.  The  sentence. 
3.  The  misery.  Application.  1.  Now,  all  that  is  necessary  for  heaven  may  be 
obtained,  and  that  by  all.  2.  Let  professors  examine  themselves,  &c.  3.  Let 
sinners  be  entreated.  Listen  to  the  voice  of  the  gospel  and  live.  (<7.  Burns, 
LL.D.)  The  wedding  garment : — I.  At  this  feast  there  was  but  one  condition 
OF  acceptance — the  wearing  of  a  particular  gaiment.  Faith  in  Christ.  1.  The 
wedding  garment  had  no  merit  in  itself :  faith  has  no  intrinsic  worth.  2.  It  was 
all-important  because  commanded  by  the  king:  the  fact  that  faith,  as  the  instru- 
ment of  justification,  is  ordained  of  God  endows  it  with  importance.  3.  It  was  no 
arbitrary  symbol.  4.  It  was  highly  significant.  II.  There  was  one  who  failed 
To  COMPLY  with  this  CONDITION.  Of  whom  is  he  the  type?  1.  He  was  in  the 
guest-chamber.  2.  He  desired  to  eat  of  the  feast.  3.  He  remained  in  the  guest- 
chamber  until  the  king  came.  4,  He  may  have  been  highly  esteemed  by  the  rest. 
III.  The  probable  reasons  of  his  non-compliance.  Pride,  self-deception,  pride  of 
intellect.  (E.  Griffin.)  The  hypocrite  self-condemned: — The  guest  referred  to 
was  speechless  because — I.  He  could  not  plead  ignorance  of  the  will  of  the  king 
who  had  invited  him  to  the  feast.  II.  He  could  not  plead  that  in  his  case  the 
wedding  garment  was  not  necessary.  III.  He  could  not  plead  that  a  wedding 
garment  was  not  placed  within  his  reach.  IV.  He  had  despised  the  wedding 
garment.  V.  He  was  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  guilt.  Learn  the  worthlessness 
of  mere  profession,  and  the  necessity  of  being  prepared  for  coming  judgment. 
{Studies.)  The  wedding  garment : — Between  this  man  and  the  other  guests  there 
are  some  points  of  resemblance,  and  some  of  difference.  Let  us  trace — I.  The 
points  of  resemblance.  1.  He  was  an  invited  guest.  We  are  all  called  to  the 
great  feast.  2.  He  was  a  needy  guest.  All  equally  needy.  3.  He  was  an  ex- 
pectant guest.  II.  The  points  of  piFfEBENCE.  1.  They  differed  in  their  appear- 
ances. 2.  They  not  only  differed  in  apiiearances,  but  in  their  principles,  in  their 
states,  in  their  conduct.  He  had  neglected  to  observe  the  conditions  on  which 
admission  was  granted,  &c.  III.  The  causes  of  the  difference.  Perhaps  it  was 
carelessness,  pride,  mind  pre-occupied.  Arc.  IV.  The  consequences  to  which  it  led. 
1.  Detection.  2.  Overwhelming  confusion.  3.  Destruction.  {A.  Weston.)  The 
wedding  garment: — I.  The  scrutiny  of  the  king.  1.  The  manner  of  his  dis- 
covery. He  was  not  discovered  till  the  king  came  in.  Though  the  Lord  knoweth 
them  that  are  His,  they  that  are  His  do  not  always  know  each  other.  2.  The 
language  of  the  address,  "  Friend,"  d'c.  God's  judgments  proceed  upon  onr  self- 
assumed  character.  The  man  was  not  obliged  to  accept  the  king's  invitation. 
♦*  Not  having  a  wedding  garment."  This  was  the  affront.  II.  Thb  confosion  of 
VBS  CRIMINAL.  "He  was  speechless."  There  was  no  excuse.  Conscious  guilt 
struck  him  dumb.  Before  the  bar  of  God  man  will  not  be  able  to  plead — the  soal'a 
inborn  sin.     He  ooald  not  plead  inability  to  procure  the  garment.     (X>.  Moore, 


600  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chip,  rxn; 

M.A.)  The  wedding  garment: — I.  Thb  points  of  besemblance  between  thu 
MAN  AND  THE  OTHEB  G  DEBTS.  1.  He  was  an  iiivited  guest.  2.  He  was  a  needy 
guest.  3.  He  was  an  expecting  guest.  II.  The  point  of  diffebencb  between 
THE  MAN  HEBE  SPOKEN  OF  AND  THE  OTHEB  GUESTS.  The  Wedding  garment  is,  in 
short,  a  wedding  spirit.  III.  To  what  causes  must  wb  tbacb  this  diffebencb 
BET^\'EEN  HIM  AND  THEM.  It  must  be  traced  to  himself.  1.  Perhaps  carelessnoss, 
mere  inconsideration,  led  to  his  refusal.  2.  It  may  have  been  pride.  3.  There 
was  great  irreverence  in  his  conduct.  IV.  The  consequences  to  which  it  led.  1. 
Detection,  2.  Confusion.  3.  Destruction.  {G.  Bradley.)  The  dreadful  conse- 
quence of  being  found  at  last  without  the  wedding  garment: — I.  The  discovebt. 
II.  The  tbial.  III.  The  condemnation  of  this  man.  (T.  Drummond.)  The 
rejected  guest: — 1.  The  folly  of  the  human  heart  as  seen  in  the  way  in  which  men 
attempt  to  impose  upon  God.  2.  Though  only  one  rejected,  the  guests  admitted 
far  less  numerous  than  those  invited.  3.  It  was  the  man's  own  fault  that  he  had 
not  the  wedding  garment.  4.  Tbe  wedding  garment  is  somethinr  more  than  out- 
ward conduct,  for  it  escaped  human  observation.  It  was  something,  .rhich  the  king 
could  alone  discover.  (G.  J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.)  Speechless: — 1.  You  cannot  say 
that  the  gospel  plan  is  unworthy  of  your  acceptance  as  a  rational  and  immortal 
being.  2.  You  will  be  speechless  because  you  cannot  plead  ignorance  of  the  plan 
of  salvation.  3.  You  cannot  plead  as  an  excuse  for  your  wickedness  the  necessity 
of  an  irreligious  hfe  from  the  decrees  of  God.  (A.  Gilmour.)  The  garment  of 
life : — Old  stories  and  strange  chronicles  of  other  days  come  into  the  thoughts 
as  we  listen  to  the  words  of  Christ.  For  instance,  they  tell  ub  of  one  who  sat, 
day  after  day,  in  her  fair  house,  past  which  a  strong  river  flowed  toward  the  sea, 
and  she  ever  wove  and  wove,  and  never  looked  up,  nor  heeded  aught  beyond  that 
task ;  till,  on  one  fatal  day,  there  came  by  a  vision  of  the  pride  and  beauty  of  this 
world  :  then  she  looked  up,  and  left  her  work,  and  was  lost,  and  undone.  And  so 
may  it  be  in  many  a  hfe  :  there  is  work  for  us  to  do,  and  do  it  we  must ;  here  is 
a  garment  to  be  woven,  and  God  has  told  us  what  is  coming,  and  has  set  us  at  the 
task,  here  beside  the  great  river  of  time,  which  shall  become  for  each,  ere  long,  the 
river  of  death.  What  are  we  at  f  Are  our  hearts  in  the  task  ?  Or  are  the  eyes 
wandering,  and  is  the  thing  like  to  be  left  for  ever  undone  7  {Morgan  Dix,  D-D.) 
The  wedding  garment  is  essentially  a  habit  of  holiness  and  righteousness  : — It  differs, 
specifically,  from  those  vanities  in  which  we  take  so  much  delight,  in  the  following 
respects  :  1.  It  is  a  clothing  of  humility  ;  no  robe  of  pride  to  dress  up  the  sinner. 
2.  It  truly  corresponds  to  what  the  wearer  is  ;  no  masquerade  dress  disguising  the 
idle  reveller  or  the  stealthy  conspirator.  3.  It  is  a  habit  of  the  inner  as  well  as 
of  the  outer  man.  A  dress  of  the  soul,  the  everyday  costume  of  the  devout  and 
religious  spirit,  the  inner  habit  which  goes  together  with  the  outer,  orderly,  and 
sober  life.  (Ibid.)  The  wedding  garment :  the  maker  and  the  materials : — I.  The 
MAKEB.  It  must  be  woven  by  our  own  hands,  if  ever  woven  at  all.  No  such  thing 
as  getting  it  made  for  you.  Every  man  is  his  own  artisan :  there  are  no  work- 
shops, and  no  workmen,  here  or  elsewhere,  to  fit  for  heaven  the  souls  of  those  who 
will  not  make  themselves  ready.  We  can  buy,  according  to  our  means,  sufficient, 
or  more  than  sufficient,  of  lavish  or  gorgeous  apparel,  for  this  world  and  this  life ; 
but  not  one  thread  or  one  finger's  breadth  of  that  which  we  need  for  the  life  to 
come.  II.  The  matebials.  These  are  from  God.  They  are  the  redeeming  work 
of  Christ,  His  perfect  righteousness,  and  absolute  holiness.  His  merits,  the  benefits 
of  His  cross  and  passion,  His  mighty  resurrection  and  glorious  ascension.  To 
weave  these  materials  into  a  garment,  skilled  and  industrious  fingers  are  needed  : 
faith,  hope,  love.  We  must  weave  a  true  Christian  habit  by  Christian  acts  ;  we 
must  take  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  us,  and  of  it  we  must  work  a  holy  life  ;  we 
must  become  like  Him.  III.  We  shall  have  His  help  if  we  work  babd.  If 
we  do  our  best,  God  will  supply  all  the  defects  in  our  work,  and  make  it  good ; 
sufficient  for  every  need.  Such  garment  as  the  child  of  God  tries  to  make,  in 
accordance  with  God's  will,  may  need  much  altering  and  setting  right ;  it  shall 
need  to  be  shaped,  and  washed,  and  made  white,  till  it  become  that  radiant  dress 
which  the  King  shall  see  with  pleasure.  {Ibid.)  The  wadding  garment  a  festive 
robe : — The  garment  must,  surely,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  image,  have  been 
intended  to  signify  something  public  and  visible,  in  which  each  wearer  hannonisea 
with  all,  and  all  with  the  spirit  of  the  peculiar  scene  into  which  they  are  introduced, 
and  to  which  tbe  dress  is  appropriate.  I  would  say,  then,  that  by  this  remarkable 
■ymbol  our  Lord  did  not  intend  merely  the  inward  principle  of  faith  exclusively 
considered,  nor  yet  merely  the  mysterious  imputation  of  righteousness  throoga 


CHAP.  XXII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  601 

identification  with  Christ  (though  these  are,  no  doubt,  necessary  conditions  and 
tirst  steps  to  its  possession) ;  for  apparel  is,  of  all  things,  the  most  manifest  and 
visible,  and  the  wedding  apparel  is  especially  the  apparel  of  joy.  This  festal 
garment  of  heaven,  then,  which  each  man  must  bring  with  him  into  the  high  pre- 
sence of  God,  seems  to  be  no  other  than  that  celestial  temper  which  manifests  itself 
by  the  infallible  indications  of  a  holy  joy — that  spiritual  sympathy  with  the  things 
of  tlie  spiritual  world,  which  exhibits  itself  in  cordial,  irrepressible  demonstration 
of  the  blessedness  within  ;  holy  happiness,  pubUc  and  expressed ;  the  "  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost " — no  longer  a  secret,  timid,  haJf-uttered  delight,  but  sparklmg  in  the 
eye,  and  fearless  in  the  voice  ;  the  "  hfe  "  no  longer  "hid  with  Christ  in  God," 
but  "  apparent  with  Him  in  glory."  I  repeat  it :  inward,  spiritual  happiness, 
developed  by  the  presence  of  God,  and  the  consciousness  of  Leaven,  into  visiblo 
manifestation — this  is  the  wedding  garment  which  Christ  beholds  and  approves  in 
the  saved.  (W.  Archer  Butler,  M.A.)  Grace  a  garment : — 'Tis  usual  in  Scripture 
to  set  forth  sin  by  nakedness,  and  grace  by  a  garment.  Graces  are  a  beautiful 
ornament  to  the  soul  as  garments  are  to  the  body.  {T.  Munton.)  False  pre- 
tences in  religion  : — I.  The  oeioinal  and  ground  of  this  figurative  expression, 
of  having  on  the  wedding  garment.  The  constant  and  prevailing  temper  or  dis- 
position of  any  man's  spirit,  can  no  way  be  set  forth  more  expressively  than 
under  the  similitude  of  bodily  garments,  so  investing  the  person  as  to  be  his 
proper  and  distinguishiug  attire.  II.  Useful  and  praciical  observations.  1. 
How  absolutely  and  indispensably  God  expects  and  requires,  that  every  man  who 
hopes  to  be  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  should  have  his  miod  endued, 
and  as  it  were  clothed,  with  those  habitual  virtuous  qualifications,  which  can  no 
otherwise  be  acquired  than  by  righteous  practice,  2.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a 
false  or  iU-grounded  hope  ;  there  are  deceitful  expectations,  which  may  betray  men 
into  perdition.  3.  The  judgment  of  God  will  be  according  to  right,  in  the  sense 
that  we  understand  just  and  right ;  in  the  sense,  that  even  the  wickedest  of  men 
shall  not  be  able  to  deny,  is  according  to  righteousness  and  justice.  The  man 
convicted  was  speechless.  4.  The  reality  of  the  concern  God  has  for  the  salvation 
of  men.  5.  A  very  moving  admonition,  how  dreadful  at  last  will  be  the  state  of 
those  whom  the  great  goodness  and  long-suffering  of  God  have  not  been  able  to 
bring  to  repentance,  and  to  effectual  amendment  of  life  and  manners.  {S.  Clarke.) 
Fersoruil  dealings  with  individuals  : — The  prufessors  of  the  gospel  will  be  person- 
ally examined.  1.  There  is  a  personal  visit,  "  When  the  king  came."  2.  Thera 
is  a  personal  scrutiny,  "He  saw  a  man."  3.  There  is  a  personal  interrogation, 
"Friend,  how  camest  thou  in?"  4.  There  is  a  personal  conviction,  "He  was 
speechless."  5.  There  is  a  personal  bondage,  "Bind  him."  6.  There  is  a  per- 
sonal exclusion,  "  Cast  him  into  outer  darkness."  7.  There  is  a  personal  torment, 
"Weeping  and  gnashiug  of  teeth."  (J.  T,  Woodhouse.)  Providing  festal  gar- 
ments:— The  framework  of  the  parable  probably  pre- supposes  the  Oriental  custom 
of  providiug  garments  for  the  guests  who  were  invited  to  a  royal  feast.  Wardrobes 
filled  with  many  thousand  garments  formed  part  of  the  wealth  of  every  Eastern 
prince  (chap.  vi.  19  ;  James  v.  2),  and  it  was  par-  of  his  glory,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
assembly  which  Jehu  held  for  the  worshippers  of  Baal  (2  Kings  x.  22),  to  bring 
them  out  for  use  on  state  occasions.  On  this  assumption,  the  act  of  the  man  who 
was  found  "  not  having  a  wedding  garment  "  was  one  of  wilful  insult.  He  came  in 
the  "filthy  rags"  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6),  of  his  old  life,  instead  of  putting  on  the  "white 
linen  "  meet  for  a  kingly  feast  (Eccles.  ix.  8  ;  Eev.  iii.  4,  5),  which  had  been  freely 
offered  him.      {Dean  Plumptre.)  The    wedding  garment  given: — A    coloured 

minister  was  once  discoursing  on  salvation,  which  he  illustrated  as  follows : — 
"  Suppose,"  said  he,  "  any  of  you  wanted  a  coat,  and  should  go  to  a  white  gentle- 
man to  purchase  one.  Well,  he  has  one  that  exactly  fits  you,  and  in  all  respects  is 
just  what  you  need.  You  ask  the  price  ;  but,  when  told,  find  that  you  have  not 
enough  money,  and  shake  your  head — '  No,  massa ;  I  am  too  poor  ;  must  go  with- 
out,'— and  turn  away.  But  he  says,  '  I  know  you  cannot  pay  me  ;  I  have  concluded 
to  giv^i  it  you.  Will  you  have  it  ? '  What  would  you  do  in  that  case  ?  Would 
yon  stop  to  hem  and  haw,  and  say,  '  Oh  I  he's  just  laughing  at  me ;  he  don't  mean 
it?  '  No  such  thing.  There  is  not  one  of  you  who  would  not  take  the  coat,  and  say, 
'  Yes,  massa,  and  thank  you,  too.*  Now,  my  dear  friends,  God's  salvation  is 
offered  to  you  as  freely  as  that.  Why  won't  yon  take  it  as  freely  ?  You  are  lost, 
undone  sinners,  and  feel  that  you  need  a  covering  from  His  wrath.  If  you  could 
keep  His  holy  law  blameless,  you  might  purchase  it  by  good  works  ;  but  ah !  yoa 
are  full  of  sin.     Prayers  and  tears  are  worthless.     You  are  poor  indeed,  and  il 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

this  is  all  your  dependence  I  don't  wonder  that  you  are  turning  o3  in  despair.  But 
stop  1  look  here  1  God  gpeaks  now,  and  offers  you  the  perfect  robe  of  Christ's 
righteousness  that  will  cover  all  jour  sins,  and  fit  all  your  wants,  and  He  says  that 
you  may  have  it  without  money  and  without  price."  {American  Paper.)  High- 
ways and  hedges  :—  We  might  do  better  if  we  went  further  afield.  Our  invitations 
to  Christ,  which  fall  so  feebly  on  the  ears  of  those  who  regularly  hear  us,  would  be 
welcomed  by  those  to  whom  we  never  deliver  them.  We  are  fools  to  waste  time  in 
the  shallows  of  our  churches  and  chapels,  when  the  deep  outside  teems  with  wait- 
ing fishes.  We  need  fresh  hearers:  the  newer  the  news  to  any  man,  the  more 
likely  is  he  to  regard  it  as  good  news.  Music-hall  work,  out-door  preaching,  house- 
to-house  visitation  have  virgin  soil  to  deal  with,  and  there  is  none  like  it.  Invite 
the  oft-invited — certainly  ;  but  do  not  forget  that  thoFe  who  have  never  been  invited 
as  yet  cannot  have  been  hardened  by  refusals.  Beggars  in  the  highways  had  never 
been  bidden  to  a  marriage-feast  before  ;  and  so,  when  they  were  surprised  with  an 
invitation,  they  raised  no  questions,  but  gladly  hastened  to  the  banquet.  Lack  of 
the  ncdding  garment : — Is  there  any  common  way  of  dealing  with  God's  invitation 
than  tiiat  which  this  man  adopteil  ?  He  had  no  deep  love  for  his  king,  no  grateful 
and  humbling  sense  of  his  kindness,  no  perception  of  what  was  due  to  him ;  but 
with  the  blundering  stupidity  of  godlessness,  thought  selfishness  would  carry  him 
through,  and  ran  right  upon  his  doom.  What  is  commoner  than  this  self-com- 
placency, this  utter  blindness  to  the  fact  that  God  is  holy,  and  that  holiness  must 
therefore  be  the  rule  everywhere  ;  what  is  commoner  than  the  feeling  that  we  are  well 
enough,  that  we  shall  somehow  pass  muster,  that  as  we  mean  to  take  our  places 
among  the  heavenly  quests  we  shall  surely  not  be  rejected  ?  How  hard  it  is  for  any 
of  us  fully  to  grasp  the  radical  nature  of  the  inward  change  that  is  required  if  w« 
are  to  be  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  Conformity  to  God, 
ability  to  rejoice  with  God  and  in  God,  humble  and  devoted  reveience,  a  real 
willingness  to  do  honour  to  the  King's  Son — these  are  great  attainments  ;  but  these 
constitute  our  wedding  garment,  without  which  we  cannot  remain  in  His  presence 
nor  abide  His  searching  gaze.  It  is  the  heart  that  you  bear  towards  Him  that  will 
determine  your  destiny.  No  mere  appearance  of  accepting  His  invitation,  no 
associating  of  yourself  with  those  who  love  Him,  no  outward  entrance  into  His 
presence,  no  making  use  of  the  right  language  is  anything  to  the  purpose.  What 
is  wanted  is  a  profound  sympathy  with  God,  a  real  dt  light  in  what  is  holy,  a 
radical  acceptance  of  His  will — in  other  words,  and  as  the  most  untutored  con- 
science miglit  see,  what  is  wanted  is  a  state  of  mind  in  you  which  God  can  delight 
in,  and  approve  of,  and  hold  fellowship  with.  {Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  Refusal  of 
the  iveddhig  garment : — Had  the  man  any  means  of  obtaining  a  dress  more  in  keep- 
ing with  the  occasion  ?  Was  he  not  perhaps  so  poor  that  he  could  afford  no  pre- 
paration of  any  kind  ?  Had  this  been  so,  it  would  have  been  pleaded  in  excuse. 
But  no  doubt  the  parnble  supposf^s  that  the  not  unusual  custom  of  providing  for  the 
guests  the  needed  garment  had  been  adopted ;  a  provision  which  this  gu.-st  had 
despised  and  refused ;  he  had  pushed  past  the  ofiicious  servants  who  would  have 
clothed  him.  It  is  this  that  constituted  the  man's  audacity  and  guilt.  Similar 
audacity  in  entering  the  king's  presence  without  putting  on  the  roue  sent  by  the 
king  for  that  purpose,  has  been  known  to  cost  a  prime  minister  his  life.  A  traveller 
who  was  invited,  with  the  ambassadors  he  accompanied,  to  the  table  of  the  Persian 
king,  says :  "  We  were  told  by  the  officer  that  we,  according  to  their  usage,  must 
hang  the  splendid  vests  that  were  sent  us  from  the  king  over  our  dresses,  and  so 
appear  in  his  presence.  The  ambassadors  at  firpt  refused,  but  the  officer  urged  it 
BO  earnestly,  alleging,  as  also  did  others,  that  the  omission  would  greatly  displease 
the  king,  since  all  other  envoys  observed  such  a  custom,  that  at  last  they  consented, 
and  hanged,  as  did  we  also,  the  splendid  vests  over  their  shoulders."  So  at  this 
marriage,  dresses  had  been  provided  by  the  king.  The  guests  who  had  been  picked 
off  the  streets  were  not  told  to  go  home  and  do  the  best  they  could  for  their  dress, 
but  in  the  palace,  in  the  vestibule  of  the  banquet-hall,  each  man  was  arrayed  in  the 
dress  the  king  wished  to  see  worn.  Possibly  the  man  who  declined  the  offered 
garment  had  a  dress  of  his  own  he  grudged  to  cover.  Possibly  he  thought  he  wab 
as  well  dressed  as  need  be.  He  would  stroll  in  superciliously  as  a  patron  or 
spectator,  thinking  it  very  fit  for  those  poor,  coarse-clothed  and  dirty  people 
to  make  use  of  the  king's  wardrobe,  but  conscious  of  no  speck  or  unclearJiness  in 
his  own  raiuient  that  should  cause  him  to  make  any  alteration  of  it.  {Ibid.) 
The  wedding  garment: — I.  The  multitude  of  guests.  II.  The  unfitted  one.  III. 
The  merciless  end.        Piety  oulicardly  manifested: — All  organized  beings  aie  m» 


flHAP.  xxn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  6)f 

*ained  by  an  inner  economy  of  life,  which  is  made  manifest  by  an  outer  life.  There 
is  in  UB  an  inner  life  of  thoughts,  opinions,  beliefs,  emotions,  and  desires.  These 
should  be  brought  in  conformity  with  the  mind  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  They  correspond 
with  the  root  of  ihe  tree,  or  with  the  seed  which  you  hide  and  bury  in  the  ground. 
Now,  you  are  not  satisfied  with  the  root  and  the  sap  of  the  tree,  or  the  germ  power 
in  the  seed  that  you  have  hid  in  the  earth.  These  hidden,  buried,  and  unrevealed 
powers  do  not  suffice.  You  want  them  to  come  forth  and  put  on  their  gay  garments, 
that  your  eye  may  be  delighted  and  gladdened  by  their  beauty.  And  you  cut  down 
the  tree,  you  plough  up  the  seed,  if  it  puts  on  no  wedding  garment  of  blossom  and 
fruit.  So,  say  not  my  faith  is  right,  my  opinions  are  correct,  my  emotions  are 
warm  ;  for  God  wants  more  than  these.  He  looks  for  fruit,  for  the  beautiful  wed- 
ding garment  of  a  pure,  sweet,  loving,  unselfish,  and  Chiist-like  life.  The  outward 
beauty,  it  is  true,  grows  out  of  the  hidden  life.  It  is  not  put  on.  The  beauty  of 
the  lily  is  not  put  on  the  flower,  as  a  man  puts  on  his  coat.  It  grows  out  of  the 
lily-like  nature  of  the  flower.  Many  put  on  the  manners  of  the  Christian ;  bat 
when  they  are  only  put  on  they  drop  off  and  expose  the  nakedness  of  the  wearer 
when  temptation  comes,  or  when  there  is  no  end  to  be  answered  by  keeping 
them  on.  Let  us  train  ourselves,  day  by  day,  into  the  habit  and  feeling  of  the 
Christian  spirit  and  temper,  so  that  acts  of  Christian  love,  nobleness,  and  self- 
denial  may  grow  out  of  us,  as  the  beautiful  form  and  colour  grow  out  of  the  lily, 
and  the  sweet  fragrance  out  of  the  rose.  {R.  Davey.)  The  wedding  garment  :— 
1.  An  enemy  at  the  feast.  2.  The  king  at  the  feast.  3.  The  judge  at  the  feast. 
4.  The  criminal  at  the  feast.  5.  The  executioner.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Speechless 
at  the  judgment : — There  is  no  speechlessness  at  present,  when  we  ply  men  with 
questions  as  to  their  being  unprepared  for  eternity :  they  have  all  some  specious 
excuse  to  plead,  or  some  empty  promise  to  make.  But  there  will  be  no  deith-lika 
silence  hereafter,  throughout  the  company  of  those  vvho  come  up  from  the  grave 
unclothed  for  eternity.  Every  particular  of  their  lives  will  have  crowded  in  upon 
the  memory,  and  the  consciousness  of  what  they  might  have  been  will  repress  all 
murmuring  at  \vha,t  they  are.  I  have  read  the  singular  account  of  some  who  have 
been  recovered  from  apparent  death  by  drowning,  and  they  say,  that,  as  life  went 
away,  every  action,  every  occurrence  from  infancy  upwards,  presented  itself  to  the 
mind  with  overpowering  viviilness,  so  that  the  close  was  as  it  were  the  resurrection 
of  their  existence  ;  they  seemed  to  themselves  to  have  lived  the  whole  of  life  over 
again,  in  those  fearful  moments  when  they  were  grappling  with  death,  so  energetically 
and  with  60  marvellous  an  accuracy  did  long-forgotten  things  pass  before  them,  and 
the  picture  of  their  every  day,  and  every  week,  and  every  hour,  paint  itself  on  the 
mental  retina.  And  if  there  is  to  come  at  last  this  resuscitation  of  memory,  oh  I 
we  cannot  wonder  at  the  speechlessness  of  those  who  are  condemned  at  the  judg- 
ment. (JEf.  Melvill,  B.D.)  "  Called,  hut  not  chosen  "  ; — What  of  necessity  must 
be  the  character  of  that  man  who  has  put  on  that  robe?  1.  He  must  be  a  humble 
man.  2.  Ha  may  walk  into  the  feast  boldly  in  his  confidence.  3.  He  must  be 
joyous.  It  is  a  feast.  4.  He  must  be  loving.  It  is  a  feast  to  commemorate  love. 
6.  The  Christ  that  is  on  him  will  be  the  Christ  that  is  in  him.    (J.  Vaughan,  Mjl.) 

Vers.  15-22.  Is  It  lawful  to  give  tribute  unto  Csesar,  or  not  7  —  The  duty  of 
an  entire  surrender  to  God : — I.  Wfiat  those  things  are  which  wb  should  rendeb 
UNTO  God.  1.  Our  time.  Especially  youth;  and  particularly  the  Sabbath.  2. 
Our  substance.  3.  Our  children.  4.  Our  hearts.  5.  Our  whole  selves.  6.  The 
bleesc^d  fruits,  and  all  the  glory  of  His  own  grace,  should,  by  the  Chribtiat,  be 
jrend^red  back  to  God.  II.  How  this  is  to  be  performed.  That  it  may  be  an 
acceptable  service  we  mu3t  do  it — 1.  If  hitherto  neglected,  without  delay.  2. 
Freely,  and  without  reluctance.  3.  Thankfully,  and  without  murmuring.  4. 
Humbly,  and  without  ostentation.  5.  Wholly,  and  without  reserve.  6.  Fur  per- 
petuity, and  without  drawback.  7.  In  the  whole  of  this,  we  should  have  an  eve  to 
Christ.  He  is  the  medium  of  all  communication  from  God,  and  conveyance  to  Him. 
IB.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Twenty-third  Sunday  after  Trinity  : — This  narrative — I. 
In  beference  to  what  is  in  man.  1.  Here  was  a  profession  of  great  piety  and 
holiness,  conjoined  with  very  inexcusable  hatred.  The  Pharisees  were  the  most 
pretentious  religionists  of  the  day;  this  no  proof  of  genuine  piety.  They  could 
not  refute  Christ,  but  hated  Him.  2.  We  observe  here  also  a  very  base  design. 
They  *•  took  counsel  how  they  might  entangle  Him  in  His  talk."  3.  We  observe 
here  a  very  iniquitous  co-partnership.  The  Pharisees  and  Herodians  were  radical 
enemies.    4.  We  observe  here  also  a  gUb,  obsequioas,  but  treacherous  and  lying 


S04  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xxm 

flattery :  •♦  Master,  we  know  that  Ihon  art  true."  Their  design  was  to  throw  Him 
oft  His  guard.  5.  Observe  the  devilish  cunning  of  the  plot.  "  Is  it  lawful  to  giv« 
tribute  unto  Caesar,  <fec."  They  professed  honest  doubt  in  order  to  fasten  Him  on 
the  horns  of  a  dilemma.  II.  With  refekence  to  what  was  in  Christ.  1.  W« 
are  here  shown  that  Christ  was  a  very  dignified  man.  He  was  poor;  but  imposing 
majesty  went  along  with  His  humble  simplicity.  2.  We  are  here  shown  that  ou» 
Saviour  had  the  reputation  of  a  truthful  man.  8.  He  was  also  a  man  of  acknow. 
ledged  intelligence.  4.  He  was,  moreover,  a  man  of  honest  faithfulness.  But  the 
subsequent  parts  of  the  narrative  attest  still  higher  qualities  in  our  blessed  Lord. 
(1)  With  all  the  dissimulation  of  these  men  Jesus  saw  through  the  mask,  and  all 
their  secret  thoughts  were  open  to  Him.  He  "  perceived  their  nakedness."  (2)  He 
found  an  easy  way  out  of  the  net  from  which  human  trickery  beUeved  it  impossible 
lor  Him  to  escape.      (J,   A.   Seiss,  D.D.)  God  and  Ccesar : — I.  The  gospei. 

OUGHT   to   penetrate   evertthinq.      Humau   life   in    its  most  widely  sundered 
spheres  must  submit  to  its  action.     That  being  said,  I  affirm — II.  Thai  reumoub 
AND  civil  society  ARE  PROFOUNDLY  DISTINCT.     This  wiU  appear  if  we  consider — 1. 
The  nature  of  the  dominion  they  exercise.     The  dominion  of  the  State  is  that  tf 
the  present  life,  and  of  purely  temporal  interests.     It  must  guarantee  to  each 
citizen  the  free  enjoyment  of  his  rights  and  liberties.     Its  supreme  ideal  is  justice. 
On  this  side  it  meets  morals.     There  is  a  social  morality  which  should  not  be  con. 
sidered  as  doing   violence  to  the  individual  conscience,  but  which  may  claim 
submission  from  all,  and  sacrifice,  if  necessary.    They  are  mistaken,  therefore,  who 
make  of  civil  society  a  mere  community  of  interests.     It  knows,  and  can  form,  the 
citizen ;  it  ought  not  to  have  possession  of  the  man.    It  must  stop  at  the  threshold 
of  religious  conscience.     2.  Nor  is  it  only  by  the  sphere  in  which  their  authority 
is  to  be  felt  that  the  Church  and  the  State  differ ;  it  is  still  more  by  the  nature  of 
the  means  which  they  employ.     The  arm  of  the  State  is  force;  the  arm  of  the 
Church  is  the  Word  (2  Cor.  x.  4).     3.  Differing  thus,  the  Church  and  civil  society 
should  in  their  inevitable  relations  conserve,  each  for  itself,  their  independence 
with  zealous  care.     This  independence  may  be  compromised  in  two  ways :  by  the 
theocracy  which  submits  the  State  to  the  Church,  and  by  the  opposite  systems, 
which  submit  the  Church  to  the  State.     In  the  eyes  of  many  representatives  of 
modern  democracy,  a  religious  society  should  be  considered  as  any  other  society 
would  be.     It  is  to  be  governed  by  the  rule  of  the  majority  of  its  members.     But 
Chnstianity  is  a  revealed  fact,  and  does  not  depend  on  the  chances  of  majorities. 
The  Church  should  not  be  associated  with  any  political  party ;  it  suffers  in  such 
alliance.     An  analogy  will  illustrate  my  thought :  Every  modem  nation  has  two 
fundamental  institutions — the  army  and  the  school.     Now,  that  is  no  wise  head 
which  does  not  understand  that  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  these  should  be 
open  to  discussion  concerning  politics.     An  army  in  which  the  generals  became 
judges  would  surrender  the  nation  to  all  sorts  of  dangers  and  assaults ;  schools,  in 
which  masters  introduced  the  burning  questions  which  divide  us,  would  become 
a  thorough  raid  on  the  liberty  of  families.    In  demanding  that  our  soldiers  and 
professors  shall  not  intermingle  political  debates  with  their  duties,  no  one  under- 
stands that  they  are  required  to  abdicate  their  independence,  their  patriotism,  and 
their  dignity  as  citizens.   Need  I  say  that  the  Church  is  a  sphere  infinitely  superior 
to  the  school  and  the  army,  and  that  it  is  folly  to  allow  party  passions  and  hatreds 
to  penetrate  it  f    The  Church  places  us  face  to  face  with  eternity ;  she  does  not 
look  at  questions  from  the  standpoint  of  the  day  or  the  hour,  but  rules  over  time 
and  our  passing  differences.     The  mere  earthly  life  becomes  enslaving — and  -ohen 
has  it  been  more  so  than  to-day  ? — the  more  necessary  it  is  that,  from  above  it,  we 
should  affirm  the  grand  invisible  reahties  which  do  not  pass  away.     The  absolute, 
which  is  only  another  aspect  of  the  eternal — that  is  the  thing  which  the  Church 
should  proclaim.     She  must  see  questions  in  their  relation  to  God.     The  domain 
of  politics,  on  the  contrary,  is  relative,  and  often  even  less  than  that.     Politics 
takes  men  as  they  are,  and  circumstances  as  they  are.     I  do  not  ask  that  religion 
should  remain  silent  before  the  immoralities  of  politics ;   quite  the  contrary.     I 
wish  that,  in  order  to  denounce  them  with  the  greater  force,  she  should  not  descend 
into  the  political  arena ;  for,  if  she  is  suspected  of  speaking,  not  in  the  name  of 
conscience,  but  in  the  name  of  party,  slie  becomes  nothing  more  than  one  voice 
more  amid  the  discordant  clamours  of  the  day.     Let  us  take  a  celebrated  example 
to  which  it  behoves  us  always  to  recur.     There  is  not  one  of  us  who  has  not 
admired  the  conduct  of  John  the  Baptist  at  Herod's  court,  and  the  firm  courage 
with  which  he  said  to  the  blameworthy  king,  "It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have 


CHAP-.  XXII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  60S 

her, "  But  let  John  the  Baptist,  in  place  of  being  the  prophet  of  conscience,  be- 
come a  popular  judge,  and  all  his  authority  crumbles :  for,  behind  his  denuncia- 
tion,  you  discern  a  political  end  and  the  triumph  of  a  party.  Well,  then,  I  cannot 
cease  saying  to  those  whose  honour  and  privilege  it  is  to  represent  the  Church, 
"Never  compromise  it  in  struggles  to  which  it  should  remain  a  stranger.  Its 
grandeur  and  its  force  are  in  being  the  voice  of  eternal  right,  and  of  justice  toward 
all."  (jB.  Bersier,  D.D.)  Money  morally  stamped : — The  destination  of  money. 
How  might  a  man  moralize  over  a  large  heap  of  gold  pieces,  before  they  go  forth 
from  the  mint  to  have  their  purity  soiled  by  the  rough  usage  of  human  hands. 
How  many  of  you,  he  might  say,  are  going  to  be  the  currency  of  selfishness,  to  be 
coined  over  by  the  chill  spirit  of  avarice,  and  to  have  the  symbol  which  the  mint 
has  left  upon  you  effaced  by  the  figure  of  Mammon,  and  the  miserly  mottoes  that 
will  be  graved  upon  you  when  you  become  the  instruments  and  objects  of  selfish 
greed  ?  Some  of  them,  the  prophetic  eye  might  see,  were  going  to  be  spent  for 
intemperate  indulgence,  to  be  offered  on  the  altar  of  Bacchus,  and  so  morally  to  be 
recoiued  with  his  reeling  figure  bloated  upon  it,  and  that  awful  text  from  his 
gospel,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."  Others,  it  might  be  seen, 
were  on  their  way  to  the  hot  prizes  of  the  gaming-table,  the  innermost  sanctuary  of 
the  pit,  where  feverish  eyes  should  be  fastened  upon  them,  and  desperate  hearts 
stake  their  last  treasure  for  them,  and  where  they  seem  almost  visibly  to  gleam 
with  the  fiery  portrait  of  Satan,  his  chosen  medallions,  that  burn  every  hand  un- 
lucky enough  to  win.  Others  go  to  purchase  learning  and  culture,  and  the  recorded 
thoughts  of  genius,  and  upon  them  the  image  and  superscription  of  Apollo  and 
Minerva  are  outhned.  Some,  again,  will  wear  the  forms  of  the  Graces  or  the  Muses, 
inlaid  into  their  substance  by  the  human  tastes  that  make  them  serve  as  ministers. 
If  the  eye  could  foresee  what  ones  would  go  on  missions  of  mercy,  would  strengthen 
the  interests  of  truth,  would  put  wings  on  good  ideas,  would  endow  beneficent  in- 
stitutions with  new  power,  would  carry  sympathy  and  help  to  the  bed  of  some  poor 
sufferer,  kindle  a  fire  upon  the  desolate  hearth,  spread  a  meal  upon  the  table  of 
destitution,  clothe  a  pallid  and  shivering  child,  or  give  it  some  training  of  mind 
or  heart — those,  a  man  might  say,  are  the  Christian  coins.  It  should  seem  that 
they  ought  to  gleam  more  brightly  among  the  heaps  where  they  lie."  The  form  of 
Christ  is  really  stamped  upon  that  silver  and  gold,  and  His  superscription,  "  It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  enwreathes  His  image  with  immortal  truth. 
Those  are  the  dollars  that  look  precious  in  the  sight  of  heaven.  The  touch  of 
benevolence  transmutes  them  into  eternal  possessions.  Who  would  not  wish  to  own 
tii^m  ?  Who,  when  the  hour  of  di-ath  comes,  would  not  prefer  to  have  spent  such 
coin?  What  pleasure  or  profit  would  then  look  so  bright,  or  give  such  comfort  as 
the  retrospect  of  these  golden  benefactors  of  the  world  !  (T.  Starr  King.)  The  n' 
conscience  exempt  from  civil  rule : — When  certain  persons  attempted  to  persuade 
Stephen,  King  of  Poland,  to  constrain  some  of  his  subjects,  who  were  of  a  different 
religion,  to  embrace  his,  he  said  to  them,  *'  I  am  king  of  men,  and  not  of  con-  a  pi 

sciences.  The  dominion  of  conscience  belongs  exclusively  to  God."  Tliejcitieen^ 
txcofald  stewardship : — Christ  is  not  here  defining  two  duties  which  stand  in  contrast 
or  antithesis  to  each  other.  He  is  defining  one  duty,  in  its  just  relation  to  another 
and  a  higher  duty  out  of  which  it  grows.  Kecall  the  occasion  of  His  words.  Some 
one  has  brought  to  Him  a  penny,  and  asks  Him  whether  it  is  lawful  for  a  Jew  to 
pay  tribute  to  a  Koman  ruler.  Says  Christ  in  effect,  "  My  brother,  the  penny 
itself  has  settled  that  question.  It  has,  stamped  upon  it,  an  image  or  medallion 
which  is  Cffisar's  likeness.  It  is  current  here  because  this  is  Caesar's  country ;  and 
you  use  it,  whether  y^u  choose  to  own  the  fact  or  no,  because  you  are  Ctesar's 
subject.  Give  Caesar,  therefore,  his  due.  Pay  your  taxes,  obey  the  laws,  honour 
the  civil  Ruthorities  ;  but  that  you  may  do  so,  begin  by  paying  your  taxes  to  God. 
The  penny  bears  an  image;  so  do  you.  The  penny  is  from  the  mint  of  the 
emperor ;  you  are  from  the  mint  of  God.  The  use  of  the  penny  is  determined 
by  its  likeness.  So,  too,  your  use  is  determined  by  your  likeness.  Every  faculty 
in  you,  every  gift,  every  grace  and  charm  and  power  which  is  most  characteristic 
and  distinctive,  is  the  stamp  of  the  Divine.  You  are  God's  child.  You  bear  His 
image.  Bender  to  Him  your  supreme  and  unceasing  tribute  ;  and  in  doing  that, 
all  other  and  minor  questions  will  settle  themselves.  '  Render  therefore  nnto 
Cffisar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's,'  do  I  say?  Yes.  But  render  them  because, 
and  in  the  inspiration,  of  that  higher  duty  which  bids  you  render  unto  God  the 
things  that  are  God's  I  "  {Bishop  H.  C.  Potter.)  The  coinage  of  love  and  service 
for  God  and  man : — With  many  of  us  the  stewardship  of  money  is  not  our  ohiefest 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xxa. 

stewardship :  of  such  a  coinage  we  have  little  or  nothing  to  put  in  circulation. 
Still,  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  circulate  the  currency  that  buys  and  sells,  it  ii 
ours  to  circulate  the  far  mightier  currency  that  cheers  and  inspires  and  consoles. 
The  world  to-day  is  waiting  for  something  besides  money.  It  is  waiting  for  love 
and  thought  and  personal  interest  and  painstaking.  Whether,  therefore,  you  are 
a  capitalist  or  a  clerk,  a  student  or  a  teacher,  a  professional  man  or  a  woman  living 
in  the  retirement  of  your  kindred  and  home,  take  your  slumbering  sympathy  (1 
will  not  believe  that  God  has  not  implanted  it  within  you !)  and  coin  that  into  love 
and  serrice  for  your  kind.  On  your  brow  rests  the  stamp  of  Him  whose  coinage 
and  currency  you  are.  There  aie  lost  pieces  of  silver,  aye  and  of  gold,  which  also 
bear  His  imaere.  They  have  long  ago  been  missing  from  the  Father's  treasury, 
and  are  trampled  under  foot  of  man  and  beast  alike.  But,  if  you  can  find  them 
in  the  mire,  if  you  will  wash  them  with  your  tears,  and  buraisu  them  back  to 
brightness  and  beauty  by  your  patient  and  loving  touch,  you  will  find  on  them  the 
image  of  Him  who  made  them,  and  the  supersci'iption  of  His  immortal  kingdom. 
Light  the  cautUe  of  your  love,  then,  and  sweep  diligently  till  you  find  them.  Think 
of  some  one,  to-day,  who-e  life  is  lonely,  whose  youth  is  gone,  whose  lot  is  hard 
aud  cheerless  and  unlovely,  and  try  to  lift  them  up,  at  least  for  the  hour,  into  the 
atmosphere  of  a  wai-mer  and  more  beneficent  brotherhood.  (Ibid.)  The  claims 
of  God  and  man : — I.  Notice  the  claims  op  C^har,  ob  civil  qovkrnments.  The 
just  claims  of  civil  governments  are  limited  to  civil  exactions,  in  opposition  to 
religious  or  sacred  claims.  Civil  governments  rightly  demand — 1.  Homage  and 
subjection  (Rom.  xiii.  1,  Ac. ;  1  Poter  ii,  13,  &c.).  2.  Obedience,  and  tribute,  or 
taxes.  Christ  did  this  (ilatt.  xvii.  27 ;  Titus  iii.  1).  3.  Thanksgiving  and  prayei 
to  God  on  their  belialf  (1  Tim.  ii,  17,  Ac).  There  are  the  claims  of  Cjesar  aud  civil 
governments.  But  civil  governaients  may  demand  more  than  their  rif^hts ;  if 
they  do  so,  they  will  be  eithi-r  in  matters  civil  or  ecclesiastical ;  if  they  levy  unjust 
civil  exactions,  then,  as  citizens,  they  may  be  peacefully,  yet  firmly,  resisted.  This 
has  been  repeatedly  done.  By  the  three  Hebrews,  Daniel,  Peter,  and  the  apostles 
(Acts  iv.  18).  II.  The  claims  of  God.  We  are  to  render  to  God — 1.  R-digious 
belief  and  homage.  2.  Religious  awe  and  fear.  "  Fear  before  Him  all  the  earth  " 
(Psa.  xcvi.  4,  9).  3.  Praise  and  thanksgiving,  4,  Our  highest  love  and  delight. 
5.  Universal  obedience.  Learn — 1.  That  the  Christian  religion  is  favourable  to 
order  and  obedience,  but  it  limits  the  authority  of  the  State  to  civil  concerns,  2. 
It  distinctly  exhibits  true  liberty  of  conscience.  Should  not  this  be  dear  and 
sacred  to  every  good  man,  especially  when  sanctioned  by  the  spirit  of  our  textT 
(J.  Burns,  LL.B.)  Our  duiirs  as  subjects: — I.  That  thev  should  honoceablk 
AND  FULLY  PAY  ALL  TAXES  which  are  Imposdd  upon  them.  The  aJvuntages  of  civil 
government  are  costly,  and  means  must  be  provided  by  the  individuals  of  the 
n.ition.  We  must  not  defraud  the  government,  or  a  neighbour,  who  will  have  to 
make  pood  our  default.      II.    That  Chbistlans  shodld  acquiesce  in  that  form 

OF    OOVKRNMliNT    UNDER  WHICH   THEY    LIVE,  WHATEVER   BE    ITS    CHARACTER    AND  ORIGIN. 

A  nation  has  the  right  to  secure  its  independence  of  a  foreign  nation ;  a  nation  has 
the  right  to  amend  its  institutions ;  but  the  duty  alleged  is  that  of  individuals. 
"  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers."  This  is  God's  will.  But  if 
human  government  has  its  rights,  God  has  His  rights.  As  human  governments 
depend  on  the  authority  of  God,  they  must  be  subordinate  to  it.  His  rights  are 
supreme,  and  the  rights  of  the  human  government  terminate  whero  the  rights  of 
God  begin.  The  contract  in  "the  things  which  are  Caesar's."  1.  It  is  the 
)'ight  of  God  to  demand  our  worship.  2.  General  obedience  to  His  laws.  3.  That 
we  should  maintain  that  truth  which  He  has  revealed,  by  which  He  is  glorified, 
and  the  world  is  to  be  blessed.  How  small  a  portion  all  this  is  of  what  we  owe  to 
G"d.  Admire  this  feature  of  the  law  of  Christ,  which  secures  the  onloi  of  states. 
Let  us  be  good  subjects.  (B.  W.  Noel,  31. A.)  Casar's  dues  :— I.  We  owe  them 
honour  inward,  by  a  reverent  conceit.  II.  And  outward,  by  an  honourable  testi- 
mony  of  the  virtues  in  thtm,  and  the  good  we  receive  by  tiiem.  And  sure  I  am 
this  we  owe,  "  Not  to  speak  evil  of  them  that  arc  in  authority,'"  aud  if  there  were 
some  infinnity,  not  to  blaze,  but  to  conceal  aud  cover  it,  for  that  the  Apostle 
maketh  a  part  of  honour  (1  Cor.  xii.  23).  III.  We  owe  them  our  prayers,  and 
daily  devout  remembrances ;  "  for  all,"  saith  St.  Paul,  "  but,  by  special  p'crogative, 
for  princes."  IV.  We  owe  them  the  service  of  our  bodies,  which  if  we  refuse  to 
come  in  person  to  do,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  will  curse  us,  as  he  did  Meroz  (Judges 
V.  23).  {Bishop  Andrewes.)  Eights  of  Casar  and  rights  of  God: — L  Some  par- 
ticular rights  and  privileges  belong  to  Cffisars,  or  sovereign  princes :  1.  Honour  to 


CHAP,  xxn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  50? 

their  persons.  2.  Obedience  to  their  laws.  3.  Tribute.  11.  Some  peculiar  rights 
and  prerogatives  belong  to  God  only.  1.  All  religious  worship.  2.  Due  reverence 
And  regard  to  all  sacred  things,  such  as  (a)  ministers ;  (b)  God's  house ;  (c)  the 
Lord's  Day ;  {d)  Tenth  part  of  our  substance.  III.  The  duty  of  all  Christians 
with  reference  to  both,  and  that  is,  to  render  the  respective  rights  and  dues  to  each. 
{Matthew  HoU.) 

Vers.  23-33.  For  In  the  resurrection  they  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  Is 
marriage. — The  joys  of  heaven : — The  Gauls,  an  ancient  people  of  France,  after  they 
had  once  tasted  of  the  sweet  wine  of  the  grapes  that  grew  in  Italy,  inquired  after 
that  country  where  such  pleasant  liquor  was,  and  understanding  of  it,  they  made 
towards  that  place,  and  never  rested  till  they  came  thither  where  such  pleasant 
things  grew.  Could  we  only  realize  somethiug  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  should  we  not 
more  earnestly  set  ourselves  to  find  the  way?  This  thought  often  sustained 
Christian  martyrs  in  their  sufferings.  The  angelic  life : — We  must  all  of  us  de- 
velop one  way  or  the  other ;  manhood  here  is  but  the  corn  in  the  ear.     I.  In  what 

EESPECT3  ARE  THESE  SAINTS  WHO  HAVE    PASSED  THE   STREAM  OF  DEATH  LIKE    UNTO  THE 

ANGELS.  1.  The  saints  of  God  are  like  unto  the  angels  as  to  the  qualities  of  their 
persons.  Sex  is  obliterated  not  in  mental  characteristics,  but  in  bodily  frame. 
Alike  in  their  immortality  they  cannot  die.  Like  the  angels  in  the  maturity  of  their 
being,  the  body  is  raised  in  glory.  Eesemble  the  angels  in  beauty,  and  equal 
them  in  strength.  What  a  blessed  personality  will  be  yours  when  the  present  age 
is  past.  2.  There  will  be  likeness  between  the  angels  and  glorified  saints  in  the 
matter  of  character.  No  inbred  sin.  Purity  and  perfection.  3.  The  souls  of  the 
blessed  are  like  to  angels  as  to  their  occupation.  Adoration;  wondering  study; 
gazing  upon  God ;  untiring  service — these  their  occupations.  4.  We  shall  be  like 
the  angels  in  heaveuliuess.  Here  we  want  externals ;  eat  and  drink :  there  no 
desires  of  an  earthly  kind.  5.  Like  the  angels  as  to  our  happiness.  II.  Thb 
ANGELIC  LITE  ON  EARTH.  We  may  be  like  augels  here  below.  1.  Be  it  ours,  as  it 
was  theirs,  to  declare  the  word  of  God.  2.  For  fighting  a  good  fight.  Michael  and 
h'is  angels  fought  against  the  dragon.  3.  In  setting  free  those  who  are  the  prisoners 
of  hope.  The  angel  came  to  Peter  in  prison.  4.  In  ministering  comfort  to  those 
who  are  saved.  An  angel  said  to  Paul,  "Fear  not."  5.  In  watching  our  souls. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Ignorance  of  Holy  Scripture  the  soxiree  of  error  in  religion  : — 

1.    To   establish   the   FACT   THAT   IGNORANCE   OF   HOLT    SCRIPTORE   IS    THE    SOURCE   OF 

ERROR  IN  RELIGION.  Holy  Scripture  is  the  truth  from  which  error  is  the  deviation. 
The  Sadducees  erred  because  they  knew  them  not :  they  denied  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead.     They  substituted  tradition  for  them :  hence  their  error.     II.  That 

MISREPRESKNTATION    OF    ScBIPTURE    LEADS    TO    SINFUL    CONSEQUENCES.       "  Dcstroy  thO 

temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up."  Upon  this  false  witnesses  accused 
Christ.  See  how  the  misinterpretation  of  Christ's  words  led  to  sin.  Education  that 
falls  short  of  "  knowing  the  Scriptures  "  will  end  in  error.  (C.  Cator,  M.A.)  A 
resurrection  emblem: — Tlie  churchyard  at  Oi;erhofen,  Switzerland)  was  beautiful, 
and  the  siraphcity  of  the  httle  remembrance-posts  set  upon  the  graves  very  plea- 
sant. One  who  had  been  too  poor  to  put  up  an  engraved  brass  plate,  or  even  a 
painted  board,  had  written  with  ink  on  paper  the  birth  and  death  of  the  being  whose 
remains  were  below,  and  this  had  been  fastened  to  a  board,  and  mounted  on  the 
top  of  a  stick  at  the  head  of  the  grave,  the  paper  being  protected  by  a  little  edge 
and  roof.  Such  was  the  simple  remembrance,  but  Nature  had  added  her  pathos, 
for  under  the  shelter  by  the  writing  a  caterpillar  had  fastened  itself,  and  passed  into 
its  death-like  state  of  chrysalis,  and  having  ultimately  assumed  its  final  state,  it 
had  winged  its  way  from  the  spot,  and  had  left  the  corpse-like  rehjs  behmd.  How 
old  and  how  beautiful  is  this  figure  of  the  resurrection  1  Surely  i1  can  never  appear 
before  our  eyes  without  touching  the  thoughts.  (Life  of  Faraday.)  Creation  i$ 
more  inexplicable  than  resurrection : — For  it  is  not  the  same  thing  to  rekindle  an 
extinguished  lamp,  as  to  show  fire  that  has  never  yet  appeared.  It  is  not  the  same 
thing  to  raise  up  again  a  house  that  has  fallen  down,  and  to  produce  one  which  has 
never  had  an  existence.  (Chrysostom.)  The  intermediate  state: — I.  The  soul 
of  man  subsists  after  death,  and  hath  some  place  of  abode  allotted  to  it  at  the 
resurrection.  II.  This  intermediate  state  is,  in  all  probability,  not  a  state  of  in- 
eensibility  to  the  souls  of  the  righteous ;  but  of  thought  and  self-consciousness,  and 
consequently  of  content  and  of  happiness,  in  a  certain  degree.  (John  Jortin.) 
Things  said  not  to  be  in  heaven,  which  yet  are  in  lieaven : — There  are  many  thingd 
laid  not  to  be  in  heaven,  and  yet,  in  another  sense,  said  to  be  there.    There  is  ns 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

temple  in  heaven ;  but  the  Lord  God  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  thereof.  Thera 
is  no  69a  in  heaven  ;  but  there  is  a  glassy  sea  proceeding  from  before  the  throne, 
not  a  tumultuous  angry  sea,  but  a  translucent  one  whose  kindly  waves  are  gently 
•flowing.  There  is  no  night  in  heaven,  but  there  are  stars  there :  for  they  who  turn 
many  to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  stars  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  one  stai 
differeth  from  another  star  in  glory.  So  there  is  no  marriage  in  heaven,  and  ye 
beaven  is  one  marriage,  and  its  happiness  is  represented  by  a  marriage  festival 
God  Himself  being  the  universal  husband,  and  all  the  redeemed  being  to  Him  aE 
one  etdeared  wife.  So  we  may  be  very  sure  that  if  marriage,  as  it  exists  here,  be 
not  the  pattern  of  things  to  come,  it  is  the  parable  of  things  to  come.  We  may  be 
very  sure  of  this,  that  if  relationships  on  earth  shall  not  be  entanglements  hereafter, 
yet  that  whatever  we  enjoy  now  we  shall  enjoy  then  in  a  transfigured  way  ;  we  may 
be  very  sure  that  in  a  world  where  there  is  no  death,  and  therefore  where  there 
needs  to  be  no  birth,  there  shall  be  those  varieties  of  life  for  which  birth  here  provides. 
No  death,  therefore  no  birth,  therefore  not  the  ordinary  terrestrial  necessity  for 
marriage  as  it  exists  around  us.  But  marriase  is  an  intimate  delightful  companiou- 
ehip  ;  and  shall  the  joy  of  companionship  fail  for  ever?  Nay;  has  not  the  one  Lord — 
if  we  think  deeply,  and  purify  our  thoughts  from  sensual  relation — has  not  the  one 
Lord  a  married  nature  ?  Can  we  think  of  Him  otherwise  than  as  having  in  Himself 
the  pji-petual  joy  of  companionship,  and,  with  a  motherly  heart  and  a  fatherly 
heart  blended  in  the  one  great  heart  of  supreme  love,  giving  forth  to  us,  as  the  ex- 
pression of  His  maternity  and  His  fatherhood,  His  Son — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — so 
womanly  in  His  tenderness,  so  manly  in  His  strength.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Voice$ 
from  heaven: — I  was  reading  the  other  day  that,  on  the  shores  of  the  Adriatic  Sea, 
the  wives  of  fishermen  whose  husbands  have  gone  out  on  the  deep  are  in  the  habit, 
at  eventide,  of  going  down  to  the  sea-shore,  and  singing,  as  female  voices  only  can, 
the  first  stanza  of  a  beautiful  hymn.  After  they  have  sung  it,  they  listen  till  they 
hear,  home  by  the  wind  across  the  desert-sea,  the  second  stanza,  sung  by  their 
gallant  husbands,  as  they  are  tossed  by  the  gale  upon  the  waves ;  and  both  are 
happy.  Perhaps  if  we  could  listen,  we,  too,  might  hear  on  this  desert-world  of 
ours  some  sound,  some  whisper,  borne  from  afar,  to  remind  us  that  there  is  a  heaven 
and  a  home  ;  and,  when  we  sing  the  hjmn  upon  the  shores  of  earth,  perhaps  we 
sha'ii  hear  its  sweet  echo  breaking  in  music  upon  the  sauds  of  time,  and  cheering 
the  hearts  of  them  that  are  pilgrims  and  strangers,  and  look  for  a  city  that  hath 
foundations.  (J.  Cmnming,  D.D.)  As  the  angels: — The  blessed  in  heaven  after 
the  resurrection  shall  be  hke  the  angels,  not  by  nature;  but  (1)  by  purity;  (2)  by 
Bpiritual  life,  for  they  live  by  spiritual  not  corporeal  fuod:  (3)  by  incorruption  and 
immortality ;  (4)  by  happiness  nnd  glory,  in  whi<h,  like  the  angels,  they  will  con- 
tinue for  all  eternity.  {Lopide.)  The  functions  of  vian's  animal  nature  not 
operative  in  heaven: — "Well,  how  is  that?  He  did  not  say.  He  likened  them  to  the 
angels,  but  did  not  tell  us  how  the  angels  were.  It  was  rather  negative.  He  de- 
clared that  one  potential,  universal  part  of  the  economy  of  human  life,  with  all  its 
incidents  and  concomitants,  stopped  at  the  grave.  This  is  the  part  of  man  out  of 
which  multitudivjous  history,  good  and  bad,  is  derived.  But  useful  as  it  is,  it 
ceases  and  does  not  go  on  into  the  other  life  ;  and  it  seems  very  natural,  since  man 
is  a  double  being,  born  for  this  lower  life,  in  transition  and  formation  for  a  life  to 
come,  that  a  portion  of  the  powers  or  faculties  which  fit  him  especially  for  this  lower 
life,  when  they  shall  have  performed  their  function,  will,  as  it  were,  like  the  calyx 
of  a  flower,  wither  and  fall  back,  and  that  into  the  other  life  we  shall  carry  only 
those  parts  of  our  nature  which  are  highest  and  noblest,  and  which  have  relation 
io  the  t^piritual  rather  than  to  the  physical.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Heaven  vagtuiy 
revealed  yet  a  comfort  to  the  human  heart : — I  have  eat  on  the  summit  of  Mount 
Holyoke,  and  looked  out  over  the  Connecticut  valley,  and  seen  as  entrancing  views 
as  ever  comforted  the  heart  of  man,  poet  though  he  might  be  ;  and  yet,  if  ycu  had 
asked  me,  "What  is  in  that  field?"  I  could  not  have  told  you  whether  it  was 
wheat,  or  rye,  or  grass,  or  corn.  If  you  had  asked  me,  "  What  is  that  village?  "  I 
could  not  have  told  you.  I  could  just  soo  a  white  glimmer  among  the  gretn  trees, 
bat  that  was  all.  If  you  had  asked  me,  "  Who  are  those  men  wo:  king  yonder  ?  " 
or  ••  What  are  they  doing  ?  "  I  could  not  have  told  you.  I  could  see  men  that 
seemed  to  be  about  the  size  of  ants  crawling  over  the  surface  of  the  ground  ;  but 
•whether  they  were  mowing,  or  hoeing,  or  walking,  or  running,  I  could  not  tell.  Tha 
whole  picture  lay  before  me,  magnificent,  and  quickened  every  spring  of  fancy,  and 
comforted  my  heart ;  but  I  could  not  give  much  idea  of  its  horticulture,  or  agri- 
cnltture,  or  anything  that  went  to  make  up  the  interior  of  its  life.     {Ibid.)        God'$ 


«HAP.  XXII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  S09 

power  a  guarantee  for  the  care  of  men  who  have  departed  this  life  : — The  argnment 
Christ  uses  bo  convincingly  is  really  this,  and  it  is  very  simple  :  God  said,  "  I  am 
the  God  of  your  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob " — not  I  was,  but  I  am — 
meaning,  that  these  had  been  dear  to  Him,  and  still  were.  Now,  if  these  were  God'a 
children,  and  God  loved  them,  why  should  they  die?  All  "live  unto  Him,"  says 
Christ — as  He  pleases,  and  as  long  as  He  pleases.  If  he  speaks  of  your  fathers  as 
caring  for  their  life,  why  should  you  think  them  dead?  They  lived  from  Him,  ind 
they  lived  for  Him,  and  therefore  they  live  still.  If  they  lived  from  Him,  (vad  no 
power  could  take  their  life  away  without  His  permission  ;  if  they  lived  for  Him  in 
Buch  a  sense  that  they  were  endeared  to  Him — why  should  they  die  ?  Would  we 
let  any  one  dear  to  us  die,  if  we  had  an  absolute  control  over  life,  as  God  has  ?  Leave 
the  thought  of  peiscns,  and  take  the  baser  case  of  money.  If  a  man  keeps  his 
money  upon  his  table,  and  has  a  sufficient  watch  over  his  house,  why  do  we  feel 
sure  that  the  bags  of  money  are  safe  ?  Because  we  know  that,  being  in  his  power, 
he  not  only  is  not  likely  to  throw  them  out  of  the  window — he  loves  them  too  well 
for  that — but  that,  having  power  also  to  keep  them  from  the  thief,  his  love  answers 
for  their  security.  If  he  could  not  keep  them,  it  is  hkely  enough  that  they  would 
be  lost,  for  there  are  other  people  that  desire  to  have  them.  The  fact  of  his  having 
them  would  be  no  obstacle  to  their  having  them,  if  only  they  could  lay  hands  on 
them.  But  if,  in  the  case  of  money,  where  a  man  has  power  to  keep  it,  he  certainly 
will,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  soul — the  soul  on  which  God  has  bestowed  His 
Fatherly  care  ?  If  no  one — no  devouring  lion — can  pluck  Abraham  out  of  God's 
band,  will  God  throw  him  away  and  say  He  cares  for  him  no  longer  ?  If  no  one  could 
destroy  the  lives  of  these  fathers  but  God,  was  He  likely  to  do  it?    (T.  T.  Lynch.) 

Vers.  30-40.  Master,  which  Is  the  great  commandment  In  the  law  1 — How  may 
we  attain  to  love  God  with  all  our  hearts,  souls,  and  minds  J — I.  What  is  it  to 
LOVE  God  with  all  the  heart,  soul,  and  mind  ?  1.  What  is  love  ?  It  is  not  a 
carnal  love.  It  is  not  a  natural  love.  It  is  not  a  merely  moral  love.  2.  What  ifl 
love  to  God?  Metaphors  to  illustrate  what  it  is  to  love  God.  (1)  The  soul's  love 
to  God  may  be  a  little  shadowed  forth  by  the  love  of  the  iron  to  the  loadstone.  (2) 
Our  love  to  God  is  like  the  love  of  the  flower  of  the  sun  to  the  sun.  (3)  Our  love 
to  God  is  like  the  love  of  the  turtle  to  her  mate.  (4)  Our  love  to  God  should  be  like, 
though  exceed,  Jacob's  love  to  Benjamin.  We  must  not  love  God  only  with  the 
heart,  but  with  the  whole  heart.  The  whole  heart  is  opposed  either  to  a  divided 
and  dispersed  heart,  or  to  a  remits  and  a  sluggish  heart.  As  the  whole  heart  is 
opposed  to  a  remiss  and  sluggish  heart,  the  meaning  is  this — the  care  of  our  heart 
should  be  set  upon  nothing  so  much  as  upon  the  loving  and  pleasing  God.  II.  It  is 
OTJK  INDISPENSABLE  DUTY  THUS  TO  LovB  GoD.  To  lovo  God  is  OUT  great  natural  duty. 
Man  would  more  naturally  love  God  than  himself,  were  it  not  for  sin.  Christ's 
reason  in  the  following  verse — "  This  is  the  first  and  the  great  commandment." 
Not  that  any  command  of  God  is  small.  The  commands  in  Scripture  are  hke  the 
stars  in  the  firmament,  which  though  to  ignorant  persons  they  are  but  like  twinkling 
candles,  yet  are  greater  than  the  whole  earth ;  so  these  commands,  that  careless 
persons  overlook  as  inconsiderable,  are  such  as  without  respect  unto  them  there  is 
no  salvation.  But  this  upon  a  manifold  account  is  •'  the  great  command."  1.  In 
respect  of  the  object.  2.  In  respect  of  order  and  dignity.  3.  In  respect  of 
obligation.  4.  In  respect  of  the  matter  of  it.  5.  In  respect  of  the  largeness 
of  it,  6.  In  respect  of  its  capacity.  7.  In  respect  of  the  difficulties  of  it. 
8.  In  respect  of  the  end.    9.  In  respect  of  the  lastingness  of  it.    IH.  What 

ABILITIES   ARE     REQUISITE     TO     THE     PERFORMANCE     OF  THIS  DUTT,    AND   HOW   WE   MAT 

ATTAIN  THOSE  ABILITIES  ?  As  the  Only  efficient  cause  of  our  loving  God  is  God 
Himself,  so  the  only  procuring  cause  of  our  loving  God  is  Jesus  Christ,  that  Son  of 
the  Father's  love,  who  by  His  Spirit  implants  and  actuates  this  grace  of  love,  which 
He  hath  merited  for  us  (Col.  i.  20).  Impediments  of  our  love  to  God.  1.  Self-lore. 
2.  Love  of  the  world.  3.  Spiritual  sloth  and  carelessness  of  spirit.  4.  The  lore 
of  any  sin  whatsoever.  5.  Inordinate  love  of  things  lawful.  Means  to  attain  love 
to  God.  1.  Directing  by  spiritual  knowledge.  (1)  The  knowledge  of  spiritaal 
things.  (2)  The  knowledge  of  ordinary  things  in  a  spiritual  manner,  so  as  to  make 
the  knowledge  of  natural  things  serve  heavenly  designs.  2.  Promoting  means  are 
various.  (1)  Self-denial.  (2)  Contempt  of  the  world.  (3)  Observation  of  Good's 
benefits  to  ns.  (4)  Watchfulness  over  our  own  hearts.  (5)  Prayer.  (6)  Medita> 
tion.  (7)  Choice  of  friends.  (8)  Thanksgiving.  3.  Sustaining  and  conserving 
means     (1)  Faith,  whereby  we  are  persuaded    that    what    God    hath    spokot 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxh 

is  true  and  good.      (2)  Hope,  whereby  we  expect   a  future  good.     (3)  Patience. 

1.  Directing.  (1)  Prize  the  word.  (2)  Set  immediately  upon  the  practice  of  those 
things  wliich  you  shall  be  convinced  to  be  your  duty.  2.  Exemplary  means.  (1) 
Men.      (2)  Angels.      (3)  Christ.      IV.  How    aw   improve   and   adoment  all    odb 

POSSIBLE    ABILITIES    TO    LOVE  GoD    WITH    ALL  OUE  HEAKT,    SOUL,    MIND,    AND    STRENGTH. 

Degrees  cf  love.  1.  Tiie  hrst  degree  is  to  love  God  for  those  good  things  which  we 
do  or  hujie  to  receive  from  Him.  2.  The  second  step  of  our  luve  to  God  is  to  love 
God  for  Himself,  because  He  is  the  most  excellent  good.  3.  The  third  step  is  to 
love  nothing  but  for  God's  sake,  in  Him,  and  for  Him,  and  to  Him.  4.  The  fourth 
step  of  our  love  to  God  is  for  our  highest,  love  of  everything  to  be  hatred  in  com- 
parison of  our  love  to  God.  5.  The  most  eminent  degree  of  our  love  to  God  is 
ecstasy  and  ravishment.  Properties  of  love  to  God.  1.  To  begin  with  the  pro- 
perties of  our  love  to  God.  (1)  This  Divine  love  is  not  at  all  in  the  unregtinerate, 
unless  only  in  show  and  imitation.  (2)  This  Divine  love  is  far  from  perfection.  (3) 
Our  love  to  God  shall  never  be  abolished  (4)  This  Divine  love  is  so  unknown  to 
the  world,  that  when  they  behold  the  effects  and  flames  of  it  in  those  that  love  God 
in  an  extraordinary  manner,  they  are  rendy  to  explode  it  as  mere  vanity,  folly, 
madness,  ostentation,  and  hypocrisy.  2.  The  absolute  properties  of  love  to  God  are 
among  many,  some  of  them  such  as  these.  (1)  It  is  the  most  ingenious  of  all 
graces.  (2)  Love  to  God  is  the  most  bold,  strong,  constant,  and  daring  grace  of  all 
the  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  (3)  Love  to  God  is  the  only  self-emptying  and 
satisfying  grace.  (4)  The  love  of  God  makes  us  anxiously  weary  of  life  itself.  3. 
This  much  of  tlie  positive  properties;  the  transcendent  properties  of  our  love  to 
God  are — (1)  Love  to  God  is  the  great  general  directing  grace  containing  all  other 
particular  graces  in  it  and  most  intimately  goes  through  the  acts  of  all  of  them 
(1.  Cor.  xiii).  (2)  It  is  in  a  si  gular  manner  infinite.  Effects  of  love  to  God: — 
They  relate  either  to  God  HiQis>;lf  or  to  ourselves,  or  they  are  mutual.  1.  Effects 
that  relate  to  God  are  such  as  these — (1)  Hatred  of  and  flight  from  all  that  is  evil. 
{2)  The  fear  of  God.  (a)  Obedience  to  the  commands  of  God,  and  to  those  com- 
mands which  would  never  be  obeyed  but  out  of  love  to  God  (1.  John  v.  3).  (4) 
Resignation  of  ourselves  to  God.  (5)  Adhesion  and  cleaving  unto  God,  in  every 
case  and  every  condition.  (G)  Tears  and  sighs  through  desires  and  joys.  2.  The 
only  effect  I  shall  name  as  to  us  is  a  seeking  of  heaven  and  things  above,  with  con- 
tempt of  the  world  and  all  worldly  excc41ences.  3.  Mutual  effects  are  these — (1) 
Union  with  God.  (2)  Communion  with  God.  (3)  Familiar  love-visits.  (4)  A 
putting  a  love-interpretaiion  upon  all  things.  Concomitants : — 1.  Devotion, 
v»hich  is  an  absolute  delivering  up  of  ourselves  to  God's  worship  and  service,  so  as 
by  no  flatteries  or  dangers  to  be  diverted.  2.  The  other  concomitant  is  zeal,  which 
is  the  most  intense  d>  gree  of  desire  and  eaduavonr  to  please  and  honour  God — (1) 
In  the  exercise  of  zeal ;' gainst  sin  observe  this  rule — v.-hatever  act  of  zeal  you  express 
towards  others,  double  the  first  upon  yourselves.  (2)  For  zeal  about  duties — in 
every  duty  you  take  in  hand,  endeavour  to  do  it  above  your  strength.     V.  I  pkoposb 

TO    DRGE    SOME    PEKStJASIONS    TO    BE    GRACIOUSLY   AMBITIOUS     OF   SUCH     QUALIFICATIONS, 

AND  AS  GRACIOUSLY  DILIGENT  IN  SUCH  EXERCISES.     1.  God  is  our  great  Benefactor. 

2.  Love  to  God  ennobles  all  other  graces.  3.  Love  to  God  rectifieth  all  other  loves, 
and  brings  them  in  due  bounds.  4.  Our  love  to  God  doth  more  sensibly  qniet  our 
hearts,  than  God's  love  to  us.  (S.  Annesley,  D.D.)  Love  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law: — I.  Look  to  the  testimony  of  the  Bible  and  see  whether  1  am  right  in  saying 

that    THE     GREAT     CONTROLLING     INFLUENCE     OF     RELIGIOUS     LIFE     IS     TO    BE    LCVB    TO 

God  and  man.  Chri^tian  people  spend  much  time  watching  their  motives  and 
actions  that  they  have  little  or  no  time  to  attend  to  anything  else.  There  is  but  one 
thing  required  of  man,  and  that  is,  that  he  shall  have  loi'e.  If  you  take  care  of 
that,  everything  else  will  take  care  of  itself.  As  in  a  watch  there  is  a  spring,  which, 
if  you  coil  it  up,  will  of  itself  keep  all  the  wheels  in  motion,  so  there  is  in  the  human 
soul  a  spring  which,  if  you  wind  it  up,  will  uncoil  itself,  and  carry  forward  every- 
thing related  to  your  duties  and  conduct  in  this  world.  II.  "What  is  included  ih 
THIS  LOVB.  God  has  made  in  the  human  soul  a  threefold  provision  for  the  exercise 
of  affection :  maternal  love,  personal  affection,  benevolence  to  men  irrespective  of 
character.  To  these  forms  of  affection  I  must  add  a  capacity  for  a  higher  love,  by 
which  we  are  able  to  develop  out  of  ourselves  a  true  love  for  that  which  is  invisible 
and  perfect — the  ideal  religious  love.  This  is  given  us  that  we  may  find  our  way 
np  to  God,  whom  we  have  not  seen,  with  love  and  trust.  III.  What  is  the  con- 
dition IN  which  this  state  of  mind  is  to  exist?  We  are  conscious  that  our 
feelinga  exist  in  a  two-fold  way — &XBi  as  impolses,  and  second  as  dispositions.   Tha 


CHAP,  xxn.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  611 

former  are  occasional,  the  latter  are  permanent.  Loye  must  be  a  disposition,  otur 
natural  equilibrium  and  rest.  Some  men  are  habitually  in  a  state  of  industry ; 
they  are  idle  sometimes,  but  idleness  with  them  is  special,  the  exception.  Industry 
is  their  abiding  state.  Love  must  be  our  abiding  condition.  IV.  I  am  to  ask  your 
attention  to  the  relations  of  this  disposition  of  love  to  the  work  of  Cheib- 

TIANXTY   IN   THE   INDIVIDUAL   AND   IN    THE   WORLD.      ThiS    disposition    of    loVB    is   the 

atmosphere  in  which  all  other  qualities  ripen,  and  in  which  only  they  are  perfect. 
Those  duties  impelled  by  fear  are  usually  caustic,  those  impelled  by  conscience  are 
nsually  hard  ;  but  those  which  spring  from  love  are  always  easy.  We  shall  never 
be  able  to  treat  our  fellow-men  aright  without  the  disposition  of  love ;  to  correct 
their  faults  ;  without  love  we  cannot  correctly  present  Christianity  to  the  world.  {H. 
W.  Beechcr.)  The  law  of  the  heart: — We  all  know  the  physical  phenomenon 
called  attraction,  that  is  to  say,  the  still  unexplained  caase  by  which  the  molecules 
of  matter  draw  one  another.  Science  tells  us  that  it  is  a  general  property  of  matter, 
that  it  exists  in  all  bodies  whether  at  rest  or  in  movement  and  whatever  their 
nature  ;  that  it  acts  irrespective  of  distance  as  well  as  in  all  substances ;  when  it  is 
operating  amongst  the  stars,  it  is  called  universal  gravitation  ;  when  it  is  manifested 
on  the  surface  of  our  globe,  it  is  called  weight.  All  those  who  have  known  nature 
since  the  remotest  periods,  have  known  it.  Newton  was  the  first  to  give  to  this  law 
the  formula  which  we  all  learned  by  heart  in  our  youth,  and  all  ulterior  observations 
have  only  verified  it.  This  law  of  Newton  then  is  only  a  sublime  analogy  of  the 
law  of  love  which,  in  the  moral  order,  should  bind  together  all  thinking  beings ;  and 
as  there  is  not  an  atom  of  matter  which  can  loosen  itself  from  physical  attraction, 
BO  there  is  not  a  moral  being  who  can  loosen  himself  from  the  law  of  love.  "  Thoa 
shalt  love."  I.  Let  us  face  the  objections  that  confront  us.  It  is  denied  that  the 
heart  can  have  a  law  ;  it  is  said  that  the  proper  characteristic  of  the  aSectiona  is  to 
be  free  from  every  commandment.  There  is  in  every  man  a  domain  where  nature 
reigns  supreme.  It  is,  however,  the  end  of  education  to  diminish  in  man  the  too 
powerful  part  of  instinct  and  necessity,  in  order  to  develop  that  of  intelligence  and 
will.  Instinctsays  when  we  suffer  an  injury,  *' Revenge  thyself. "  Social  education 
keeps  back  the  arm.  The  heart  can  be  modified  by  the  will.  Christianity  has 
commanded  aSeotions  such  as  nature  never  had  inspired.  In  Saul  of  TarsoB  ^ 
overcame  all  the  hatreds  of  his  race.  It  is  true  that  we  can  learn  to  love ;  the  heart 
can  overcome  nature.  Whence  this  love  in  a  dead  heart?  God  alone  can  inspire 
it.  II.  When  this  love  which  comes  from  faith  shall  have  been  thus  created  in  your 
hearts,  it  will  be  possible  for  you  to  love  humauity,  not  only  in  vague  enthusiasm 
of  a  general  philosopliy,  but  in  that  particular  attachment  which  sees  in  each  of  its 
members  a  being  created  in  the  image  of  God.  1.  To  love  humanity  we  most 
believe  in  humanity.  The  Christian  sees  under  the  most  repulsive  being  the  ideal 
which  can  one  day  be  bom  of  God  in  him.  2.  Learn  to  see  in  him  not  that  which 
is  antagonistic  to  you,  but  all  that  is  possible  to  be  good,  noble,  and  true.  In  the 
most  benighted  soul  there  remains  some  Divine  spark.  3.  Guard  against  those 
unjust  prejudices,  those  harsh  antipathies,  which  obscure  the  sight  and  hinder  oa 
from  seeiug,  in  their  true  features,  those  whom  we  meet  with  on  our  way.  4.  Love 
in  order  to  learn  to  love — "To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  If  disorderly  pa8> 
sious  have  their  bewilderments,  if  they  drag  down  an  inchue  that  is  never  reascended 
by  the  souls  that  yield  to  them,  do  you  not  believe  that  it  will  be  the  same  with  the 
noblest,  the  holiest,  the  best  of  loves  ?  Will  it  not  have  its  enthusiasms,  its 
irrepressible  outbursts,  which  will  fill  the  soul  to  a  point  that  it  will  desire  no  other 
im  because  thai  it  would  find  there  nothing  but  coldness  and  weariness  f  Those 
floly  souls  that  reproduce  upon  earth  something  of  the  Ufe  of  Christ,  and  make  to 
circulate  in  the  present  world  the  current  of  a  warm  love,  were  at  their  beginning 
lukewarm  and  cold  as  you  and  your  soul ;  they  have  known  all  the  discouragements, 
all  the  repugnances,  all  the  disgusts  that  you  complain  of.  But  they  gave  them* 
selves  first  to  God  and  afterwards  to  man;  they  loved,  and  love  became  their 
dominant  passion ;  something  of  heaven  has  begun  for  them  here  below :  hence- 
forth  all  inferior  ends  will  appear  to  them  baiTen  and  unattractive  ;  they  have 
already  found,  they  will  soon  possess  in  its  infinite  fulness,  the  eternal  life  oi  which 
love  is  the  law.  {E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  "  The  second  it  like  unto  it  "  : — In  the  present 
day  there  are  three  classes  of  men  who  are  disposed  to  confine  the  idea  of  duty  to 
our  relations  with  our  fellow-men  ;  either  because  they  absolutely  deny  the  existenea 
of  God,  or  because  they  think  that  nothing  can  be  known  about  Him,  or  becaiua 
they  hold  that  there  is  something  anthropomorphic  about  the  idea  of  duty  altogether, 
•nd  therefore  that  it  is  idle  to  speak  of  duty  on  the  part  of  feeble  creatures  suoh  as 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm, 

we  are,  towards  the  absolute  and  tlie  infinite.  One  class  consists  of  those  in  wbona 
the  spiritual  organ  is  defective ;  the  second  of  those  who  cannot  believe  without 
strict  logical  proof,  and  find  a  stumbling-block  in  the  demand  for  faith  ;  while  a 
third  consists  of  thDse  who  are  repelled  by  moral  difficulties.  All  these  classes  join 
to  swell  the  tide  of  secularism,  "  To  do  as  you  would  be  done  by,  and  to  love  your 
neighbour  as  yourself  "  constitutes  the  ideal  perfection  of  utilitarian  morality.  Still 
the  question  remains,  Is  the  rule  here  given  sufficient  in  itself  ;  can  the  second  com- 
mandment stand  thus  isolated  ?  Is  it  enough  that  a  man  should  do  to  others  as  he  would 
wish  them  to  do  to  him  ?  Does  it  necessarily  lead  to  virtue  ?  Take  the  example  of  a 
sensuahst :  what  he  wishes  to  have  done  is  to  have  his  appetites  gratified,  to  be  spared 
all  self-denial.  To  act  towards  others  as  he  would  wish  them  to  act  towards  him, 
might  lead  to  the  worst  consequences.  Also  what  is  the  "  love  "  of  the  sensualist, 
and  what  is  the  "self  "  which  he  loves.  He  loves  the  lower  self  in  himself  and  in 
others.  You  must  be  sure  that  the  man  who  loves  you  rightly  loves  himself.  You 
must  in  short  rise  to  the  ideal  that  should  be.  In  this  there  is  a  transcending  the 
matter-of-fact  rule — "  Do  as  you  would  be  done  by."  But  how  and  where  is  the  ideal 
to  be  found.  Is  it  a  fancy,  in  nature,  art,  poetry  ?  The  dullest  life  offers  some 
foothold  for  the  God-given  faculties  of  admiration,  imagination,  and  affection.  The 
beauties  of  nature  are  tokens  of  au  existence  outside  ourselves,  infinite  in  power  and 
wisdom,  sympatliising  with  every  higher  feeling  of  the  heart.  This  isconfirmed  by  our 
o\vn  experience  of  life.  The  first  dawn  of  consciousness  reveals  to  us  a  mother's 
unselfish  devotion.  We  learn  to  appreciate  the  thoughtful  justice  of  a  father; 
watching  the  world  we  come  to  feel  tiiat  we  are  in  the  midst  of  "  a  stream  of  ten- 
dency which  makes  for  righteousness,"  and  we  see  its  effects  on  a  large  scale  in  the 
rise  and  fall  of  nations.  Here  then  we  find  the  right  interpretation  of  the  rule, 
"  Love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  It  is  love  the  ideal  in  thy  neighbour  as  thou 
lovest  it  in  thyaelf.  And  to  this  end  we  must  keep  our  eyes  open  to  the  ideal  in 
others.  See  your  friend  glorified,  as  what  he  may  be  by  God's  grace.  And  now 
we  have  seen  the  Ideal  at  work  both  in  hfe  and  in  nature,  we  may  take  a  further 
step,  and  ask  whether  there  is  any  other  name  under  which  it  is  known  to  ua. 
Two  heathen  philosophers  shaU  furnish  us  with  an  answer.  All  lower  ideals,  says 
Plato,  are  summed  up  in  one  highest  Ideal,  the  perfection  of  beauty  and  goodness. 
This  Ideal  is  to  the  world  of  mind  what  the  sun  is  to  the  world  of  matter,  the 
fountain  of  life  and  light.  Love  is  the  yearning  after  this  Ideal,  at  first  a  dim  on- 
conscious  yearning,  but  as  it  grows  in  purity  it  comes  to  discern  its  object  more 
clearly,  until  at  length  it  beholds  it  face  to  face,  and  then  there  is  heaven.  For 
this  ideal  is  God,  the  Author  of  the  universe,  the  Father  of  each  individual  soul. 
And  Seneca  shall  tell  us  what  is  the  ideal  nature  formed  within  each  : — sacer  intra 
tws  tpiritus  sedet,  "  a  holy  spirit  dwells  within  us ;  "  and  again,  prope  est  ad  te  deus, 
tecum  est,  intus  est,  "God  is  near  you,  He  is  with  you.  He  is  in  you."  Need  I 
remind  you  that  the  same  truth  is  proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  revelation — "  In  Him 
we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being ;  "  "  The  invisible  things  of  Him  are  clearly 
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  His  eternal  power  and 
Godhead ;  "  "In  Him  was  life  and  tbe  Ufe  was  the  light  of  men  ; ''  "  That  was  the  true 
light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  Once  only  has  the  per- 
fect Ideal  01  man  been  seen  on  earth,  and  that  Ideal  was  one  with  the  Father ;  the 
ideal  can  be  formed  in  each  one  of  us  only  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  within  us.  "  Abide 
in  me  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself  except  it  abide  in  the 
vine,  so  neither  can  ye  except  ye  abide  in  Me;  "  "If  Christ  be  in  you  the  spirit  is 
life  because  of  righteousness."  Here  then  we  may  advance  to  a  further  definition 
of  our  rule.  When  we  say,  "  Love  the  ideal  in  thy  neighbour,"  we  mean  as  we  now 
see,  "  Love  that  which  is  Christ-hke,  that  which  is  God-like  in  thy  neighbour."  The 
natural  object  of  love,  as  Plato  has  taught  us,  is  the  Divine  perfection.  That  we  art 
to  love ;  that,  in  so  far  as  our  heart  is  in  its  right  state,  we  cannot  help  loving,  with  all 
our  soul  and  all  our  strength  ;  all  other  things  we  shall  love  in  so  far  as  they  em- 
body or  represent  to  us  any  portion  of  the  iviue  perfection.  Thus  the  second 
commandment  is  like  unto  the  first,  because  it  is,  in  fact,  an  exemplification  of  it 
in  one  direction,  just  as  we  might  have  another  exemplification,  bidding  us  love  and 
admire  all  the  beauty  and  sublimity  of  outward  nature,  or,  as  our  Lord  bids,  "Consider 
the  lilies  of  the  field. "  The  lessons,  then,  which  we  should  draw  from  the  consideration 
of  the  close  connection  between  the  first  and  the  second  commandmentsare  mainly  two. 
One  is,  to  suspect  all  religious  emotions  in  ourselves  which  do  not  tend  to  increase 
our  love  for  our  fellow-men.  "  Pure  religion  and  undefiled,"  says  St.  James,  "  is  to 
visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction,  and  to  keep  himself  unspotted. 


«HAP.  xxu.]  ST  MATTHEW.  SIS 

from  the  world."  If  our  religion  fails  to  do  this,  whatever  ecstatic  heights  we  may 
eeem  to  soar  to,  it  is  mere  self-deception ;  such  religion  is  vaiu.  The  other  is  that 
on  which  we  have  already  dwelt  so  much,  that  we  are  to  love  our  fellow-men  in 
God,  as  created  by  God,  as  redeemed  by  Christ,  as  called  to  be  temples  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  aU  having  in  them  the  germ  of  a  new  and  Divine  life,  which  it  ia  the 
privilege  and  the  duty  of  human  love  to  cherish  and  to  strengthen,  until  at  last  the 
whole  body  of  the  Church,  "  being  fitly  joined  together  and  compacted  by  that 
which  every  joint  supplieth,  may  grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  head, 
even  Christ."  {J.  B.  Mayor,  M.A.)  Comprehensive  summary  of  the  Ten  Command- 
ments : — There  are  many  things  about  this  law  to  fill  us  with  admiration.  I.  Its 
completeness.  It  includes  the  whole  of  life  and  all  its  chiefest  duties.  II.  Its 
twofold  division.  The  first  table  of  the  law  reveals  and  informs  a  man's  duty  to 
God.  The  second,  his  duty  to  himself  and  his  fellows.  III.  Its  twofold  summary. 
When  classified  from  a  spiritual  standpoint,  it  has  two  great  commandments: 
supreme  love  to  God ;  love  to  fellow-man  as  to  one's  self.  IV.  Eeflections.  Its 
uniqueness,  origin,  scope,  simplicity,  tendency  to  lead  to  Christ.  {L.  0.  Thompson.) 
The  love  of  our  neighbour: — I.  This  duty  arises  out  of  our  eational  and  sociai. 
NATURES.  II.  The  obligations  under  which  we  are  laid  to  the  practice  of  the  duty. 
1.  From  the  connection  of  this  commandment  with  the  first.  If  we  love  God,  we 
shall  love  our  brother.  2.  A  sense  of  justice,  the  golden  rule,  should  lead  ua  to  do 
good  to  our  neighbour.  3.  The  greatest  dilficulty  to  contend  with  is  the  more 
powerful  influence  of  other  motives  addressed  to  the  selfishness  of  the  heart.  4. 
What  is  heaven,  as  to  which  we  profess  to  aspire,  but  the  region  of  perfect  love, 
III.  Apply  the  bdejeot  akd  hold  beasoninos  with  the  selfish  spikit.  To  all 
we  have  said  selfishness  says,  "  I  must  mind  myself."  {W.  H.  Bums.)  The 
law  of  love: — The  pbinciple  ob  philosophy  of  it.  Most  men  are  actuated  by 
exclusive  self-love.  This  law  operates  as  a  command  and  as  a  restraint.  II.  Tub 
positive  chabacteb  which  this  law  gives  to  all  the  commandments  of  the 
SECOND  TABLE.  By  the  first  commandment  of  the  second  table,  the  different  orders 
of  society  are  protected ;  domesticated  order  the  well-spring  of  all  social  order.  Life 
is  protected  by  the  sixth  commandment ;  by  the  next  precept  the  person  of  our 
neighbour  is  protected,  property,  reputation.     (R.  Frost,  M.A.)        The  law  of  love  : 

—Mark  the  unity  and  the  simplicity  which  characterises  this  law  of  love  to  God.  It 
is  based  on  the  declaration  that  there  is  but  one  God  the  Lord.  I.  The  law  of  lovb 
HI  not  infeeiob  to  the  ten  commandments  ;  in  fact,  love  of  God  and  man  includes 
aU  which  these  teach  at  greater  length.  II.  The  law  of  love  is  bupebiob.  1.  The 
positive,  whereas  the  old  law  was  negative.  2.  The  law  of  love  u  superior  because  ex- 
haustive. 3.  It  is  superior  because  it  begins  at  the  heart.  4.  It  is  superior  because 
it  leads  us  directly  to  feel  our  need  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     {A.  H.  Charteris,  D.D.) 

The  mind's  love  for  God : — In  the  first  place,  then,  we  want  to  assure  ourselves  in 
general  that  there  is  such  a  power  as  intellectual  affection,  and  that  no  man  com- 
pletely and  worthily  loves  any  noble  thing  or  person  unless  he  loves  it  with  his 
mind  as  well  as  with  his  heart  and  soul.  That  will  not,  I  think,  be  very  hard  to 
■ee.  Take,  for  instance,  your  love  for  some  beautiful  scene  of  nature.  There  is 
somewhere  upon  the  earth  a  lordly  landscape  which  you  love.  When  yon  are 
absent  from  it,  yon  remember  it  with  delight  and  longing.  When  you  step  into 
the  sight  of  it  after  long  absence,  your  heart  thrills  and  leaps.  While  you  sit 
quietly  gazing  day  after  day  upon  it,  your  whole  nature  rests  in  peace  and  satis- 
faction. Now,  what  is  it  in  you  that  loves  that  loveliness  ?  Love  I  take  to  be  the 
delighted  perception  of  the  excellence  of  things.  With  what  do  you  delightedly 
perceive  how  excellent  is  all  that  makes  up  that  landscape's  beauty,  the  bending 
sky,  the  rolling  hill,  the  sparkling  lake,  the  waving  harvest,  and  the  brooding  mist? 
First  of  all,  no  doubt,  with  your  senses.  It  is  the  seeing  eye,  the  hearing  ear,  the 
sense  of  feeling  which  in  the  glowing  cheek  is  soothed  or  made  to  tingle,  the  sense 
of  smell  which  catches  sweet  odours  from  the  garden  or  the  hayfield, — it  is  these 
that  love  the  laudscape  first ;  you  love  it  first  with  all  your  senses.  But  next  to 
that  what  comes  ?  Suppose  that  the  bright  scene  is  radiant  with  associations,  sup- 
pose that  by  that  river  you  have  walked  with  your  most  helpful  friend ;  upon  that 
lake  you  have  floated  and  frolicked  when  you  were  a  boy ;  across  that  field  you 
have  guided  the  staggering  plough ;  over  that  hill  you  have  climbed  in  days  when 
life  was  all  sunshine  and  breeze.  That  part  of  yon  which  is  capable  of  delightedly 
perceiving  these  associations  as  they  shine  up  to  you  from  the  glowing  scenery, 
perceive;  them  with  delight  and  takes  the  landscape  into  its  affection.  Yoa 
love  ihi  icene  with  all  your  heart.     But  yet  again,  snppose  a  deeper  faoaltjr 

83 


BU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

in  yon  perceives  the  hand  of  God  in  all  this  wondrous  beauty ;  Bupposa  a  glad  and 
earnest  gratitude  springs  up  in  you  and  goes  to  meet  the  meadow  and  the  sky ; 
suppose  that  all  seems  to  tell  to  some  deep  listening  instinct  in  you  that  it  was  all 
made  for  you,  and  made  by  one  who  loved  you ;  suppose  that  it  all  stands  as  a 
rich  symbol  of  yet  richer  spiritual  benefits  of  which  you  are  aware ;   what  then  ? 
Does  not  another  part  of  you  spring  up  and  pour  out  its  affection,  your  power  of 
reverence  and  gratefulness  ;  and  so  you  love  the  landscape  then  with  all  your  souL 
Or  yet  again,  if  the  whole  scene  appears  to  tempt  you  with  invitations  to  work ;  th< 
field  calling  on  you  to  till  it,  and  the  river  to  bridge  it,  and  the  hill  to  set  free  the 
preciousness  of  gold  or  silver  with  which  its  heart  is  full  and  heavy  ;  to  that  too 
you  respond  with  your  power  of  working ;  and  then  you  love  the  scene  with  all 
your  will  or  all  your  strength.     And  now,  suppose  that  beyond  all  these  another 
spirit  comes  out  from  the  landscape  to  claim  another  yet  unclaimed  part  of  you ; 
suppose  that  unsolved  problems  start  out  from   the  earth  and  from  the   sky. 
Glimpses  of  relationship  between  things  and  of  qualities  in  things  flit  before  you, 
just  letting  you  see  enough  of  them  to  set  your  curiosity  all  astir.     The  scene  which 
cried  before  :  "  Come,  admire  me  ;  "  or,  "  Come,  work  on  me ;  "  now  cries,  "  Come« 
study  me."    What  hangs  the  stars  in  their  places  and  swings  them  on  their  way  ; 
how  the  earth  builds  the  stately  tree  out  of  the  pretty  seed  ;  how  the  river  feeds 
the  cornfield  ;  where  lie  the  metals  in  the  mountains  ? — these,  and  a  hundred  other 
questions,  leap  out  from  the  picture  before  you,  and,  pressing  in  past  your  senses 
and  your  emotions  and  your  practical  powers,  will  not  rest  till  they  have  found  out 
your  iDtelligence.     They  appeal  to  the  mind,  and  the  mind  responds  to  them  ;  not 
coldly,  as  if  it  had  nothing  to  do  but  just  to  find  and  register  their  answers,  but 
enthusiastically,  perceiving  with  delight  the  excellence  of  the  truths  at  which  they 
point,  recognizing  its  appropriate  task  in  their  solution,  and  so  loving  the  nature 
out  of  which  they  spring  in  its  distiuctive  way.    It  would  be  strange  indead  if  it 
were  not  so  ;  strange  indeed  if  the  noblest  part  of  us  were  incapable  of  the  noblest 
action ;  strange  indeed  if,  while  our  senses  could  thrill  and  our  hearts  leap  with 
affection,  the  mind  must  go  its  way  in  pure  indifference,  making  its  great  discoveries 
with  no  emotion  for  the  truths  which  it  discovered,  and  for  the  men  in  whom 
those  truths  were  uttered.     But  it  is  not  so.     The  intellect  can  love.     But  can  we 
think  about  God's  love  and  not  feel  ever  present,  as  an  element  in  it,  the  working 
of  the  infinite  mind  as  well  as  of  the  perfect  heart  ?    No  doubt  men's  minds  differ 
from  one  another  exceedingly  in  their  capacity  of  affection.     You  tell  your  scholar 
that  he  must  study  because  his  parents  wish  it,  because  he  ought  to  be  equal  to 
his  fellow-scholars,  because  he  will  be  poor  and  dishonoured  if  he  is  ignorant.  These 
motives  are  good,  but  they  are  only  the  kindling  under  the  fire.     Not  until  an 
enthusiasm   of  your  scholar's  own   intellect  begins,    and    he  loves    the    books 
you  offer  him  with  his  mind,  because  of  the  way  they  lay  hold  of  his  power 
of  knowing   them;    not  until  then  has  the  wood  really  caught  and  your  fire 
truly  begun   to  burn.      To  that  end   every  true  teacher  must  devote  himself, 
and  not  count  his  work  fairly  begun  till  that  is  gained.      When  that  is  gained 
the  scholar  is  richer  by  a  new  power  of  loving — the  power  of   loving  with  his 
intellect — and  he  goes  on  through  Ufe,  carrying  in   the  midst  of  eil  the  suf- 
ferings  and  disappointments  which  he  meets,   a  fountain   of   true  joy  is  his 
own  mind  which  can  fill  him  with  peace  and  happiness  when  men  about  him 
think  that  he  has  only  dreariness  and  poverty  and  pain.       (P.   Brooks,   D.D.) 
Love  of  God  to  be  the  dominant  passion  : — It  could  scarcely  lead  to  any  satisfactory 
result  if  we  were  to  attempt  nicely  to  discriminate  between  what  is  meant  here  by 
the  heart,  the  soul,  and  the  mind.     In  point  of  fact,  of  the  four  Greek  representa- 
tives that  we  have  of  the  same  Hebrew  original  (Deut.  vi.  5) — that  of  the  Septua- 
gint,  and  those  of  St.  Matthew,  St.  Mark,  and  St.  Luke — no  two  precisely  agree  in 
the  words  chosen  for  the  purpose.     And  what  this  variation  may  seem  to  say  to  us 
is  this :    Apart  from  all  metaphysical   and  psychological  distinctions,  whatever 
terms  will  best  convey  to  you  a  description  of  all  the  powers,  faculties,  and  capacities 
which  can  in  any  way  be  affected  by  love,  let  them  be  adopted  and  employed  in 
exhibiting  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  love  that  you  owe  to  God.  Feelings,  intellect, 
and  will  may  perhaps  best  express  for  popular  purposes  the  different  spheres  or 
constituents  of  our  moral  nature  which  that  love  ought  to  pervade  and  influence. 
The  combination  of  the  three  is  absolutely  essential.     1.  The  love  of  the  under- 
standing only — a  love  into  which  we  have  reasoned  ourselves — which  is  based  upon 
a  certain  balancing  of  argument  for  a  d  against  it,  resulting  in  a  decision  favourable 
»n  the  whole  to  the  Divine  claims ;  a  love  which  we  profess  because  we  see  clearly 


CHAP,  xxii.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  515 

that  God  ought  to  be  loved,  that  He  has  a  right  to  a  place,  aye,  and  the  very  first 
place,  in  our  hearts — this  is  not  the  kind  of  love  which  is  looked  for  from  us  by 
Him  who  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  up  for  us  all.  2.  Nor  will 
He  be  content  with  the  love  which  is  merely  a  feeling,  and  which  rests  upon  no 
Bolid  foundation  of  a  rational  conviction  that  He  is  worthy  of  the  love  which  is  felt 
lor  Him.  You  must  justify  to  your  judgment  the  feeling  that  you  have  admitted. 
8 .  The  will — that  power  by  which  the  feelings  of  the  heart  and  the  convictions  of 
the  understanding  are  made  influential  and  operative  in  the  conduct.  This  is  the 
true  test  of  the  sincerity  of  those  feelings,  and  the  soundness  of  those  convictions. 
Any  love  which  stops  short  of  this  is  but  self-love.  To  be  of  the  right  sort,  our 
love  for  God  must  be  an  active  moving  principle  and  power,  which  so  determines 
our  thoughts,  words,  and  works,  that  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified  in  ua 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  we  ourselves,  as  it  were,  may  be  absorbed  into 
that  glory.  {J.  E.  Kempe,  M.A.)  Love  for  God  the  ruling  energy  : — This,  like 
Aaron's  rod  of  old,  swallows  up  all  evil  enchantments  of  tl:e  leart.  It  enters  the 
Bacred  temple  within,  and,  like  another  Messiah,  it  expels  e\ery  lurking  desecration 
forthwith.  It  is  a  flame  which  not  only  lights  up  the  dark  chambers  of  the  soul, 
but  transmutes  into  its  own  pure  essence  all  its  elements  of  feeling  and  of  thought. 
{Dr.  Thomas.)  The  second  is  like  unto  it: — For  it  has — 1.  The  same  Author. 
God  spake  all  these  words.  2.  The  same  tie.  3.  The  same  sanction  and  punish* 
ment  of  the  violation.  4.  It  requires  the  same  kind  of  love  and  service ;  for  the 
love  of  our  neighbour  is  the  service  of  God.     (John  Trapp.)  Like  unto  it  in 

amplitude  and  largeness,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  root  out  of  which  all  laws  of  duty 
to  men -ward  have  grown,  as  out  of  the  former  all  offices  of  religion  towards  God. 
(R.  Hooker.)  It  is  tJie  duty  of  every  man  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself: — It 
is  requisite  to  show — I.  Who  is  otjb  neighbour?  We  are  to  account  as  our 
neighbour  any  man  whomsoever,  friend  or  enemy,  that  lives  nigh  to  us,  or  at  a 
greater  distance  from  us.  II.  The  i,awfulnb:ss  oi"  a  man's  loving  himself.  It 
is  a  duty  incumbent  on  every  man  to  love  himself.  There  is  a  twofold  self.  1.  A 
natural  self.  2.  A  sinful  self.  This  is  to  be  hated,  the  other  loved.  He  that  came 
to  destroy  "  the  works  o£  the  devil "  came  to  save  the  soul  and  body,  the  works  of 
God  (Luke  xix.  lOJ.  1.  A  man  may  love  his  own  body,  and  is  bound  to  preserve 
the  life  of  it  (Epn.  v.  29).  A  man  may  sin  against  his  own  body  by  excessive 
laboiir,  neglect,  intemperance  (1  Cor.  vi.  18).  2.  A  man  may  and  ought  chiefly  to 
love  his  own  soul.  The  new  nature,  or  spiritual  self,  is  the  best  self  we  have,  and 
should  be  most  loved  (Rom.  xiv.  12).  III.  To  lay  down  some  conclusions.  L 
That  as  God  is  to  be  loved  above  aU  thitgs  else,  so  He  is  to  be  loved  for  Himself  (Luke 
xviii.  19).  2.  That  creatures  may  be  loved  according  to  that  degree  of  goodness 
which  God  hath  communicated  to  them,  not  for  themselves,  but  for  God,  who 
••  made  all  things  for  Himself  "  (Prov.  xvi.  4).  3.  No  man  can  love  himself  or  his 
neighbour  aright  while  he  remains  in  a  state  of  sin.  Love  is  a  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit " 
(Gal.  V.  22).  L  How  ought  we  to  love  oub  neighbour  ?  I.  In  the  same  things 
wherein  we  show  love  to  ourselves,  we  ought  to  show  love  to  our  neighbour.  1. 
Our  thoughts  of,  and  the  judgment  we  pass  upon,  ourselves  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5).  2.  Our 
speeches  (Titus  iii.  2).  3.  Our  desires  after  that  which  is  good  for  ourselves.  We 
should  desire  the  good  of  others  in  all  things  as  our  own  (Matt.  v.  44).  4.  Oui 
actual  endeavours  that  it  may  be  well  with  us.  So  ought  we  to  endeavour  to  do 
others  good  (1  Peter  iv.  10).  II.  After  the  same  manner  that  we  love  ourselves  we 
ought  to  love  others.  1.  We  do,  or  should,  love  ourselves  holily,  in  the  fear  of 
God.  In  this  manner  we  must  love  others.  Every  man  is  a  creature  upon  whose 
soul  there  is,  in  a  sort,  the  image  of  God  (Titus  iii.  3,  4).  2.  Our  love  to  oiu:- 
selves  should  be  orderly  ;  we  must  first  and  chiefly  love  our  souls,  and  then  our 
bodies  (Deut.  iv.  9).  (1)  We  must  seek  the  conversion  of  those  who  are  unconverted 
(James  v.  19,  20).  (2)  We  should  show  our  love  to  the  souls  of  others  by  seek- 
ing the  increase  of  their  faith,  holiness,  and  comfort  (1  John  i.  4).  3.  Our  love  to 
ourselves  goes  out  freely.  In  the  hke  manner  we  should  go  forth  to  others  (1  Tim. 
vi.  18).  4.  We  love  ourselves  unfeignedly ;  and  thus  it  is  required  we  should  be  to 
others  (1  John  iii,  18).  6.  We  do  not  only  love  ourselves  truly  and  sincerely,  but 
with  some  fervency ;  our  love  to  others  must  not  be  cold  (1  Peter  i,  22).  6.  We 
love  ourselves  very  tenderly  (Eph.  v.  29).  It  is  required  of  us  that  we  "be  kind 
one  to  another,  tender-hearted "  (Eph.  iv.  32).       (Y.  Milward,  A.M.)  The 

royal  law  — The  Christian  finds  what  a  right  royal  law  this  is  of  the  Savionx's,  for 
he  sees  that  it  includes  and  covers  every  possible  form  of  duty ;  that  if  this  com- 
mand  be  fulfilled,  it  necessitates  the  fulfilling  of  every  other  command.    He  who 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiu 

is  content  with  visiting  the  lower  eminences  which  surround  Mont  Blano  may 
wander  abont  from  one  to  another,  and  get  picturesque  views  in  detail ;  but,  at  th« 
best,  they  are  only  partial  and  imperfect  glimpses.  He  alone  who  reaches  the 
topmost  summit  can  command  at  one  glance  all  the  glorious  view.  In  like  manner 
must  it  be  with  him  who  wishes  to  serve  God.  He  may  try  in  detail  to  keep  this  or  thai 
commandment,  and  he  will  be  the  better  and  happier  for  his  efforts.  But,  in  order 
to  observo  them  all  truly  and  in  their  spirit,  he  must  stand  on  the  moral  eminence  oi 
love  towards  God.  Then  he  will  be  able  to  perform  his  duty,  not  bit  by  bit,  but 
as  a  whole,  complete  and  perfect,  doing  everythii^^  for  God,  and  yet  not  neglecting 
man.  {Uooper.)  Love  to  God: — 1.  The  natdbk  of  this  principle.  1.  Its  defini- 
tion.  Love  to  God  is  a  principle,  not  a  passion.  2.  Its  extent.  3.  Its  sublimity. 
II.  The  OBLIGATIONS  of  this  principle.  Love  to  God  is  (1)  the  great  commandment ; 
(a)  in  point  of  importance ;  (b)  in  order  of  nature ;  (c)  as  aD  others  are  dependent 
on  it.  (2)  It  is  most  reasonable  and  simple.  (3)  It  is  most  powerful,  binding,  and 
endearing.  III.  The  influence  of  this  principle.  Observe  (1)  the  connection 
between  the  commandments.  (2)  The  comprehension  of  duty  contained  in  this 
commandment.  (3)  The  certainty  of  this  result — loving  our  neighbour — from  the 
principle.  (W.  B.  Collyer.)  ChrisVs  two  commandments : — I.  How  is  the  love  of 
God  said  to  be  the  first  commandment?  It  is  (1)  in  order  of  time;  (2)  in  order  of 
nature.  II.  How  is  the  love  of  God  said  to  be  the  great  commandment  ?  1. 
Upon  the  account  of  the  greatness  and  dignity  of  the  object — God.  2.  Upon  the 
account  of  the  largeness  and  comprehensiveness  of  it — the  whole  duty  of  man. 
3.  Upon  the  account  of  the  influence  it  hath  upon  all  the  parts  and  duties  of 
religion,  which  have  all  their  worth  and  acceptance  entirelv  from  it.  4.  Upon  thu 
account  of  its  perpetual  and  everlasting  duration.  III.  How  is  loving  our  neigh 
hour  the  stcond  commandment,  and  like  unto  it  f  1.  In  respect  of  the  authority 
that  commands  it,  aud  our  obligation  to  observe  it.  2.  In  respect  of  the  ground 
and  motive  of  our  obedience,  which  are  some  Divine  perfections  residing  in  God, 
aud  communicated  to  His  creatures.  3.  In  respect  of  the  extent  and  comprehensive- 
ness of  it.  4.  In  respect  of  the  reward  and  punishment  that  attend  the  keeping  and 
breaking  of  it.       {Matthew  Hole.)  Tlie  nature  of  moral  and  positive  duties:— 

I.  All  moral  duties  are  contained  in,  and  may  be  reduced  to,  these  two  heads — the 
love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbour.  II.  AH  positive  and  ritual  injunctions,  though 
in  their  proper  place  they  ought  not  to  be  left  imdone,  yet  they  are  but  subordinate 
to  these,  and  subservient  to  them.  This  appears  from  the  following  considerations. 
1.  The  moral  duties  of  life  are  things  in  their  own  nature  good  and  excellent,  of 
eternal  and  necessary  obligation.  All  ritual  and  ceremonial  observances  have  no 
intrinsic  goodness  in  the  nature  of  the  things  themselves ;  nor  any  obligation  but 
v,hat  arises  merely  from  their  being  positively  and  occasionally  enjoined.  2.  All 
positive  and  ritual  injunctions  whatsoever,  can  be  but  subordinate  to  the  practice 
of  moral  virtues ;  because  these  latter  are  the  end  for  which  the  former  are  com- 
manded, and  the  former  can  be  considered  only  as  means  to  the  latter.  3.  Moral 
duties,  or  the  practice  of  true  virtue,  will  continue  for  ever,  but  all  positive  com- 
mandments are  but  of  temporary  obligation.  (S.  Clarke.)  The  love  of  God  man's 
*irst  duly  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  love  of  God  (i.e.,  oni  love  to  God).  II.  The  im- 
portance of  it  in  point  of  duty.  III.  Its  influence  on  our  happiness.  IV.  The 
methods  which  infinite  wisdom  hath  employed  to  cultivate  it  in  our  miuds.  {Arch- 
bishop Seeker.)  Love  of  neighbour  man's  second  duty: — Our  neighbour  signifies 
in  Scripture,  and  not  seldom  in  hfeathen  writers,  every  person  who  is  placed  within 
our  reach  and  influence.  The  principal  causes  of  our  narrowing  the  circle  of  our 
neighbours  are — 1.  Hatred,  from  diversity  of  faith  and  worship ;  or  rivalsh'p  in 
protit,  advancement,  affection,  and  reputation.  2.  Pride.  They  cannot  allow 
such  low  creatures  as  the  "  multitude,"  to  claim  their  notice.  3.  Selfishness. 
The  selfish  man  acknowledges  no  neighbour ;  is  concerned  solely  for  himself, 
and  wliat  he  is  pleased  to  reckon  his  own  interest.  (Ihid.)  God  the  object 
of  love : — I  can  imagine  nothing  more  perilous  than  the  theory  that  piety  is 
independent  of  the  affections — it  were  better  to  be  the  enthusiast  with  every 
feeling  excited  than  the  mere  philosophical  reasoner  with  the  belt  of  ice  for  ever 
round  the  heart.  I.  This  love  of  God  is  reasonable.  1.  There  are  feelings  which 
will  be  called  into  exercise  according  as  God  is  surveyed  under  different  points  of 
view.  The  proper  object  of  love,  as  distinguished  from  other  affections,  is  goodness. 
It  is  not  as  the  all-powerful  Being  that  we  love  God ;  I  have  an  awe  of  God  as 
powerful.  See  how  the  case  stands  in  regard  of  a  creature.  A  man  cannot  ba 
just  and  not  love  justice ;  neither  can  he  be  good  and  not  love  goodness.    Suppose 


mar.  xxa.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  §lt 

this  creature  waB  yonr  friend,  your  governor,  what  would  be  the  effect  of  this  aooa* 
mulation  of  qaalitiea  f  Would  not  your  love  be  enhanced  by  their  depending  on 
one  upon  whom  it  was  safe  to  depend.  Now  substitute  the  Creator  for  the  creature, 
and  shall  not  He  be  the  object  of  love.  God  has  planted  in  us  these  affections,  and 
there  is  that  in  Himself  which  should  raise  them  to  the  highest  pitch.  II.  The 
threefold  requirement  comprehended  in  the  loving  "  with  all  the  heart,  and  with 
all  the  soul,  and  with  all  the  mind."  It  is  demanded  that  there  be  no  energy 
unemployed  in  the  service  of  God.  If  such  a  love  seem  unattainable,  it  is  not  the 
less  to  be  proposed  as  the  standard  at  which  we  should  aim.  Let  it  not  be  imagined 
that  in  demanding  all,  God  leaves  nothing  for  othsr  objects  of  affection.  The  truth 
is  that  in  proportion  as  we  love  the  Creator,  we  shall  love  with  a  purer  and  warmer 
love  every  other  lawful  object  of  affection.  III.  That  in  representing  God  as  the 
alone  sufficient  object  of  love,  we  state  a  general  truth  whose  full  demonstration 
must  be  referred  to  the  scenes  of  eternity.  Let  us  throw  away  confused  and  inde- 
terminate notions  of  happiness,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  happiness  consists  in 
every  faculty  having  its  proper  object.  And  if  love  find  its  proper  object  in  nothing 
short  of  God,  may  it  not  be  that  the  perfect  happiness  of  the  future  shall  result  from 
the  fact,  that  every  faculty  will  have  found  its  object  in  God?  But  it  is  certain 
that  in  loving  God,  we  have  foretastes  of  its  delights — for  love  is  to  eurvive,  when 
faith  and  hope  shall  have  passed  away.  Let  us,  then,  take  heed  lest  entangled  with 
earthly  attachments,  forgetful  of  the  rule  that  love  of  the  creature  must  be  secondary 
to  love  of  the  Creator,  we  provoke  God  to  jealousy,  and  thus  weaken  the  anti- 
cipation of  heaven.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  true  religion : — I.  We  have  here  an 
explicit  revelation  of  the  true  nature  of  religion,  about  which  the  whole  world  has 
been  in  so  much  dispute.  The  essence  of  true  religion  is  love  to  God  and  love  to 
man.  It  is  towards  God  a  whole  and  continuous  sympathy  and  love.  It  is  toward 
man  a  uniform  and  dominating  disposition  of  benevolence.  II.  We  have  here, 
then,  the  physiological  idea  of  the  Bible  in  regard  to  the  perfect  man.  Christ's  ideal 
is  neither  philosophy,  nor  war,  nor  statecraft,  but  love  to  God  and  man.  The 
capacity  to  create  happiness  will  be  the  true  ideal  of  man.  HI.  If  this  be  so,  we 
have  now  the  only  true  test  of  personal  religion.  Conversion  and  regeneration  are 
not  only  really  possible,  but  they  are  indispensable ;  and  no  man  can  enter  the 
kingdom  of  God,  which  is  a  kingdom  of  love  and  peace  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  unless 
he  is  born  again.  Selfishness  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  lY.  This 
is  the  true  gauge  by  which  to  measure  the  spread,  the  progress  of  religion  in  the 
soul.  We  are  apt  to  confound  the  question  of  growth  in  grace  with  the  Greek  idea 
of  acquisition,  eelf-culture.  The  gauge  of  rehgion  is  the  intensity  and  the  produc- 
tiveness of  the  love  principle.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Love  divinely  cultured  in  u» : — 
There  is  not  a  daisy  that  was  not  organized  to  be  a  daisy,  but  I  should  like  to  see 
one  that  did  not  have  the  sun  to  help  it  up  from  the  seed !  there  is  not  an  aster  that 
was  not  organized  to  be  an  aster,  but  where  is  there  one  that  grew  independent  of 
the  sun  ?  What  the  sun  is  to  flowers,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  must  be  to  our  hearts, 
if  we  would  be  Christians.  {Ibid.)  Love  renders  service  easy  : — If  one  wera  sent 
to  take  care  of  the  poor,  miserable,  wounded  soldiers  lying  in  the  plague-stricken 
hospitals  on  the  plain  of  Solferino,  he  would  say  to  himself,  "  Money  would  not 
hire  me  to  do  it,  but  I  must  do  it  because  it  is  my  duty.  Here  are  men  who  are 
suffering  and  need  attention,  and  I  am  bound  to  look  after  their  wants."  But  let 
me  find  my  own  son  among  those  unfortunate  creatures,  and,  no  matter  how 
loathsome  might  be  the  offices  to  be  performed  toward  him,  could  money  buy  from 
me  the  privilege  of  ministering  to  his  necessities  ?  Could  any  motive  induce  me  to 
leave  his  side  day  or  night  f  That  which  I  should  do  in  the  one  case  through  con- 
scientiousness, or  from  a  sense  of  duty,  and  which  would  be  a  disagreeable  task,  I 
should  do  in  the  other  case  through  love,  and  it  would  then  be  a  pleasure  to  me.  I 
should  do  it  with  delight.  There  would  not  be  hours  enough  in  which  I  might 
serve  in  love  my  wounded  son.  (Ibid.)  The  heart  to  be  educated  as  well  as  ths 
intellect : — Is  it  not  the  special  characteristic  of  the  age  that  it  trains  the  intellect 
with  unrivalled  zeal  and  success,  while  it  leaves  too  often  out  of  sight  the  heart  and 
the  affections  ?  Are  not  all  the  prizes  of  life  heaped  together,  and  increasing  in 
their  value  and  what  may  be  called  their  piquancy,  in  order  to  spur  on  to  th« 
utmost  the  culture  of  the  intellect  alone  ?  There  is  not  a  schoolmaster  who  doea 
not  complain  that  he  is  ceaselessly  goaded  by  the  parents  to  press  on  their  children 
even  beyond  their  strength  in  the  race  for  distinction.  Nor  does  this  pressure  touch 
the  child  alone.  In  age  as  well  as  in  youth,  we  are  all  pressed  on  by  the  swift  tide 
of  the  world  to  worship  the  idol  of  intellect  aa  though  it  had  all  to  give  in  earth 


S18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxB. 

and  heaven.  And  where,  in  all  this  eagerness  to  learn  or  gain  distinctions,  where 
is  the  education  which  all  our  life  long  should  be  bringing  nearer  to  the  heart  the 
truths  of  the  unseen  world?  (Capel  Cure,  M.A.)  Character  viade  bij  love: — 
The  mere  knowledge  of  things  will  not  necessarily  exert  any  influence  on  conduct; 
and  it  were  profanely  absurd  to  call  that  man  religious  whose  deportment  ia 
nnaffected  by  the  great  truths  of  religion.  In  respect  even  of  the  things  of  sense, 
we  require  a  combination  of  love  with  knowledge  in  order  to  the  constitution  of 
character ;  for  we  do  not  call  a  man  a  sensualist  merely  because  he  knows  the 
objects  of  sense.  He  must  love  those  objects,  lie  must  have  given  his  heart  to  those 
objects,  before  we  think  of  applying  to  him  such  a  title  ;  before  we  think  of  calling 
him  a  sensual  man.  In  like  manner  you  can  have  no  right  to  say  that  acquaint- 
ance with  the  articles  of  religion  makes  a  man  a  religious  man.  He  may  know  the 
articles  of  religion  just  as  he  knows  the  objects  of  sense  ;  but  he  is  not  a  sensualist 
unless  attached  to  the  objects  of  tense  ;  neither  is  he  religious  unless  his  affections 
fasten  on  the  articles  of  religion.  Wlien,  however,  it  has  been  allowed  that  the 
affections  must  be  engaged  in  religion,  there  will  arise  various  questions  as  to 
degree  and  direction.  We  have  already  said,  that  wth  many  the  majetty  and  the 
awfulness  of  the  Almighty  pass  as  evidence  of  the  impo^sibiUty  of  His  being  the 
objects  of  our  love.  They  will  tell  you  that  He  might  lij/htly  be  the  object  of  the 
fear,  of  the  reverence,  of  the  adoration  of  His  creatures  ;  but  that  it  savours  of  an 
unholy  familiarity,  and  therefore  marks  a  species  of  enthusiasm  to  speak  of  Him  as 
the  object  of  love — and  when  you  set  against  such  an  opinion  the  grave  require- 
ments of  Scripture,  which  insist  on  the  love  of  God  as  the  sum  and  substance  of 
religion,  then  you  will  be  told  that  love  as  directed  towards  the  Creator  must  be 
something  wholly  different  from  love  as  felt  between  man  and  man;  and  thus  hj 
representing  it  a  mystic  and  unearthly  thing,  they  will  quite  remove  it  from  your 
comprehension  and  attainment.  (H.  Melvill,B.D.)  Love  ruling  the  soul,  butTiot 
excluding  other  proper  activities : — This  we  may  easily  understand  by  familiar 
parallels.  We  say  of  persons  who  are  cultivated,  that  their  whole  manhood  ia 
cultivated.  We  do  not  meitn  that  there  is  a  thing  called  cultivation  which  they 
have  in  exercise,  and  notiiintr  besides.  We  simply  mean  that  there  is  a  given  mode 
of  activity  ;  that  the  reason  and  the  affections  act  in  a  certain  fine  way  ;  that  they 
act  with  a  particular  quality  which  we  call  cultivation.  When  we  speak  of  a  man  as 
well-bred  and  refined,  we  do  not  mean  that  his  taste  is  the  only  active  part  of  his 
nature,  but  this:  that  whatever  other  faculties  are  acting,  they  all  take  on  the 
quality  of  taste,  so  that  they  are  of  the  nature  of  this  predominant  influence.  Just 
the  same  is  true  of  conscience.  A  man  is  said  to  be  a  conscientious  man  when  con- 
science  rules  him.  When  we  speak  of  a  man  as  conscientious,  we  do  not  mean  that 
conscience  is  the  only  feeling  that  rises  up  and  acts,  but  that  it  so  distributes  itself 
through  the  mind  that  every  other  feeling  which  comes  in  acts  conscientiously. 
And  when  we  are  commanded  to  love  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength, 
and  mind,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  it  is  not  meant  that  a  man  should  sit 
down  and  lovp,  love,  love,  love,  with  a  repetition  that  is  just  like  the  ticking  of  a 
clock,  which  repeats  the  same  tick  over,  and  over,  and  over,  and  over  again.  It  is 
not  meant  that  we  are  to  compress  all  the  parts  of  our  life  into  any  such  unity,  or 
any  such  singleness,  that  they  shall  all  be  included  in  one  thing,  that  one  thing 
being  love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  It  is  meant  that  a  strong  predominant  love  to 
God  and  man  shall  so  pervade  the  soul,  that  there  cannot  be  in  all  the  action  of  the 
mind  one  feeling  that  will  go  contrary  to  that  spirit.  The  reason  must  be  a  reason 
acting  in  the  spirit  of  love  ;  the  conscience  must  be  a  conscience  acting  in  the 
atmosphere  of  love  ;  the  taste  must  be  a  taste  acting  in  the  atmosphere  and  spirit  of 
love — love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  The  appetites  and  passions,  and  every  otlier 
faculty  of  the  mind,  in  all  their  power  or  variety  or  versatility,  may  act ;  but  they 
will  act  as  steeds  that  feel  the  one  rein,  which  goes  back  to  the  hands  of  the  one 
driver,  whose  name  is  Love.  (//.  W.  Beecher.)  The  woith  oy  love  determint'd  by 
its  ofjject : — Love  is  but  an  indifferent  passion,  till  it  be  united  to  the  thing  loved, 
and  then  it  gets  a  denomination.  For  example :  If  the  object  be  earthly,  it  is  an 
earthly  love  ;  if  sensual,  it  is  a  brutish  love ;  if  it  be  man,  it  is  a  human  love;  if 
God,  it  is  a  Divine  love :  so  that  by  our  love  we  are  changed  and  transformed  into  a 
thing  more  noble,  or  more  vile.  Wo  therefore  debase  ourselves  in  loving  any  tiling 
but  God  :  there  is  nothing  else  worthy  of  our  love.  Whatsoever  we  love,  we  give  it 
a  kind  of  dominion  over  us,  so  that  the  will  loseth  its  dignity  and  excellency  when 
it  loves  inferior  things ;  we  are,  as  it  were,  married  to  that  we  love.  '*  Suppose," 
sailh  Baymundas,   "  a  poor  man,  of  mean  stock  and  no  reputation,   have  six 


CHAP,  ixii.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  619 

daughters ;  they  are  all  eqnal  by  birth  as  to  reputation  and  esteem,  but  they  are  all 
differenced  by  their  marriage.  The  eldest  marries  a  farmer,  the  next  a  citizen,  the 
third  a  knight,  tho  fourth  a  duke,  the  fifth  a  king,  the  sixth  an  emperor  ;  by  these 
marriages  there  is  a  very  great  inequality.  So,  here,  by  the  object  of  your  love  you 
are  dignified  or  debased."     (S.  Annesley,  D.D.)  Proprietorship  heightens  love  : 

— "  Thou  Bhalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  Those  things  that  are  ours,  though  they 
are  not  always  lovely,  yet  we  love  them ;  our  own  children,  whether  of  our  bodies 
or  our  minds,  our  own  estates.  We  are  more  troubled  at  the  loss  of  anything 
wherein  our  own  propriety  [property]  is  concerned,  than  in  all  the  world  besides.  A 
small  thing  of  our  own  is  a  thousand  times  more  to  us  than  a  thousand  times  as 
much  of  another's.  We  are  more  concerned  for  the  cutting  off  our  own  finger,  than 
the  cutting  off  another  man's  head.  Propriety  [proprietorship]  doth  exceedingly 
heighten  love.  {Ibid.)  Love  is  a  husy  grace: — Love  among  the  passions  is 
like  fire  among  the  elements.  Love  among  the  graces  is  Mke  the  heart  among 
the  members.  Now  that  which  is  most  contrary  to  the  nature  of  love  must 
needs  most  obstruct  the  highest  actings  of  it.  The  truth  is,  a  careless  frame  of 
spirit  is  fit  for  nothing  ;  a  sluggish,  lazy,  slothful,  careless  person  never  attains  to 
any  excellency  in  any  kind.  (Ibid.)  The  first  and  great  command  : — Love  to  God 
is  the  most  excellent  of  aU  graces  (1  Cor,  xiii.  13).  Love  among  the  graces  is  like 
the  sun  among  the  stars,  which  not  only  enlightens  the  lower  world,  but  communi- 
cates light  to  all  the  Btens  in  the  firmament ;  so  love  to  God  does  not  only  its  own 
o£^ce,  but  the  offices  of  all  other  graces.    (Ibid.) 

Vera.  42-45. — What  think  ye  of  Christ  ? — I.  There  are  some  who  never  think 
of  Christ  at  all.  II.  There  are  some  who  deem  it  unneeessary  to  have  fixed 
thoughts  about  Christ,  in.  There  are  some  who  have  many  thoughts  about  Christ. 
rv.  There  are  some  who  have  right  thoughts  about  Christ,  but  wrong  feelings.  V. 
There  are  some  who  have  right  thoughts  about  Christ,  and  right  feelings.  {Various.) 
What  think  ye  of  His — I.  Person  ?  II.  Mission  7  III.  Condescension  and  grace  f 
rv.  Work  ?  V.  Ability  and  willingness  to  save  ?  (T.  Eajles,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  A 
testing  question : — 1.  It  recognizes  in  man  a  mighty  power,  the  power  to  think. 
2.  It  indicates  that  all  right-tLinkiug  of  Christ  must  have  respect  to  Him  as  He  is 
revealed  in  Holy  Scriptures.  3.  That  to  think  of  Christ  is  a  personal  and  indivi- 
dual duty.  4.  To  think  right  of  Christ  is  a  matter  of  transcendent  importance. 
{J.  Williams.)  Eevelation  not  to  supersede  thought: — The  Book  of  God  is  not  a 
book  for  the  mentally  indolent.  An  amount  of  mental  digging  is  needful  to  dis. 
cover  much  of  the  precious  ore  that  lies  hidden  under  the  paetry,  parables,  proverbs, 
figures,  symbols,  and  the  "many  things  hard  to  be  understood"  in  Holy  Writ. 
"  The  telescope,  we  know,"  says  Archbishop  Whately,  ••  brings  within  the  sphere 
of  our  vision  much  that  would  be  undiscoverable  by  the  naked  eye ;  but  we  must 
not  the  less  employ  our  eyes  in  making  use  of  it,  and  we  must  watch  and  calculate 
the  motions,  and  reason  on  the  appearances  of  the  heavenly  bodies  which  are  visible 
only  through  the  telescope,  with  the  same  care  we  employ  in  respect  of  those  seen 
by  the  naked  eye.  And  an  analogous  procedure  is  requisite  if  we  would  derive  the 
intended  benefit  from  the  pages  of  inspiration,  which  were  designed  not  to  save  ua 
the  trouble  of  inquiring  and  reflecting,  but  to  enable  us  in  some  points  to  inquire 
and  reflect  to  better  purpose ;  not  to  supersede  the  use  of  reason,  but  to  supply  its 
deficiencea."  (Ibid.)  I.  What  THI^•K  ye  of  Christ?  For  the  religion  of  the 
Bible  extends  to  the  very  thoughts.  Our  conduct  towards  Him  must  always  be  re- 
gulated by  our  views,  n.  What  esteem  have  toc  fob  him  ?  He  is  esteemed  by 
all  most  worthy  of  our  regard  :  Abraham.  What  regard  have  you  for  His  great- 
ness? III.  What  are  you  willing  to  pabt  with  fok  His  sake?  With  your 
eins — the  world — with  learning —self  righteousness.  IV.  What  la  it  that  keeps 
TOTJ  FBOM  Him?  1,  Is  it  ignorance ?  2,  Prejudice?  3.  Insensibility?  V.  What 
WILL  YOD  DO  WITHOUT  HiM  ?  1.  lu  the  couviction  of  conscience.  2.  In  prosperity. 
8.  In  adversity.  4.  In  death.  5.  In  the  great  day  of  account.  {W.  Jay.)  All 
doctrines  equally  true,  but  not  equally  important  • — There  is  a  difference  between 
the  railing  of  the  bridge  and  the  keystone.  The  one  is  indeed  ornamental,  but  the 
other  is  essential  to  the  structure.  Take  from  man  an  eye,  or  a  hand,  or  a  foot, 
and  you  injure  him  ;  but  take  away  the  head,  or  heart,  or  lungs,  and  yon  demolish 
him.  The  doctrines  concerning  Christ  are  of  supreme  importance.  {Ibid.)  WJiat 
think  ye  of  Christ  f — This  question  is  not  an  appeal  to  the  faith  of  the  Pharisees, 
but  to  their  opinion.  I.  I  commend  the  question.  You  should  think  of  Christ — 
1.  Because  yon  cannot  help  yourself.    2.  Because  yon  cannot  escape  the  con8*> 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIL  [chap,  xni, 

qnences  of  the  qnestion.  8.  As  8  man  thinks  of  Christ  so  is  he  at  the  hour  of  hit 
death.  II,  Knowlkdgb  op  Christ  is  necessary  before  answering  tuib  qubs* 
TioN.  1.  Who  is  He?  "Wliose  Son  is  He?"  2.  Why  did  Christ  come?  3. 
Whither  is  Christ  gone  ?  4.  Wherefore  will  He  return  ?  III.  Now  what  think  t« 
OF  Christ?  1.  Not  what  will  you  think  to-morrow,  but  what  do  you  think?  2. 
Improve  the  thought.  3.  Strengthen  the  thought.  4.  Express  the  thought. 
(C.  Molyneux,  B.A.)  The  question  of  questions  : — On  my  own  part,  and  on  the 
part  of  those  among  as  who  are  desirous  to  have  expressed  in  a  compendious  form 
the  primary  grounds  of  that  belief  which  makes  them  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ,  I  shall  give  (beginning  for  the  most  part  in  modern  and  non-theological 
language)  an  answer  to  that  question  of  questions  for  every  age,  "  What  think  yo 
of  Christ  ?  "  That  answer  will  land  us  at  last  ou  the  highest  summit  of  theological 
speculation.  I.  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  That  He  is  exceptional  in  thb 
SPiRiTUAii  WORLD.  1.  The  holiest  men  areever  most  conscious  of  their  own  sinfulness. 
Sublime  dissatisfaction  with  self  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  Christian  saint.  2.  Jesus 
is  the  solitary  exception  to  this  rule.  Besides  the  testimony  both  of  enemies  and 
of  friends  to  the  fact  of  His  perfect  innocence  and  sinlessness,  we  have  His  own 
witness.  No  utterance  of  conscious  sin,  no  half-hid  oonfessioa.  He  never  includes 
Himself  among  sinners.  We  think,  then,  that  Christ  is  unique  and  without  parallel. 

II.    We    "  THINK "   THAT  THB   EXCEPTIONAL   MAN    HAS   ENDOWED   VB  WITH   EXCEPTIONAI. 

rBciTS,  WITH  BENEFITS  UNPARALLELED.  Not  merely  fruits  of  thought,  art,  litera- 
ture. 1.  Christ's  hving  influence  is  yearly  sending  forth  missionaries  to  the  most 
abject  tribes  upon  the  earth.  2.  Christ's  teaching  and  example  furnish  a  perpetual 
motive  for  tending  the  sick — perpetuating  His  miracles  of  healing.  3.  Christ  did 
not  merely  preach  a  doctrine :  He  founded  a  Church,  to  be  the  home  of  charity.  Is 
she  not,  with  her  ministries  for  the  poor,  like  the  mother  whom  we  have  seen  on 
Alpine  or  Pyrenean  ridges,  as  she  passes  some  razor-like  edge,  knitting  for  her  little 
ones  while  she  goes,  though  her  heart  and  eye  are  up  among  the  clouds  ?  4.  Who 
ehall  say  what  Christ  gives  daily  to  those  who  receive  Him  ?  (a)  Elevation  above 
sordid  selfishness.  (6)  Eesignation.  (c)  Joy.  IIL  We  "  think  "  of  Christ  that 
He  is  "First-born  from  the  dead."  1.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  not  s 
fraud — not  a  singular  recovery  of  a  lacerated  and  tortured  man,  awakened  from  a 
death-Uke  swoon  by  the  coolness  of  the  rocky  chamber,  or  by  the  pungency  of  the 
apices  I  We  have  to  account  for  cowards  turned  into  heroes ;  for  the  faith  that 
overcame  the  world.  2.  Nor  is  the  resurrection  of  Christ  the  projection  of  creative 
enthusiasm.  The  Church  is  too  real  for  a  foundation  of  mist.  Faith  did  not  "create 
the  resurrection  :  the  resurrection  created  faith.  We  think,  then,  that  as  Christ  was 
exceptional  in  His  hfe,  and  in  the  benefits  He  conferred  on  humanity,  so  was  He  in 
His  victory  over  the  grave.  IV.  This  exceptional  Man  must  have  had  an  excep- 
tional ORIGIN.  He  is  the  Son  of  God  (Luke  i.  35).  He  is  the  Word  of  God  (John 
i.  1).  '*  And  the  Word  was  God."  V.  Christ  is  the  Wisdom  or  God.  VI.  He  is  very 
MAN.  His  delights  are  with  the  sons  of  Adam,  (BisJiop  William  Alt!xander.) 
The  ideal  Christ: — I.  Some  people  do  not  think  much  about  Him  any  way. 
Their  minds  are  preoccupied.  They  think  of  something  else.  1.  These  Pharisees 
were  evidently  stunned  by  our  Lord's  inquiry.  2.  We  meet  those  in  our  time  who 
have  reached  no  convictions  worth  recording.  3.  It  is  not  the  part  of  a  wise  man  to 
miss  such  a  question  as  this.  II.  Some  do  think;  and  now  it  is  of  much  im 
poetance  that  we  inquire  what  they  think.  1.  There  is  a  historic  ideal  of 
Christ.  This  admits  the  facts  of  His  life.  2.  There  is  a  theologio  ideal  of  Christ. 
A  cold  dogmatism  is  the  result.  3.  There  is  a  poetic  ideal  of  Christ.  One  imagines 
a  Jesus  to  suit  himself ;  the  result  is  mystic  or  emotional.  4.  There  is  an  evan- 
gelic ideal  of  Christ.  A  sacrifice  for  ein.  It  holds  all  the  history;  receives  the 
theology ;  accepts  the  poetry  ;  it  recognizes  the  atonement.  HI.  Let  tjs  ask  what 
this  will  do  for  U8?  1.  Observe,  then,  how  thinking  affects  the  character;  ideals 
control  life.  Observe  also  that  one  may  study  his  ideal  through  his  personal  ex- 
perience and  character ;  and  that  is  the  safest  way.  What  is  your  notion  of  Christ 
doing  for  you  ?  3.  Obsei've  that  the  only  safety  for  a  young  believer  is  found  in 
accepting  the  scriptural  Christ  for  his  all  in  all.  4.  Observe  how  pitifully  the 
the  world's  hero-worship  contrasts  with  the  Christian's  love.  5.  Observe  that  in 
after  ages  the  question  wiU  be  reversed ;  then  it  will  be  of  the  highest  moment  to 
ask.  What  does  Christ  think  of  me  ?  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Christ  not  thought 
about ; — I  once  asked  a  man  what  he  thought,  and  he  replied  frankly,  "  I  suppose  I 
never  do  think  of  Jesus  Christ. "  Then  I  inquired  when  he  was  bom.  Hegaveth« 
date — 1843.     "  B.C.  or  A.D.  7 "  I  kept  on.     He  smiled,  as  if  he  conjectured  I  might 


«HAP.  XXII.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  421 

deem  him  an  antediluvian.  But  I  asked  soberly,  "  Before  Christ  or  after  Christ?" 
He  was  silent,  and  I  continued,  "  Have  you  been  dating  letters  for  twenty  intelli- 
gent years  without  even  reflecting  that  you  were  daily  commemorating  the  nativity 
of  Jesus  Christ?  Have  you  actually  formed  no  opinion  concerning  that  personage 
whose  advent  among  men  changed  the  reckoning  of  time,  whose  birthday  shook 
the  race  into  a  new  era,  as  His  crucifixion  shook  the  planet  with  a  new  earthquake?  " 
(Ibid.)  Christ's  origin: — Who  a  man's  parents  were  ordinarily  makes  very  little 
difference  to  us.  We  gauge  the  man  according  to  his  own  ability  and  efficiency, 
without  reference  to  his  origin.  Our  estimate  of  Shakespeare  or  of  Bacon  is  no 
greater  because  we'  know  their  ancestry.  But  the  case  is  otherwise  with  Christ. 
His  practical  relation  to  the  world  is  bound  up  with  His  origin.  His  life  suggests, 
and  words  lay  claim  to,  a  superhuman  lineage  ;  and  it  bears  very  directly  upon  the 
living  and  thinking  of  all  of  us,  whether  He  be  indeed  born  Lord  of  men 
and  angels,  co-equal  with  God,  or  whether  He  be  no  more  than  a  man  like 
unto  ourselves.  It  makes  the  difference  between  worship  and  admiration ; 
between  allegiance  and  partial  adherence ;  between  implicit  trust  and  critical  • 
discrimination  ;  between  passionate  enthusiasm  and  cool  respect.  So  it  behoves 
us  to  press  the  question  in  this  direction;  "What  think  ye  of  Christ?  If 
He  the  Son  of  God  or  not?  ''  {Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  The  test  question: — 
I.  Look  at  bomb  things  about  Christ  it  is  well  for  tod  to  think  of.  1. 
Think  of  Him  as  a  Prophet.  2.  Think  of  Him  as  Priest.  3.  Think  of  Him 
as  King,  the  immortal,  the  invisible.  4.  Think  of  Him  as  qualified  for  these 
offices  by  uniting  in  Himself  the  nature  of  the  Deity  and  the  nature  of  man.  11. 
Reasons  why  you  should  think  of  Christ.  1.  That  you  may  know  God.  2.  That 
we  may  think  rightly  of  ourselves.  3.  That  you  may  have  faith.  Faith  comes 
through  thinking.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D. )  The  re?pomibility  of  thought : — He  holds 
all  responsible  for  their  thoughts.  The  question  is  not  how  do  you  act,  how  do 
yon  treat  Christ,  but  what  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  The  seed  is  held  responsible  for 
the  harvest,  the  child  for  the  man,  the  thought  for  the  act,  the  character.  Christ 
declared  that  he  who  lusted  and  bated  was  an  adulterer,  a  murderer.  A  thought 
to  the  mind  of  God  is  a  thing.  The  first  requirement  of  education  is  that  the  man 
BhaU  regulate  his  thoughts.  Says  the  Apostle :  •*  Whatsoever  things  are  true  " 
(Phil.  iv.  8).  The  thought  is  of  first  importance.  Every  harmony  that  moves  the 
hearts  of  men  first  swayed  the  soul  of  some  one  as  an  unexpressed  thought.  So  it 
is  of  sculpture  and  of  painting.  The  thought  went  before  the  creation  of  the 
universe.  The  philosopher  strives  to  find  out  the  things  which  do  not  appear  from 
those  which  do  appear.  (Ibid.)  What  think  ye  of  Christ  f — I.  That  Christlanitt 
OHALLENOBS  HUMAN  THOUGHT.  It  is  a  System  of  thought ;  its  first  impulse  is  to  set 
the  mind  at  work.  You  will  find  in  all  systems  of  error  a  tendency  to  prevent  men 
from  thinking.  Tyrants  do  not  wish  their  people  to  think.  Man  is  not  only  to 
think  of  things  on  earth,  but  of  things  in  heaven.  How  elevating  the  character  of 
the  thought ;  it  travels  to  the  spiritual  and  invisible.  II.  The  effect  which  thb 
THOUGHTS  He  gives  HAS  UPON  LITERATURE.  The  thoughts  of  Christ  are  the  thoughts 
that  give  power  to  the  world.  The  people  who  worship  Christ  are  the  great  inven- 
tors and  law-givers  to  our  earth.  III.  Where  Christ  is  beceived  as  Divine, 
HUMANITY  becomes  DIGNIFIED  AND  ENNOBLED ;  for  if  Christ  was  Diviuc,  the  human 
nature  may  be  nearly  joined  to  God.  Man  is  lifted  up  from  grovelling  appetites, 
and  becomes  the  prospective  inhabitant  of  eternity ;  heir  to  a  throne.  Christ  con- 
nected with  human  nature  sanctifies  it.  IV.  Note  one  prophecy.  Isaiah  saw  Him 
ae  a  child  that  was  born,  a  son  given,  called  Wonderful,  &c.  These  characteristics 
of  Christ  are  all  fulfilled  in  Christianity.  Christianity  was  small  at  first.  The  cry  of 
a  child  was  heard ;  then  it  grew  strong  like  a  son,  coming  to  grasp  the  government; 
and  then  it  was  wonderful.  Then  as  the  everlasting  Father  it  is  full  of  pity.  ''What 
tiiiuk  ye  of  Christ  ? "  When  we  look  at  Him  personally  He  is  our  Saviour.  What- 
ever we  think  I  know  what  others  think ;  the  angels,  '•  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest," 
Ac.  What  do  the  host  of  the  departed  think:  "Unto  Him  that  loved  us,"  Ao, 
{Bishop  Simpson.)  The  God-man — Jesus  Christ: — That  Christ  was  hneally  de- 
scended from  David,  and  that  as  such.  He  had  the  body  and  the  mind  and  the  heart 
of  a  man,  is  a  historical  fact.  That  body,  first  natural,  then  spiritual,  became  at 
His  ascension  a  glorified  body ;  but  none  the  less  it  was  the  identical  body.  Christ 
is  now  in  heaven.  "  The  son  of  David  " — a  man — what  is  the  result  of  that.  L 
Whatever  He  cams  to  this  earth  to  do  is  finished  and  accepted,  else  He  would  not 
be  resting  there.  II.  His  presence  there  in  manhood  shows  what  manhood  is  capa- 
ble of,  what  hamaa  nature  may  become.    III.  There — in  that  man  Christ,  David'a 


62 J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn, 

gon — we  have  a  brother.  What  a  posseseion — brotherhood  in  heaven.  1.  He  if 
there  as  a  representative  man.  On  the  cross  He  was  our  substitute,  not  a  repre- 
eentative.  Now  He  is  not  a  substitute,  but  a  representative  man.  2.  Re  is  pledged 
as  the  forerunner  of  us  all.  3.  So  on  earth  and  in  heaven  He  is  David's  son  and 
David's  Lord.  If  Cbrirt  be  man  in  heaven,  no  less  He  is  God.  4.  And  now  all  that 
this  man  died  to  purchase,  He  now  lives  as  God  to  give.  (J.  Vawihan,  M.A.) 
ChrUVs  solution  of  David's  assertion: — I.  The  Jews  had  not  the  slightest  difliculty 
in  answering  that  Christ  was  David's  son.  They  had  learned  that  all  their  lives. 
Natural  that  He  should  come  from  the  nation's  greatept  man.  We  all  have  our 
pictujcs  for  the  future,  and  they  correspond  to  Israel's  Christ  in  the  part  they  per- 
form iu  ourlives.  Whose  sons  are  they  to  be?  Th- y  are  to  be  bom  of  human 
exertion.  The  force  of  human  exertion  is  all  around  us,  and  most  of  us  owe  all  we 
have  to  it.  It  is  the  parent  of  great  results  in  the  world.  II.  Human  exertion  is 
KOT  ALL.  David  cal-eu  Christ  bi.s  "  Lord."  "  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord."  They 
had  magnified  David  and  his  greatness  and  his  power  so  highly,  that  the  thought 
of  eoiiiel'ody  being  over  him  and  having  a  right  to  command  him  did  not  form  a 
very  prominent  feature  in  their  cimceptiou  of  him ;  and  yet  they  would  have  ac- 
knowledged that  he  had  a  Lord.  For  that,  after  all,  is  an  essential  of  our  thought 
in  connection  with  everything.  We  all  want  God  for  a  finish  to  our  ideas,  even  if 
we  do  not  want  Him  practically.  If  we  are  thinkers,  we  hke  God  as  representing 
to  us  the  oneness  of  our  system  of  thought.  He  forms  a  sort  of  easy  transition 
from  one  line  of  thought  to  another.  The  scientific  man  calls  his  God  law  or 
nature  or  some  such  vague  term,  and  he  magnifies  it  very  much  in  all  his  thoughts 
and  expressions.  His  Christ,  his  great  ideal,  is  a  lord  to  him — it  is  above  all  that 
he  does.  Another  man  makes  his  God  the  summary  of  all  that  is  beautiful :  he 
loves  music  or  art,  and  the  idea  of  God  represents  to  him  the  perfection  of  that 
feeling  of  which  he  just  catches  a  glimpse  wben  he  is  wrapped  up  in  one  or  other  of 
those  pursuits.  God  stands  to  him  for  that  wonderful  effect  which  he  cannot 
explain.  Another  man  is  busy  with  commonplace  things;  perhaps  he  sees  much  of 
the  wickedness  of  the  world,  and  he  likes  to  think  that  there  is  a  place  where  every, 
thing  is  better — that  there  is  one  who  is  not  assailed,  or  even  reached,  with  all  that 
troubles  liini.  He  likes  to  think  that  there  is  one  who  realizes  all  that  is  good  and 
pure,  which  he  is  sure  exists,  but  in  which  his  circumstances  do  not  allow  him  to 
have  a  very  great  share.  He  holds  to  Christ  as  his  Lord.  He  has  one  Christ  whom 
he  is  to  produce  who  is  to  be  his  son :  he  is  working  for  that  every  day  in  the  rush 
of  life's  battles :  he  has  another  Christ  who  is  his  Lord — a  pure,  a  high,  a  noble 
ideal,  far  above  him  :  his  Lord.  Eeligion  supplies  just  that  element  of  romance  to 
life  which  we  feel  the  want  of,  for  there  is  little  enough  of  romance  in  human  exer- 
tion, after  the  novelty  of  some  new  effort  is  over.  To  many  men  that  thought  of 
God  as  the  great  mysterious  Lord  of  life — that  thought  of  a  coming  power,  a  Christ 
as  one  above  and  beyond  us — is  just  what  they  need  and  hold  to,  because  their  life 
is  so  busy.  It  is  the  dreamers  who  generally  supply  the  infidels ;  they  do  not  feel 
the  want  of  a  thought  superior  to  this  world  so  much  as  the  men  of  affairs  who  will 
not  let  this  idea  of  God  the  Lord  depart  from  their  creed,  but  hold  to  it  because 
their  thought  needs  it,  little  as  their  lives  may  use  it.  We  have  seen  that  men  do 
hold  these  two  thoughts  of  the  power  that  is  in  the  world,  and  that  is  to  save  it. 
Now,  Christ's  question  is  seen  in  all  its  importance.  It  was.  Can  you  hold  these 
two  together  ?  David  did  ;  he  called  the  same  person  Son  and  Lord  ;  he  worked  to 
bring  furth  the  Messiah  by  his  great  and  powerful  life,  and  yet  all  the  time  he  knew 
that  Messiah  was  hit.  Lord.  Whatever  can  combine  these  two  ideas  is  the  true 
Christ :  that,  and  that  only,  can  save  the  world.  We  separate  these  things.  The 
things  we  work  for,  in  our  best  moments,  we  will  not  acknowledge  to  be  our  Lord ; 
the  things  we  worship,  the  things  we  acknowledge  to  be  great  and  pure,  we  forget 
when  we  get  out  at  our  work.  Our  sons  are  not  our  lords ;  our  lords  are  not  oar 
eons.  Hence,  we  have  no  true  idea  of  Christ.  Till  our  practical  hfe,  our  life  of 
human  energy,  and  our  thoughtful,  our  spiritual  life,  our  life  of  aspiration,  are  at 
one,  there  is  no  hope  of  a  real  salvation  for  us.  The  flesh  and  the  spirit  are  war- 
ring against  each  other,  and  that  contest  is  wearing  us  out.  Go  tell  that  man  who 
is  working  so  hard  to  make  a  fortune,  that  that  is  all  he  is  good  for,  that  he  has  no 
thought  above  money,  and  he  will  say  yoo  insult  him;  he  will  tell  you  that  all  that 
work  is  only  a  means — he  wants  to  make  the  fortune,  but  he  has  higher  motives: 
and  he  will  talk  vaguely  of  doing  good  with  it.  He  is  the  father  of  one  thing,  bat 
he  acknowl  dges  another  thing  as  lord.  Who  shall  unite  these  two  in  our  life? 
Who  is  our  Christ  t    That  is  our  Savu)ur*B  pointed  question.     Have  we  the  right 


CHAP,  xxni.]       '  ST.  MATTHEW,  S23 

idea  in  searching  for  a  great  Deliverer?  Only  God,  in  connection  with  earth,  can 
supply  euch  a  want.  We  shall  appreciate  that  as  soon  as  we  see  the  demaud.  For, 
let  our  object  come  from  the  earth,  from  ourselves,  from  our  fellow-men,  and  it 
may  stimulate  our  exertions — it  may  make  us  work  hard.  But  we  are  lords  Df  thia 
earth,  we  are  equal  to  our  fellow-mei:,  and  so  such  an  object  cannot  be  our  lord — 
and  the  best  part  of  us,  the  ci-y  for  something  higher,  remains  unsatisfied.  It  can- 
not be  the  pure  thought  of  God  as  above  us,  as  apart  from  as,  God  the  pure  and 
holy  One:  for,  then,  how  can  it  be  the  son  of  any  man,  however  great  and  high; 
how  can  it  call  upon  our  exertions  for  their  assistance  in  its  appearance  upon  the 
earth?  We  are  almost  driven  to  give  up  this  idea  of  a  Christ,  so  diCicult  does  it 
eeem  to  be  to  satisfy  it ;  and  we  go  to  asking  little  unimportaut  questions,  and 
erecting  smaller  tests  as  the  Pharisees  did,  or  letting  the  thing  drift  along uusetlled. 
JesuB  claims  to  be  the  one  that  fills  this  important  requirement,  and  tells  us  that 
we  must  get  back  to  that  idea  of  a  Christ  before  we  can  appreciate  Him  ;  we  must 
answer  that  old  difficulty  of  David's.  He  is  the  Son  of  David,  and  the  Son  of  every 
high  and  noble  character  who  looks  for  Him.  He  came  of  David's  line ;  He  was  the 
fruit  of  the  kingdom  which  David  planted ;  He  carried  out  into  fulness  all  the  cha- 
racter and  acts  of  David's  life ;  He  fulfilled  all  the  prophecies  and  aspirations  of 
David's  Psalms.  We  all  know  that,  if  we  understand  the  facts  of  our  Bible  at  all. 
But  that  line  of  historical  facts  is  but  the  expression  of  the  fact  that  He  is  the  Son 
of  all  high  devoted  energy.  Christ  is  to  succeed  in  the  world  by  our  energy  conse- 
crated to  Him.  He  calls  on  us  to  labour  for  and  with  Him.  Christian  character  is 
produced — not  by  being  forced  upon  ub  from  without,  but  by  the  quickening  of  our 
own  being — that  it  may  bring  forth  more  of  Chiist  in  the  world.  Christ  is  among 
us ;  His  life  was  eartlily  in  all  its  development ;  it  was  His  life  on  earth  and  among 
men  that  made  Him  Christ.  He  was  David's  Lord — far  above  David  in  every 
respect.  We  read  the  story  of  the  two  lives  of  David  and  Jesus,  and  we  neyex 
think  of  doubting  which  waa  the  Lie  of  the  Master.    (A.  Brooks,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXin. 


Yeb8.  1-7.  Tbe  Bcrlbes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  Mosea*  Bea.t.-^Chritt'trrproaehes 
of  Pharisees: — There  must  be  some  just,  reasonable,  and  great  cause  of  our  Lord's 
indignation,  and  this  we  find  was  an  accumulation  of  great  wickedness  in  these  men, 
which  received  aggravations  (1)  from  their  pretences  to  greater  sanctity  than  others; 
(2)  from  their  having  greater  opportunities  of  being  better  than  others;  (3)  because 
they,  being  many  of  them  in  public  places,  their  practice  must  have  a  bad  influence 
on  their  followers.  Fur  they  who  pretend  holiness,  and  are  wicked;  they  who  are 
wicked,  though  they  have  great  helps  to  be  good  ;  and  by  being  wicked  cause  others 
to  be  so  too,  their  sin  is  exceeding  sinful.  The  particulars  for  which  our  Saviour 
taxes  them,  were  principally  these :  1.  Their  great  pride.  Under  the  title  of  Kabbi 
they  afi'ected  a  greater  authority  than  ia  compatible  to  men.  2.  Their  wretched 
covetousness,  which  showed  itself  in  the  instances  of  devouring  widows'  houses,  of 
esteeming  the  gifts  and  the  gold  above  the  altar  and  the  temple.  3.  Their  abomin- 
able hypocrisy,  shown  in  "  teaching  others  to  do  what  they  themselves  would  not 
do;  "  in  serving  a  carnal  interest  by  a  religious  carriage.  It  might  have  been  sup- 
posed that  Christ's  disciples  had  been  out  of  danger  of  these  evils,  that  they  would 
not  have  come  near  the  place  where  their  Pilot  had  set  a  sea-mark.  But  whoso 
takes  a  view  of  the  Christian  Church,  as  Erasmus  hath  represented  it,  he'll  say,  that 
Pharisaism  then  lived  and  reigned  as  much  as  ever.  {Hezekiah  Burton.)  Origin 
of  Pharisaism : — There  was  a  great  rehgious  re\ival  among  the  Jews  after  their  re 
turn  from  the  captivity,  which  continued  for  a  considerable  time  ;  and  which,  after 
they  had  rebuilt  the  temple,  sent  them  back  to  the  law  with  a  sincere  desire  to 
honour  God  by  keeping  its  commands.  So  long  as  the  life  remained,  the  obedience 
was  the  real  outcome  of  an  inward  principle  ;  but  when  the  life  died  out,  then  the 
obedience  became  only  a  fossil,  and  was  soon  covered  over  with  corruption,  until  it 
became  what  we  see  it  to  have  been  in  the  days  of  the  Saviour  upon  earth.  The 
same  danger  attends  on  every  spiritual  movement.  A  real  devotion  to  Christ 
stimulates  to  reverent  attention  to  the  forms  of  worship,  and  so  long  as  that  is 
simply  an  expression  of  loyalty  to  Him,  all  is  well ;  but  by  and  by  all  thought  ol 


«24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xna 

Him  drops  out,  and  then  only  the  ritual  remains,  becoming  the  idol  of  the  heart, 
and  BO  the  life  departs.  Thus  what  was  a  voice  full  of  sincerity  in  one  genera- 
tion, is  often  only  an  empty  echo  in  that  which  follows.  (W.  Jk.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Evil  ministers  better  in  speech  than  works  : — If  ministers  do  well,  it  is  their  own 
gain;  if  they  say  well,  it  is  thine.  Take  thou  what  thine  own  is,  and  let  alone  what 
is  another  man's.  Sylla  and  King  Bichard  III.  commanded  others,  under  great 
penalties,  to  be  virtuous  and  modest,  when  themselves  walked  the  clean  contrary 
way.  A  deformed  painter  may  draw  a  goodly  picture  ;  a  stinking  breath  sounds  a 
mighty  blast ;  and  he  that  hath  but  a  bad  voice  may  show  cunning  in  descant.  A 
blind  man  may  bear  a  torch  in  a  dark  night,  and  a  harp  wake  music  to  others,  which 
itself  is  not  sensible  of.  Posts  set  for  directions  of  passengers  by  the  highway  side 
do  point  out  the  way  which  themselves  go  not ;  and  sign-posts  tell  the  traveller 
there  is  wholesome  diet  or  warm  lodging  within,  when  themselves  remain  in  the 
storms  without.  Lewd  preachers  are  like  spire-steeples,  or  high  pinnacles,  wbieh 
point  up  to  heaven,  but  press  down  to  the  centre.  (J.  Trapp.)  Ministerial  ineon- 
tistency  : — They  had  tongues  which  spake  by  the  talent,  but  their  hands  scarce 
wrought  by  the  ounce ;  like  that  ridiculous  actor  at  Smyrna,  who,  pronouncing,  O 
ecelum,  O  heaven,  pointed  with  his  finger  toward  the  ground :  so  these  Pharisees  had 
the  heaven  commonly  at  their  tongues'  end,  but  the  earth  continually  at  their 
fingers'  end.  In  a  certain  battle  against  the  Turks,  there  was  a  bishop  who  thus 
encouraged  the  army  :  "  Play  the  men,  fellow-soldiers,  to-day  :  and  I  dare  promise 
you,  that  if  ye  die  fighting,  ye  shall  sup  to-night  with  God  in  heaven."  Now  after 
the  battle  was  begun,  the  bishop  withdrew  himself ;  and  when  some  of  the  soldiers 
inquired  among  themselves  what  wa^, become  of  the  bishop,  and  why  he  would  not 
take  a  supper  with  them  that  night  in  heaven,  others  answered,  "  This  is  fasting-day 
with  him,  and  therefore  he  will  eat  no  supper,  no,  not  in  heaven  1  "  {Ibid.)  Sel- 
fish  religious  pride  : — Thirty  miles  north-east  of  Sholapoor,  at  Toolazapoor,  is  the 
great  temple  of  the  goddess  Bhowani,  and  twice  in  the  year  the  place  is  thronged  by 
men  and  women  of  every  grade,  who  come  to  pay  their  vows  and  sacrifices  to  the 
idol.  Besides  this,  at  every  full  moon  long  trains  of  pilgrims  may  be  seen  flock- 
ing thither ;  and  such  is  the  faith  of  the  people  in  the  healing  powers  of  the  goddess, 
that  the  sick  are  resorting  there  constantly  in  the  vain  hope  of  some  relief.  The 
temple  at  Punderpoor  is  still  more  renowned.  Not  to  speak  of  the  myriads  who  go 
there  at  the  great  festivals,  persons  make  a  pilgrimage  thither  every  month  from  a 
distance  of  fifty  or  a  hundred  miles ;  and  the  practice  is  kept  up  for  many  yeara. 
One  man,  who  had  apparently  come  from  a  distance,  the  writer  saw  near  Barsee, 
making  the  journey  by  prostrations,  measuring  his  length  upon  the  ground.  It  was 
tuider  the  burning  sun  of  noonday  ;  and,  hardly  able  to  proceed,  he  seemed  the  very 
picture  of  despair.  But  a  case  still  more  remarkable  was  that  of  a  man  performing 
the  journey  by  rolling  himself  upon  the  ground.  We  came  up  with  him  two  miles 
east  of  Wairag,  and  asked  him  where  he  was  going,  and  why  he  was  thus  torturing 
himself.  He  at  first  did  not  seem  to  hear;  but  at  length  stopping,  he  lay  exhausted 
upon  the  ground,  and  answered  in  a  faint  voice  that  he  was  going  to  Punderpoor. 
After  some  further  questions,  as  the  writer  remonstrated  with  him  upon  the  folly  ol 
Buch  a  course,  he  raised  his  head  from  the  ground,  and  half  reclining,  said  that  bfl 
had  come  so  far  already  he  could  not  desist  now.  He  stated  that  his  village  was 
near  Chandrapoor,  450  miles  to  the  east  from  there,  that  he  had  spent  fifteen 
months  on  the  way  thus  far,  and  that  it  was  forty  miles  more,  and  he  wished  to  com- 
plete the  pilgrimage.  He  was  accustomed  to  go  about  a  mile  each  day.  He  would 
then  note  the  place  where  he  had  stopped,  and  walking  back  to  the  nearest  village, 
would  remain  until  the  next  day,  receiving  his  food  from  the  villagers.  Then  he 
would  return,  and  from  the  place  left  the  previous  day  would  begin  his  toilscme 
pilgrimage.  If  he  came  to  a  river  that  could  not  be  passed  in  this  manner,  he  wruld 
go  back  a  distance  equal  to  this  space,  and  roll  over  the  ground  a  second  time.  He 
had  for  clothing  only  a  coarse  cluth  bound  tightly  about  his  loins,  and  another  about 
his  head  ;  and  thus,  almost  naked,  over  roads  extremely  rough  and  stony,  exposed 
to  heat  and  cold,  sometimes  drenched  with  rain  or  coversd  with  mud — for  a  year 
and  three  months  this  poor  man  had  been  rolling  himself  along  towards  the  shrine 
of  Vithoba.  Yet  it  was  not  a  nense  of  sin  or  a  desire  for  pardon  that  induced  him 
to  undertake  this  painful  journey.  But  it  was  evident,  upon  further  conversation, 
that  he  was  urged  on  by  no  higher  motive  than  a  selfish  pride.  He  sought  a  repu- 
tation for  holiness.  (Bombay  Times.)  Worthless  ceremonies: — When  corn  inins 
into  straw  and  chafif,  those  who  feed  on  it  may  well  be  thin  and  lean ;  but  when  it 
runs  into  ears  and  kernel,  thou  mayest  expect  such  as  eat  of  it  to  be  fat  and  well- 


•HAP.xxni.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  52 J 

favoured.  When  religion  rtins  into  formalities  and  ceremonies,  her  followers  ean 
never  be  thriving  spiritually.  They  may  starve,  for  all  the  gaudy  flowers  where- 
with several  dishes  on  her  table  are  decked  and  set  forth.  (Swinnock.)  Decep- 
tive religious  obedience  : — The  shops  in  the  square  of  San  Marco  were  all  religiously 
closed,  for  the  day  was  a  high  festival.  We  were  much  disappointed,  for  it  was  our 
last  day,  and  we  desired  to  take  away  with  us  some  souvenirs  of  lovely  Venice ;  but 
our  regret  soon  vanished,  for  on  looking  at  the  shop  we  meant  to  patronise,  we 
readily  discovered  signs  of  traffic  within.  We  stepped  to  the  side  door,  and  found 
when  one  or  two  other  customers  had  been  served,  that  we  might  purchase  to  our 
heart's  content,  saint  or  no  saiut.  After  this  fashion  too  many  keep  the  laws  of  Qod 
to  the  eye,  but  violate  them  in  the  heart.  The  shutters  are  up  as  if  the  man  no 
more  dealt  with  sin  and  Satan  ;  but  a  brisk  commerce  is  going  on  behind  the  scenes. 
From  such  deceit  may  the  Spirit  of  Truth  preserve  us.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Best 
places  at  feasts : — When  Hanway  was  in  Persia,  a  certain  governor  rose  from  his 
Beat  and  left  the  room,  because  Hanway  had  inadvertently  taken  his  seat  higher  than 
he,  though  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  table.  Pope  and  councils  not  infallible : — 
There  is  no  external  supreme,  infallible  judge  in  the  Church  of  God,  to  whom  al) 
Christians  are  obliged  to  submit  their  faith  and  consciences  in  all  matters  of  religion. 
Argument  I.  This  authority  which  they  pretend  to  is  a  greater  authority  than  the 
apostles  themselves  did  ever  claim  or  exercise  in  the  Church  of  God,  as  plainly 
appears  from  2  Cor.  i.  24 — "Not  that  we  have  dominion  over  your  faith."  Thia 
was  very  agreeable  to  the  nature  and  person  of  Christ.  Argument  11.  Such  an 
authority  as  tbey  pretend  to  is  contrary  to  that  command  of  the  trial  of  doctrines 
which  is  laid  upon  all  Christians ;  for  if  there  be  an  infallible  judge  to  whom  I 
ougbt  to  submit  my  faith  and  conscience  in  all  matters  of  religion,  what  need  I  try 
doctrines  T  1.  Christians  have  ability  to  try  things  with.  2.  They  have  a  rule  to 
try  things  by.  3.  Christians  have  a  promise  of  discovery  upon  trial.  Argument  IIL, 
against  the  supremacy  and  the  infallible  authority  of  tbe  pope,  is  taken  from  the 
danger  of  following  false  guides.  People  may  sin  in  following  their  guides  asd 
teachers.  Argument  lY.,  and  last,  against  this  doctrine  is,  from  the  want  of  a 
Divine  appointment  and  promise.  Inference  IL  Forasmuch  as  there  is  no  person 
upon  earth  that  can  infallibly  guide  you  to  salvation,  it  concerns  you  to  have  tbe 
greater  care  of  your  own  salvation.  1.  Study  the  Holy  Scriptures.  2.  Pray  fervently 
for  the  guidance  of  God's  Spirit.  3.  If  you  would  discern  and  hold  fast  the  truth, 
love  and  practise  it.  {M.  Pool.)  A  proud  title  the  sign  of  usurped  authority  ;-- 
But,  indeed,  there  was  a  deeper  and  worse  design  than  this  in  it ;  they  did  not  only 
aim  at  splendid  and  glorious  titles,  but  they  did  usurp  authority  and  dominion  over 
the  consciences  of  the  people,  whereof  this  was  but  a  sign  :  as  amongst  us  the  flag 
is  a  sign  of  the  dominion  of  the  seas,  so  this  title  was  an  indication  and  sign  of  that 
authority  which  they  usurped  over  the  people.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  8-12.  But  be  not  ye  called  RabbL — Christians  are  brethren: — The  late 
Rev.  Wm.  Jay,  in  a  sermon  at  Surrey  Chapel,  said  :  "  Some  time  ago  a  oonntryman 
observed  to  me,  •  I  was  exceedingly  alarmed  this  morning,  sir.  I  was  going  down 
in  a  lonely  place,  and  I  thought  I  saw  a  strange  monster.  It  seemed  in  motion, 
but  I  could  not  make  out  its  form.  I  didn't  Uke  to  turn  back,  but  my  heart  beat, 
and  the  more  I  looked  the  more  I  was  afraid.  But,  as  we  came  nearer  each  other, 
I  saw  it  was  a  man,  and  who  do  you  think  it  was  ? '  *  I  know  not.'  •  Oh,  it  was 
my  brother  John  I '  *  Ah,'  said  I  to  myself,  as  he  added  that  it  was  early  in  the 
morning,  and  very  foggy,  '  how  often  do  we  thus  mistake  our  Christian  brethren  1  * " 
Cht'i'itian  brethren  not  to  be  treated  as  enemies : — During  the  Peninsular  war,  an 
officer  of  artillery  had  just  served  a  gun  with  admirable  precision  against  a  body  of 
men  posted  in  a  wood  to  his  left.  When  the  Commander-in-Chief  rode  np,  after 
taming  his  glass  for  a  moment  in  the  direction  of  the  shot,  he  said,  in  hia  cool 
*ay,  '•  Well  aimed,  captain ;  but  no  more  ;  they  are  our  own  99th."  This  sad 
fclunder  has  been  repeated  too  often  in  the  armies  of  .Jesus.  The  great  guns  of  the 
Charch,  which  might  have  battered  down  the  citadels  of  Satan,  have  been  mis- 
directed against  Christian  brethren  !  A  bond  of  union : — A  Hindoo  and  a  New 
Zealander  met  upon  the  deck  of  a  missionary  ship.  They  had  been  converted  from 
their  heathenism,  and  were  brothers  in  Christ,  but  they  could  not  speak  to  each 
other.  They  pointed  to  their  Bibles,  shook  hands,  smiled  in  each  other's  faces, 
but  that  was  aU.  At  last  a  happy  thought  occurred  to  the  EUndoo.  With  sadden 
joy  he  exclaimed,  ••  Hallelujah  1 "  The  New  Zealander,  in  dehght,  cried  oat, 
"Amen!  "     Those  two  words,  not  found  in  their  own  heathen  tongues,  were  te 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxm, 

them  the  beginning  of  •*  one  language  and  one  speech."  Recognition  of  Christian 
brotherhood  : — It  was  on  a  sacramental  Sabbath,  and  at  the  close  of  the  service,  Dr. 
Gumming  invited  Christ's  followers  to  remain  and  partake  of  the  emblems  of  Hia 
atoning  love.  As  we  changed  our  seat  to  take  our  place  among  the  communicants, 
•we  found  ourselves  in  the  pew  of  the  Duke  of  Sutherland.  The  only  two  persons 
in  the  pew,  besides  our  republican  self,  were  the  beautiful  Duchess  (then  apparently 
about  live-and-thirty  years  of  age)  and  a  poor,  coarsely-clad  woman,  who  had 
strayed  in  there  from  her  seat  in  the  gallery.  On  seeing  the  name  of  the  titled 
owner  of  the  pew  upon  the  psalm-book,  the  poor  woman  looked  disconcerted,  as  il 
she  was  "  in  the  wrong  box.*'  But  when  the  sacramental  bread  was  passed,  the 
Duchess  very  courteously  took  the  plate  and  handed  it  to  her  neighbour  with  such 
delicate  graciousness  that  the  "  puir  body  "  was  made  to  feel  quite  at  ease  imme- 
diately. It  was  a  striking  illustration  of  the  unity  of  Christ's  household,  in  which 
the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  lofty  and  the  lowly,  meet  together  and  feel  that  Jesus  ig 
the  Saviour  of  them  all.  When  the  sei-vice  ended  I  said  to  myself,  "  Now,  which  of 
these  two  women  has  had  the  most  serious  obstacle  to  contend  with  in  taking  up 
the  cross  for  Ciirist  ?  That  poor  labouring  woman  probably  lives  in  some  back 
alley,  and  thanks  God  for  her  daily  meal  of  potatoes  and  salt.  Her  worldly  temp- 
tations are  few  ;  her  sources  of  enjoyment  are  few ;  and  perhaps  her  chief  comfort 
in  life  is  found  in  her  Bible,  her  prayers,  her  communion  with  Christ,  and  her  hope 
of  heaven.  The  Duchess  dwells  amid  the  splendours  of  Stafford  House,  with  every- 
thing to  attract  her  toward  this  world,  and  very  little  to  remind  her  of  eternity. 
She  has  troops  of  friends,  and  luxury  tends  to  self-indulgence.  The  atmosphere  of 
high  life  is  unfavourable  usually  to  godliness.  Gold  is  often  a  hardener  of  the 
heart.  So  I  decided  tliat  it  required  more  grace  to  make  the  lady  of  rank  a  humble- 
minded,  devoted  disciple  than  it  did  to  make  the  poor  woman  at  her  side  a  Christian. 
"Was  1  not  right?  Eemember  the  dear  Master  said,  "  How  hard  it  is  for  them  that 
have  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Christ  the 
true  Master: — I.  Human  masters  may  transmit  their  words;  Christ  alone  can 
impart  His  Spirit.  II.  Human  masters  may  teach  the  element^ ;  Chiist  alone  can 
conduct  to  the  goal.  III.  Humau  masters  may  establish  schools ;  Christ  alone 
can  found  a  church.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Christ's  right  to  leadership: — ^L  He 
Himself,  by  Himself,  teaches  us,  and  leads  us  by  the  way  of  virtue  to  heavenly 
glory.  All  others  teach  as  they  have  been  first  taught  by  Him.  U.  All  others 
only  teach  in  words  that  sound  in  the  outward  ears,  like  a  tinkling  cymbal ;  but 
Christ  makes  known  their  meaning  inwardly  to  the  mind.  IH.  All  others  only 
show  what  the  law  commands  and  what  God  requu-es ;  but  Christ  gives  grace  to 
the  will,  that  we,  when  we  hear  the  things  which  ought  to  be  done,  may  indeed 
constantly  fulfil  the  same.      (Lapide.)  The  true  Master:  —  "I  am  my  own 

master,"  cried  a  young  man,  proudly,  when  a  friend  tried  to  dissuade  him  from  an 
enterprize  he  had  on  hand,  "  I  am  my  own  master."  "  Did  you  ever  consider  what 
a  responsible  post  that  is  t "  asked  his  friend.  "  Kesponsible  !  what  do  you  ruean  ?  " 
*'  A  master  must  lay  out  the  work  which  he  wants  done,  and  see  that  it  is  done 
right.  He  should  try  to  secure  the  best  ends  by  the  best  means.  He  must  keep 
on  the  look-out  against  obstacles  and  accidents,  and  watch  that  everything  goes 
Btiaight,  else  he  must  fail.  To  be  master  of  yourself,  you  have  your  conscience  to 
keep  clear,  your  heart  to  cultivate,  your  temper  to  govern,  your  will  to  direct,  and 
your  judgment  to  instruct.  You  are  master  over  many  servants,  and,  if  you  don't 
master  them,  they  will  master  you."  "  That  is  so,"  said  the  young  man.  «•  Now 
I  could  undertake  no  such  thing,"  continued  his  friend ;  ••  I  should  fail  if  I  did. 
Saul  wanted  to  be  his  own  master,  and  failed.  Herod  failed.  Judas  failed.  No 
man  is  fit  to  be  his  own  master.  '  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ.'  I  work  under 
His  direction."  Calling  no  man  master: — I.  Christians  have  a  Master  and  a 
Father.  II.  Christians  have  but  one  Master,  but  one  Father.  III.  There  is  no  man 
upon  earth  that  is  the  Christian's  father  or  master.  IV.  God  is  the  Christian's 
ordy  Father,  Jesus  Christ  their  only  Master.  (Hezekiah  Burton.)  A  truth  about 
religion : — Religion,  hke  water,  will  not  rise  higher  than  the  spring  ;  if  it  derives 
its  origin  from  this  earth  only,  it  will  not  rise  and  raise  us  up  with  it  to 
heaven.      {Ibid.)  Call  no  man  father  .-—The  reasons  for  this    caution   are 

evident.  1.  When  the  gospel  began  to  be  preached,  men  who  were  convinced  of 
its  truth,  and  inclined  to  receive  it,  were  often  in  danger  of  incurring  the  displeasm-e 
of  their  nearest  relations  and  dearest  friends,  of  father  and  mother,  as  also  of  the 
mlera  in  Church  and  State.  2.  The  Jews  at  that  time  were  accustomed  to  pay  • 
blind  and  slavish  deference  to  their  spiritual  fathers,  their  doctors,  and  wise  men. 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  527 

and  to  prefer  their  authority  even  to  that  of  their  prophets  and  of  their  own  sacred 
books.  3.  Our  Saviour  foresaw  that  the  same  corruption  would  enter  into  Hia 
Church,  and  the  same  slavish  obedience  to  the  traditions  and  doctrines  of  men  ; 
that  fathers,  and  mouks,  and  councils,  and  synods,  and  prelates,  and  popes  would 
at  last  80  engross  all  power,  both  spiritual  and  tempor:il,  and  abuse  it  to  such  an 
enormous  degree,  that  scarcely  the  shadow  of  Christianity  would  remain  in  the 
Christian  Church.  (J,  Jortin.)  What  we  may  learn  from  earth  masters  : — The 
pa'nts  may  be  reduced  to  three.  1.  A  belief  in  God,  in  opp  )sition  to  atheism. 
2.  Moral  duties,  in  opposition  to  vice  and  debauchery.  3.  Chrisf  ianity,  in  oppo- 
sition to  infidelity.  (Ibid.)  God  our  Father : — As  God  is  our  Father,  a  williug 
compliance  and  a  cheerful  obedience  are  due  to  Him,  God  is  a  Father  to  us  in 
every  senso  of  the  word,  bestowing  uiJon  db  more  than  we  ivjuld  Lope  or  expeol;, 
forgiving  us  our  offences,  ruling  us  with  lenity,  making  allowances  for  human 
infirmities,  temptations,  surprisos,  mistakes,  and  errors,  for  everything  that  can 
claim  compassion,  and  is  not  deliberate  and  stubborn.  We  should  imitate  and 
resemble  Him,  We  should  place  our  trust  and  confidence  in  Him.  If  God  be  tha 
Father  of  all  beings,  they  are  all,  in  some  way,  related  to  us.  (Ibid.)  God  the 
Father  of  Hispeijde: — I.  He  is  the  Author  of  ilieir  spiritual  being,  gives  life,  and 
imparls  His  own  nature.  11.  God  supplies  all  the  need  of  His  cliildren.  They 
are  dependent,  &c.  III.  He  provides  them  with  a  suitable  home  and  habitation — 
Himself,  His  Church,  His  heaven.  IV.  He  secures  the  instruction  of  His  children 
by  His  works.  His  word.  He  has  appointed  for  them  teachers.  V.  He  guards  and 
protects  His  children.  VI.  He  gives  them  a  glorious  and  everlasting  portion. 
Eeverence  and  fear  Him ;  live  and  delight  in  Him ;  follow  and  obey  Him,  &o. 
{J.  Burns,  LL.D.)  Virtue  only  commands  esteem: — It  is  virtue  that  puts  an 
esteem  upon  men,  it  makes  their  countenances  lovely,  their  words  to  be  remembered ; 
it  casts  a  perfume  on  all  that  men  do  or  say ;  gives  every  word  or  action  a  rich 
■cent.  This  will  make  our  so  much  distasted  habits  and  gestures  that  they  shall 
not  be  contemned  or  derided,  but  reverenced  and  honoured.  (Hezekiah  Burton.) 
Authority  means  service,  not  proud  dominion : — Excellent  and  admirable  was  the 
speech  of  Xuuue,  Emperor  of  China,  to  his  son  Taais,  who,  according  to  the  rela- 
tion of  Martiiiius,  lived  2258  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ.  "  Take,"  said  he, 
when  he  was  dying,  "  this  sceptre,  due  to  your  virtue  and  merits  ;  remember  that  yon 
are  the  father  of  your  people,  that  you  are  to  deal  with  them  as  with  your  children ; 
that  the  people  are  not  born  to  serve  you,  but  that  you  are  born  and  designed  to 
serve  them ;  and  that  a  king  is  alone  raised  up  above  all  the  rest  that  he  ought 
alone  be  able  to  sei-ve  all.  (G.  Buckley.)  Peril  of  high  things  : — Do  you  see,  so 
we  have  it  in  Herodotus,  how  God  strikes  the  taller  animals  with  His  thunder,  and 
causes  them  to  disappear ;  while  the  small  ones  are  not  at  all  affected  by  it  f  Do 
you  see  how  the  loftiest  houses  and  the  highest  trees  are  in  a  like  manner  thunder- 
stricken.  {Ibid.)  Jesus  Christ  to  the  brethren: — I.  A  pkohibition.  1.  Against 
a  proud,  ambitious  spirit — "  Be  not  ye  called  Eabbi."  2.  Against  a  servile  spirit — 
"  And  call  no  man  your  father  upon  earth."  II.  A  bevklation.  1.  As  to  Christ. 
He  was  their  Master.  2.  As  to  the  unseen  God.  He  is  our  Father  in  beaven. 
III.  An  iDEAii — "  All  ye  are  brethren.'*    {A.  Scott.) 

Vers.  13- 1£.  But  woe  unto  yon,  scribes  and  Fhartsaes,  hypocrites. — The  tin$ 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees: — I.  That  thbt  shot  up  thb  kingdom  of  HEAvav 
AGAINST  MEN.  "  Neither  suffer  ye  them  that  are  entering  in."  1.  They  did  this  by 
their  extraordinary  strictness  and  outward  purity.  By  such  austerities  they  made 
religion  repulsive.  This  accusation  has  often  been  preferred  against  the  pura 
ministers  of  a  pure  religion.  Compare  this  text  with  the  par,tllel  passage  in 
Luko  xi.  62.  They  shut  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  tbemselves  and  others  by 
taking  away  the  key  of  knowledge.  The  same  sin  is  committed  by  any  church  that 
imposes  the  traditions  of  men  in  that  province  in  wJiich  only  the  commandment  ol 
God  is  of  authority.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  by  knowledge.  It  is 
important  to  recognize  this.  Ministers  of  the  Church  have  in  a  certain  sense  the 
power  of  shutting  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men.  (1)  Let  us  learn  to  read 
the  Bible  and  listen  to  its  truths,  in  the  assurance  that  our  eternal  destiny  depends 
upon  the  knowledge  of  them.  (2)  Let  ministers  learn  their  proper  vocation  as 
porters  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  let  them  beware  of  handling  the  Word  of 
God  deceitfully.  2.  The  second  charge  against  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  They 
devoured  the  houses  of  widows.  They  were  robbers  of  the  defenceless.  Those 
who  lie  under  this  woe  are :  (1)  Those  ministers  wtio  enter  upon  and  continue  ia 


628  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xhu 

their  office  for  a  piece  of  bread.     8.  The  third  charge  against  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees — "  Ye  compasB  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte."    The  apostles  of 
deceit  and  falsehood  have  often  manifested  a  zeal  iu  the  propagation  of  their 
principles  which  is  fitted  to  minister  a  severe  reproof  to  those  who  know  and  beheve 
the  truth.    It  is  not  the  fact  of  making  proselytes  against  which  the  woe  is  directed ; 
this  is  the  duty  of  the  Church.     But  they  did  not  care  to  make  their  councils 
holier.     (1)  They  made  proselytes  by  reviling  and  scorn  ;  (2)  by  misrepresentation 
and  calumny  ;  (3)  by  force,     (w.  Wilson.)        In  the  description  of  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  in  this  chapter  we  have  o  full-length  portrait  of  the  hypocrite : — I.  They 
shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  others  (ver.  13).     II.  They  committed  the 
grossest  iniquity  under  a  cloak  of  religion  (ver.  11).     III.  They  showed  great  zeal 
in  milking  pros^lytf'R,  yet  did  it  only  for  gain,  and  made  them  more  wicked  (ver.  15). 
IV.  They  taught  f.ilse  doctrine,  artful  contrivances  to  destroy  the  force  of  c-aths, 
and  shut  out  the  Creator  from  their  view  (vers.  16-22).     V.  They  were  superstitious 
(ver.  23).     VI.  Thoy  were  openly  hypocritical  (vers.  25-28).     VII.  They  prufessed 
great  veneration  for  the  memory  of  the  pious  deud,  while  at  the  same  time  they 
were  conscious  tbat  they  really  apjiroved  the  conduct  of  those  who  killed  them 
(vers.  29-31).     Never,  perhaps,  was  there  a  combination  of  more  wicked  feelings 
and  hypocritical  ac'Jons  than  among  them ;  and  never  was  there  more  profound 
knowledge  of  the  humau  heart  and  more  faithfulness  than  in  Him  who  tore  oft  the 
mask,  and  showed  them  what  tliey  were.     {A.   Barnes,  1>.D.)        The  woes: — I. 
Spiritual  ambition ;    petitioners  changed  into  beggars.     The  long  prayers  of  the 
hypocrites,  and  the  long  sentence  of  judgment.     II.  Those  who  shut  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.     III.  Prosel^tism.     Soul-winners  and  soul-ruiners.     IV.   The  work  of 
man  up,  the  work  of  God  down  ;  the  inward  nothing,  the  outward  everything.    The 
true  oath  always  by  the  living  and  true  God.      The  blindest  ignorance  connected 
with  a  conceit  of  keenest  insight  into  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God.    V.  Legality 
in  httle  things  ;  lawlessness  in  great.      VI.  The  outside  and  the  inside  of  the  cup 
and  the  platter,  or  the  feast  of  the  religious  and  moral  hypocrite.     1.  In  the  out- 
ward form,  consecrated  or  adorned.     2.  In  the  inner  character,  abominable  and 
reprobate.     VII.  The  whited  sepulchres :  like  pleasant  abodes  outwardly  ;  caves  of 
bones,  diffusing  death,  within — spiritual  death,  in  the  guise  of  spiritual  bloom. 
VIII.  The  murderers  of  the  prophets.      To  persecute  Christ  in  His  saints  is  to 
persecute  Christ  himself.     (J.  P.  Lunge,  D.D.)        Folly  of  hypocrisy : — If  the  devil 
ever  laughs,  it  must  bo  at  hypocrites ;  they  are  the  greatest  dupes  he  has.     They 
serve  him  better  than  any  others,  and  receive  no  wages ;  nay,  what  is  still  more 
extraordinary,  they  submit  to  greater  mortifications  to  go  to  bell,  than  the  sincerest 
Christian  to  go  to  heaven.     (CoUon.) 

Vers.  16-22.  Whosoever  shall  swear  toy  the  Temple,  It  Is  nothing. — Tlioughtlat 
profanity  : — Are  there  any  before  me  who  are  accustomed  to  use  God's  name  as  an 
expletive,  and  to  bandy  it  as  a  byword  ?  Who  employ  it  in  all  kinds  of  conversa- 
tion, and  throw  it  about  in  every  place  ?  Perhaps  in  their  hearts  they  consider  this 
an  accomplishment !  think  it  manly  and  brave  to  swear  I  Let  me  say,  then,  that 
profaneness  is  a  brutal  vice.  He  who  indulges  in  it  is  no  gentleman.  I  care  not 
what  his  stamp  may  be  in  society.  I  care  not  what  clothes  he  wears,  or  what  cul- 
ture be  boasts.  Despite  all  his  refinement,  the  light  and  ha!  itual  taking  of  God's 
name  betrays  a  coarse  nature  and  a  brutal  will.  Nay,  he  tacitly  admits  that  it  is 
ungentlemanly,  for  he  restrains  his  oaths  in  the  presence  of  ladies ;  and  he  who  fears 
not  to  rush  into  the  chancery  of  heaven  and  swear  by  the  Majesty  there,  is  decently 
observant  in  the  drawing-room  and  the  parlour.  (E.  U.  Chapin,  D,D.)  Ostm' 
tatious  profanity  : — If  there  are  hypocrites  in  religion,  there  are  also,  strange  as  it 
may  api)ear,  hypocrites  in  impiety — men  who  make  an  ostentation  of  more  irreligion 
than  they  possess.  An  ostentation  of  this  nature,  the  most  irrational  in  the  records 
of  human  foUy,  seems  to  lie  at  the  root  of  profane  swearing.  (Ji.  Hall.)  Un- 
reaaonuhle  oaths ; — He  that  sweareth  by  any  person,  or  thing,  doth  two  things- 
1.  He  attributeth  to  the  thing,  or  person,  by  which  he  sweareth,  a  knowledge  of  the 
heart  and  the  secret  intention.  2.  He  calleth  upon  the  person,  or  thing,  by  which 
he  sweareth,  to  be  bis  judge,  or  to  take  a  revenge  upon  him,  in  case  he  doth  not 
believe  in  bis  heart  what  he  afhrmeth  or  denieth  with  his  words  to  be  true  or  false ; 
otherwise  an  oath  is  no  security  at  all.  From  whence  appeareth  that  it  is  nnreason- 
ftble  for  any  to  swear  by  any  other  than  God,  who  alone  can  have  a  knowledge  d 
the  truth  and  security  of  the  heart ;  and  that  he  who  sweareth  by  any  creature 
eommitteth  idolatry  in  bia  heart,  and  indee    blasphemetb,  paying  Divine  homage  t« 


OHiP.  xiin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  639 

a  creature,  and  attributing  to  the  creature  what  belongs  only  to  the  Creator.  (M. 
Pool.)  The  altar: — The  one  altar  which  sanctifieth  the  gift  is  the  person  and 
merit  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Jesus  Chkist  is  the  Antitype  of  this  brazen 
ALTAB  (Exodus  xxvii.).  1.  The  altar  typifies  our  Lord  if  we  consider  the  use  of  it.  To 
sanctify  that  which  was  put  upon  it,  and  to  sustain  it  while  the  fire  was  consuming 
it.  Oar  Lord  lifts  up  our  gifts  towards  heaven.  2.  The  place  of  the  altar.  You 
Baw  it  the  moment  you  entered  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  The  most  prominent 
thought  of  the  soul  is  Jesus  as  Mediator.  3.  The  form  of  the  altar.  It  was  four- 
square ;  stability  and  endurance.  4.  The  materials  of  which  the  altar  was  made. 
Shittim  wood,  overlaid  with  brass ;  the  former  represents  the  incorruptible  human 
character  of  Jesus  :  the  latter  the  endurance  of  Christ.  II.  A  question  or  two. 
1.  Have  you  always  taken  care  to  keep  to  the  one  spiritual  altar  ?  2.  Are  there  not 
Bome  among  you  who  have  been  offering  to  God  without  an  altar  at  all  ?  You  have 
not  respect  to  the  Mediator  in  your  life,  and  prayers,  and  acts.  3.  Whether  we  have 
not  often  forgotten  to  attach  the  importance  to  the  altar  which  we  should  have  done. 
We  must  plead  the  merit  of  Christ.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  23,  24.  And  have  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law. — Strw  oj 
omission : — 1.  The  very  earliest  cause  of  nearly  aU  sin  lies  in  omitting  something 
which  we  ought  to  have  done.  Perhaps  you  left  your  room  without  prayer.  2.  That 
sins  of  omission  in  God's  sight  are  of  larger  magnitude  than  sins  of  commission. 

3.  They  will  form  the  basis  of  judgment  at  the  last  day — *'  Ye  gave  Me  no  meat." 

4.  Why  is  any  man  lost  that  is  lost,  but  because  he  omitted  God's  way  of  escape? 
6.  Sins  of  omission  are  characteristically  sins  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  Ita 
laws  are  positive.  (J.  Vanghan,  M.A.)  The  great  duties  of  religion: — Define 
these  weightier  matters  of  the  law.  1.  One  virtue  originating  immediately  in 
primitive  law  is  more  important  than  another,  an  obligation  to  perform  which 
18  founded  only  on  some  particular  circumstances.  2.  Virtues  anterior  to  particu- 
lars  subsist  after  those  circumstances.  3.  A  virtue  that  hath  a  great  object  is  more 
than  those  which  have  small  objects.  4.  Every  virtue  connected  with  other  virtues, 
and  drawing  after  it  many  more,  is  greater  than  any  single  or  detached  virtue.  5. 
A  virtue  that  constitutes  the  end,  to  which  all  religion  conducts  us,  is  more  impor- 
tant than  other  virtues,  which  at  most  are  only  means  to  lead  to  the  end.  {J.  Saurin). 
Small  duties  of  religion: — Obligation  to  little  duties  may  be  urged,  because  (1)  they 
contribute  to  maintain  a  tenderness  of  conscience ;  (2)  they  are  sources  of  re-con- 
version after  great  falls ;  (3)  they  make  up  by  their  frequency  what  is  wanting  to 
their  importance;  (4)  they  have  sometimes  characters  as  certain  of  real  love  a3 
the  great  duties  have.  {Ibid.)  The  superlative  importance  of  the  moral  duties  of 
religion : — 1.  Moral  duties,  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  the  love  of  God,  justice, 
mercy,  and  fideUty,  are  more  excellent  in  their  own  nature,  and  ought  always  to  be 
preferred  to  all  ritual  and  positive  institutions,  whenever  they  come  into  compe- 
tition with  them.  II.  Notwithstanding  the  intrinsic  and  superior  excellence  of 
moral  duties,  yet  those  rites  and  external  institutions  which  are  of  Divine  appoint- 
ment onght  to  be  rehgiously  observed,  and  it  is  really  criminal  in  the  sight  of  God 
to  despise  and  neglect  them.  {W.  Leechman.)  Sins  of  omission  : — The  last  words 
that  Archbishop  Usher  was  heard  to  express,  were,  •'  Lord,  forgive  my  sins ;  espe- 
cially my  sins^  of  omission."  Fidelity  in  little  duties  no  excuxe  for  neglect  of 
great : — The  tithing  of  cummin  must  not  be  neglected ;  but  take  heed  thou  dost  not 
neglect  the  weightiest  things  of  the  Law — ^judgment,  mercy,  and  faith ;  making  your 
preoJsenesa  in  the  less  a  blind  for  your  horrible  wickedness  in  the  greater.  (W". 
ChirTiall.)  All  sin  traced  to  an  omission  : — It  scarcely  admits  of  a  question,  but 
that  every  sin  which  was  ever  committed  upon  the  earth,  is  tracf-able,  in  the  first 
instance,  to  a  sin  of  omission.  At  a  certain  point  of  the  genealogy  of  that  sin, 
there  was  something  of  wbich  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  if  it  had  been  done 
that  sin  would  have  been  cut  short.  And  the  very  earUest  ca'ise  of  that  sin  (whether 
you  are  able  to  discover  a  root  or  not)  lay,  not  in  anything  we  did,  or  said,  or 
thought,  but  in  that  which  we  might  have  done,  and  did  not  do  ;  or,  might  have  said, 
and  did  not  say  ;  or,  might  have  thought,  and  did  not  think.  Every  sin  lies  in  a  chain, 
and  the  first  link  is  fastf^ned  to  another  link.  For  instance,  that  first  sin  committed 
after  the  Fall — Cain's  fratricide — ^was  the  result  of  anger ;  that  anger  was  the  result 
of  jealousy  ;  that  jealousy  was  the  result  of  an  unaccepted  sacrifice ;  that  unaccepted 
Baorifice  was  the  result  of  the  absence  of  faith  ;  and  that  absence  of  faith  was  the 
result  of  an  inattentive  ear,  or  a  heart  which  had  grown  silent  towards  God.  .  •  . 
As  yoa  oncoil  a  sin,  you  have  been  surprised  to  find  what  a  compound  thing  that  is. 

34 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  xira, 

■which,  at  first  sight,  appeared  single.     Tou  have  gone  on,  finding  the  germ  ol  sne 
«in  in  the  seed  of  anoth'^r  sin,  till  you  could  scarcely  pursue  tlie  process  because  it 
stretched  so  far ;  but,  if  you  went  far  enough,  you  found  at  last  that  some  neglect 
■was   the   beginning  of  it  all.     (J.    Vavghan,  M..A.)         Sinn  of  omiKsion  the  most 
heinous : — By  which  are  we  most  pained — the  omissions,  or  the  commissions,  of 
life  f     Say  you  have  two  persons  whom  you  love.     I  will  suppose  a  father  with  two 
Bons.    The  one  often  offends  him  by  direct  and  open  disobedience  ;  and  your  heart 
ia  made  to  ache,  again  and  again,  by  Lis  frequent  and  flagrant  transgressions  of 
your  law.     The  other  does  nothing  which  is  outwardly  and  palpably  bad.     His  hfe 
is  moral,  and  his  course  correct.     But  he  shows  no  sign  whatsoever  of  any  personal 
regard  for  you.    You  long  to  catch  some  indication  of  affection  ;  but  there  is  none. 
Day  atlei  day  you  have  watched  for  it ;  but  still  there  is  none  1     You  are  plainly 
indifferent  to  him.     He  does  not  injure  you.    But  in  no  thought,  or  word,  or  deed, 
does  he  ever  show  you  that  he  has  you  in  his  heart,  to  care  for  you  and  love  you. 
Now,  wliich  of  those  two  sons  will  pain  you  most?     The  disobedient,  or  the  cold 
one  f    The  one  who  often  transgresses,  or  the  one  who  never  loves  ?    The  one  who 
commits,  or  the  one  who  omits  'I  Is  there  a  doubt  that,  however  much  the  committee 
may  the  more  injure  himself,  or  society,  the  emitter  most  wounds  the  parent's 
heart?     And  is  it  not  so  with  the  great  Father  of  us  all?     (Ibid.)       Omission  the 
sin  of  the  lost ; — Why  is  any  man  lost  who  is  lost  ?    Is  it  because  he  did  certain 
things  which  brought  down  upon  him  the  righteous  retribution  of  eternal  punish- 
ment ?    No ;  but  because,  having  broken  God's  commandments,  he  omitted  to  use 
God'B  way  of  escape — to  go  to  Christ,  to  believe  the  promises,  to  accept  pardon,  to 
realize  truth  :  therefore  he  is  lost ;  and  the  cause  of  the  final  condemnation  of  every 
sinner  in  hell  is  a  sin  of  omission.     The  gospel  precept — unlike  the  law — is  direct 
and  absolute,  not  negative:    "Thou  shalt  love  God,  and  thy  neighbour."    And 
therefore  the  transgression  must  consist  in  an  omission.     It  is  only  by  not  loving, 
that  you  can  be  brought  in  guilty,  under  the  code  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(Ibid.)        Religious  duties  great  and  small  to  be  combined : — Turning  to  the  house- 
hold, we  may  see  how  the  principle  here  stated  holds  good.  Public  religious  services 
must  not  be  made  the  substitute  for  home  duties ;  and,  again,  home  duties  must  not 
be  pleaded  as  an  apology  for  the  neglect  of   public  ordinances.    Arrangementa 
ought  to  be  made  for  rightly  engaging  in  both.     The  instructing  of  other  people's 
children  must  not  be  allowed  to  keep  us  ir^m  giving  needed  attention  to  the  godly 
upbringing  of  our  own.     And,  again,  the  training  of  our  own  families  should  not 
be  made  a  plea  for  exemption  from  aU  effort  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  those  of 
others.    A  workman  meeting  a  friend  on  the  street  in  Edinburgh,  one  Monday 
morning,  said  to  him,  "  Why  were  you  not  at  church  last  night  t   our  minister 
preached  an  excellent  sermon  on  home  religion.     Why  were  you  not  there  to  hear 
it?  "     •'  Because,"  was  the  answer,  "  I  was  at  home  doing  it."     That  was  a  good 
answer,  for  the  service  was  an  extra  one,  and  the  man  had  been  at  church  twice 
before.     So  ho  was  right,  with  the  third,  to  give  his  home  duties  the  preference. 
But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  the  *'  at  home  doing  it "  is  not  all,  and  it  should  be  so 
provided  for  as  not  to  take  away  from  proper  attendance  on  regular  ordinances, 
otherwise  the  result  will  be  that  after  a  while  religion  will  not  be  much  cared  for 
either  in  the  church  or  in  the  home.     A  tardy  student  coming  late  into  the  class 
•was  asked  by  his  professor  to  account  for  his  want  of  punctuality;   and  replied 
that  he  had  delayed  for  purposes  of  private  devotion.   But  his  teacher  very  properly 
reproved  him  by  saying,  ♦'  You  had  no  right  to  be  at  your  prayers,  when  you  ought 
to  have  been  here ;  it  is  your  duty  to  make  such  arrangements  that  the  one  shall 
not  interfere  with  the  other."     So  in  regard  to  the  conflicting  claims  of  the  house- 
hold and  the  church  upon  you.     Make  arrangements  for  giving  due  attention  to 
both,  and  do  not  sacrifice  the  one  on  the  shrine  of  the  other.    (TV.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Thi-se.  things  done,  and  others  not  left  undone : — A  clear  conception  of  the  real  nature 
of  Phariseeism  is  all  that  is  needed  to  vindicate  the  severity  of  this  denunciation. 
1.  The  error  of  the  Pharisees  was  not  superficial,  but  fundamental.    Their  religion 
was  not  simply  defective,  but  positively  false.     2.  Such  radically  erroneous  notions 
concerning  religion,  lulled  the  Pharisees  into  absolute  self -security.    8.  Still  further 
we  may  account  for  the  severity  of  these  denunciations  from  the  fact  that  the 
Saviour  foresaw  that  Phariseeism  would  in  after  ages  become  the  greatest  hindrance 
to  the  progress  of  His  cause  in  the  world.     There  is  a  constant  tendency  to  retain 
the  form  after  the  Ufe  has  departed.     I.  That  the  commands  of  God  abb  op  dut- 
RBENT  DEOKRES  o»  iMPORTANOK.    There  are  matters  of  more  weight  than  otherf 
among  the  Divine  precepts.    The  heart  that  reverences  God  will  seek  to  obey  all, 


CHAP,  xxra.]  ST.  BI ATT  HEW.  631 

but  each  in  its  ovm  orc^er.  In  morals  as  in  doctrine  there  are  things  essential  and 
non-essential.  The  weightiest  of  all  God's  commancls  have  respect  to  judgment, 
mercy,  faith.  The  inner  is  more  important  than  the  outward  life  ;  out  of  the  heart 
are  the  issues  of  life,  and  therefore  should  have  the  greatest  attention.  So  the 
great  things  and  the  smaller  will  foUow  in  their  train.     II.  That  attention  to  thh 

MATTERS    OF    LESS    IMPOBTANCB    WILL    MOT    COMPENSATE    FOB    THE    NEGLECT     OF    THOSB 

WHICH  ABE  OF  ESSENTIAL  MOMENT.  Punctillous  title-pajiug  will  uot  condone 
lack  of  humble  faith  in  God.  III.  That  when  the  heart  is  right  with  God  through 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  both  the  weightier  matters  and  those  of  LEt:s  import- 
ance WILL  BE  PROPERLY  ATTENDED  TO.  (Ibid.)  The  gnat  and  the  camel : — 
I.  Inward  qualities  count  for  more  than  outward  observances.  II.  That  a  just 
sense  of  proportion  is  essential  to  a  well -regulated  Christian  mind.  It  is  no  infre- 
quent thing  to  find  a  person  who  seems  to  be  very  religious  curiously  deficient  in 
the  sense  of  proportion.  He  cannot  quite  see  what  is  great  or  what  is  sruall.  If 
he  be  disposed  to  obstinacy  or  bigotry,  he  simply  regards  all  that  is  plain  to  him  as 
great ;  and  alJ  his  tenets  and  regulations  as  equally  great.  If  he  be  merely  small- 
minded,  by  natural  afiinity  he  fastens  keenly  on  small  points.  These  are  of  the 
proper  size  for  him ;  and  he  takes  them  to  be  quite  large.  Or  if  he  be  of  a  self- 
regarding  mind,  considering  religion  simply  with  reference  to  his  own  safety,  he  laya 
all  the  stress  on  the  truths  which  are  near  himself,  and  has  but  a  faint  appreciation 
of  those  which  are  much  more  vast  but  more  remote.  (D.  Fmser,  D.D.) 
Cumviin : — "  That  we  meet  so  often,"  says  Sir  Thomas  Brown,  "  with  cummin 
seeds  in  many  parts  of  Scripture,  in  reference  unto  Judaea,  a  seed  so  abominable  at 
present  to  our  palates  and  nostrils,  will  not  seem  strange  unto  any  who  consider  the 
frequent  use  thereof  among  the  ancients,  not  only  in  medical,  but  in  dietetical  use 
and  practice;  for  their  dishes  were  filled  therewith ;  and  their  noblest  festival  pre- 
parations in  Apicius,  were  not  without  it ;  and  even  in  the  polenta  and  parched 
com,  the  old  diet  of  the  Eomans,  unto  every  measure  they  mixed  a  small 
proportion  of  linseed  and  cummin  seed.  And  so  cummin  is  justly  set  down 
among  things  of  vulgar  and  common  use.  {C.  Bulkley.)  Tithe  of  mint: — The 
Pharisee,  in  his  minute  scrupulosity,  made  a  point  of  gathering  the  tenth  sprig  of 
every  garden  herb,  and  presenting  it  to  the  priest.  {Dean  Pluwptre.)  Straining 
out  a  gvat : — The  expression  may  be  more  precisely  rendered,  "  strain  out  a 
gnat,"  and  then  there  may  be  a  reference  intended  to  the  custom  that  prevailed, 
among  the  more  strict  and  accurate  Jews,  of  straining  their  wine  and  other 
drinks,  lest  they  should  inadvertently  swallow  a  gnat,  or  some  other  unclean 
insect:  supposing  that  thereby  they  would  transgress  (Lev.  xi.  20,  23,  41,  42). 
A  traveller  in  North  Africa,  where  Eastern  customs  are  very  jealously  retained, 
reports  noticing  that  a  Moorish  soldier  who  accompanied  him,  when  he  drank, 
always  unfolded  the  end  of  his  turban,  and  placed  it  over  the  mouth  of  his  bota, 
drinking  through  the  muslin  to  strain  out  the  gnats,  whose  larva  swarm  in  the 
water  of  that  30untry.     (Trench.) 

Vers.  25-28.  For  ye  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup. — 2Ioral  ahhaion : — By 
this  allusion  to  t>ie  cup  and  platter  the  Saviour  taught  that  it  is  necessarv^  to  cleanse 
the  heart  first,  that  the  external  conduct  might  be  pure.  I.  Why  must  we  cleanse 
ourselves  from  sin  ?  1.  Because  it  renders  us  injurious  to  our  fellow-men.  2. 
Because  it  hinders  prayer.  3.  Because  it  renders  us  offensive  to  God.  4.  Because 
it  is  destructive  to  ourselves.  II.  How  may  we  cleanse  ourselves  from  sin  ?  1. 
Not  by  merely  desiring  to  be  cleansed.  2.  Not  by  external  reformations.  3.  Not 
by  scrupulous  attention  to  religious  ordinances.  4.  Not  by  mere  repentance.  5. 
But  by  faith  in  the  only  cleansing  element — the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  HI.  When 
may  w^e  cleanse  ourselves  from  sin  ?  Now  1  1.  Delay  increases  the  difficulty.  2. 
The  present  the  only  time  of  which  we  are  sure.  3.  God's  commands  brook  no 
delay,  &c.  {A.  Tucker.)  Hypocrisy  contradictory  : — Hypocrites  are  like  pictures 
on  canvas,  they  show  fairest  at  farthest.  A  hypocrite's  profession  is  in  folio,  but 
his  sincerity  is  so  abridged  that  it  is  contained  in  decimo-sexto,  nothing  in  the  world 
to  speak  of.  A  hypocrite  is  like  the  Sicilian  Etna,  flaming  at  the  mouth  when  it 
hath  snow  at  the  foot.  Their  moutl's  talk  hotly,  but  their  feet  walk  coldly.  The 
nightingale  hath  a  sweet  voice,  but  a  lean  carcase ;  a  voice,  and  nothing  else  but  a 
voice:  and  so  have  aU  hypocrites.  (Adams.)  Hyjwcrixy  deceptive : — As  a  tliick 
wood  that  giveth  great  shadow  doth  dehght  the  eyes  of  the  behol>(ers  greatly  with 
the  variety  of  tiourishing  trees  and  pleasant  plants,  so  that  it  seemeth  to  be  ordained 
only  for  pleasure's  sake,  and  yet  within  is  full  of  poisonous  serpents,  ravening  woivea. 


632  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xua. 

and  other  wild  beasts  ;  even  so  a  hypocrite,  when  outwardly  he  seemeth  holy  and 
to  be  well  furnished  with  all  sorts  of  virtues,  doth  please  well  the  eves  of  hia 
beholders  ;  but  within  him  there  lurketh  pride,  envy,  covetousness,  and  all  manner 
of  wickedness,  like  wild  and  cruel  beasts  wandering  in  the  wood  of  his  heart. 
(Cawdray.)         Whited  sepulchres: — Appearances  not  always  to  be  trusted: — Hypo- 
crites seem  as  glow-worms,  to  have  both  light  and  heat ;  but  touch  tbem  and  they 
have  neither.     The  Egyptian  temples  were  beautiful  on  the  outside,  when  within 
ye  should  find  nothing  but  some  serpent  or  crocodile.    Apothecaries'  boxes  oft  have 
goodly  titles  when  yet  they  hold  not  one  dram  of  any  good  drug.  A  certain  stranger 
coming  on  embassage  unto  the  senators  of  Rome,  and  colouring  his  hoary  hair  and 
pale  cheeks  with  vermilion  hue,  a  grave  senator  espying  the  deceit  stood  up  and 
said,  '  What  sincerity  are  we  to  expect  from  this  man's  hands,  whose  locks,  and 
looks,  and  lips,  do  lie  ?  "    Think  the  same  of  all  painted  hypocrites.     These  we 
may  compare  (as  Lucian  doth  his  Grecians)  to  a  fair  gilt  bossed  book ;  look  within 
it,  and  there  is  the  tragedy  of  Thyestes  ;  or  perhaps  Arrius'  Thalya ;  the  name  of  a 
muse,  the  matter  heresy  ;  or  Conradus  Vorstius'  book-monster  that  hath  De  Deo  in 
the  front,   but  atheism   and   blasphemy  in  the  text.     (J.  Trapp.)        False  ap- 
pearances : — If  you  go  into  a  churchyard  some  snowy  day,  when  the  snow  has  been 
falling  thick  enough  to  cover  every  monument  and  tombstone,  how  beautiful  and 
white  does  everj'thing  appear  I     But  remove  the  snow,  dig  down  beneath,  and  you 
find  rottenness  and  putrefaction — dead  men's  bones  and  all  unclearmess.    How  like 
that  churchyard  on  such  a  day  is  the  mere  professor — fair  outside,  sinful,  unholy 
within  I     The  grass  grows  green  upon  the  sides  of  a  mountain  that  holds  a  volcano 
in  its  bowels.     IT.  Guthrie,  D.D.)       Emblem  of  hypocrisy  : — A  very  capital  painter 
in  London  exhibited  a  piece  representing  a  friar  habited  in  his  canonicals.    View 
the  painting  at  a  distance,  and  you  would  think  the  friar  to  be  in  a  praying  attitude. 
His  hands  are  clasped  together,  and  held  horizontally  to  his  breast;  his  eyes  meekly 
demissed  like  those  of  the  publican  in  the  gospel,  and  the  good  man  appears  to  be 
quite  absorbed  in  humble  adoration  and  devout  recollection.    But  take  a  nearer 
survey,  and  the  deception  vanishes.    The  book  which  seemed  to  be  before  him  is 
discovered  to  be  a  punch-bowl  into  which  the  rascal  is  all  the  while,  in  reality,  only 
squeezing  a  lemon.     How  lively  a  representation  of  a  hypocrite  !     (G.  S.  Bowes.) 
There  is  a  spice  of  hypocrisy  in  us  aU.     (S.  Rutherford.)        The  hypocrite — the 
man  that  stole  the  livery  of  heaven  to  serve  the  devil  in.     (R.  Pollok.)        The 
hypocrite  takes  a  partial  Christ : — The  hypocrite  maps  out  the  road  to  Zion,  knows 
it  well,  has  sounded  with  plummet  the  depths  of  the  promises,  can  talk  about  them. 
But  he  has  accepted  a  two-parts  Christ ;  there  is  perhaps  a  little  pet  sin,  snugly 
tucked  up  in  a  warm  comer  of  his  heart,  that  he  is  unwilling  to  part  with.    Christ 
is  his  Priest,  bis  Prophet,  but  he  will  not  have  Him  as  his  King.      Hypocrisy  some- 
times difficult   to  discover: — Formality  frequently   takes    its  dwelling    near  the 
chambers  of  integrity,  and  so  assumes  its  name ;  the  soul  not  suspecting  that  hell 
should  make  so  near  an  approach  to  heaven.    A  rotten  post,  though  covered  with 
gold,  is  more  fit  to  be  burned  in  the  fire  than  for  the  building  of  a  fabric.     The  dial 
of  our  faces  does  not  infallibly  show  the  time  of  day  in  our  hearts  ;  the  humblest 
looks  may  enamel  the  former,  while  unbounded  pride  covers  the  latter.    Unclean 
spirits  may  inhabit  the  chamber  when  they  look  not  out  at  the  window.   {Archbishop 
Seeker.)         Posthumous  testimony   to  the  great  and  good: — I.  A  serious  chabob. 

1.  A  too  late  recognition  of  goodness  which,  when  living,  was  ignored  or  persecuted. 

2.  A  pretended  veneration  of  the  characters  of  the  pious  dead.  3.  In  truth  a  sig- 
nalizing of  their  own  goodness.  II.  A  falsk  defence.  1.  Their  cliaracter  beHed 
their  profession — persecutors  of  Jesus  would  hardly  have  beeu  defenders  of  Isaiah, 
Ac.  2.  Betrayed  great  ignorance  of  their  own  character.  III.  A  solemn  verdict. 
1.  Pronounced  guilty  of  the  righteous  blood  shed  by  their  party.  2.  Hypocrites  for 
pretending  a  veneration  for  departed  worth  while  they  persecuted  living  goodness. 
Tombs : — Tombs  are  the  clothes  of  the  dead  :  a  grave  is  but  a  plain  suit,  and  a  rich 
monument  is  one  embroidered.  Tombs  ought,  in  some  sort,  to  be  proportioned, 
not  to  the  wealth,  but  deserts  of  the  party  interred.  Yet  may  we  see  some  rich  man 
of  mean  worth  loaden  under  a  tomb  big  enough  for  a  prince  to  bear.  There  were 
officers  appointed  in  the  Grecian  games  who  always,  by  public  authority,  did  pluck 
down  the  statues  erected  to  the  victors  if  they  exceeded  the  true  symmetry  and  pro- 
portion of  their  bodies.  The  shortest,  plainest,  and  truest  epitaphs  are  the  best 
Mr.  Camden,  in  his  "  Remains,"  presents  us  with  examples  of  great  men  who  had 
little  epitaphs.  And  when  once  I  asked  a  witty  gentleman  what  epitaph  was  fitted 
to  be  written  on  Mr.  Camden's  tomb,  "  Let  it  be,"  said  he,  "  Camden's  Remains.*^ 


CHAP,  xxiu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  63S 

I  say  also,  *'  the  plainest ;  "  for  except  the  sense  lie  above  ground,  few  will  trouble 
themselves  to  dig  for  it.  Lastly,  it  must  be  "  true ; "  not,  as  in  some  monuments  where 
the  red  veins  in  the  marble  may  seem  to  blush  at  the  falsehoods  written  on  it.  He 
was  a  witty  man  that  first  taught  a  stone  to  speak ;  but  he  was  a  wicked  man  that 
taught  it  first  to  lie.  {N.  Rogers.)  God  searches  the  heart : — Momus,  the  heathen 
god  of  ridicule,  complained  that  Jupiter  had  not  made  a  window  in  the  human 
breast,  so  that  it  might  be  seen  what  was  passing  within.  To  an  omniscient  God  no 
window  is  needed,  every  thought,  and  wish,  and  intention  being  perfectly  discerned. 
Garnished  tombs : — The  tombs  of  saints  in  Egypt  are  held  in  great  veneration. 
They  are  covered  with  a  circular  building  in  the  form  of  a  cupola,  and  are  regularly 
whitewashed,  repaired,  rebuilt,  and  decorated,  as  was  the  case  with  the  Jews.  In 
the  larger  tombs  lamps  are  kept  constantly  burning,  as  amongst  the  Eomanists,  and 
no  Christian  is  allowed  to  enter.  At  Pera  the  tablets  are  all  upright,  and  sur- 
mounted with  turbans,  tarbooshes,  or  flowers.  The  dignity  of  the  person  in  the 
grav9  is  displayed  by  the  kind  of  turban  at  the  top  of  the  stone.  Most  were  of 
white  marble,  and  many  richly  gilt  and  ornamented.  They  are  about  the  size  of 
our  railway  raile-posts,  and  are  as  thick  on  the  ground  as  nine-pins.  The  flowers 
denote  females.  Some  are  painted  green,  these  were  descendants  of  Mahomet. 
{Gadsby.)  Whitened  sepulchres: — ^In  the  plains  of  Sahrai-Sirwan  Eawlinson 
noticed  many  whitewashed  obelisks  placed  on  any  elevations  which  occurred  con- 
veniently, some  rising  to  the  height  of  fifteen  feet,  a  modern  example  of  "  whitened 
Bepulchres."  The  custom  of  "  garnishiug  the  sepulchres  "  prevails  more  or  less 
throughout  Persia.  Outward  purification  must  begin  within: — I.  It  is  a  cha- 
racteristic of  fallen  men  that  they  are  apt  to  content  themselves  with  cleansing  the 
outside.  They  are  at  greater  pains  to  seem  pure  than  to  be  pure.  II.  Though  out- 
ward parity  is  desirable,  and  even  measurably  praiseworthy,  yet,  if  it  be  not  the 
fruit  of  a  purified  heart,  it  is  unreliable  and  comparatively  valueless.  For  the 
welfare  of  this  life  it  is  better  that  one  should  be  winning  than  repulsive,  moral 
than  immoral.  It  is  better  to  have  a  washed  outside  than  to  have  both  outside  and 
inside  filthy.  If  outside  only  it  is  unreliable  ;  has  no  inherent  permanency.  III. 
A  cleansed  heart  is  a  sure  producer  of  genuine  and  permanent  purity  of  hfe.  Learn: 
1.  That  God  estimates  character  by  the  state  of  the  heart.  2.  That  man  has  a 
corrupt  heart,  and  is  therefore  loathsome  in  God's  sight.  3.  That  to  have  God's 
favour  man  must  be  cleansed,  and  that  to  be  effectual  it  must  begin  in  his  heart. 
4.  That  there  is  such  a  thing  as  being  effectually  cleansed  and  rendered  acceptable 
to  the  Holy  One.  (T.  Williston.)  Deception  deceived  : — So  it  ever  comes  to  pass 
that  we  are  punished  for  deceiving  others  by  being  ourselves  deceived.  Our  success 
secures  our  delusion.  When  an  act  which  is  properly  an  indication  of  some  good 
motive  is  repeatedly  performed  in  the  sight  of  those  who  cannot  see  the  heart,  they 
take  for  granted  the  motive  and  give  us  the  credit  of  it — provided  only  the  act  be 
of  the  class  which  it  is  the  fashion  of  the  day  and  place  to  applaud  as  religions. 
We  are  assumed  to  be  what,  at  first,  we  know  we  are  not.  But  in  time  this  know- 
ledge fades  away  ;  we  accept  as  the  independently  formed  judgment  of  others  that 
which  really  rested  upon  our  own  successful  deception ;  we  come  to  consider  our 
conduct  as  in  itself  suflicieni  proof  of  the  motive  which  is  universally  assumed  to 
be  its  source.  We  move  in  a  circle  of  hypocrisy,  and  it  becomes  dilficult  to  decide 
whether  we  are  the  authors  or  the  victims  of  the  delusion.  We  are,  in  fact,  both. 
{J.  C.  Coghlany  D.D.) 

Vers.  29,  S3,  86.  How  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell  7 — The  difficulty  oj 
escaping  the  damnation  of  hell: — I.  What  Tona  situation  actually  is.  1.  You  are 
even  now  i  uder  sentence  of  coudemnation.  2.  Yon  need  to  be  awakened,  no  man  will 
escape  a  danger  he  does  not  perceive.  3.  In  order  to  escape  final  condemnation  you 
must  pursue  religion  with  perseverance.  11.  The  obstacles.  1.  The  effect  of  sin  is  to 
make  men  blind  to  their  own  sins.  2.  The  sinner  often  seeks  deliverance  in  a  way  in 
which  it  cannot  be  obtained.  3.  The  unbelieving  heart  will  not  submit  to  God  until  its 
opposition  be  removed.  4.  The  fascinating  power  of  worldly  objects.  5.  Then  you 
eay  the  difficulties  are  so  great  that  yon  have  not  courage  to  make  the  attempt  to 
escape.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Pretence  vain: — To  pretend  holiness  when  there  is 
none  is  a  vain  thing.  What  were  the  foolish  virgins  better  for  their  blazing  lamps 
when  they  wanted  oil  ?  What  is  the  lamp  of  profession  without  the  oil  of  saving 
grace  P  What  comfort  will  a  show  of  holiness  yield  at  last  ?  Will  painted  gold 
enrich  7  Painted  wine  refresh  him  that  is  thirsty  t  Will  painted  holiness  be  a 
cordial  at  the  hour  of  death  7    A  pretence  of  sanctification  is  not  to  be  rested  in. 


534  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Iohap.  xim. 

Many  ships  have  had  the  name  of  Hope,  the  Safeguard,  the  Triumph,  yet  hav« 
been  cast  away  upon  the  rocks ;  so  many  who  have  had  the  name  of  saintship  have 
been  cast  into  hell.  (T.  ]rati<on.)  Suspension  and  infliction  of  judgments: — 1. 
It  is  not  right  that  God  should  punish  one  generation  for  the  sins  of  another.  S. 
It  is  just  that  God  should  punish  all  goneiations  for  their  own  sins.  3,  God  might 
if  He  pleased  pass  by  the  sins  of  all  generations  ;  He  might  puuish  them  hereafter, 
not  here.  4.  It  is  right  that  God  should  punish  one  generation  and  not  another. 
He  has  always  acted  as  a  Sovereign  in  sparing  or  punishing  particular  generations. 
God  delayed  to  destroy  the  Egyptians.  5.  When  God  does  spare  oue  generation 
and  punish  another  He  alwa^  s  has  some  good  reason  for  "both  sparing  and 
punishing.  6.  The  sins  of  one  generation  may  be  a  good  reason  why  God  should 
punish  the  sins  of  another.  7.  It  is  criminal  and  foolish  for  one  generation  to 
imitate  the  sins  of  a  former.  8.  It  is  well  for  the  present  generation  to  discoun- 
tenance open  vices  prevailing.  9.  Sinners  always  are  the  troublera  of  the  world. 
(.V.  Evimoiis,  D.D.) 

Vers.  37-39.  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  Wllest  the  prophets. — The 

invitation  refused: — Consider  some  of  the  different  modes  in  which  the  rejection  of 
God's  call  has  been  made.  For,  all  do  not  reject  Him  alike.  I.  Some  will  even 
rise  up  and  say,  "  I  do  not  consider  that  i  have  ever  yet  been  called."  1.  Those 
who  wish  they  could  believe  they  had  been  called,  but  cannot  think  such  good  news 
true.  2.  Those  who  are  waiting  for  a  louder,  more  irresistible  call,  saying,  "  Why 
does  cot  God,  if  He  would  indeed  save  me,  make  some  great  interposition  on  my 
behalf  ?  "  Alas  for  the  guilty  unbelief  of  the  one,  and  tbe  awful,  blasphemous  pre- 
sumption of  the  other  1  II.  Those  who,  although  conscious  of  having  been  called, 
yet  treat  the  matter  with  indifference.  These  are  "  men  at  ease  in  Zion "  i 
familiarized  with  stifled  convictions ;  of  secular  habit  of  mind  ;  to  whom  invisible 
things  carry  no  reahty  in  daily  life.  Three  classes  of  them  depicted  in  Luke  xiv. 
18-20.  III.  Those  who  recognize  the  importance  of  the  Divine  call,  but  who  put 
OFF  THE  acceptance  OF  IT.  Satan  decoys  them  by  enticing  pictures  of  their  own 
future.  They  live  in  fancies  of  their  own  coming  holiness,  thinking  that  to-morrow'a 
goodness  will  make  up  for  to-day's  worldliness.  Oh  the  sin  !  As  if  they  could 
command  the  sovereign  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  1  As  if — having  refused  Him 
their  attention  now — they  may  recall  Him  when  they  please.  IV.  Those  who,  at 
the  time,  receive,  welcome,  reciprocate  the  love  of  God;  and  then,  when  the 
excitement  of  the  moment  is  past,  their  feelings  evaporate,  and  nothing  remains. 
Their  religion  never  becomes  a  principle.  V.  Those  who  listen  to  the  heavenly 
call,  draw  nigh,  taste  the  heavenly  gift ;  and  then  the  old,  carnal  nature  asserts  ita 
sway,  and  they  draw  back  again.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  God's  continual  calls: — 
Oh  that  "  how  often  "  !  Do  not  let  it  be  a  mere  impassioned  exclamation.  Make  it 
what  it  is,  a  distinct,  definite  question  put  to  you  tliis  day — "  how  often  f  "  And 
what  arithmetic  can  write  the  answer?  I  never  yet  visited  a  man  upon  a  sick- 
bed— I  never  talked  with  a  single  person  in  any  of  those  moments  which  unlock  the 
breast,  and  set  it  free  to  speak  its  secrets — that  I  did  not  receive  this  confession : 
"I  have  been  greatly  conscious  all  my  life  of  the  inward  sti'iving,  and  the  oft- 
repeated  calls  of  God  in  my  soul."  Sometimes,  doubtless,  those  calls  fall  louder 
and  deeper  upon  the  spiritual  ear  than  they  fall  at  other  times.  They  lie  thickest, 
I  believe,  in  early  life.  There  are  states  of  mind  we  can  scarcely  say  how,  and  there 
are  providential  scenes  we  can  scarcely  say  why,  which  give  an  intensity  to  those 
many  voices,  when  a  verse  of  Scripture  will  sometimes  roll  its  meaning  like  thunder, 
or  when  a  whisper  of  the  soul  will  carry  an  accent  tenfold  with  it.  But  the  call  is 
not  confined  to  those  specialities.  There  is  a  "finger  of  a  man's  hand"  which  is 
always  waking  the  strings  of  thought.  It  is  when  we  lie  down ;  it  is  when  we  rise 
np ;  it  is  when  we  sit  in  tbe  house ;  it  is  when  we  are  walking  by  the  way.  We 
can  see  it  on  the  little  face  of  early  childhood,  before  the  date  when  our  utmost 
memories  reach  ;  we  can  trace  it  in  ourselves  back  to  the  utmost  dawn  of  rising 
reason.  Perhaps  not  a  room  in  which  we  have  ever  laid  down  to  sleep ;  perhaps 
not  a  church  into  which  we  have  ever  entered,  even  with  careless  foot;  perhaps  not 
a  sin  which  we  ever  deliberately  went  and  did ;  perhaps  not  an  incident  for  weal  or 
woe  that  lies  on  the  chequered  path  of  life,  but  there  was  something  there  which 
swelled  that  "  how  often  ?  "  (Ibid.)  Why  the  Divine  invitation  is  refused  : — 01 
all  the  refusals  of  God's  grace,  the  real  secret  is  tlie  same.  They  may  cover  them- 
selves with  various  pretexts — just  as  persons,  having  made  up  their  mind  to  decline 
an  invitation,  begin  to  look  out  for  some  convenipjit  excuse — but  the  cause  is  one. 


CHAP,  xxm.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  5U 

It  is  not  in  any  outwird  circumstances ;  it  is  not  in  any  particular  temperament ; 
it  is  not  in  the  want  of  power ;  it  is  not  in  the  straitenings  of  Divine  grace :  but 
the  Saviour  points  to  it  at  once  with  His  omniscient  mind — "  ye  would  not."  It  is 
the  absence  of  the  will ;  it  is  the  want  of  that  setting  of  the  mind  to  God's  mind ; 
that  conformity  of  the  affections  to  God's  promises ;  that  appreciation  of  unseen 
things ;  that  spiritual  sense,  which  is  the  essence  and  the  beginning  of  a  new  life. 
Therefore  they  cannot  come.  (Ibid.)  Compassion  of  Jesus  towards  the  giiilty : — 
Scripture  is  full  of  the  sublime  and  pathetic.  It  opens  to  us  the  very  heart  of  the 
Redeemer.  Observe  here — I.  The  ckoelty  and  wickedness  of  the  Jews.  They 
paid  no  regard  to  the  character  and  Divine  conamission  of  God's  prophets.  1.  An 
act  of  great  injustice  and  ingratitude.  2.  An  act  of  rebellion  against  God.  II. 
Christ's  tenderness  and  care.  The  hen  an  affectionate  creature  to  her  young. 
When  justice  pursues,  Satan  assaults,  and  hosts  of  enemies  compass  us  round 
about ;  if  we  can  but  get  under  the  shadow  of  Christ's  ^ings  we  are  safe,  and, 
being  safe,  may  be  content.  The  wings  of  Christ  are  so  large,  they  are  sufficient  to 
cover  the  whole  Church.  They  are  also  strong  and  impenetrable,  and  ever  stretched 
out  to  screen  us  from  danger.  III.  Christ's  earnestness  and  importunity.  "  Jeru- 
Balem,  Jerusalem."  "  How  often."  IV.  Stdbbornness  and  perverseness  of  thosb 
BO  TENDERLY  REGARDED.  "  Te  would  Hot."  Not  a  Want  of  powcr,  but  of  will.  1. 
None  continue  the  slaves  of  Satan  and  sin  but  with  their  own  consent.  2.  Every 
man  may  be  saved  if  he  will.  3.  Divine  influence  necessary  to  overcome  the  sin- 
ner's enmity.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Relationship  between  the  Lord  and  Hit 
people: — I  have  been  raising  chickens  this  year,  and  have  devoted  a  part  of 
my  pear-orchard  to  the  cliicken-coops ;  and  I  have  been  accustomed  to  go  out 
mornings  and  evenings  to  see  that  the  boy  took  care  of  the  chickens.  I  think  I 
have  now  about  ten  or  fifteen  broods.  The  old  hen,  when  watching  them,  would 
cluck  ;  and  it  was  to  them  a  warning  of  danger,  I  suppose.  They  understand  it  to 
mean  that  they  are  to  come  in.  I  could  not  understand  that  language;  but  thes« 
little  things  that  had  never  been  to  school  understood  instantly  just  what  she  said. 
She  gave  her  whole  self  to  them ;  and  their  instinct  was  to  run  under  her ;  and 
when  there  to  lift  themselves  close  up  to  her  body,  and  get  their  warmth  from 
her.  I  have  watched  them  as  they  did  this  again  and  again.  What  an  idea  of  the 
intimate  and  endearing  relationship  between  the  soul  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
conveyed  in  that  figure.  (H.  W.  Beechpr.)  Christ  the  refuge  for  the  destitute: — 
I  remember  some  few  years  ago  meeting  a  young  woman  at  a  mission,  who  said 
that  for  two  years  she  had  been  trj-ing  to  make  herself  feel  her  sins,  and  could  not. 
This  was  to  her  a  great  grief.  I  had  been  preaching  on  the  words  of  Christ  in  this 
verse ;  so  I  said  to  her,  "  Suppose  a  little  chick  were  half  frozen  in  a  barn-yard, 
and  could  scarcely  feel  itself  alive  from  numbness,  what  would  be  the  best  thing  for 
it  to  do  ?  Would  it  not  be  to  flee  at  once  to  the  warmth  of  the  hen's  wing  T"  I 
think  she  saw  her  mistake.  I  think  she  learnt  that  those  who  would  learn  more  of 
their  sin,  and  who  desire  a  more  contrite  spirit,  can  find  it  nowhere  so  surely  and 
fully  as  in  nearness  to  Jesus,  trusting  only  in  His  grace,  and  finding  their  shelter 
beneath  His  merciful  wings.     (G.  Everard,  M.A.)         Willingness  to  save  : — I.  Thb 

MANIFESTATION    OF   GoD    TO   ISRAEL    WHICH   THIS   VERSE   BKINaS  BEFORE   VB.      1.   God'o 

sovereignty  of  Israel.  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem."  Why  sliould  Jerusalem  be 
singled  out  from  all  other  nations.  He  had  a  right  to  select  the  depositaries  of  His 
truth.  2.  God's  grace  in  the  messages  which  He  sent  to  this  people.  "  Them 
which  are  sent  unto  thee."  3.  God's  mercy  manifested  in  His  dealings  towards 
them.  4.  God's  love.  5.  God's  unchangeableness — "How  often."  6.  God's  justice— 
"  Behold  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  7.  God's  faithulness  in  the  final 
issue  of  His  dealings  with  Israel.  II.  The  special  instruction  to  ourselves. 
Learn  what  we  have  to  do  with  the  purposes,  messages,  salvation  of  God.  Like 
Chnst,  Christians  should  desire  and  seek  the  salvation  of  men.  {W.  Cudman,  M.A.) 
Of  God's  free  grace  and  man's  free  will: — In  this  invective  two  things  are  to  be 
considered,  the  rebellion  of  Jerusalem,  in  ver.  37  ;  the  punishment  of  this  sin,  ver. 
38.  Touching  the  rebellion  itself,  three  things  are  set  down — (1)  the  place  and 
persons ;  (2)  the  degree  and  practice  of  rebellion ;  (3)  the  manner  and  form  of 
their  rebellion.  In  this  example  of  Jerusalem's  rebellion  we  learn  many  things. 
(a)  The  vileness  of  man's  nature,  and  our  violent  proneness  to  sin.  (6)  To  exercise 
ourselves  in  the  duties  of  goodness,  meekness,  peace  to  all  men.  (c)  Not  to  oppose 
ourselves  agsiinst  the  ministers  of  God.  (W.  Perkins.)  Ond's  gracious  dealings 
with  sinners : — I.  God  has  desired  to  gather  you  to  Himself.  Have  you  not  had 
gathering  mercies,  invitations,  appeals,  providences,  seasons?    II.  But  yoa  hav* 


€86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  txit% 

often  rejected  the  oveituresof  Divine  mercy.  Tour  unwillingness  is  the  result  of 
your  ignorance  of  your  real  state,  unbelief,  love  of  the  world,  dislike  to  Christ's 
terms.  III.  The  obstinate  rejection  of  the  Divine  mercy  must  involve  the  sinner  Id 
irreparable  ruin.  Application :  In  order  to  salvation  your  will  must  harmonize 
with  the  will  of  God.  The  entire  responsibility  is  with  you.  (J.  Burns,  LL.D.) 
Privilege  and  duty  : — I.  Jerusalem's  peivileges.  The  natural  advantages  of  Jeru- 
salem were  very  great.  Typical  of  higher  spiritual  privileges — the  goodly  fellow- 
ship of  the  prophets  ;  the  extraordinary  ministrations  of  special  men,  raised  up  and 
qualified  by  God,  and  sent  to  warn  people  from  their  sins,  and  to  bid  them  repent 
and  live  ;  the  personal  ministry  of  the  Bon  of  God.  The  mind  involuntarily  turns 
to  the  privilegps  of  England,  and  of  London.  II.  Jerusalem's  sins.  Ingratitude 
and  cruelty.  Illustrates  ihe  lengths  which  those  will  go  in  sin  who  cherish  affection 
for  torbidden  sins,  and  who  harden  their  hearts  agamst  Divine  things.  III.  Jeru- 
salem's DOOM.  Wain  against  ijardness  of  heart  and  contempt  of  the  word  and 
doctrine.  {J.  J.  Sargent.)  I.  Men,  while  they  are  m  a  state  of  nature,  are 
exposed  to  imminent  danj^'er.  As  transgressors  of  the  law  of  God  they  are  liable 
to  its  penalty.  TLey  overlook  this  danger,  but  it  is  real,  and  it  is  terrific.  II. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  offers  Himself  as  a  shelter  against  this  danger.  If  He 
had  been  a  mere  man  He  could  not  have  been  the  Saviour.  III.  He  fulfils  this 
function  with  condescending  tenderness.  IV.  He  delivers  His  people  by  the  substi- 
tution of  His  own  life  for  theirs.-  V.  The  immediate  result  of  application  to  Him  is 
safety.  VI.  Men  are  responsible  in  the  matter  of  their  own  salvation.  (President 
Davies.)  Judgment  in  tears: — Such  is  the  affecting  apostrophe  in  which  our 
Lord's  faithful  denunciations  of  "  Woe,  woel  "  terminate.  Like  the  thunder-cloud, 
which,  having  discliarged  its  bolt  at  the  earth,  weeps  itself  a^ay — exhausts  itself  in 
a  healing  shower,  which  closes  the  rent  it  had  made — so  His  pity  commiserates, 
and  pours  itself  forth  over  those  whom,  in  the  same  breath.  He  had  felt  Himself 
called  to  rebuke.  (Dr.  J.  Harris).  Christ's  protection  rejected: — As  much  as  to 
say,  as  the  parent  bird,  when  she  sees  some  bird  of  prey  hovering  over  her  helpless 
young,  gives  them  the  signal,  which  nature  teaches  them  to  understand,  and 
vipreads  her  wings  to  protect  them,  resolved  to  become  a  prey  herself  rather  than 
her  tender  brood  ;  or,  as  she  shelters  them  from  the  rain  and  cold,  and  cherishes 
them  under  her  friendly  featliers, — so,  says  the  compassionate  Eedeemer,  bo,  O 
Jerusalem  !  I  see  thy  children,  like  heedless  chickens,  in  the  most  imminent  danger; 
I  see  the  judgments  of  God  hovering  over  them ;  I  see  the  Roman  eagle  ready  to 
seize  them  as  its  prey  ;  I  see  storms  of  vengeance  ready  to  fall  upon  them  ;  and 
how  often  have  I  invited  them  to  fly  to  me  for  shelter,  and  gave  them  the  signal  of 
theif  danger  I  how  often  have  I  spread  the  wings  of  My  protection  to  cover  them, 
and  keep  them  warm  and  safe  as  in  My  bosom  1  but,  O  lamentable  1  0  astonishing  I 
ye  would  not  I  I  was  willing,  but  ye  would  not  1  The  silly  chickens,  taught  by 
nature,  understand  the  signal  of  approaching  danger,  and  immediately  fly  for 
shelter ;  but  ye,  more  silly  and  presumptuous,  would  not  regard  My  warnings ; 
would  not  believe  your  danger,  nor  fly  to  Me  for  protection,  though  often — oh,  how 
often — warned  and  invited!  (President  Davies.)  O  Jerusalem: — I.  What  it  is 
Christ  proposed  to  confer  upon  His  people.  Christ  not  only  willing  but  tenderly 
anxious  to  confer  the  various  privileges  of  light  and  grace.  1.  When  our  Saviour 
declares  He  would  have  collected  them,  He  means  He  would  bless  them  with  all  the 
privileges  common  to  that  Church,  of  which  He  was  the  head,  and  which  He  came 
to  construct.  2.  The  moral  state  of  the  people  when  our  Saviour  stated  His  will- 
ingness to  receive  them  to  Himself.  The  readiness  of  Christ  to  receive  any  class  of 
sinners.  The  haughty  Pharisee.  The  infidel  Sadducee.  They  had  rejected  the 
ministry  of  Christ.  Divine  love  goes  out  towards  these.  3.  Their  danger.  II. 
The  declaration  of  Christ  respecting  the  means  employed  for  our  salvation — "  I 
would  have  gatijered  you."  1.  Tenderness.  2.  Long-suffering.  3.  A  time  will 
come  when  He  will  leave  us  to  our  sins  if  we  continue  to  spurn  Him  from  us.  (J. 
Dixon,  D.D.)  ChrisVs  pitij  for  tiie  sinner: — The  reasons  of  this  special  sym- 
pathy. I.  Clirist  as  our  llcdeemer  knows  the  dreadfulness  of  sin,  and  therefore 
pities  those  to  whom  it  clings.  II.  He  pities  the  sinner,  knowing  all  that  is  in- 
volved  in  his  final  doom.  HI.  Christ  is  the  exponent  of  God's  infinite  love  to  man. 
IV.  There  is  a  ground  for  this  compassion  of  Christ,  growing  out  of  His  knowledge 
of  the  completeness  of  His  salvation  and  the  security  of  those  who  aicept  it.  V. 
The  Saviour's  compassion  is  founded  upon  His  knowledge  of  what  the  gospel  cost 
Him  to  achieve.  But  if  Clirist's  power  is  boundless  and  His  pity  so  great,  why 
does  He  not  interfere  to  save  us  anyhow  t    God  deals  with  man  as  a  free  agent     1. 


CHA?:  SSt.i  fir.  Matthew:  si? 

The  loss  of  the  sonl  is  Belf-cansed.    2.  How  great  the  sin  of  refusing  the  gospeL 
IB.  F.  Falmer,  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Tb».  1.  And  Jmyib  went  out  and  departed  from  the  temple. — Judgment  of 
erusalem  and  the  world  : — In  this  chapter  the  accounts  of  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem,  and  of  the  "  end "  of  the  world  are  so  interwoven,  that  it  is  not  easy  to 
distinguish  between  them.  Many  people  have  been  puzzled  because  they  could  not 
draw  the  line  of  demarcation  arbitrarily,  and  say  where  the  division  was.  But  the 
best  way  of  looking  at  the  passage  is  to  regard  it  as  not  confused — as  one  narrative, 
not  two.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  end  of  the  world  are  here  considered 
as  one  event.  We  who  live  in  the  present  dispensation  are  they  "  upon  whom  the 
ends  of  the  world  are  come."  The  narrative  is  of  one  thing  in  two  parts ;  one  tale 
told  in  two  chapters ;  one  drama  in  two  acts.  This  is  why  it  looks  like  two  accounts. 
And  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  this.  It  may  be  felt  to  be  the  duty  of  a  parent,  who 
has  an  unruly,  incorrigible  child,  to  administer  corporal  chastisement,  but  he  would 
nut  strike  more  than  one  blow  at  a  time.  Between  each  stroke  there  is  an  interval, 
a;id  the  parent  may,  after  having  begun,  suspend  the  punishment ;  and  then,  when 
the  waiting  time  is  over,  and  the  necessity  of  punishment  still  continuing,  he  may 
finish  what  had  already  been  begun.  The  act  of  punishment  is  one,  though  distri- 
buted over  two  periods  of  time.  So  with  God's  judgments  related  in  this  chapter. 
The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  not  merely  a  prelude  to  the  day  of  judgment,  nor 
merely  a  type  of  it,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  but  it  was  a  part  of  it.  The  day  of 
judgment,  which  is  to  come  upon  the  whole  world,  began  with  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem ;  and  God  having  struck  one  blow  in  one  place,  is  now  waiting,  with 
Bword  still  uplifted,  to  strike  again  and  finish  His  work.  The  corresponding  account 
in  Luke  tells  us  that  God  is  waiting  "  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in." 
T)ie  Jew  was  first  in  grace;  he  is  likewise  first  in  judgment.  But  the  turn  of  the 
GHntiles  is  coming  on.  Judgment  has  begun  at  the  House  of  God,  but  it  stays  not 
there.  The  awful  drama  of  the  end  of  the  world  has  two  acts,  and  the  time  in  which 
we  are  living  is  due  to  a  suspension  of  the  judgment  already  begun.  (F.  Godet, 
D  D.)  On  the  destruction  of  the  temple : — I.  An  instkdctive  question — "  See 
y«  not  all  these  things?" — these  goodly  stones,  this  stately  fabric,  this  masterpiece 
of  architecture.  The  question  was  meant  as  a  reproof ;  1.  That  they  so  much  ad- 
mired it.  As  if  He  had  said,  "  Turn  your  eyes  from  hence,  and  see  things  of  a  superior 
nature ;  the  beaaty  and  excellence  of  the  renewed  soul ;  the  gospel  Church ;  the 
house  which  is  eternal  in  the  heavens,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God.  2.  That 
which  they  admired,  they  imagined  He  must  admire  also.  But  what  are  earthly 
temples  to  Him  who  meted  out  the  heavens  with  a  span,  who  Himself  dwells  in  un- 
a^jproachable  light,  and  before  whom  the  serajihim  cover  their  feet  and  veil  their 
faces?  II.  A  solemn  dkclaration — "Verily,  I  say  unto  you,"  &c.  By  this  Christ 
may  have  intended  to  instruct  His  disciples — 1.  That  though  God  may  bear  long, 
yet  He  will  not  bear  always,  with  a  sinful  and  provoking  people.  2.  That  the  most 
stately  structures  and  the  most  splendid  edi rices,  through  the  pride  of  their  inhabi- 
tants, shall  one  day  fall  in  ruins.  Only  God's  spiritual  temple  will  not  be  burnt 
op,  nor  any  of  the  materials  of  it  destroyed.  3.  That  the  time  was  coming  when 
God  would  no  longer  prefer  one  place  of  worship  to  another.  4.  That  the  whole 
frame  of  the  Jewish  economy  should  shortly  be  dissolved.  The  substance  being 
come,  the  shadows  are  fled.  {B.  Beddome,  A.M.)  The  destniction  of  Jerusalem 
seemed  improbable : — There  was  no  outward  sign  of  any  such  disaster.  The  indica- 
tions were  all  against  that  prediction.  The  sunlight  wliich,  that  day,  glorified  the 
towers  of  Jerusalem  was  of  the  common  kind,  only,  it  may  be,  brighter  than  eyer. 
There  was  nothing  unusual  in  the  sif^ht  which  met  the  eyes  of  the  disciples.  They 
beheld  the  tide  of  traffic  ebbing  and  flowing  along  its  noisj'  streets  in  the  ordinary 
way.  They  knew  that  in  the  temple  the  priests  stood  ministering,  just  as  they  had 
done  for  years.  Therefore  Christ's  words,  His  mournful  prophecy,  His  pitying 
lament  and  tears  must  have  seemed  to  them  strange  and  uncalled  for.  And  yet, 
although  what  He  saw  was  so  different  from  what  met  their  vision,  though  He 
beheld  desolation  where  they  discerned  nought  save  splendour,  that  difference  waa 
but  the  result  of  less  than  half  a  century's  change.    In  the  crowds  then  pressing 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi». 

along  that  city's  prosperous  courts,  there  were  some  who  did  not  taste  of  death,  till 
they  drank  the  cup  of  a  worse  bitterness  ia  the  day  when  Christ's  word  was  all  ful- 
filled. (E.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Why  Jerusalem  must  be  destroyed: — ^And  now 
there  rises  the  question :  Why  did  not  Jesus  save  that  city  ?  The  awful  poril  which 
He  saw  impending  in  the  near  future  was  destined  to  involve  not  the  guilty  alone, 
but  the  Innocent  as  well ;  why  then  did  not  the  Son  of  God  avert  the  coming  tribula- 
tion He  80  bitterly  lamented  ?  Why  did  He  not  do  it  at  least  for  the  sake  of  those 
who  had  shown  themselves  friendly  to  Him,  the  humble  ones  who  followed  Uim 
with  a  sort  of  dumb  faithfulness  until  the  hostility  of  the  government,  which 
frightened  the  apostles,  filled  them  also  with  paralyzing  fear  ?  There  is  no  doubt 
that  Christ  was  able  to  dispel  that  storm  rising  so  black  and  terrible.  The  twelve 
legions  of  angels  who  were  ready  to  save  Him  from  capture,  would,  at  His  word, 
have  saved  Jerusalem.  The  myriads  of  the  army  of  heaven  could  have  turned  to  a 
retreating  flight  the  advancing  eagles  of  the  heathen  conqueror.  .  .  .  The  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem  belongs  to  tiie  workings  of  that  natural  law  in  which  there  is,  after 
a  time,  no  place  and  no  use  for  repentance,  under  which  God,  for  some  inscrutable 
reason,  permits  the  innocent  to  suffer  along  with  the  guilty,  and  where  no  regret  on 
the  part  of  any  one  can  save  him  from  the  doom  of  reaping  precisely  what  the  com 
munily  has  sown.  Christ  offered  to  the  Jewish  nation,  as  a  nation,  dehveranc* 
from  temporal  evil.  There  is  no  doubt  of  that.  He  stood  ready  to  fulfil  for  theia 
all  the  glorious  things  spoken  of  Zion  by  the  prophets.  Both  spiritual  and  earthly 
peace  lay  within  their  reach.  It  was  bound  up  in  the  kingdom  preached  and  offered 
by  Him.  He  promised  to  take  them  out  from  the  realm  of  natural  government, 
where  fixed  laws  work  on  regardless  of  the  cry  of  pain  and  the  supplication  for  pity, 
where  nothing  miraculous  ever  interposes  to  avert  the  gathered  lightning  of  moral 
retribution,  where  the  storm  of  judgment  breaks  over  the  community  that  deserves 
it,  even  tliough  some  who  are  comparatively  righteous  must  endure  thereby  what 
seems  temporal  wrong.  He  offered,  I  say,  to  redeem  that  Jewish  world  from  the 
natural  law  of  sin  and  death  and  inflexible  justice,  and  lift  it  into  the  higher,  super- 
natural realm  of  grace  and  life.  But  that  redemption  depended  upon  their  knowing 
and  receiving  Him.  And  their  selfishness  and  pride  prevented  them  from  recognizing 
Him.  Their  King  and  Redeemer  came,  but  they  cast  Him  out.  They  chose  to  be 
a  law  unto  themselves.  Hence  that  former  law  must  have  its  perfect  work.  The 
hand  outstretched  to  save  the  nation  drifting  to  ruin  was  not  grasped,  and  therefore 
that  nation  must  whirl  on  and  on,  down  the  rapids  and  over  the  brink.  The  de- 
struction of  Jerusalem  became  simply  a  question  of  time.  Inward  corruption  would 
sooner  or  later  have  accomplished  what  we  are  wont  to  regard  as  solely  the  result  of 
external  force.  The  fig-tree  had  ceased  to  bear  fruit;  and  that  fact  was  of  itself  a 
sign  of  thd  death  which  had  already  begun  to  work.  All  that  was  left  of  the  glorious 
opportunity  was  the  bitter  consciousness  that  it  was  past.  .  .  .  Under  the  working 
of  this  law,  the  drunkard  comes  at  last  to  a  point  where  repentance  is  too  late,  and 
where  death  lies  both  in  continued  indulgence  and  in  attempted  reformation.  And 
60  with  nations.  The  day  may  come  to  even  the  strongest,  when  on  the  whole  it  is 
not  worth  saving,  when,  although  there  are  many  pure  patriots  in  it,  the  only  thing 
left  for  it  to  do  is  to  die  and  be  blotted  out  of  the  map  of  the  world.  {Ibid.)  The 
W'lrtiings  of  judgment : — The  uncertainty  of  the  day  bespeaks  our  preparedness. 
When  the  disciples  asked  Christ  concerning  the  sign  of  His  coming.  He  answers 
them  with  a  how,  not  with  a  when.  He  describes  the  manner,  but  conceals  the 
time ;  suoh  signs  shall  go  before.  He  does  not  determine  the  day  when  the  judg- 
ment shall  come  after.  Only  He  cautions  them,  with  a  "  Take  heed,  lest  that  day 
come  upon  you  unawares  :  for  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all  them  that  dwell  on  the 
face  of  the  earth  "  (Luke  xxi.  34,  35).  The  bird  little  thinks  of  the  snare  of  the 
fowler,  nor  the  beast  of  the  hunter ;  this  fearlessly  rangeth  through  the  woods,  the 
other  merrily  cuts  the  air :  both  follow  their  unsuspected  liberty,  both  are  lost  in 
unprevented  ruin.  Against  public  enemies  we  fortify  our  coasts ;  against  private 
thieves  we  bar  our  doors,  and  shall  we  not  against  the  irremediable  fatality  of  this 
day  prepare  our  souls  ?  It  is  favour  enough  that  the  Lord  hath  given  us  warning ; 
the  day  is  sudden,  the  warning  is  not  sudden.  The  oli  world  had  the  precaution 
of  six-score  years,  and  that  (we  cannot  deny)  was  long  enough  ;  but  we  have  had  the 
prediction  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  of  above  fifteen  hundred  years'  standing; 
besides  the  daily  sounds  of  those  evangelical  trumpets,  that  tell  us  of  that  arch- 
angelical  trumpet  in  their  pulpits.  When  we  hear  the  thunder,  in  a  dark  night  on 
cur  beds,  we  fear  the  lightning.  Our  Saviour's  gospel,  premonishing  cf  this  day, 
U  like  thunder;  if  it  cannot  vrake  as  from  our  sins,  the  judgment  shall  oome  upon 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  639 

ns  like  lightning,  to  onr  utter  destruction.  But  I  will  thank  the  Lord  for  giving  me 
warning.  The  thunder  first  breaks  the  cloud,  and  makes  way  for  the  lightning,  yet 
the  lightning  first  invades  our  sense.  All  sermons,  upon  this  argument  of  the  last 
day,  are  thunder-claps ;  yet  such  is  the  security  of  the  world,  that  the  sons  of  thun- 
der cannot  waken  them,  till  the  Father  of  lightning  consume  them.  The  huntsman 
doth  not  threaten  the  deer,  or  terrify  him ;  but  watches  him  at  a  stand,  and  shoots 
him.  But  God  speaks  before  He  shoots ;  takes  the  bow  in  His  hand  and  shows  it 
OS  before  He  puts  in  the  arrow  to  wound  us.  (T.  Adams.)  Christ's  comivg  no 
dehixion: — The  first  reason  why  the  declarations  of  Christ  respecting  the  near  ap- 
proach of  His  coming,  although  they  were  not  realized  in  their  utmost  sense,  yet 
involve  no  error,  is  this — that  it  is  an  essential  ingredient  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
advent  of  Christ  that  it  should  be  considered  every  moment  pcasible,  and  that 
believers  should  deem  it  every  moment  probable.  To  have  taught  it  so  that  it  should 
have  pointed  to  an  indefinite  distance  would  have  robbed  it  of  its  ethical  significance. 
The  constant  expectation  of  the  return  of  Christ  is  verified,  secondly,  by  the  fact 
that  Christ  is  constantly  coming  in  His  kingdom ;  it  is  relatively  true  that  the  history 
of  the  world  is  a  judgment  of  the  world,  without  superseding  by  the  judicial  activity 
of  God,  as  already  manifesting  itself  in  the  history  of  the  development  of  mankind, 
the  judgment  as  the  concluding  act  of  all  developments.  And  it  is  here  we  find  the 
foundation  of  the  principle,  that  great  events  in  history,  wherein  either  the  fulness 
of  the  blessing  that  is  in  Christ,  or  His  severity  against  sin,  is  strikingly  manifested, 
may  be  viewed  as  types  of  the  last  time — as  a  coming  of  Christ.  To  this  category, 
BO  far  as  respects  the  fulness  of  blessing  revealed  by  Christ,  the  outpouring  of  tho 
Holy  Spirit  belongs.  (Olshausen.)  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem: — I.  An  illustration 
of  the  instability  of  all  earthly  grandeur.  H.  An  instance  of  God's  punishment  of 
Bin  in  the  present  world.  III.  An  example  of  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  prophecy. 
lY.  A  proof  of  the  abolition  of  the  Mosaic  economy.  Y.  A  cause  of  the  dispersion 
of  the  Jews.    (G.Brooks.) 

Ver.  6.  Bat  the  end  Is  not  yet — The  end  it  not  yet : — I.  So  far  as  we  have  any 
means  of  judging,  the  end  is  not  yet.  The  negative  argument  is  that  there  are  no 
conclusive  indications  of  a  speedy  end,  afforded  either  by  the  Word  of  God  or  the 
condition  of  the  world.  Such  are  alleged,  but  rest  upon  gratuitous  assumptions.  It 
ie  assumed  that  a  certain  form  or  pitch  of  moral  depravation  is  incompatible  with 
the  continued  existence  of  society ;  but  we  do  not  know  how  much  evil  is  necessary 
to  the  end  in  question.  The  same  is  true  as  to  the  predictions  of  the  Word  of  God; 
they  may  not  be  sure  signs.  Experience  renders  this  clear  ;  all  these  signs  have 
been  misapplied  before.  Let  us  look  at  the  positive  arguments  in  favour  of  the 
same  position ;  that  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  is  still  incomplete,  and  will  require 
a  long  time  for  its  completion.  Befer  to  the  grand  and  comprehensive  scale  on 
which  the  Divine  purpo-es  are  projected  in  the  Scripture.  The  language  of  the 
Bible  indicates  a  long  continued  process  of  change  and  dissolution.  The  spread  of 
the  gospel ;  the  general  vindication  of  Scriptures  from  doubt ;  to  exhibit  society  in 
its  normal  state,  and  the  effects  of  holiness  as  compared  with  sin  ;  all  will  take  ages. 
II.  It  is  betteh  to  assume  that  the  end  is  not  tet,  than  to  assume  the  contrabt. 
1.  The  doubt  in  which  Scripture  leaves  the  day  creates  a  presumption  that  it 
was  not  meant  to  influence  our  conduct  by  the  expectation  of  this  great  event  aa 
just  at  hand.  The  expectation  of  a  speedy  end  would  paralyze  effort,  while  the 
opposite  belief  invigorates  it.  2.  No  less  dissimilar  is  the  effect  of  these  two  causes 
in  relation  to  the  credit  and  authority  of  Scripture.  The  constant  failure  of  the 
prcdut^i  signs  discredits  Scripture.  S.  The  prei^aration  for  death  is  not  secured  by 
a  belief  in  the  approach  of  the  great  final  catastrophe.  If  men  are  unprepared  to 
die,  they  will  be  as  much  surprised  by  death  as  by  the  coming  of  the  end.  Let  ua 
prepare  to  die  and  thus  prepare  to  livs.  "  The  end  is  not  yet."  Let  us  not  imagine 
oorwork  done.  {J.A.Alexa7ider,D,D.)  Themagnitude  of  the  Divine  purposfi  indicates 
the  end  of  the  world  as  far  distant : — The  natural  impression  made,  perhaps,  on  aU 
nnbiassed  readers  is,  that  in  the  Bible  there  are  vast  beginnings,  which  refjuire  pro- 
portionate conclusions,  even  in  the  present  life.  There  are  germs  which  were  never 
meant  to  be  developed  in  the  stunted  shrub,  but  in  the  spreading  oak.  There  are 
springs,  in  tracing  which  we  cannot  stop  short  at  the  brook  or  even  at  the  river,  but 
are  hurried  on,  as  if  against  our  will,  to  the  lake,  the  estuary,  and  the  ocean.  Every 
■nch  reader  of  the  Bible  feels  that  it  conducts  him  to  the  threshold  of  a  mighty  pile, 
and  opens  many  doors,  through  which  he  gets  a  distant  glimpse  of  long-drawn  aisles, 
vast  halls,  and  endless  passages ;  and  how  can  he  believe  that  this  glimpse  is  tbt 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xmt 

last  that  he  shall  see,  and  that  the  edifice  itself  is  to  be  razed  before  he  steps  aoroas 
tbe  threshold?    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  7. — For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation. — War  for  those  who  reject  peace: — 
See  here  the  woeful  effects  of  refusicg  God's  free  offers  of  grace.  They  that  would 
have  none  of  the  gospel  of  peace  shall  have  the  miseries  of  war.  They  that  loathed 
the  heavenly  manna  shall  be  hunger- starved.  They  that  despised  the  only  medi- 
cine of  their  souls  shall  be  visited  with  the  pestilence.  They  that  would  not  suffer 
heart-quake  shall  suffer  earthquake.  Or,  as  Bradford,  the  martyr,  expresses  it, 
they  that  trembled  not  in  hearing  shall  be  crushed  to  pieces  in  feeling.  As  they 
heap  up  sin,  as  they  treasure  up  wrath,  as  there  hath  been  a  conjuncture  ol 
offences,  so  there  sball  be  of  their  miseries.  The  black  horse  is  at  the  heels  of  the 
red,  and  the  pale  of  the  black  (Eev.  vi.  4).  God  left  not  Pharaoh,  that  sturdy  rebel, 
till  He  had  beaten  the  breath  out  of  his  body,  nor  will  He  cease  pursuing  men  with 
His  plagues  till  they  throw  the  traitor's  head  over  the  wall.  (John  Trapp.) 
War:  — The  relations  of  Christianity  to  war  are  at  first  sight  an  extraordinary  enigma. 
The  Christian  recognition  of  the  right  of  war  was  contained  in  Christianity's  original 
recognition  of  nations,  as  constituting  at  the  same  time  the  division  and  the  structure 
of  the  human  world.  Gathering  up  the  whole  world  into  one  communion  spiritually, 
the  new  universal  society  yet  announced  its  coalescence  with  mankind's  divisions 
pohtieally  ;  it  was  one  body  of  one  kind,  in  many  bodies  of  another  kind.  It  gathered 
np  into  itself,  not  only  the  unions,  but  the  chasms  of  the  human  race,  all  that 
separated  as  well  as  all  that  united.  In  some  schools  of  thought  there  is  a  jealousy 
of  tliis  national  sentiment,  as  belonging  to  members  of  the  Clmrch  Catholic,  as  if  it 
were  a  sentiment  of  nature  which  grace  had  obliterated.  Christianity  does  not 
abolish  but  purify  nature.  It  may  be  said  that  the  tie  of  country  is  not  inculcated 
in  the  New  Testament ;  which,  on  the  other  hand,  speaks  of  us  as  members  of  the 
Church  which  it  contemplates  extending  over  the  whole  world.  Hooker  says  that 
Scripture,  by  leaving  out,  does  not  condemn,  but  only  sends  us  back  to  natural  law 
and  reason.  The  Christian  Church  adopted  nations  with  their  inherent  rights  ;  took 
them  into  her  enclosure.  But  war  is  one  of  these  rights,  because,  under  the  division 
of  mankind  into  distinct  nations,  it  becomes  a  necessity.  Questions  of  riglit  and 
justice  must  arise  between  these  independent  centres.  Christianity  does  not  admit 
but  condemns  the  motives  which  lead  to  war — selfish  ambition,  rapacity  ;  but  the 
condemnation  of  one  side  is  the  justification  of  the  other ;  these  very  motives  give 
the  right  of  resistance  to  one  side.  Individuals  can  settle  their  disputes  peaceably 
by  the  fact  of  being  under  government ;  but  nations  are  not  governed  by  a  power 
above  them.  The  aim  of  the  nation  in  going  to  war  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  oi 
an  individual  entering  a  court.  It  is  the  same  force  in  principle,  only  in  court  it  is 
superior  to  all  opposition ;  in  war  it  is  a  contending  force,  and  as  such  only  can 
assert  its  supremacy.  So  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  wars  of  self  defence,  wliich 
by  no  means  exhaust  the  whole  rationale  of  war.  War  is  caused  by  progress,  selfish 
greed,  the  instinctive  movements  of  nations  for  alteration  and  improvement.  We 
must  distinguish  the  moral  effects  of  war  and  the  physical.  There  is  one  side  of  the 
moral  character  of  war  in  special  harmony  with  the  Christian  type  ;  death  for  the 
sake  of  the  body  to  which  he  belongs.  This  consecrates  war;  it  is  elevated  by  sacri- 
fice. Is,  then,  war  to  be  regarded  as  an  accident  of  society,  which  may  some  day  be 
got  rid  of,  or  as  something  vested  in  it  ?  I.  It  is  said  that  the  progress  of  society 
will  put  an  end  to  war.  But  human  nature  consists  of  such  varied  contents  that  it  is 
very  difficult  to  say  that  any  one  principle,  such  as  what  we  call  progress,  can 
control  it.  But  if  progress  stops  war  on  one  side  it  makes  it  on  another,  and  war  is 
its  instrument;  nor  does  it  provide  any  instrument  by  which  nations  can  tzain  their 
rights.  The  natural  remedy  for  war  would  seem  to  be  a  government  of  nations  ;  this 
•would  be  a  universal  empire,  and  can  this  be  accomplished  by  progress  ?  II.  Are 
we  then  to  look  for  a  cessation  of  war  from  the  side  of  Christianity.  It  assumes  the 
world  as  it  is  ;  it  does  not  profess  to  provide  another  world  for  us  to  live  in.  It  is 
not  remedial  to  the  whole  human  race,  but  only  to  those  who  accept  it.  Prophecy 
foresees  the  time  when  nations  shall  beat  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks  ;  but  this 
applies  as  much  to  the  civil  governments  of  the  world.  It  foresees  a  reign  of  uni- 
■versal  lovo,  when  men  shall  no  longer  act  by  terror  and  compulsion.  A  kingdom  of 
peace  there  will  be.  But  Christianity  only  sanctions  war  through  the  medium  of 
national  society,  and  the  hypothesis  of  a  world  at  discord  with  itself.  In  her  own 
world  war  would  be  impossible.  lU.  Lastly,  Christianity  comes  as  the  consoler  of 
ihe  sufferings  of  war.     (/.  B.  Mozley,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  rsiv.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  641 

"Ver.  12. — The  love  of  many  sball  wax  cold. — The  love  of  the  eaints  destroyed  by 
the  abounding  of  iniquity  : — I.  When  iniquity  may  be  said  to  abound.  1.  When 
those  who  are  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel  can  see  its  doctrines  cormpted  with- 
out emotion.  2.  When  those  who  live  in  total  disregard  of  practical  religion 
increase.  3.  When  all  classes  give  each  other  countenance  in  crime,  and  provoke 
each  other  to  it  by  example,  by  solicitation,  and  by  menaces  (Gen.  vi.  5-7 ;  xix.  12, 
13).  II.  The  aboundino  ov  iniquity  operates  to  cool  the  blood  of  Christians. 
(Sketches.)  Declension  and  backsliding  in  the  Church  : — I.  The  external  position 
OF  THE  Chubch.  Abounding  iniquity  in  the  forms  of  speculative  error,  obvious  and 
shameful  sin,  direct  opposition  to  the  gospel,  &o.  II.  The  internal  state  of  thb 
Church.  The  same  circumstances  which  cause  gross  wickeduess  to  abound  in  the 
world,  produce  coldness  of  love  in  the  Church.  Antediluvians,  Jewish  history,  &c. 
The  wickedness  which  abounds  in  tlie  world  is  often  the  fruit  of  coldness  in  the 
love  of  the  Church,  and  then  the  reaction,  &o.  That  you  may  sustain  no  harm  by 
the  abounding  of  iniquity,  guard  your  attention,  affections,  &c.  Cherish  ardent, 
enthusiastic  love  to  Christ.  {A.  Tucker.)  Evil  example  contagious : — Conversa- 
tion with  cold  ones  will  cast  a  damp,  and  will  make  one  cold,  as  Christ  here 
intimates ;  there  is  no  small  danger  of  defection,  if  not  of  infection  by  such  ;  they 
are  notable  quench-coals.  This  both  David  and  Isaiah  found,  and  therefore  cried 
out  each  for  himself,  "  Woe  is  me  "  (Psa.  cxx.  6  ;  Isa.  vi.  5).  There  is  a  compulsive 
power  in  company  to  do  as  they  do  (Gal.  ii.  14).  It  behoveth  us,  therefore,  upon 
whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come,  to  beware  lest  we  suffer  a  decay ;  lest,  leaving 
our  first  love,  and  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  we  fall  from  our  former 
steadfastness  (Eev.  ii.  5 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  17).  The  world,  says  Ludolfus,  has  been  once 
destroyed  with  water  for  the  heat  of  lust,  and  shall  be  again  with  fire  for  the  cold, 
ness  of  love.  Latimer  saw  so  much  lack  of  love  to  God  and  goodness  in  his  time  that 
he  thought  verily  Doomsday  was  then  just  at  hand.  What  would  he  have  thought 
had  he  lived  in  our  age,  wherein  it  were  far  easier  to  write  a  book  of  apostates  than 
a  book  of  martyrs  ?  (John  Trapp.)  Temptations  of  the  early  Christians  to 
apostasy  : — There  was  always,  in  the  converts  of  Jerusalem,  a  strong  temptation 
towards  a  relapse  into  Judaism  ;  and  in  those  disturbed  times  which  preceded  the  fall, 
any  man  with  Jewish  blood  in  his  veins,  with  the  traditional  Jewish  temper,  the 
ancestral  beliefs,  the  intense  love  for  his  nation  and  people,  must  have  been  hard 
beset.  Why  should  he,  too,  not  choose  the  heroic  part,  and  cast  in  his  lot  with  the 
defenders  of  the  sacred  walls  ?  Why  not  with  lus  dying  body  make  a  rampart 
against  the  on-pressing  Roman,  rather  than  slip  away  in  cowardly  desertion  like  a 
traitor,  leaving  the  glorious  city  to  perish  as  it  might  ?  All  patriotic  instincts,  all 
that  the  Jew  most  cherished,  must  have  drawn  the  convert  in  that  direction  :  it  was 
a  sore  trial  to  have  to  make  this  choice  between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New. 
It  was  such  a  crisis  as  rarely  happens  to  a  man,  to  a  society,  to  a  nation.  It  broke 
up  the  old  Church,  the  old  national  life.  By  destroying  the  centralized  worship  of 
the  temple,  and  staying  the  immemorial  sacrifices,  it  taught  Christians  to  look  far 
afield,  it  bade  them  bow  down  in  no  single  shrine  to  worship  the  Father,  and  it  sent 
them  forth  to  evangelize  a  world  lying  in  darkness.  They  learnt,  by  the  fall  of  the 
Holy  City,  that  the  Christian  faith  was  to  be  not  national  but  cosmopolitan,  and 
that  out  of  the  ruins  of  a  narrower  polity  a  larger  and  wider  world  would  grow.  .  .  . 
It  was  by  endurance  and  self-denial  of  no  ordinary  kind  that  these  early  Jewish 
Christians  succeeded  in  overcoming  the  danger  besetting  them  at  every  turn.  They 
endured  to  the  end  ;  they  learned  by  patience  to  get  a  broader  and  wiser  view  of  the 
true  position  and  relation  of  the  faith  of  their  adoption.  The  sneers  of  the  uncon- 
Terted  Jews,  the  sense  that  they  had  lost  their  patriotic  standing-ground,  the 
oppression  and  sword  of  their  Roman  masters — these  were  the  bitter  draughts 
which  refreshed  their  souls,  and  ner\ed  them  for  independence  in  a  larger  sphere  of 
life.  By  these  they  not  only  saved  their  souls,  but  ennobled  their  views  and  aims, 
till  they  were  able  to  enter  fully  into  the  new  conditions  of  the  faith  of  Christ,  and 
thereby  take  an  active  part  in  the  outward  movements  of  a  missionary  church. 
{Dean  Kitchen.)  Iniquity  the  cause  of  unbelief: — We  are  not  to  expect  that 
apostates  will  own  that  iniquity  is  the  cause  of  their  apostasy.  They  have  always 
assigned  other  causes  of  it,  which  in  their  opinion  clears  them  from  all  suspicion  of 
unjust  prejudice  or  prevention.  And  these  are  (1)  the  immcral  and  unexemplary 
livefc  of  the  clergy ;  and  (2)  the  irrational  system  of  Christianity.  (Bishop  Warburton.) 
Rarity  of  steadfastness : — It  ia  but  a  "he,"  a  single  man,  that  hold«th  out,  when 
•*  many  *'  lose  their  love  and  therewith  their  reward.  Ecebolus,  JLneas,  Sylvias, 
Baldwin,  Pendleton,  Shaxton,  and  many  others,  set  forth  gallantly,  but  tired  era 


C«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOn.  [chap,  xxik 

they  carae  to  their  journey's  end.  Like  the  Galli  Insubres,  they  showed  all  theb 
valour  in  the  first  encounter.  Like  Charles  VIII.  of  France,  of  whom  Guicciarden 
notes,  tbat  in  his  expedition  to  Naples  he  came  into  the  field  like  thunder  and 
ligbtning  but  went  out  like  a  snuff.  Like  Mandrobulus  in  Lucian,  who,  the  firs\ 
year  ohered  gold  to  hia  gods,  the  second  year  silver,  the  third  nothing.  Or,  lastly, 
like  tlie  iions  of  Syria  which,  as  Aristotle  reports,  bring  forth  five  wlielps,  next  time 
four,  next  three,  and  so  on,  till  at  length  they  become  barren.  So  apostates  come 
at  last  to  nothing,  and  therefore  must  look  for  nothing  better  than  to  be  cast  off  for 
ever ;  when  they  that  hold  out  and  hold  on  their  way,  passing  from  strength  to 
strength,  from  faith  to  faith,  &c.,  shall  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  hia 
strength  ;  yea,  they  shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father. 
Caleb  was  not  discouraged  by  the  giants,  and  therefore  had  Hebron,  the  place  of 
the  giants  so  those  that  hold  out  in  the  way  of  h'  aven  shall  be  sure  to  have  heaven. 
Thomas  San  Paulius,  at  Paris,  a  young  man  of  eighteen  years,  being  in  the  fire, 
was  plucked  up  again  upon  the  gibbet,  and  asked  whether  he  would  turn.  To  whom 
he  said,  That  he  was  in  his  way  towards  God,  and  therefore  desired  them  to  let  him 
go.  That  merchant  of  Paris,  his  case  was  nothing  so  comfortable,  who,  for  jestmg 
at  the  friars,  was  by  them  condemned  to  be  hanged ;  but  he,  to  save  his  life,  was 
content  to  recant,  and  so  he  did.  The  friars,  hearing  of  his  recantation,  commended 
him,  saying,  If  he  continued  so  he  should  be  saved ;  and  so,  calling  upon  the 
officers,  caused  them  to  make  haste  to  the  gallows  to  hang  him  up,  while  he  was 
yet  in  a  good  way,  said  they,  lest  he  fall  again.  {John  Trapp.)  The  honour  of 
endurance  : — There  lies  a  ship  in  the  stream.  It  is  beautiful  in  all  its  hnes.  It  has 
swung  out  from  the  pier  and  is  lying  at  anchor  yonder  ;  and  men,  as  they  cross  the 
river  on  the  ferry-boats,  stand  and  look  at  it  and  admire  it ;  and  it  deserves  admira- 
tion. But  it  has  never  been  out  of  port :  there  it  stands,  green,  new,  untried ;  and 
yet  everybody  thinks  it  is  beautiful.  It  is  like  childhood,  which  everybody  thinks 
is  beautiful,  or  ought  to  be.  There  comes  up  the  bay,  and  is  making  towards  the 
navy-yard,  another  ship.  It  is  an  old  man-of-war.  It  has  been  in  both  oceans, 
and  has  been  round  the  world  many  times.  It  has  given  and  taken  thuuder-blowa 
under  the  flag  of  its  country.  It  is  the  old  Conxtitution  we  will  suppose.  She 
anchors  at  the  cavy-yard.  See  how  men  thiong  the  cars  and  go  to  the  navy-yard 
to  get  a  sight  of  her !  See  how  the  sailors  stand  upon  the  deck  and  gaze  upon  her ! 
Some  of  them,  perchance,  have  been  in  her,  and  to  them  she  is  thrice  handsomer 
than  any  new  vessel.  This  old  war- beaten  ship,  that  carries  the  memory  of  many 
memorable  campaigns,  lies  there  ;  and  they  look  at  its  breached  bow,  its  shattered 
rigging,  its  coarse  and  rude  lines,  its  dingy  sides,  which  seem  long  since  to  have 
parted  company  with  paint;  and  every  one  of  them  leels,  if  he  is  a  true  patriot, 
"  God  bless  you,  old  thing  I  God  bless  you  1  "  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Not  to  fail  at 
the  end  of  the  Christian  life : — When  Diogenes  had  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  liie 
in  observing  the  most  extreme  and  scrupulous  self-denial,  and  was  now  verging  on 
ninety  years  of  age,  one  of  his  friends  recommended  him  to  indulge  himself  a  little. 
•'  What  I  "  said  he,  "  would  you  have  me  quit  the  race  close  by  the  goal  t  " 

Ver.  14.  And  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  In  all  the  world  for  a 
witness. — The  goxpei  vj  the  kingdom: — I.  "Gospel" — good  news,  God  spell — the 
information  God  has  to  tell  us.  An  epitome  of  the  news.  Familiarity  with  the 
message  takes  aways  its  edge,  and  blunts  its  impressions.  II.  It  is  not  merely  % 
gospel,  good  news,  but  a  gospel  or  eouETHrNO  vkky  specific — of  a  kingdom.  This 
kingdom  is  composed  first  of  moral  and  next  of  personal  elements — "  The  kingdom 
of  God  is  not,"  &&.  Who  are  the  personal  subjects  of  this  kingdom?  Men  of  every 
rank  and  every  clime.  The  gospel  is  not  so  cramped  as  we  sometimes  think. 
III.  This  kingdom,  thus  composed,  shall  overflow  all  kingdoms.  Heathendom 
is  {rradually  dying  out  over  all  the  world.  Mahometanism  is  almost  gone ;  the 
crescent  wanes  over  all  the  earth,  &o.  The  gospel  shall  be  preached  to  all  the  world 
as  a  witness.  Not  to  convert  all  nations,  &g.  (J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  The  con- 
trolling influence  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  kingdom  of  Christ,  as  a  kingdom  of  control, 
set  up  in  the  hearts  of  His  followers.  1.  It  controls  the  opinions.  They  who  are 
nnder  this  kingdom  are  obliged  to  believe  all  the  truths  of  the  Bible.  2.  It  con- 
trols the  will.  God  makes  it  criminal  to  choose  the  evil  and  refuse  the  good.  8.  tt 
controls  the  belief  of  mankind.  The  subjects  of  this  kingdom  are  called  upon  to 
trust  in  Christ,  and  in  Him  only,  for  salvation.  4.  It  controls  the  affections — "  Thou 
shalt  love,"  Ac.  It  controls  the  temper,  pride,  and  all  those  feelings  which  art 
akin  to  it.    II.  There  is  infinite    mebcy  in  buch  coKTBoik     1.  Without  it  the 


CHAP,  xxiv.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  Mt 

opinions  of  mankind  have  ever  been  tossed  to  and  fro  by  every  wind  of  doctrine. 
2.  There  is  mercy  in  a  control  being  exercised  over  the  ■will.  Man  is  in  a  wilder- 
ness of  sin,  (fee.  3.  Were  it  not  for  this,  every  man  might  form  a  system  of  behef 
for  himself,  &c.  4.  Man's  affections  are  collected  to  one  point.  III.  The  gosfjel 
shall  be  preached  for  a  witness.  Of  human  depravity.  Of  the  method  of  recon- 
ciliation with  God,  &c.  {R.  Watson.)  The  gospel  of  the  kingdom : — L  The 
BDEJECT  of  the  text.  The  gospeL  The  gospel  of  the  kingdom.  II.  The  mode  of  iia 
communication.  The  gospel  of  the  kingdom  is  to  be  "  preached."  It  must  be 
preached  freely,  plainly,  aiiectionately,  faithfully.  III.  The  extent  of  its  ditiusion. 
The  whole  world  stands  in  need  of  it.  The  gospel  is  the  only  remedy  for  it.  It  is 
expressly  designed  for  all.  IV.  The  great  end  of  its  publication.  As  a  witness. 
It  shall  witness  to  man's  mind,  state,  &c.  1.  The  responsibility  of  having  the 
gospel  preached  to  us.  2.  Our  duty  to  labour  for  its  diffusion  among  those  who 
possess  it  not.  (J.  Burns,  L.D.)  I.  The  King  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  II.  Ths 
seat  of  this  kingdom  is  the  soul.  III.  The  spirit  of  this  kingdom  is  wise  and  bene- 
ficent and  holy.  Every  kingdom  has  its  peculiar  character.  IV.  The  progress  of 
His  kingdom  is  unostentatious ;  ine?i&tible,  yet  noiseless,  like  many  of  the 
mightier  forces  in  nature.  IV.  The  boundaries  of  His  kingdom  are  the  boundaries 
of  the  dwellings  of  human  kind.  1.  Submit  to  Christ  as  a  King.  2.  Seek  the 
extension  of  His  kingdom  by  personal  exertions,  by  pecuniary  contributions,  by 
prayer.  {Anon.)  The  gospel  a  witness: — 1.  That  there  are  ends  to  be  answered 
by  the  publication  of  the  gospel,  over  and  above  the  gathering  in  of  a  remnant  from 
the  mass  of  human  kind.  The  statement  is  simply  that  the  gospel  is  to  be  preached 
for  a  witness.  2.  We  are  bound  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  this  witness,  in  order  that 
we  may  understand  the  responsibleness  laid  on  all  who  ever  heard  the  gospel,  and 
the  ends  which  are  answered  by  its  publication.  3.  You  are  sufficiently  acquainted 
with  the  nature  of  the  gospel  to  regard  it  as  an  authoritative  account  of  all  that  is 
benevolent,  and  all  that  is  awful  in  Deity.  4.  It  is  not  an  uncertain  and  unac- 
credited witness,  but  one  which  carries  with  it  its  credentials  in  all  its  marchings  over 
the  face  of  the  globe.  5.  The  witness  of  the  gospel  hereafter.  The  gospel  is  now  a 
witness  to  warn  and  direct ;  hereafter  it  \^•ill  accuse  and  condemn.  (H,  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  universal  witness  : — The  preaching  of  the  gosped  throughout  the  world  testifies — 
1.  To  ihe  unchanging  mercy  of  God.  He  is  the  same  as  He  was  before  the  fiood — 
would  have  been  warned  of  the  end  of  their  evil  courses.  Men  shall  be  without 
excuse.  2.  To  the  character  and  mission  of  Christ.  Men  who  accept  the  gospel 
shaU  prove  that  He  is  the  Saviour.  3.  To  the  invincible  hostility  of  men.  They 
shall  have  in  their  own  characters  a  vindication  of  God's  past  judgments.  Uni- 
versal adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  men's  needs  : — The  gospel  is  a  plant  which  ia  not 
affected  by  earthly  changes.  It  is  the  same  in  the  temperate  as  in  the  torrid  zone, 
and  as  in  the  frigid.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  scorched  by  heat,  or  benumbed  by  cold. 
Age  does  not  diminish  the  freshness  of  its  bloom ;  soil  does  not  affect  its  nature  ; 
climate  does  not  modify  its  peculiar  properties.  Among  the  frost-bound  latitudes 
of  North  America,  and  the  burning  sands  of  Africa,  or  the  fertile  plains  of  India, 
we  find  it  still  shooting  up  the  same  plant  of  renown,  the  same  vine  of  the  Lord's 
right-hand  planting,  the  same  "  tree  of  life,"  raised  up  from  the  beginning  of  time, 
"whose  leaves  were  for  the  heaUng  of  the  nations,"  and  under  which  aU  kindreds, 
and  tribes,  and  tongues,  and  people  shall  one  day  rejoice,  when  privileged  to  take 
shelter  under  its  aU-covering  shade,  and  draw  refreshing  nourishment  from  its 
pereimial  fruits.  {Dr.  Duff.)  Vitality  of  the  gospi-l : — See  what  vitality  the 
gospel  has  1  Plunge  her  under  the  wave,  and  she  rises  the  purer  from  her  washing  ; 
thruut  her  in  the  fire,  and  she  comes  out  the  more  bright  for  her  burning  ;  cut  her 
in  sunder,  and  each  piece  shaU  make  another  church ;  behead  her,  and  like  the 
hydra  of  old,  she  shall  have  a  hundred  heads  for  every  one  you  cut  away.  She 
cannot  die,  she  must  live ;  for  she  has  the  power  of  God  within  her.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  15-19.  When  ye  therefore  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation. — The 

great  judgmrnt : — The  prophecy  was  by  no  means  exhausted  by  what  happened  to 
Jerusalem.  Though  it  begins  there,  it  does  not  stop  there.  History  repeats  itself. 
1.  Were  the  last  days  of  Jerusalem  calamitous  days,  times  of  great  tribulation, 
violence,  and  war — so  will  it  be  at  the  ending  period  of  the  present  world.  2.  Did 
Jerusalem's  day  of  judgment  come  on  in  a  seemingly  natural  course  of  things — so 
also  will  it  be  at  the  coming  of  the  great  day.  It  will  have  much  less  of  the 
immediately  supernatural  than  we  imagine.    3.  Were  those  last  davs  of  the  old 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  itnAt.  xar. 

eoonomy  days  of  abounding  falsehood  and  deception  —  the  same  is  to  ocoor 
again.  4.  The  zealots  in  the  days  of  Jerusalem's  troubles  would  by  no  means  believe 
what  was  before  them,  or  what  wickedness  they  were  enacting  in  the  name  of  truth. 
They  relied  on  their  covenant  privileges.  So  will  it  be  in  the  end.  6.  We  are  not 
left  without  consolation  and  hope.  There  was  an  elect  who  escaped  the  destruction 
when  Jerusalem  fell.  Jesus  will  save  His  own  in  the  day  of  doom.  {J.  A. 
Sehs,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  Not  In  tli«  winter. — Winter  and  how  to  meet  it : — The  winter  season  is 
especially  full  of  temptation,  because  of  the  long  evenings  allowing  such  full  swing 
for  evil  indulgenceB.  You  can  hardly  expect  a  young  man  to  go  into  his  room  and 
Bit  there  from  seven  to  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  reading  Motley's  •'  Dutch 
Republic  "  or  John  Foster's  Essays.  It  would  be  a  very  beautiful  thing  for  him  to 
do,  but  he  will  not  do  it.  Then  the  winter  has  especial  temptations  in  the  fact  that 
many  homes  are  peculiarly  unattractive  at  this  season.  In  the  summer  months  the 
young  man  can  sit  out  on  the  steps,  or  he  can  have  a  bouquet  iu  the  vase  on  the 
mantel,  or,  the  evenings  being  so  short,  soon  after  gaslight  he  wants  to  retire,  any- 
how. But  there  are  many  parents  who  do  not  understand  how  to  make  the  long 
winter  evenings  arractive  to  their  children.  A  good  tise  of  winter  nights : — Employ 
these  long  nights  of  December,  January,  and  February  in  high  pursuits,  in  intelli- 
gent socialities,  in  innocent  amusements,  in  Christian  work.  Do  not  waste  this 
winter,  for  soon  you  will  have  seen  your  last  snow  shower  and  have  gone  up  into  the 
companionship  of  Him  Whose  raiment  is  white  as  snow,  whiter  than  any  fuUer  on 
earth  could  whiten  it.  For  all  Christian  hearts  the  winter  nights  of  earth  will  end 
in  tiie  June  morning  of  heaven.  The  river  of  life  from  under  the  throne  never 
freezes  over.  The  foliage  of  life's  tree  is  never  frost-bitten.  The  festivities,  the 
hilarities,  the  family  greetings  of  earthly  Christmas  times  will  give  way  to  larger 
reunion  and  brighter  lights  and  sweeter  garlands  and  mightier  joy  in  the  great 
hoUday  of  heaven!  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Winter  dissipation: — This  season  is  not 
only  a  test  of  one's  physical  endurance,  but  in  our  great  cities  is  a  test  of  moral 
character.  A  vast  number  of  people  have  by  one  winter  of  dissipation  been  destroyed 
and  for  ever.  Seated  in  our  homes  on  some  stormy  night,  the  winds  howhng  out- 
side, we  imagine  the  shipping  helplessly  driven  on  the  coast,  but  any  winter  night, 
if  our  ears  were  good  enough,  we  could  hear  the  crash  of  a  thousand  moral  ship- 
wrecks. There  are  many  people  who  come  to  our  city  on  the  1st  of  September  who 
will  be  blasted  by  the  Ist  of  March.  At  this  season  of  the  year  temptations  are 
especially  rampant.  Now  that  the  long  winter  evenings  have  come  there  are  many 
who  win  employ  them  in  high  pursuits,  in  intellectual  socialities,  in  Christian  work, 
in  ths  strengthening  and  ennobling  of  moral  character,  and  this  winter  to  many  ol 
you  will  be  the  brightest  and  the  best  in  all  of  your  lives,  and  in  anticipation  I  con- 
gratulate you.  But  to  others  it  may  not  have  such  effect,  and  I  charge  you,  my 
beloved,  look  out  where  you  spend  your  winter  nights.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  23-26.  Then  If  any  man  shall  say  unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ. — I.  Let 
ns  settle  what  we  really  want  in  life,  and  we  may  safely  shut  our  ears  to  many 
counsellors.  II.  Let  us  learn  more  and  more  of  the  true  Christ,  and  we  shall  not 
be  led  astray  by  false  Christs.  III.  Let  us  give  ourselves  to  earnest  practical  living, 
and  not  gape  after  wonders.  IV.  Let  us  not  think  that  some  other  Christ  is  needed 
when  we  are  surrounded  by  great  and  unwonted  troubles.  (Anon.)  The  gl^ry  of 
the  coming  of  Christ: — The  coming  of  Christ  will  be — I.  Preceded  by  frequent 
delusive  rumours.  H.  A  self-evident  manifestation.  III.  A  time  of  judgment.  IV. 
A  time  of  great  distress  of  nations.  V.  "  With  power  and  great  glory."  VI.  For 
the  salvation  of  the  elect.  (Avon.)  I.  The  Christian  dispensation  is  disturbed  by 
attempts  of  impostors  to  delude  the  unwary.  II.  These  attempts  at  imposture  are 
accompanied  by  credentials  likely  to  deceive  r  any.  III.  There  is  in  our  possession 
a  test  sufficient  to  unmask  all  pretenders.  (Anon.)  Forewarned: — Our  Lord 
forewarns — I.  His  own  people  of  the  dang  r  of  being  led  astray.  II.  Of  the 
manner  of  His  coming — sudden,  unmistaka  le.  III.  Sinners  of  the  certainty  of 
judgment.  Do  we  heed  the  warnings?  D  we  live  as  if  we  gave  attention  to 
them  f  (Anon.)  ChritVs  advent  not  restricted : — Take  as  an  example  of  the 
twilight  condition  in  which  the  Christian  world  stands  to-day,  the  different  opinions 
that  its  members  have  concerning  the  Lord's  second  coming.  Some  say  He  came 
in  judgment  when  the  Eoman  army  encompassed  and  subdued  Jerusalem.  '*Lo  ! 
Christ  was  there;"  and  so  He  was,  in  that  Divine  Word  of  His  which  then  and  thus 


CTI.U-.  x:av.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  545 


became  visibly  true.  Others  affirm  that  He  came  in  the  desjent  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
and  so  He  certainly  did,  and  by  that  Spirit  He  still  abides  and  works  here  on  earth, 
remaining  ■with  and  in  His  Church  always  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  Yes, 
Clirist  is  here  as  well  as  there,  in  this  temple  as  well  as  in  that  where  the  first  dis- 
ciples were  gathered.  Yet  another  voice  says,  "The  Redeemer  comes  in  every 
signal  manifestation  of  spiritual  life,  in  each  great  reformation  and  revival  of  faith, 
in  each  social  uplifting  of  the  people  to  holier  desires  and  to  a  better  life.  In  ail 
of  these  Christ  is,  no  doubt,  present.  By  and  in  thein  He  is  evermore  coming.  And 
He  comes,  moreover,  to  each  individual  soul  at  baptism,  at  conversion,  and  in  the 
Holy  Communion.  He  comes  into  the  secret  closet  of  prayer  and  meditation.  He 
comes  to  every  open  heart,  and  outside  the  closed  door  of  others  He  stands,  and 
knocks,  and  waits.  Blessed  truths  are  these,  all  of  them.  Christ  does  come  hj 
many  paths  to  help  the  needy,  and  He  comes  with  power.  But  no  one  of  these 
comings  is  exclusive  of  the  others.  We  are  not  to  believe  that  Christ  is  altogether 
"  nere  "  or  "  there,"  that  His  presence  is  entirely  restricted  to  any  single  one  of  the 
many  ways  by  which  He  has  promised  to  bestow  the  blessings  of  His  risen  lifa 
And  all  of  these  comings  put  together  should  not  exclude  from  our  minds  the  beliet 
or  the  constant  thought  of  that  other  coming,  which  is  to  be  not  as  a  combination 
or  succession  ot  separate  star-gleams,  but  as  the  lightning,  a  body  of  glory  covering 
the  whole  world,  and  reaching  at  once  from  the  east  even  unto  the  west.  (E.  E, 
Johnson,  M.A.). 

Ver.  27.  For  aa  the  lightning. — The  hut  conflagration: — I.  Christ's  advent 
shall  be  sudden.  Unexpected  by  the  masses ;  like  the  flash  that  leaps  from  the 
bosom  of  the  black  cloud,  sweeps  through  the  sky,  and  completes  its  journey  in  an 
instant.  II.  Christ's  advent  will  be  with  intense  and  vivid  splendoub.  The 
lightning  fills  the  whole  world ;  leaps  from  the  east,  and  finds  its  lair  only  in  the 
remote  and  distant  west.  When  the  searching  lightning  of  that  day  shall  come  it 
will  penetrate  the  cell  of  the  captive,  Ac.  What  an  arrest  will  take  place.  The 
world  will  be  going  on  when  Christ  comes,  aa  it  does  this  moment.    There  will  bk 

SIGNS,  AND  SYMPTOMS,  AND  PREMONITORY  WASKINOa  OF  ChRIST'S  ADVENT.      1.    Some  will 

say,  on  seeing  them,  "  The  whole  thing  can  be  explained  on  the  principles  of 
natural  science."  &q.  It  may  be  so ;  but  certainly  these  scientific  objectors  seem  to 
be  the  successors  of  a  class  who  are  a  sign  of  the  times,  while  they  say,  "  Wliere 
is  the  promise  of  His  coming?"  &c.  2.  Others  will  meet  all  statements  on  the  sub- 
ject with  "  Wishes  it  may  not  be  true,"  &a.  3.  God's  ovm  people  will  say,  *'  Come, 
Lord  Jesus ;  we  have  been  looking  for  Thee,"  &c.  4.  The  testimony  of  God's  Word 
as  to  the  accompaniments  of  this  day.  5.  What  is  the  lesson  from  all  this? 
•'  What  manner  of  persons,"  cfec.  6.  Seek  to  promote  things  that  will  survive  the 
last  fire.  7.  The  prospect  of  a  dissolving  world  is  a  more  practical  motive  force 
than  the  prospect  of  death.  This  is  the  apostolic  motive  power.  {J.  Gumming, 
D.D.).  Duty  to  be  done  in  time  of  judgment : — About  sixty  years  ago,  there  was 
in  America  a  universal  superstition — not  an  enlightened  belief — that  the  world  was 
about  to  close.  They  believed  that  the  world  was  about  to  end,  because  a  total 
eclipse  of  the  sun  took  place  at  noonday.  There  was  all  the  darkness  and  the  gloom 
of  midnight.  It  happened  that  the  Congress  of  the  United  States  was  assembled 
at  this  hour ;  half  the  members  of  the  Congress  believed  that  that  dense  night, 
caused  by  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun,  was  really  the  darkness  that  preceded  the 
nshering  in  the  judgment  and  another  state  and  world.  They  were  in  great  alamx 
and  two  or  three  of  the  most  agitated  got  up  at  once,  and  moved  that  the  Congress 
do  adjourn.  There  was  a  panic.  In  the  midst  of  the  panic,  and  while  somb  were 
proposing  an  adjournment,  an  old  and  venerable  Puritan,  who  had  learned  noble 
lessons  from  the  Puritans  of  England,  the  salt  of  the  country  at  that  time,  rose  up 
and  said,  •'  Mr.  Chairman,  we  are  told  that  our  duties  are  always  imminent,  that 
they  are  always  obligatory.  Some  in  this  house  are  afraid  that  the  last  day  is 
come ;  it  may  be  they  are  right ;  I  have  some  suspicion  they  are  so ;  but  as  onr 
duties  never  cease,  instead  of  moving  that  the  house  adjourn,  as  we  cannot  see  in 
this  darkness  to  do  business,  I  move  that  the  candles  be  brought  in,  and  that  we 
proceed  to  the  order  of  the  day."  That  man  spoke  like  a  Christian,  and  he  lived 
like  a  Christian.  And  may  we  be  found  going  on  with  the  orders  of  the  day  when 
the  light  of  the  last  day  shall  flash  upon  this  world.  (Ibid.)  The  coming  of  the 
Son  of  Man : — The  Eev.  Edward  Irving  was  once  preaching  at  Perth.  The  text  waa 
taken  from  Matthew  xxiv.,  regarding  the  comi  g  of  the  Son  of  Man.  While  he  wa« 
•ngaged  in  unfolding  his  subject,  ttom  out  of  a  dark  oloud,  which  obscured  the 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxiT. 

church,  there  came  forth  a  bright  blaze  of  lightning  and  a  crash  of  thtmder.  There 
was  deep  stillness  in  the  audience.  The  preacher  paused ;  and  from  the  stillness 
and  the  gloom,  his  powerful  voice,  clothed  with  increased  solemnity,  pronounced 
these  words :  •'  For  as  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  earth,  and  shineth  even  unto 
the  west ;  bo  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be."  ChrisVs  second  coming: — 
Here  are  two  opposite  yet  ever-present  dangers.  One  is  of  fancying  that  our  Saviour 
and  our  salvation  are  to  be  found  in  some  extraordinary  out-of-the-way  fashion  ol 
religious  manifestation :  "  Behold  he  is  in  the  desert."  The  other  danger  is  that 
■we  Bhall  fancy  that  our  Saviour  and  our  salvation  are  to  be  found  in  particular 
states  of  our  owra  interior  feeling :  "  Behold  he  is  in  the  secret  chambers."  The  first 
was  Buperstition ;   this  is  fanaticism.     I.  Both  Chbist  and  His  apostles  speak 

BEPEATEDLT  OF  A  SECOND  COMING  OF  THE  SON  OF  MaN  IN  BUCH  A  SENSE  AS  FORBIDS  US  TO 

confound  the  second  WITH  THE  FiKBT.  The  two  are  put  entirely  apart  in  time, 
though  they  are  internally  and  morally  connected  with  each  other ;  the  one  pre- 
paring the  way  for  the  other,  and  each  being  in  tact  fragmentary  and  unintelligible 
without  the  other.  II.  That  coming  is  personal  and  literal.  We  may  call  signal 
social  revolutions,  reforms  in  government,  the  emancipation  of  slaves,  or  great  aces- 
sions  of  knowledge  or  charity,  new  comings  of  Christ.  The  figure  is  intelligible; 
but  they  are  not  comings  of  Him.  They  may  be  comings  of  the  impersonal  power 
and  principles  of  His  religion — partial  blessings  reminding  us  of  the  one  great  bless- 
ing that  includes  them  all ;  but  He  is  to  come.  "  Ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man(  not 
His  ideas,  but  Him)  coming  in  power  and  great  glory."  Nor  will  it  do  to  tamper  with 
Holy  Scripture  by  such  a  theory  of  intei-pretation  as  that  His  coming  means  our 
going.  The  death  or  departure  of  the  individual  is  one  thing;  the  Bible  often 
mentions  that,  meaning  just  what  it  says.  The  Lord's  coming  is  another.  III. 
This  great  coming  is  to  be  connected  with  a  separation  of  the  good  from  thb 

BAD,  the  believers  FROM  THE  DENIEE3,  THE  SPIRITUALLY  ALTVB  FROM  THE  SPIRITUALLY 

DEAD.    IV.  There  is,  however,  some  reference  to  a  kind  of  coming  of  christ 

WHICH  WAS  TO  TAKE  PLACE  IN  THE  LIFETIME  OF  THE  GENERATION  THAT  WAS  ON  THE  8TAGB 

WHILE  THE  Saviour  was  speaking.    V.  Inspired  writers,  apostles,  signify  theib 

EXPECTATION    THAT    CHRIST'S     SECOND    ADVENT    WOULD    TAKE    PLACE     DURING    THEIR   OWN 

NATURAL  LIFE.  Were  they  mir-taken,  and  mistaken  teachers  of  others?  A  vast 
amount  of  ingenious  effort  has  been  made  to  break  the  force  of  this  objection  with 
out  sacrificing  the  infallibility  of  the  record.  For  the  most  part  it  has  failed  by 
taking  the  purely  external  or  philological  method,  and  without  sounding  spiri- 
tually the  depths  of  the  Evangelic  purpose.  Let  us  honestly  take  the  language 
of  honest  men  in  its  ordinary  acceptation.  What,  then,  shall  we  say?  All 
diflSculties  are  cleared  by  the  following  proposition,  which  is  reasonable  and 
reverential :  The  purpose  of  revelation,  in  this  matter,  was  to  create  in  Chris- 
tians, not  a  belief  that  Christ  would  come  at  any  particular  hour  in  history, 
but  a  belief  that  He  is  always  at  hand,  and  that  all  Christians  should  at  all  times 
and  in  all  places  be  ready,  as  men  that  stand  with  their  lamps  trimmed  and  burn- 
ing, to  meet  Him  personally.  The  date  of  the  event  was  no  part  of  the  Divine  com- 
munication. In  proportion  as  we  rise,  in  thouo;ht,  toward  the  immensity  of  the  life 
of  God,  and  have  "  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,"  the  whole  period  of  history  shrinks, 
great  distances  dwindle,  epochs  are  pressed  together,  and  "  a  thousand  years  are  as 
one  day."  Besides,  the  highest  authority  in  modem  physical  science,  in  astronomy, 
and  geology,  and  chemistry,  harmonizes  singularly  enough,  as  to  the  issue,  with  the 
ApoBtoUc  language.  It  concludes  that  the  machinery  of  the  material  universe  is 
wasting,  its  movements  are  (-lackening,  its  balance  is  slowly  loosening,  and  that  a 
general  catastrophe  is  inevitable.  The  sneer  of  the  scientific  sceptic  of  the  last 
century  is  silenced  by  the  science  of  to-day.  We  may  say  that  in  the  Bible  pre- 
dictions generally,  borrowing  a  phrase  from  the  fine  arts,  what  we  may  call  historical 
perspective  is  lost  sight  of.  We  are  not  told  at  what  intervals  from  each  other,  or 
always  in  just  what  order,  these  majestic  events,  by  which  eternity  seems  to  open 
down  into  time,  shall  follow  on.  Chronology  is  not  the  object.  The  facts  are 
what  we  are  to  know,  and  receive,  and  feed  upon  in  our  hearts  by  faith.  The 
moment  we  begin  to  try  our  petty  arithmetic  on  them  we  miss  the  mark,  and  lose 
our  way.  We  all  know  that,  even  with  ourselves,  the  moments  of  tremendous  peril, 
when  awful  events  are  casting  their  colossal  shadows  about  as,  are  just  the  time 
when  the  ordinary  measure  of  succession  drops  out  of  fight.  We  look  across  the 
great  tract  and  see  other  great  conjunctions,  as  if  they  were  nigh  at  hand.  Christ 
Jesus  is  not  enclosed  in  time,  but  time  is  all  in  Him.  (Bishop  Huntington). 
ChrisVt  second  coming  a  revelation  : — The  essential  circumstance  in  this  parable  of 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  54f 


analogy  is  not  so  mnch  the  suddenness  of  the  splendour  that  breaks  forth  from  th» 
cloud,  as  the  wide-reaching  and  supernatural  illumination  and  revelation  which 
eome  with  it.  It  annihilates  all  the  darkness  of  the  night  and  of  the  storm.  Each 
of  all  the  hidden  objects  stands  out  clearly  manifest.  The  daylight  comes  so  slowly 
that  we  seldom  thini  of  its  revealing  power.  Even  when  we  pause  to  watch  its  in- 
crease, the  world  has  ample  time  to  grow  into  its  old  look  of  naturalness  without  any 
shock  to  us ;  and,  ere  the  sun  has  fully  risen  and  disclosed  clearly  to  our  sight  the 
familiar  objects  around  us,  we  have  already  well-nigh  forgotten  that  the  night  ever 
hid  them.  But  it  is  not  so  when  the  lightning  comes.  That  has  no  twilight.  Its 
dawn  is  its  fullest  day.  It  transfigures  the  world  at  once.  It  divides  the  light  from 
the  darkness  somewhat  as  we  imagine  God  did  at  the  beginning — separating  them 
perfectly,  and  leaving  no  neutral  ground  between  them.    (JS.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  28.  For  wherever  the  carcase  Is. — The  carcase  and  the  vultures: — Onr 
Lord  Bays,  wherever  there  is  a  rotting,  dead  society,  a  carcase  hopelessly  corrupt 
and  evil,  down  upon  it,  as  if  drawn  by  some  unerring  attraction,  will  come  the 
angel,  the  \'ulture  of  the  Divine  judgment.  There  are  many  "  comings  of  the  Lord  " 
which  on  a  smaller  scale  have  embodied  the  same  principles  as  shall  be  displayed 
in  world-wide  awfulness  at  the  last  judgment.     I.  The  first  thing  in  these  words  is 

THAT  THEY  ABE  TO  VS  A  REVELATION  OF  A  LAW  WHICH  OPERATES  WITH  CKERBINO 
CEETAINTT    THROUGH    ALL    THE    CODFSE    OF   THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY.       God  Can  tell  when 

evil  has  become  incurable,  when  the  manor  country  has  become  a  "carcase."  There 
may  be  flickeriugs  of  life  unseen  by  our  eyes.  So  long  as  there  is  possibility  of 
amendment,  "sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily."  II.  We 
have  here  a  law  which  shall  have  a  far  more  tremendous  accomplishment  in  thb 
FUTURE.  These  days  proclaim  "  the  day  of  the  Lord."  In  the  prophecies  both  of 
the  Old  and  New  1  estament  the  universal  judgment  is  seen  gleaming  through  the 
nearer  partial  judgments.  That  judgment  is  to  be  the  destruction  of  opposing 
forces,  the  sweeping  away  of  the  carrion  and  moral  evil.  There  are  many  tempta- 
tions to  put  the  "  day  of  the  Lord "  in  the  background ;  such  suppression  is 
unfaithfulness.  III.  That  this  is  a  law  which  need  never  touch  you,  nor  need  you 
know  about  it  except  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear.  It  is  told  us  that  we  may  escape 
it.  Take  Christ  for  your  Saviour  and  you  shall  have  a  refuge  from  the  vultures. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Suppression  of  retributive  umrnings  : — Such  suppression  is 

nnfaithfulness.  Surely  if  we  preachers  believe  that  tremendous  truth,  we  are  bound 
to  speak.  It  is  cruel  kindness  to  be  silent.  If  a  traveller  is  about  plunging  into 
some  gloomy  jungle  infested  by  wild  beasts,  he  is  a  friend  who  sits  by  the  wayside 
to  warn  him  of  his  danger.  Surely  you  would  not  call  a  si.Ernalman  unfeeling  because 
he  held  out  a  red  lamp  when  he  knew  that  just  round  the  curve  beyond  his  cabin, 
the  rails  were  up,  and  that  any  train  that  reached  the  place  would  go  over  in  horrid 
ruin ;  and  surely  that  preaching  is  not  justly  charged  with  harshness  which  rings 
out  the  wholesome  proclamation  of  a  day  of  judgment  when  we  shall  give  each 
account  of  ourselves  to  the  Divine-human  Judge.  {Ihid.)  Retribution  operative 
in  delay : — Now  that  is  the  law  that  has  been  working  from  the  beginning,  working 
as  well  in  regard  of  the  long  delays  as  in  regard  of  the  swift  execution.  There  is 
another  metaphor,  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  puts  the  same  idea  in  a  very  striking 
form.  It  speaks  about  God's  "awakening,"  as  if  His  judgment  slumbered.  All 
70und  that  dial  there  the  hand  goes  creeping,  creeping,  creeping  slowly,  but  when  it 
comes  to  the  appointed  line,  then  the  bell  strikes.  An*  so  years  and  centuries  go 
by,  all  chance  Of  recovery  departs,  and  then  the  crash !  The  ice  palace,  built  upon 
the  frozen  blocks,  stands  lor  a  while,  but  when  the  spring  thaws  come  it  breaks  up. 
The  sanitary  order  of  human  life: — You  know  how  in  Eastern  lands,  if  any  beast 
of  burden  falls  and  dies,  though  the  moment  before  the  whole  horizon  may  have 
been  clear,  with  not  a  bird  in  sight,  a  stream  of  vultures  suddenly  appears  to  wrangle 
over  the  unexpe 'ted  feast.  You  know  how  on  any  tropical  ocean,  if  a  carcase  be 
thrown  overboard,  though  at  the  moment  there  may  not  be  a  speck  in  the  sky,  the 
albatross  and  other  birds  of  mighty  wing  appear  as  if  by  ma^ic,  and  scold  and  fight 
over  the  welcome  repast.  Our  Lord,  then  applies  this  familiar  image  of  the  carcase 
and  the  birds  of  prey  to  the  judicial  and  retributive  forces  of  human  history,  and 
intends  to  illustrate  some  law  or  principle  by  which  they  are  governed.  I.  A  certain 
order  underlies  the  events  of  human  history.  Catastrophes  do  not  come  by  chance, 
or  spring  from  caprice.  The  effect  always  has  a  cause.  Judgment  only  follows  on 
the  heels  of  offence.  II.  This  order  is  a  sanitary  and  beneficent  order.  Unconsumed, 
the  carcase  would  but  rot  and  fester  and  infect  the  air.    All  the  birds  that  prey  oa 


643  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr9 

carrion  are  scavenger  birds,  and  we  owe  them  nothing  short  of  health  and  life,  for 
a  world  without  scavengers  would  soon  become  a  stinking  sepulchre.  III.  All  the 
strifes  and  discords  of  time  are  parts  of  that  great  conflict  between  good  and  evil 
in  which  the  ultimate  defeat  of  evil  is  assured.  The  calamities  and  miseries  to 
which  men  lie  open,  are  intended  to  remove  only  that  which  must  be  removed  if  we 
are  to  live  in  health  and  peace.  Wherever  there  is  evil,  there  also  is  good,  to  replace 
the  evil  as  well  as  to  overcome  and  destroy  it.  What  greater  consolation  than  to 
know  that  the  very  miseries  of  men  are  messengers  of  the  Divine  mercy,  come  to 
give  health  and  life  rather  than  to  destroy,  since  they  come  only  to  destroy  that 
which  is  fatal  to  life  and  health.  (.5.  Cox,  D.D.)  Inner  reading  of  history  : — If 
only  we  have  eyes  to  read  it  aright,  to  see  the  Divine  will  and  the  Divine  laws  at 
work  in  it,  the  history  of  the  Kings  of  England  is  just  as  ins^tructive  to  us  as  the 
history  of  the  Kings  of  Israel,  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  as  the 
siege  and  capture  of  Jerusalem,  the  reformation  wrought  by  Luther  as  the  revival 
of  religion  under  Hezekiah,  the  French  Revolution  as  the  rupture  between  the  ten 
Hebrew  tribes  and  the  two.  No  historical  event  is  without  its  religious  lesson  for 
us,  if  only  we  can  trace  it  to  its  moral  cause ;  no  human  life,  if  only  we  can  read 
its  illustrations  of  that  law-abiding  Providence  which  watches  over  us  as  carefully 
as  it  did  over  the  Jews,  and  shapes  our  rough-hewed  ends  for  us  as  it  shaped  theirs. 
{Ihid.)  The  need  for  scaiicvgers  : — That  the  vultures  gather  wheresoever  the 
carcase  is,  and  gather  to  consume  it,  is  clearly  for  the  health  of  the  world ;  for, 
uneonsumed,  the  carcase  would  but  rot  and  fester,  and  infect  the  air ;  by  its  infection 
turning  the  very  breath  of  life  into  a  minister  of  death.  All  the  birds  that  prey  on 
carrion  are  scavenger  birds.  Most  of  the  scavengers,  from  the  vulture  of  the  East 
down  to  the  flies  which  cleanse  our  shops  and  rooms  from  every  morsel  of  corruption 
are  a  little  loathsome  to  us :  yet  how  much  we  owe  them !  We  owe  them  nothing 
short  of  health  and  life.  A  world  without  scavengers  would  soon  become  a  stinking 
sepulchre.  {Ibid.)  Speedy  destruction  of  carcases : — On  the  highway,  the  ass, 
mule,  or  camel,  which  has  fallen  under  its  burden,  and  is  no  longer  able  to  rise,  is 
unloaded  by  its  master,  its  saddle,  halter,  and  even  Us  shoes  are  taken  off,  and  it  ia 
scarcely  dead  when  its  skin,  too,  is  hastily  removed  to  be  sold  to  a  tanner ;  the 
carcase  is  left  where  it  fell ;  and  as  the  traveller  passes  by  upon  the  narrow  road  hia 
horse  is  frightened,  not  more  by  the  repulsive  scent  and  sight,  than  by  the  eagles 
vultures,  ravens,  crows,  and  magpies,  that  take  wing  on  his  approach,  or  continuf 
to  dispute  the  prey  with  hungry  dogs.  When  night  comes  on,  however,  the  winge'l 
devourers  withdraw,  and  give  place  to  sneaking  jackals  and  foxes,  and  to  the  hyenas 
and  wolves,  which  now  warily  quit  their  lairs,  and  hasten  to  secure  a  share  of  the 
feast.     (Van  Lennep.) 

Vers.  29-34.  Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  these  days  shall  the  srm  iM 
darkened. — The  manifestation  of  Christ  in  judgment : — I.  There  will  be  a  manifes- 
tation of  Christ  in  truth  and  onmistakablb  beality.  Till  the  moment  of  His 
coming,  it  will  be  possible  to  deceive.  False  prophets  were  the  bane  of  the  old 
dispensation ;  false  Christs  are  the  bane  of  the  new.  Then  He  will  stand  before 
men  as  the  true  Messiah.  "  I  am  the  truth  "  will  be  condemnation  for  millions  io 
that  day.  II.  Christ  will  be  manifested  in  univeesalitt.  At  present  He  is  here 
and  there  as  men  carry  the  message.  His  coming  then  shall  be  like  the  lightning 
flash,  which  penetrates  everywhere,  awfully  beautiful,  irresistibly  destructive,  and 
fearfully  silent.  III.  The 'awful  majesty  in  which  He  will  appear.  This  is  set 
forth  in  the  appalling  changes  that  wiU  come  over  the  material  heavens.  IV. 
Christ  will  be  manifested  as  in  seabch  of  His  own.  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  come 
to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,"  not  secretly  as  before;  but  His  angels 
shall   conspicuously  gather  together  the  dead.      (E.  T.  Marshall.)  The  sign 

of  the  Son  of  Man: — The  Jews,  with  carnal  spirit,  were  contiujially  sajnng  to 
Jesus,  "  Master,  we  would  see  a  sign  from  Thee."  They  were  refused.  But  to 
His  people  He  does  give  signs — distinct,  striking,  and  unmistakable — signs  which 
constitute  at  once  the  seal  and  epitome  of  the  truths  for  which  they  stand.  I.  Thb 
BiON  OF  Christ's  humiliation.  •'  This  shall  be  a  sign  unto  you,"  &o.  (Luke  ii.  12). 
A  most  disappointing  sign  this  must  have  been  to  the  shepherds,  if  they  shared 
the  current  expectation  of  a  regal  and  triumphant  Messiah.  A  sign  of  exquisite 
tenderness  and  attractiveness  to  us.  II.  The  sign  of  Christ's  olobt.  Our 
Lord,  in  answer  to  the  question  of  the  disciples,  "What  shall  be  the  sign 
of  Thy  coming,"  Ac,  sketches  a  solemn  prophetic  picture  of  the  eveuti 
that  are    to   precede  it — the    apostasies,  and  wars,  and  famines,  and  tribul»> 


ciUP.  xnT.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  &4S 

tious — and  then  finisheg  with  this  as  the  final  omen,  "  And  then  shall  appear  the 
sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  the  heavens."  Vast  conjecture  and  speculation  have 
been  awakened  as  to  the  nature  of  this  sign.  The  many  descriptions  of  Christ's 
coming  given  in  Scripture  agree  in  one  particular,  that  He  comes  in  clouds.  Ex- 
amine this  sign,  and  seek  to  interpret  it.  .  .  .  As  in  the  sign  of  Christ's  first 
coming  there  weia  marks  of  glory  accompanying  the  marks  of  humiliation,  so  in 
the  sign  of  His  second  coming  there  will  be  marks  of  His  humiliation  accompanying 
the  marks  of  His  glory.  Both  signs  are  true,  they  shine  on  the  pages  of  prophecy 
as  we  read,  like  the  dazzling  lenses  of  a  revolving  lighthouse,  first  one  and  then  the 
other ;  now  the  glory  and  now  the  humiliation ;  now  the  suffering  and  now  the 
conquest.  The  one  has  been  fulfilled.  Glory,  then,  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
one.  Watch  for  the  appearing  of  the  other.  "  WTiat  I  say  imto  you  I  say  unto 
all — Watch."  {A.J.Gordon.)  The  last  congregation : — I.  The  persons  of  whom 
that  assembly  will  be  composed.  11.  The  process  by  which  that  ass-embly  will  be 
collected.  III.  The  manner  in  which  that  assembly  will  be  arranged.  Only  two 
classes  will  be  recognized.  The  last  division  of  the  assembly  will  be  public  and 
visible.  How  momentous  the  events  which  that  division  has  created  and  displayed ! 
IV.  The  decision  which  on  it  will  be  pronounced.  The  principles  by  which  the 
decision  will  be  guided.  The  consequences  which  the  decision  will  involve. 
{J.  Parsons.)  Tokens  of  perdition: — I.  Vicious  habits.  U.  A  resort  to  infidelity 
or  universalism  to  relieve  the  mind  from  presentiments  of  a  judgment  to  come.  IIL 
A  false  hope  and  a  false  profession.  IV.  The  approach  of  age  without  religion.  V. 
Cwimal  security.  VI.  Satisfaction  with  worldly  good.  VII.  A  loose  and  presump- 
tuous confidence  in  God's  mercy.  Vni.  Increasing  hardness  of  heart.  IX.  Neglect 
oi  prayer  and  the  means  of  grace.  X.  The  rejection  of  many  calls.  How  many 
of  these  marks  of  death  do  you  find  upon  yourself?  (E.  Griffin,  D.D.)  The 
kingdom  comes  J7t  crises  of  judgment : — The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you,  but  the 
crises  of  judgment  are  periodical  and  outward.  The  kingdom  is  within  the  in- 
dividual— the  kingdom  of  habit,  which  eludes  observation ;  silently  formed  day  by 
day,  growing  as  seed  grows  in  the  earth,  full  of  slow,  secret  developments ;  the 
kingdom  of  impressions  received — no  change  on  the  face  showing  the  inner  working ; 
the  kingdom  of  life  discipline — lessons  quietly,  privately  learned — experiences  which 
only  you  know  of  laid  to  heart — memories  hoarded;  the  kingdom  of  prayer, 
aspiration,  spiritual  communion,  into  which  you  can  enter  alone,  none  knowing  how 
or  when  you  pray — the  Divine  Host  coming  in  silently,  "without  observation." 
It  comes  also,  this  spiritual  kingdom,  to  nations,  "  without  observation ; "  slowly 
beneath  its  invisible  sway  slavery  disappears ;  the  place  of  woman  is  secured ;  human 
law  brought  into  nearer  afiinity  with  Divine  law ;  the  brotherhood  of  man  gradually 
acknowledged,  in  theory,  at  least;  even  the  horror  of  war  alleviated.  Thus  slowly, 
without  observation,  do  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  tend  to  become  the  kingdoms  of 
our  God  and  of  His  Christ.  But,  oh,  how  much  remains  to  be  done  1  Philosophers 
talk  of  the  mihtary  barbarous  phase  giving  place  to  the  industrial  phase  in  civiliza- 
tion, and  we  enter  the  Inventions  Exhibition,  1885 — that  late  product  of  the 
nineteenth  century — and  the  first  things  which  meet  our  gaze  are  certain  awful 
cannons  and  war  implements  for  the  destruction  of  human  life,  and  the  unfratemal 
torture  of  human  beings.  Cold  steel,  gunpowder,  and  the  big  battalions  have  it  all 
their  own  way  in  a  world  which  laughs  at  arbitration,  sneers  at  right,  and  still 
swears  by  Christ.  And  now  see  how  the  judgment  crises  of  this  kingdom  within 
work  themselves  out,  and  are  as  startling  and  as  terrible  as  any  appearance  of  the 
Son  of  Man  in  the  clouds,  surrounded  by  His  angelic  heralds  of  judgment.  Every 
tima  the  measure  of  a  nation's  iniquity  is  full,  there  comes  such  a  judgment  crisis. 
It  came  to  Jerusalem  when  the  armies  of  Vespasian,  in  the  year  70,  trampled  out 
the  heartless  and  effete  ecclesiastical  system  of  the  old  Judaism.  It  came  to  Kome 
when  the  unparalleled  corruption  of  the  CoBsars  had  spread  to  the  provinces,  and  in 
due  time  the  empire  went  to  pieces,  under  the  weakness  of  its  head,  and  was  broken 
up  to  be  re-constituted  in  the  Christian  nations  of  modern  Europe.  It  came  to 
England  when  the  Eeformation  stamped  the  authority  of  the  Pope  out  of  the  king- 
dom. It  came  again  when  huge  popular  oppression  and  political  wrong  nerved  the 
people  to  strike  for  justice  in  the  execution  of  an  English  king.  It  came  to  France 
after  centuries  of  organized  selfishness  and  robbery  of  the  poor  by  the  rich,  in  the 
French  Eevolution  and  Eeign  of  Terror,  1793.  It  came  again  with  the  overthrow 
of  an  adventurer,  who  in  our  time  rose  to  power  by  treachery  and  massacre,  and 
wielded  the  sceptre  of  Fiance  for  more  than  twenty  years  until  the  judgment  fell 
open  hi"!  at  Sedan  and  hurled  him  from  the  throne.    People  were  taken  in  by 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xaf. 

Napoleon  III.  and  the  glitter  of  his  empire.  They  thought  that  he  at  all  eventa  hsd 
outdone  Providence.  But  neither  he  nor  any  one  else  can  do  that.  One  Frenchman 
at  least  saw  clear — stood  firm  for  the  permanence  of  spiritual  principle,  and  waited 
for  the  kingdom  of  God  which  cometh  not  with  observation.  That  was  Victor 
Hugo.  Nothing  could  induce  him  to  enter  France  whilst  Antichrist  was  on  tha 
throne.  The  day  after  Sedan  he  presented  himself  at  the  ticket-office  in  BruEsels, 
and  left  that  night  for  Paris.     {H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.) 

Ver.   35.  But  My  words  shall  not  pass  away. — The  words  of   Christ: — Th« 
characteristics  of  our  Lord's  words.     1.  The  authority  which  speaks  in  them.    2. 
Their  elevation.     3.  Their  awful  depth.     (Canon  Liddon.)        The  permanency  of 
Christ's  teaching  : — 1.  The  words  of  Christ  are  abiding  because  of  their  special  in- 
spiration.    His  words  cannot  die  by  reason  of  the  living  power  that  is  in  them.     2. 
The  teachings  of  Jesus  have  a  great  and  an  enduring  task  to  perform.     The  gospel 
has  the  "power  of  an  endless  life  "  which  the  work  before  it  demands.   Great  things 
and  great  ends  require  great  and  large  preparation.   The  Niagara  Falls  is  one,  if  not 
the  greatest,  of  the  wonders  of  the  world ;  but  the  river  St.  Lawrence  was  twenty- 
seven  thousand  years  making  the  deep  cutting  in  the  rock  which  forms  the  cataract. 
The  great  task  before  the  gospel,  of  bringing  the  light  of  truth  to  every  heart,  must 
be  accomplished.     The  efforts  of  the  Church  must  not  be  relaxed  until  this  end  has 
been  attained.     Whatever  changes  are  woven  into  the  nature  of  things  the  continua- 
tion of  gospel  teaching  is  inevtable.     "  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth  ;  but 
the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."    3.  As  the  gospel  has  survived  the  revo- 
lutions of  more  than  eighteen  centuries,  so  it  will  survive  those  yet  to  come.   4.  The 
impression  which  the  words  of  Jesus  make  on  the  souls  of  the  redeemed  is  another 
proof  that  they  shall  not  pass  away.   When  the  world  has  passed  away,  these  words 
will  abide  in  the  hearts  of  men  who  have  believed  in  Christ.     Every  portion  of  the 
gospel  we  leam  and  feel  and  practice  will  remain  with  us  for  ever.     (The  Weekly 
Pulpit.)        The  transient  and  the  permanent : — "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away." 
I.   It  needs  some   thoughtfolness   to  apprehend   the  transient   chabactee  oy 
THESE  GREAT  OBJECTS  OF   ODR  INTEREST.      1.  The  foiTns  of  life  and  activity  with 
which  we  are  familiar  pass  away.     The  morning  light,  buds,  seasons,  living  crea- 
tures, soon  die.     2.  If  we  extend  our  vision  and  take  within  its  sweep  not  only  the 
life  of  the  individual,  but  the  course  of  the  ages,  and  the  history  of  the  world.  These 
pass  away.     II.  And  yet  in  all  this  there  is  permanence.     The  form  passes,  but 
the  material  remains.   Perhaps  even  the  material  may  be  our  name  for  the  unknown 
nothing,  and  there  remams  only  the  law,  only  the  type,  only  the  order,  which  un- 
ceasingly lives.     Thus  the  form  of  the  living  thing  disappears,  but  life  remains ; 
and  that  vegetable  life  which  we  saw  so  busy  and  so  plentiful  in  forms  of  flower  and 
leaf  and  tree,  shall  next  year  bring  forth  new  tiowers  and  put  out  fresh  leaves  ;  and 
when  the  trees  that  to-day  stand  erect,  monarchs  of  the  forest,  shall,  fallen  prone, 
be  slowly  turning  into  the  fuel  of  future  ages,  that  same  Ufe  shall  yet  be  lifting  up 
new  pillars  of  the  forest,  tall  and  stately,  beautiful  and  strong,  over  which  new 
generations  of  branches  and  leaves  shall  wave  beneath  the  sunshine  and  be  swayed 
by  the  breezes  of  the  future  years.   And  so  is  it  with  the  life  of  the  animal  and  man. 
This  animal,  this  man,  may  perish,  but  man  remain.     And  the  human  race  has  not 
vanished.  Babylon,  Egypt,  and  ancient  Greece  and  Kome  have  disappeared,  but  man 
remains,  in  his  essential  nature  unchanged.   The  moods  of  the  sensitive  nature  pass 
away  and  follow  each  other  like  the  shadows  on  the  mountain-side  when  the  fleecy 
clouds  are  floating  o'er  the  sky  on  a  summer  noon.   And  yet  there  is  something  that 
remains.     There  is  the  subject  of  these  sensations ;  there  is  that  element  which  ia 
always  present  in  these  conscious  states  »^hich  knows  itself  and  them,  and  the  diffe- 
rences between  each  state,  and  the  resemblances  and  the  differences  between  itself 
and  them,  and  the  combination  of  all  into  one  homogeneous  whole.   There  is  some- 
thing permanent,  something  that  lasts.     You  cannot  destroy,  you  cannot  waste  it, 
you  cannot,  indeed,  change  it.     It  is  itself — itself  always — eternal,  I  believe,  as  the 
eternal  God.     Or  we  might  illustrate  it  again  in  relation  to  thoughts,  to  ideas,  to 
concepts  ;  to  those  class  cognitions  of  the  mind  which  result  from  the  comparisoa 
and  the  abstract  classification  of  states  of  sensation,  of  memory,  of  judgment.     We 
thus   gain   ideas — the   good,   the   beautiful,   the   true,   the   evil,   the  human,   tha 
Divine.     The  individual  states,  the  individual  acts,  the  individual  persons  who, 
by  these  acts,  produce   these   states — all  these  may  vanish.     They  may  be  only 
a  memory ;  or  even  grow  in  memory  dim,  and  at  last  fade  away  from  the  last  remi 
niscence  of  the  soul ;  but  the  ideas  we  have  formed- -that  abstract  beauty,  goodnest 


CHAP.  XSI7.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  66$ 

humanity,  or  divineness — these  remain.  Their  light  Avill  play  about  other  forms ; 
their  relations  dwell  within  the  caverns  of  our  nature  and  till  them  with  music,  or 
make  them  hideous  with  discord.    III.  Thus  the  wokds  of  Christ  seem  only  to 

BE  THE  FOLLOWING  ACCOMPANIMENT  OF  WHAT  WE  SAW  ON  ALL  SIDES  OF  OUB  QtJHST  — 
THAT   THERE    IS   A   PEKMANENT,    AND    THAT    THEBE    IS   A   TRANSIENT.       He   gOCS    down    tO 

the  very  base  of  the  nature,  and  declares  that  a  man  must  be  bom  from  above  if  he 
is  to  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  spiritual  only  can  behold  the  things  of  tliat 
kingdom,  which  are  wholly  spiritual.  The  worship  of  God  is  to  be  in  spirit  and  in 
truth.  His  own  very  words  are  to  be  interpreted  in  the  sphere  of  the  spiritual  and 
the  true,  and  the  work  He  came  to  do  for  men  was  not  to  make  their  lot  here  easy  or 
hard,  not  to  spread  life's  path  with  flowers  or  wii  h  thorns ;  it  had  no  respect  to  these 
mere  circumstances  and  conditions  of  outer  life.  But  it  went  to  the  very  centre  of 
being,  to  the  inner  personality  of  the  man.  And,  as  Christ  Himself  gave'up  all  that 
He  had  that  was  external,  material,  physical,  letting  it  all  go  in  death,  and  living 
only  in  His  living  union  with  the  eternal  God,  so  must  man  live  only  in  that  living 
personality,  letting  all  else  die  with  Christ,  and  even  when  living,  not  living  except 
as  Christ  Lived  in  him.  (L.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  The  immutability  of  the  words  of 
Christ : — I.  The  permanence  and  immutability  of  the  gospel  are  proofs  of  the  per- 
fection of  its  plan.  U.  The  immortality  of  the  words  of  Christ  is  proof  of  their  perfect 
adaptability  to  the  constitution  and  course  of  nature.  III.  Is  proof  of  their  perfect 
consonance  with  absolute  truth.  IV.  Is  proof  of  their  identity  wth  the  ultimate 
basis  of  life.  V.  Two  lessons.  1.  He  that  foimulated  this  immutable  scheme  is  and 
must  be  Divine.  2.  Upon  these  words  of  Christ  we  have  an  assured  and  stable  basis 
upon  which  to  build  for  eternity.  {E.  S.P.)  The  enduring  word : — I.  What  word  is 
THIS?  1.  "  My  Word."  Who  spoke  this  word?  Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour.  Must 
not  He  be  God  who  could  fling  upon  the  winds  such  a  prophecy  as  this,  and  be  sure 
of  its  everlasting  success  ?  It  is  not  the  word  of  Jeremiah,  John,  &c.  They  were 
the  instruments,  but  Christ's  word  is  nevertheless  audible  in  all.  2.  What  are  some 
of  the  marks  and  characteristics  of  Christ's  word  ?  Given  in  the  Bible.  1.  Authori- 
tative. We  hear  men  saying,  "  We  want  an  authority :  "  here  it  is.  2.  True.  3. 
Spirit  and  life.  4.  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  man."  II.  Wh.^t  does  Christ  sat  ? 
of  His  word?  It  shall  not  pass  away.  Empires,  &c.,  have  passed  away,  but  the 
word  of  Christ  still  survives ;  it  speaks  with  undiluted  emphasis ;  it  spreads  with  un- 
interrupted speed.  All  things  that  threatened  to  extinguish  it  have  only  aided  it. 
Those  things  that  once  seemed  to  rise  like  mountain  obstructions  to  its  march  are 
day  by  day  dissolving  like  wreaths  of  snow  in  the  sunshine,  in  contrast  to  the  ad- 
vancing and  triumphant  word  of  the  Lord.  And  when  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 
earth  shall  come,  Christ's  word  shall  not  cease.  The  only  change  will  be,  all  its 
promises  will  be  enjoyments,  &o.  Comfort  for  the  believer.  Of  the  least  promise 
that  you  choose  to  select  you  may  say,  "  Heaven  and  earth,"  &c.  Encouragement 
to  the  seeker,  worker,  minister,  <fec.  {J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  The  immutability  of  the 
Divine  Word : — 1.  The  certainty  of  Divine  truth.  2.  The  words  of  Christ  considered 
in  their  necessary  imperishableness.  3.  The  words  of  Christ  shall  never  pass  away, 
because  they  form  the  last  of  that  series  of  communications  given  by  God  to  a  lost 
world.  4.  Because  they  are  founded  on  eternal  tmth,  and  on  the  fixed  counsels  of 
the  immutable  God.  5.  Because  of  their  connection  with  His  own  final  glory  as 
Mediator.    6.  These  are  the  words  preached  unto  yon.     (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 

Vers.  38,  39.  And  took  them  all  away. — The  moral  of  accidents: — I.  What 
are  we  to  think?  Let  us  now  collect  and  enumerate  a  few  thoughts  that 
we  ought  to  think  when  we  are  considering  sad  things  that  happen.  1. 
How  many  accidents  are  but  slight  as  to  the  hurt  they  do  in  comparison  with 
the  service  of  the  lesson  they  teach.  2.  From  how  many  things  "going  to 
happen"  we  are  saved  when  loss  and  danger  appear  imminent.  3.  How 
manifest  and  honourable  are  the  work  and  courage  of  man  in  averting 
accidents,  and  in  lessening  the  harm  they  do.  4.  How  incessant  is  the  beneficial 
operation  of  the  great  natural  laws,  and  how  varied  in  kind  is  their  benefit.  5. 
How  careless  and  untrue  is  the  work  of  many  men ;  how  needful  is  it  that  they 
should  have  a  warning  they  will  heed.  And  how  often,  after  all,  does  the  right 
accident  happen  obviously  at  the  right  time  and  to  the  right  kind  of  person.  6. 
How  certain  it  is  that  unfaithfulness  in  work  will  bring  disasters,  small  and  great, 
which  are  misnamed  when  we  call  them  "  accidents ;  "  for,  though  we  knew  not, 
we  might  have  known  that  they  were  sure  to  happen.  And — 7.  How  certain  it  is, 
too,  that,  if  anything  favourable  to  us  unexpectedly  occurs,  we  shall  not  be  able  U 


553  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRA20R.  [chap,  xxit 

take  advantage  of  it  nnless  we  are  men  of  Bome  resource  and  some  character. 
II.  We  come  now  to  our  second  (juestion  :  What  abe  we  to  do  ?  What  are  we  to 
do,  then  ?  We  are  not  to  eat,  drink,  and  marry,  careless  of  the  way  in  which  we 
do  these  things,  and  unmindful  of  our  duty  to  God  in  them,  as  if  the  world,  that 
can  take  care  of  itself,  would  take  care  of  us  without  any  good  heed  of  our  own. 
We  are  to  ask  and  get  answered  the  question,  "What  must  I  do  to  he  saved?  " 
Let  us,  seeing  that  so  much  we  have  niay  at  any  time  be  the  prey  of  the  spoiler, 
store  up  the  inconsumable,  imperishable  riches.  Many  men  have  lost  their  lives  by 
accident;  no  man  ever  lost  his  soul  by  accident.  {T.  T.  Lynch.)  ■  Noah's  flood: — 
Three  rules  without  an  exception — I.  "  The  flood  came  and  took  theh  aiIi 
AWAT."  1.  Many  in  that  time  were  wealthy.  Not  one  rich  man  could  escape  with 
his  hoards.  2.  There  were  some  in  those  days  who  were  extremely  poor.  The 
pauper  out  of  the  ark  perished  as  well  as  the  prince.  3.  There  were  in  those  daya 
learned  men  in  the  world.  Their  knowledge  could  not  deliver  them.  4.  There 
were  many  who  were  very  zealous  in  the  cause  of  religion.  Their  outward  leligion 
of  no  avail.  5.  Some  of  the  oldest  men  that  have  lived  perished.  6.  They  won- 
dered at  Noah  building  his  ark,  as  contrary  to  reason  ;  criticised  his  building ;  some 
took  his  part ;  some  worked  for  him.  All  out  of  Christ  perished.  11.  The  flood  found 
them  ALL  eating,  dkinking,  and  maekying — this  without  exception.  The  mass  of 
men  are  busy  about  fleeting  interests,  and  neglect  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  The 
reason — 1.  Men's  indifference  about  their  souls.  2.  Universal  unbelief.  3.  That 
they  were  always  and  altogether  given  to  worldliness.  III.  All  who  week  in  thb 
AKK  WERE  SATE.    {C.  U.  Spurgeoti.) 

Vers.  40,  41.    Two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  mllL — Routine  life: — ^Tha 
text  speaks  of  an  experience  which  comes  to  all  of  us  in  our  turn,  as  life  gradually 
builds  us  round.     At  first,  in  our  childhood,  it  is  otherwise.     This  earth  seems, 
then,  to  have  no  fixed  hardness ;  the  spot  on  which  we  stand  melts  off  indefinitely 
into  a  dreamlike  distance,  which  is  hazy  and  vague,  and  peopled  with  we  know  not 
what  possibilities,  holding  within  its  rays  strange  fairy  worlds  which  rumours  may 
fill  as  they  will,  and  everything  seems  possible,  and  anything  might  happen,  and  no 
relentless  law  of  undeviating  existence  has  imprisoned  our  expectations  and  expe- 
rience, and  the  world  of  our  hopes  mingles  with  the  world  of  our  senses,  and  earth 
and  heaven  are  not  afraid  of  each  other ;   their  lines  cross  without  a  shock.    But, 
as  we  grow  up,  we  know  how  solid  and  how  hard  the  whole  thing  becomes.    The 
earth  takes  its  stiff  limits  and  its  exact  rules  ;  it  is  seen,  and  known,  and  measured 
— a  round  ball,  rolling  in  space,  compact,  and  massive,  and  blind,  and  entire — a 
round,  rolling  ball,  and  we  roll  round  with  it.     We  are  things  in  it,  embedded  in  it ; 
we  belong  to  it ;  we  have  a  fixed  spot  and  lot  on  its  surface.     To  it  we  are  tied ;  we 
are  bound  to  definite  purposes  which  we  never  dream  of  disputing.     So  we  travel 
with  the  moving  earth  ;  and  our  days  are  settled  for  us ;  occupations  and  holidays 
repeat  themselves,  year  after  year,  with  stolid  regularity,  against  which  gradually 
we  give  up  protesting ;  we  make  up  our  minds  to  live  out  our  own  parts ;  and  all 
the  emotions  that  beat  against  this  even  tenour  of  uneventful  days — dreams,  im- 
pulses, alarms,  hopes,  aspirations — cease  to  be  more  than  empty  visions.     The 
common  day  closes  in  upon  us,  settled  and  familiar ;  the  common  world  is  about 
us,  with  interests  that  ever  increase,  with  work  and  play,  with  rule  and  habit ;  and 
the  steady  block  of  endless  business  fills  in  all  our  allotted  space  of  action,  fills  it  in 
down  to  every  cranny,  thick  and  solid  and  unyielding.     (Conon  Scott-Holland.) 
Circuvistances  no  index  of  character : — How  powerless  and  immaterial  are  circum- 
Btances  for  those  two  1     Every  single  circumstance  of  life  is  identical ;  together  they 
rise  at  the  same  hour ;   right  through  the  day  they  grind  together ;  at  the  same 
hour  they  go  to  the  evening  meal,  and  at  the  same  hour  they  sleep.     Everything, 
year  after  year,  repeats  itself.     They  dress  alike ;  they  were  paid  alike  ;  life  passed 
for  both  on  the  same  level  of  low,  unchanging  poverty.     To  any  one  looking  on  they 
would  be  wholly  alike — two  poor  women,  of  the  same  class,  occupation,  education, 
wage,  interest,  dress.     Nothing   from  end  to  end  of  these  earthly  circumstances 
oould  be  found  to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other.     At  the  same  mill  they  had 
turned  and  turned,  to  both  the  earth  had  been  equally  harsh  and  unkind,  and  no 
lights  shone  in  upon  them,   and  no  changes  ever  surprised  them.      On  and  on 
together,  hand  in  hand,  and  face  to  face,  they  had  ground  at  the  same  mill  up  to 
the  last ;  and  lo  1  one  is  for  heaven,  and  one  for  hell.     Within  they  are  as  different 
as  black  from  white,  as  good  from    vil ;   so  dominant,  so  imperial  is  human  cha- 
racter. BO  free  it  is  from  the  control  of  circumstances.    Oh,  what  wide  comfort  I 


CHAP.  rnr.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  663 

What  can  it  matter  what  our  conditions  may  be?  Two  grinding  at  the  mill;  one 
taken,  and  the  other  left.  Is  there  any  one  who  sinks  under  the  sodden  monoiony 
of  daily  routine,  who  withers  under  the  pressure  of  everyday  sameness  ;  who  finds 
himself  chained  into  that  mean,  petty,  narrow  block  of  circumstances  which  he 
knows  to  be  killing  out  all  spiritual  emotions  in  those  about  him,  and  yet  he  cannot 
break  from  it,  and  he  dreads  to  feel  creeping  over  his  soul  the  same  melancholy 
dryness  he  sees  in  others  ?  That  which  kills  another  may  be  life  to  him,  if  he  will 
use  it.  He  alone  is  the  master.  .  .  .  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  how  powerful  is 
eircumstance  I  It  is  at  the  mill,  at  the  grinding — there  and  nowhere  else — that  the 
thing  has  got  to  be  done,  the  difference  is  to  be  created.  There,  as  they  ground 
and  ground  together,  these  two  poor  women  built  up  bit  by  bit  the  wall  of  their 
separation.  It  was  out  of  the  doing  of  the  same  things  that  one  grew  readier  for 
the  Lord,  and  the  other  darkened  down  to  the  slothful  servant.  At  the  mill,  still 
grinding,  the  Lord  finds  them.  No  one,  then,  need  leave  his  mill.  In  the  field 
where  men  work,  there  our  drama  works  itself  out.  Circumstances  are  nothing,  but 
they  are  also  everything ;  and  we  shall  discover  our  weakness  if  we  attempt  to  ignore 
them.  •  .  .  Strength  of  character  lies  not  in  demanding  special  circumstances, 
but  in  mastering  and  using  any  that  may  be  given.  Our  work  and  daily  contact  with 
our  fellows  form  our  scene  of  action,  and  God  blesses  with  a  peculiar  blessing  the 
efforts  to  put  to  profit,  not  some  self-selected  occasion,  but  the  actual  conditions  in 
which  we  find  ourselves.     (Ibid.)  Faithful  perfoiTuance  of  common  duties: — 

Philip  Henry  one  day  calling  upon  a  tanner,  found  him  so  busy  tanning  a  hide  that 
he  was  not  aware  of  his  approach  until  he  tapped  him  on  the  back.  Starting  in 
confusion,  the  man  exclaimed,  "  Sir,  I  am  ashamed  you  should  find  me  thus." 
Philip  Henry  replied  with  solemn  emphasis,  "  May  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  He  comes, 
find  me  discharging  with  the  same  faithfulness  and  zeal  the  duties  of  my  calling  I " 

Ver.  42.  Watch  therefore :  for  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  lord  doth  coxae. 

-^The  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man: — I.  The  warning.  Chiist's  coming  is  compared 
to  that  of  a  thief  in  the  night.  Seems  disparaging,  but  is  remarkably  apt  (1  Thess. 
V.  2-4).  The  dispensation  under  which  we  live  is  emphatically  that  of  night,  in 
comparison  with  the  dispensation  which  is  to  be  introduced  at  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
&o.  The  plans  of  the  housebreaker  are  all  laid  beforehand,  and  yet  studiously 
concealed.  So  the  coming  of  the  Lord  and  the  day  of  His  appearing  are  fixed  with 
infinite  wisdom,  but  kept  secret  with  a  profound  reserve.  That  mystery  wears  a 
pleasing  or  repulsive  aspect,  according  to  the  preparedness  of  those  to  whom  the 
Master  comes.  II.  The  caution.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Evangelist  Luke,  while 
omitting  the  parable,  gives  us  the  most  lucid  account  of  its  application  (Luke  ixi. 
84).  III.  The  PRECEfT.  A  personal  preparation  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  is  to 
be  regarded  as  a  matter  of  imminent  motive  with  us  all.  You  may  be  deceived  as 
1o  the  signs ;  but  you  are  not  to  be  negligent  of  the  event.  "  Watch  and  pray." 
Watchfulness  is  the  habit  of  keeping  the  eye  constantly  alive  to  events  ;  prayer  is 
the  habit  of  keeping  the  heart  constantly  lifted  up  to  God.  Taking  into  account 
the  conditions  under  which  we  are  admonished  to  watch  and  pray,  the  intent  be- 
comes palpable  tbat  things  we  are  not  permitted  to  know  beforehand  will  be 
gradually  unfolded  to  us  as  the  events  are  about  to  transpire.  But  the  chief 
motive  defies  analysis.  The  holy  instinct  of  loving  hearts  prompts  that  ardent 
expectancy  with  which  "hope"  anticipates  the  appearing  of  the  Lord.  {B.  W. 
Carr.)  Watchfulness: — I.  The  unexpected  arrival.  1.  Of  what  person?  2. 
In  what  manner  ?  3.  For  what  purpose  ?  4.  At  what  time  ?  Date  unknown  (ver. 
36),  knowledge  might  induce  carelessness,  &c.  II.  The  unforeseen  disclosure. 
1.  To  many,  of  the  character  of  others.  It  will  be  a  day  of  great  surprises.  We 
only  judge  by  appearances.  God  knows  thought,  intention,  character.  2.  To 
many,  of  their  own  destiny.  Judge  not.  Leave  the  judgment  with  God.  III.  Th« 
KEEDFDL  watching.  1.  With  increasing  prayer.  2.  With  unfaltering  diligence. 
8.  With  unfailing  patience.  Bioing  the  Lord's  time  submissively.  He  will  not 
always  tarry.      {J.  C.  Gray.)  Temptations  demand  watchfulness  : — 1.  Tempta- 

tions may  enter  the  senses  without  sin,  for  to  behold  the  object,  to  touch,  or  taste, 
is  not  to  commit  sin,  because  God  Himself  hath  thus  ordered  and  framed  the 
tenses  by  their  several  instruments  and  organs.  He  hath  kindled  up  light  in  the 
eyes.  He  hath  digged  the  hollow  of  the  ear,  for  hearing,  and  hath  shut  up  the  taste 
in  the  mouth  or  palate,  and  hath  given  man  his  senses  very  fit  for  the  trial  and 
reward  of  virtue.  Therefore,  we  may  make  a  covenant  with  our  eye,  bridle  out 
taste,  bind  oar  touch,  purge  our  ears,  and  so  sanctify  and  consecrate  every  sens* 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Lchap.  xaf, 

nnto  the  Lord,  which  is  indeed  to  watch.  II.  They  may  enter  the  thocohts,  and 
be  received  into  the  imagination,  and  yet,  if  we  set  our  watch,  not  overcome  us ;  for 
as  yet  they  are  but,  as  it  were,  in  their  march,  bringing  up  their  forces  ;  but  have 
made  no  battery  or  breach  into  the  soul.  III.  The  sense  and  fancy  may  receive  the 
object  with  some  dehght  and  natural  complacency,  and  yet  without  sin ;  if  we  stand 
apon  our  guard,  and  then  oppose  it  most,  when  it  most  pleads  for  admittance. 
( Anthony  Farindon.) 

Vor.  44.  Then  be  ye  also  ready.  —  I.  The  coMrN'o  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Hia 
title.  His  coming  is  death.  Theie  is  certainty  in  His  coming.  II.  That  man  in 
HIS  UNCONVERTED  STATE  18  UNREADY  FOR  H:s  COMING.  Man  is  not  ready — 1.  For 
he  is  born  under  the  curse  of  the  law.  2.  For  he  is  under  the  dominion  of  sin.  3. 
For  his  life  is  one  of  disobedience  to  the  commands  of  heaven.  4.  For  he  is  unflt 
for  the  glorified  state.  III.  The  ABsoiiUTB  necessity  for  being  ready.  1.  The 
nature  of  the  readiness.  Not  being  born  in  a  Christian  land  —not  mere  profession. 
Be  ready  :  the  act  is  ours,  the  grace  is  God's.  1.  Ready  in  state.  2.  Ready  in  life. 
(1)  It  is  necessary  that  we  are  regenerate.  (2)  That  our  generation-work  be  done. 
(3)  That  the  mind  be  weaned  from  the  world,  and  fixed  on  spiritual  objects.  IV. 
The  argument  used  to  enforce  this  necessity — "  For  in  such  an  hour."  1. 
Youthful  hour.  2.  Hour  of  health.  3.  Hour  of  carnal  amusement.  4.  Hour  ol 
worldly  prosperity.  (T.Jones.)  Ready  for  death: — I.  To  speak  of  death.  1. 
At  death,  the  body  is  dissolved  into  dust.  2.  At  death,  the  soul  and  body  separate. 
3.  At  death,  the  soul  appears  before  God.  II.  Who  are  beady  for  death  ?  1.  All 
who  are  prepared  to  die  see  their  lost  state  by  nature.  2.  All  who  love  God.  3, 
All  who  have  God.  III.  Reasons  why  we  should  be  prepared  to  die.  1.  Death 
is  sure.  2.  The  time  is  uncertain.  3.  This  is  the  only  world  where  you  can  be 
prepared  to  die.  4.  Now  is  the  time  God  has  given  you  to  prepare  to  die.  5.  He 
is  a  wise  man  who  prepares  to  die.  6.  lie  is  a  fool  who  refuses  to  prepare  to  die. 
{A.  Fletcher,  M.A.)  Comfort  under  bereavement : — I.  The  admonition.  To  be 
ready  for  the  coming  of  Christ  ought  to  be  the  great  end  of  life.  1.  To  be  ready 
for  death,  is  to  have  obtained  the  pardon  of  all  sins.  2.  It  is  to  possess  renewed 
natures.  3.  It  is  to  have  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  vigorous  exercise.  II.  Thb 
motive  and  argument  employed.  1,  The  uncertainty  of  the  event  in  question. 
2.  Death  may  come  when,  according  to  human  calculation,  there  is  the  least  pros- 
pect of  it.  3.  It  may  call  us  when  our  earthly  concerns  may  make  it  most  incon- 
venient for  us  to  depart.  4.  It  may  approach  when  we  are  least  ready  for  its 
approach.  (T.  Brown,  D.D.)  The  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  life : — I.  Thr 
Scriptural  account  of  the  uncertainty  or  human  life.     II.  Inquire  how  thh 

uncertainty  of  life  80  SELDOM   LEADS    MEN    TO    PREPARE    FOR    LEAVING   IT.       1.    Want 

of  consideration.  2.  Love  of  this  world  and  its  enjoyments.  3.  A  vague  impres- 
sion that  death  is  a  distant  event.  III.  Some  of  the  comforts  and  ADVANTAaa* 
OF  BEING  PREPARED  FOB  DEATH.  1.  It  SGCurcs  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscitnce, 
connected  with  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  happiness  that  results  from  both.  2. 
Preparation  for  death  alleviates  the  afflictions  of  life,  and  affords  much  consolation 
under  them.  3.  It  frees  from  slavish  fear  of  that  event.  (A.  Grant,  D.D.)  The 
great  business  of  life : — I.  The  event  predicted.  1.  His  coming  at  the  day  of 
judgment.  2.  At  the  hour  of  death.  II.  The  duty  enjoined.  1.  It  is  an  evan- 
gelical readiness.  2.  It  is  a  gracious  readiness.  3.  It  is  an  habitual  readinesa. 
{T.  Hitchin.)  The  second  advent : — I.  What  is  revealed  concerning  our  Lord's 
character  and  appearance?  1.  Preparation  made.  2.  His  firet  coming  was  in 
weakness  ;  His  second,  in  illimitable  power.  His  first,  in  humiliation  ;  His  second, 
in  glory.  II.  The  effect  of  His  coming.  1.  Renovation.  2.  Dissolution.  S. 
Manifestation.  (E.  Fisk,  LL.B.)  Ready  to  die  : — A  ship  in  a  port,  with  all  its 
provisions  and  sails  and  men  on  board,  is  in  one  sense  of  the  word,  ♦'  ready  "— 
ready  for  sea  ;  but  it  may  not  be  "  ready  "  in  the  sense  this  text  enjoins.  Its  sails 
must  be  in  their  places,  its  anchor  must  be  up,  every  man  must  be  at  his  post : 
then  it  is  actually  ready  for  the  ocean  and  its  storms.  Let  the  command  come,  and 
in  a  minute  or  two  it  is  disengaged  from  the  fastenings  that  held  it,  lies  down  to 
the  breeze,  and  without  hurry  or  alarm  is  gone.  And  this  is  the  readiness  our 
Lord  has  here  in  His  mind — a  state  of  actual  readiness,  preparedness  of  mind 
and  heart.  (C.  Bradley.)  I.  A  call  to  a  state  of  preparation.  The  readi- 
ness to  which  we  are  called  is  a  state  that  will  give  us  admission  to  Paradise.  ^  The 
qualifioation  for  such  a  distinction  and  privilege  is — 1.  The  possession  of  Christian 
acceptance  and  holiness.     2.  A  faithful  and  assiduous  fulfilment  of  trust.    Tnisti 


CHIP.  rxrr.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  65S 

^_________________^_____^       * , __^ 

of  the  most  important  kind  are  committed  to  man,  for  which  he  is  accountable  and 
responsible.     3.   Habitual  watchfulness.     II.    Our  Lord  enforces  this  call  bx 
THE  DECLARATION  OF  AN  IMPRESSIVE  FACT.     1.  The  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.     2. 
Ihe  purposes  of  His  coming.     3.  Man's  ignorance  of  the  period  of  His  coming. 
(.7.  B-attenbury.)        Preparation  for  death: — I.  The  event  for  which  we  are  to 
BK  BEADY.     1.  At  death,  the  body  turns  to  its  original  dust.     2.  At  death,  the  soul 
and  body  separate.      3.  At  death,  the  soul  appears  before  God.     II.   What   la 
lUPLiED  IN  BEING  BEADY  ?  Great  events  require  suitable  preparation.     Preparation 
for  death  implies — 1.  A  perception  of  unfitness  for  death,  without  an  interest  in  the  ' 
favour  of  God.     2.  Faith  in  Christ,  which  is  instrumental  in  obtaining  pardon  of 
nin,  &o.    3.  Holiness.    4.  Diligence  in  ths  uss  3f  the  public  and  private  means 
of  grace.    III.  Motives  to  uroe  tjs  to  be  ready.    1.  Death  is  sure  to  come.    2. 
The  time  of  death's  approach  is  uncertain.    3.  Abundant  provision  is  made  to 
induce  this  preparation.    4.  The  present  life  is  the  only  psriod  in  which  we  can 
prepare  for  death.     5.  To  be  ready  indicates  true  wisdom,  and  gives  peace.     {W. 
N.)        Ready: — I.  What  abe  we  to  be  beady  for?     To  be  ready  to  leave  all 
that  is  about  us  and  all  that  belongs  to  us,  however  cherished.    1.  To  be  ready  to 
leave  this  world,  with  all  its  cares,  its  troubles,  and  anxieties,  for  a  better.    2.  Tc 
be  willing  to  be  rid  of  many  things  that  now  burden  ns,  and  that  every  Christiai. 
mose  or  less  feebly  desires  to  be  rid  of :  sin,  sorrow,  sickness,  appetites,  disquie< , 
&o.     3.  To  be  ready  to  stand  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.    How  do  you  expect 
to  appear  there?     II.    Why  we  abe  to  be  ready.      1.  It  is  Christ's  command. 
Surely  that  is  enough.    2.  He  who  commands  is  competent  to  say  what  the  readi- 
ness consists  in.     It  is  not  what  we  think,  nor  what  the  minister  prescribes,  nor 
what  custom  says ;  but  what  Christ  has  inspired  in  His  own  holy  word.    Faith  in 
Christ,  &o.    3.  He  has  promised  to  make  us  ready.    He  is  the  author  first,  and 
the  finisher  next,  of  our  faith.    4.  Why  is  it  so  important  to  be  ready  ?    We  are  to 
see  the  Son  of  God,  &o.    6.  Such  readiness  will  not  interfere  with  the  duties  of  tbla 
world.     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.)         Getting  ready  for  lieaven  : — "  Mamma,"  said  a 
child,  "  my  Sunday-school  teacher  tells  me  that  this  world  is  only  a  place  in  which 
God  lets  us  live  a  little  while,  that  we  may  prepare  for  a  better  world ;  but,  mother, 
I  do  not  see  anybody  preparing.    I  see  you  preparing  to  go  into  the  country,  and 
Aox^t  Eliza  is  preparing  to  come  here ;  but  I  do  not  see  any  one  preparing  to  go  to 
heaven.      If  everybody  wants  to  go  there,  why  don't  they  try  to  get  ready?" 
Always  ready : — Sir  Colin  Campbell,  when  summoned  to  go  to  India  to  quell  the 
rebellion,  was  asked,  •'  How  long  would  it  take  him  to  get  ready  ?  "    He  replied 
promptly,  "  Half-an-hour. "    As  a  good  soldier  he  lived  in  constant  readiness  for 
the  call  of  duty.     What  a  lesson  for  Christian  soldiers  i    Suetonius  tells  us  that 
it  was  a  piece  of  Julius  Caesar's  policy  never  to  fore-acquaint  his  soldiers  of  any  set 
time  of  removal  or  onset,  that  he  might  ever  have  them  in  readiness  to  draw  forth 
whithersoever  he  would.    Christ,  in  like  manner,  who  is  called  the  "  Captain  of  our 
salvation  "  (Heb.  ii.  10).    Our  enemy  is  always  ready  to  annoy  us ;  should  we  not 
therefore  look  to  our  stand,  and  be  vigilant  7     Solomon's  wisdom,  Lot's  integrity, 
and  Noah's  sobriety,  felt  the  smart  of  the  serpent's  sting.    The  first  was  seduced, 
the  second  stumbled,  and  the  third  fell,  while  the  eye  of  watchfulness  was  fallen 
asleep.    (John  Trapp.)       Judgment  not  the  less  certain  because  unexpected : — Every 
judgment,  coming  of  Christ,  is  as  the  springing  of  a  mine.    There  is  a  moment  of 
deep  suspense  after  the  match  has  been  applied  to  the  fuse  which  is  to  fire  the  train. 
Men  stand  at  a  distance,  and  hold  their  breath.    There  is  nothing  seen  but  a  thin, 
small  column  of  white  smoke,  rising  fainter  and  fainter,  tiU  it  seems  to  die  away. 
Then  men  breathe  again  ;  and  the  inexperienced  soldier  would  approach  the  place, 
thinking  that  the  thing  has  been  a  failure.     It  is  ordy  faith  in  the  experience  of 
the  commander,  or  the  veterans,  which  keeps  men  from  hurrying  to  the  spot  again 
— till  just  when  expectation  has  begun  to  die  away,  the  lew,  deep  thunder  sends  up 
the  column  of  earth  majestically  to  heaven,  and  all  that  was  on  it  comes  crushing 
down  again  in  its  far  circle,  shattered  and  blackened  with  the  blast.     It  is  so  with 
the  world.    By  God's  Word  the  world  is  doomed.    The  moment  of  suspense  is 
past:   the  first  centuries  in  which   men   expected  the  convulsion  to  take  place 
at  once — for  even  Apostles  were  looking  for  it  in  their  lifetime.    We  have  fallen 
apon  days  of  scepticism.    There  are  no  signs  of  ruin  yet.    We  tread  upon  it  like 
a  solid  thing  fortified  by  its  adamantine  hills  for  ever.    There  is  nothing  against 
thAt,  bat  a  few  words  in  a  printed  book.    But  the  world  is  mined ;  and  (he  spark 
haa  fallen  -,  and  just  at  the  moment  when  serenity  is  at  its  height,  the  heavens 
Bh,«ll  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat. 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xxm 

and  the  feet  of  the  Avenger  shall  stand  on  the  earth.  (F.  TV,  Robertson,  M.A.) 
Sudden  death : — I.  The  soleitn  events  for  which  we  ought  always  to  be  ready. 
1.  Death.  2.  Judgment.  3.  Eternity.  II.  In  what  this  eeadine&s  consists,  and 
how  it  is  to  be  obtained.  It  consists  in  a  proper  arrangement  of  all  our  temporal 
and  spiritual  concerns.  The  prepartttion  of  the  heart  for  the  worship  of  God  on 
earth  and  in  heaven  is  from  the  Lord,  and  includes — 1.  Divine  illumination.  2. 
There  must  be  iaith.  3.  A  life  of  faith  must  be  evidenced  by  a  life  of  holinese. 
A.  We  must  live  a  life  of  prayer.  III.  The  impobtancb  of  being  aIiWats 
READY.  Reasons— 1.  It  is  certain  the  Son  of  Man  will  come.  2.  It  is  uncertain 
when  the  Son  of  Man  will  appear.  {Essex  Remembraiicer.)  The  latter  end 
contidered : — Why  do  men  refuse  to  heed  the  caution,  and  shrink  from  con 
templations  on  their  latter  end.  1.  The  love  of  life  is  a  powerful  instinct. 
As  men  shrink  from  death  by  this  vital  instinct,  so  the  thoughts  of  it  are  dis- 
agreeable. 2.  The  sentiments  and  symbols  of  men  respecting  death  which  have  a 
painful  and  mischievous  effect  upon  the  imagination  and  feelings.  3.  There  are 
reasons  which  act  powerfully  from  out  of  the  afiections,  to  make  men  slow  to  think 
of  death.  The  mother  could  think  of  death  except  as  a  separation  from  her  child. 
4.  Do  you  fear  to  come  to  God  because  of  sm.  Christ  removes  this.  The  pain  of  dying 
is  small.  We  shall  enter  upon  another  life  divested  of  the  hindrances  of  this.  Why 
is  it  not  as  easy  to  think  of  death  as  a  golden  gate,  as  to  think  of  it  as  a  murky  gate  ? 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Watching  for  the  future  no  hindrance  to  present  duty  : — I  re- 
mark, then,  in  view  of  this  subject  thus  far  opened,  that  a  proper  Christian  watch- 
fulness and  forethoughtfulness  in  regard  to  death  and  the  future  life  will  not 
abstract  us  from  this  world,  but  return  us  back  to  it  better  fitted  to  perform  our 
part  here  than  ever  before.  You  are,  after  a  long,  weary  summer's  day,  suffocated 
with  heat,  grimed  with  dust,  covered  with  perspiration,  and  fretted  of  skin ;  and 
you  are  permitted  to  go  down  to  the  shore  of  the  ocean,  and  bathe  in  its  translucent 
waters  ;  and  your  body  is  cleansed  and  cooled,  and  reinvigorated ;  and  you  return 
along  the  shadow  of  the  evening,  grateful,  and  stronger  than  you  went.  Now,  God's 
ocean  of  eternity  is  so  near,  that  the  soul,  moiled  with  trouble,  may  cast  itself  in, 
and  bathe  its  troubles  away,  and  return  to  its  life  again,  bright,  clear,  inspired, 
strong.  If  you  think  of  death  as  a  slave,  looking  upon  it  as  going  into  servitude 
under  a  hard  master,  then  it  may  weaken  you,  and  take  away  the  comfort  that  yoa 
have ;  but  if  you  think  of  it,  as  every  child  of  God  has  a  right  to  think  of  it,  as  going 
to  your  Father's  house,  where  a  rich  banquet  is  prepared  for  you,  and  where  yon 
chall  enjoy  the  companionship  of  saints  and  angels,  it  will  be  a  source  of  comfort 
and  strength  to  you.  We  can  afford  to  take  trouble  here  for  the  sake  of  gaining 
such  an  inheritance.  What  would  I  care  for  being  poor,  if  I  knew  that  at  the  end 
of  one  year  I  should  have  ten  millions  of  dollars  ?  Men  would  toil  hard,  and  unre- 
mittingly, and  without  complaint,  if  they  could  be  assured  that  the  boundary  of 
their  toil  was  within  their  computation,  and  that  all  beyond  was  to  be  enjoyment 
and^the  amplest  wealth.  Men  do  endure  everything  in  the  hope  of  securing  wealth 
and  enjoyment.  How  will  they  pursue  laborious  industry  in  the  chilling  regions  of 
the  North,  or  how  will  they  plunge  into  the  heat  of  the  tropics,  encountering  sick- 
ness, and  the  malaria  of  every  delta  that  has  commerce  in  it,  in  the  hope  that  they 
may  return  to  their  father's  house,  or  the  village  or  neighbourhood  of  their  birth, 
and  spend  the  few  closing  clays  of  their  life  in  pleasure  and  comfort.  And  if  such 
is  the  strength  of  the  hope  of  a  short  period  of  earthly  peace  and  rest,  how  much 
greater  must  be  the  strength  of  that  man's  hope  who  expects,  after  a  few  years  (he 
cares  not  how  few,  so  that  God's  will  is  done)  he  shall  rise  out  of  this  world  of 
trouble,  and  care,  and  vicissitudes,  into  the  land  of  glory ;  God's  land  of  freedom, 
of  nobility,  of  purity,  of  truth  f  {Ihid.)  Dying  in  work : — It  was  Augustine's 
wish  that  Christ,  when  He  came,  might  find  him  either  praying  or  preaching.  It 
was  Latimer's  wish  (and  he  had  it)  that  he  might  shed  his  heart-blood  for  Christ. 
It  was  Jewel's  wish  that  he  might  die  preaching,  and  he  did  so,  for  presently,  after 
his  last  sermon  at  Lacock,  in  Wiltshire,  he  was,  by  reason  of  sickness,  forced  to  hia 
bed,  from  whence  he  never  came  off  till  his  translation  to  glory.  I  have  heard  the 
like  of  Mr.  Lancaster,  a  precious  man  of  God,  some  time  pastor  of  Bloxham,  in 
Oxfordshire,  a  man  very  famous  for  his  living  by  faith.  Cushamerus,  a  Dutch 
divine,  and  one  of  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel  at  Erfurt,  in  G«rmany,  had  hia 
pulpit  poisoned  by  the  malicious  Papists  there,  and  so  took  his  death  in  God's  work. 
"What  I  would  you  that  the  Lord,  when  He  comes,  should  find  me  idle f"  said 
Calvin  to  his  friends,  who  wished  him  to  forbear  studying  awhile  for  his  health's 
sake.    And  such  a  like  answer  made  Dr.  Reynolds  to  his  physician  rpon  the  like 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  567 

occasion.  Elijah  was  going  on  and  talking  with  Elisha  (about  heavenly  things,  no 
doubt)  when  the  chariot  of  heaven  came  to  fetch  him.  There  can  be  no  better 
posture  or  state  for  the  messenger  of  our  dissolution  to  find  us  in  than  in  a  diligent 
prosecution  of  our  general  or  particular  calling,  {John  Trapp.)  Always  ready  to 
die : — Mr.  Wesley  was  once  asked  by  a  lady,  *'  Suppose  you  knew  you  were  to  die  aft 
twelve  o'clock  to-morrow  night,  how  would  you  spend  the  intervening  time  ?  " 
"How,  madam?"  he  replied;  "why,  just  as  I  intend  to  spend  it  now.  I  should 
preach  this  niglit  at  Gloucester,  and  ai-ain  at  five  to-morrow  morning.  After  that 
I  should  ride  to  Tewkesbury,  preach  in  the  afternoon,  and  meet  the  societies  in  the 
evening.  I  should  then  repair  to  friend  Martin's  house,  who  expects  to  entertain 
ma,  converse  and  pray  with  the  family  as  usual,  retire  to  my  room  at  ten  o'clock, 
commend  myself  to  my  heavenly  Father,  lie  down  to  rest,  and  wake  up  in  glory." 
A  minister  is  a  uteward : — I.  What  Christ's  ministers  are  entrusted  with?  1.  The 
gospel.  2.  The  ordinances.  3.  The  care  of  the  Church.  4.  The  souls  of  the 
members.  II.  What  ministers  may  be  said  to  be  stewards  and  rulers ;  teachers  and 
preachers;  elders  or  pastors?   III.  Who  are  wise,  faithful  servants  of  Jesus  Christ? 

I.  Such  as  serve  Christ  because  they  love  Him.  2.  Such  as  serve  Christ  in  a^ 
humility.  3.  Such  as  serve  Him  with  a  perfect  heart.  4.  Such  as  feed  the 
Master's  household  with  all  that  food  the  Master  hath  provided  or  appointed  for 
them.  6.  Such  as  feeds  the  whole  household.  6.  Such  as  seeks  the  honour  of 
Christ  in  all  he  does,  not  his  own  gain.  7.  Such  as  cares  for  the  weak  babes,  or 
little  childien,  of  his  Master's  family.    {Benjamin  Keaeh.) 

Vers.  45,  61.    Who,  then.  Is  that  faithful  and  wise  servant. — ^I.  The  pabtiovuu 

BELATioN  in  which  we  are  here  represented  as  standing  to  the  one  that  is  above  pa 

II.  The  representation  that  is  here  given  of  that  attitude  in  which  the  servant  ia 
found  who  is  obedient  to  his  Master.  There  are  terms  used  particularly  descriptive 
of  the  conduct  of  the  individual.  1.  Fidelity.  2.  Wisdom  is  associated  with 
faithfulness — "faithful  and  wise."  3.  Habitual  and  persevering  continuanea 
in  well-doing.  III.  The  blessedness  which  is  included  in  this  benediction  of 
the  Master.  1.  Blessed  at  the  appearance  of  Christ,  also  while  he  lives,  in  hia 
present  activity.  2.  Positive  reward.  3.  Contrast  the  deception  of  the  evil  ser- 
vant. (T.  Binncy,  D.D.)  The  faithful  servant  and  his  reward : — 1.  Thb  cha- 
racter OF  THE  faithful  SERVANT.  1.  The  faithful  servant  is  one  whose  service 
is  sincere.  2.  The  faithful  sei-vant  is  one  whose  service  is  unreserved,  limited 
only  by  his  capability.  3.  His  service  is  uniform.  4.  His  service  is  according 
to  the  prescribed  rule,  "If  a  man  strive  for  masteries,  yet  is  he  not  crowned, 
except  he  strive  lawfully."  6.  His  service  is  that  of  faith — the  living  faith  of  the 
heart  in  the  truth  of  God  as  revealed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  II.  His  reward.  The 
reward  is  here  made  to  depend  upon  the  servant  being  found  occupying  the  position 
assigned  him,  with  aU  fidelity,  "  when  his  Lord  cometh."  We  must  not  infer  that 
the  faithful  servant  is  not  blessed  prior  to  his  Lord's  coming,  at  the  hour  of  death. 
Nor  do  his  onerous  duties  diminish,  but  rather  contribute  to,  the  blessedness  of  the 
faithful  servant.  He  has  to  suffer,  it  is  true ;  but  these  minister  to  his  blessedness. 
The  master  promotes  his  servant  to  the  highest  post  of  honour  because  of  hia 
fidelity  in  an  inferior  position.  He  is  made  a  "  ruler."  These  pleasures  will  be 
internally  progressive.  The  reward,  however,  will  not  be  equal  in  degree.  It  is  a 
matter  of  the  first  importance  to  determine  whether  we  are  in  deed  and  truth  the 
Bervants  of  Christ.  {R.  Scott.)  The  activity  of  service  : — Christ's  departure  from 
thi9  earth  is  no  reason  for  Hjs  Church's  inaction,  but  the  source  of  her  activity. 
Far  from  withdrawing  His  Church's  interests  from  earth  by  His  withdrawal,  He 
endows  it  with  more  effective  energies,  larger  capacities  for  action.  She  can  do 
7Jiore  on  earth,  and  not  less,  now  He  is  gone.  He  shows  this  by  picture  after 
picture.  He  tells  us  that  we  are  to  be  a  society  carefully  and  shrewdly  organized, 
and  this  organization  is  to  be  formed  with  a  view  to  work,  production,  fruit.  We 
are  to  be  organized  with  a  view  to  our  capacities,  so  to  be  arranged  as  to  serve 
best  for  direct,  present,  practical  usefulness  here  on  earth ;  we  are  to  be  as  a  hoose 
which  a  householder  has  left,  in  which  house  every  one  is  in  his  place,  each  accord- 
ing to  his  gift ;  and  in  this  house  there  will  be  careful  provision,  that  each  shall 
have  his  food  in  due  season — food  brought  him  prepared  through  the  hands  of 
oificers  appointed  for  that  one  service,  while  at  the  door  will  ever  sit  the  porter, 
who  will  have  the  office  of  watching  while  the  others  work.  How  careful,  how 
orderly  it  all  is !  No  loose  shiftiness  to  fill  np  an  interval.  No  indifference  m  ic 
what  may  be  done  in  the  long  waiting  time.  His  going  does  not  destroy  or  diminish 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt. 

the  serionsness  or  care  with  which  the  interval  is  to  be  organized.  How  busy  it  all 
is  to  be.  What!  did  we  fancy  that  the  haste  and  urgency  of  worldly  business 
would  conflict  with  the  solemnity  of  watching  for  the  Lord  ?  Why,  this  kingdom 
of  His  is  to  be,  during  all  the  waiting  time,  like  a  house  of  business.  It  will  be  aa 
a  merchant  house,  in  which  everybody  is  bent  on  making  all  he  can  out  of  the 
money  given  him.  He  gives  no  picture  of  a  Church  ever  on  its  knees  at  some 
silent  shrine,  praying  for  a  far-off  time.  He  foresees  a  body  of  men  busy  and  intent, 
absorbed  in  the  practical  use  of  their  gifts,  bent  on  turning  five  talents  into  (eu  or 
two  into  four.    {Canon  Scott-Holland.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vbbs.  1-13.  Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  nnto  ten  Tirgins.— 

The  ten  virgins : — I.  We  havk  hebe  two  chaeacters  contbasted.  ••  Five  wer« 
wise  and  five  were  foolish."  That  we  may  define  the  difference  between  them,  it  is 
needful  that  we  have  a  clear  conception  of  the  things  in  which  they  were  alike. 
1.  They  all  had  some  knowledge  of,  and  regard  for,  the  bridegroom,  and  desired  to 
honour  him  by  going  forth  to  meet  him  as  he  led  home  his  bride.  2.  They  all  had 
lamps  which  at  the  moment  were  burning.  3.  That  while  the  bridegroom  tarried  they 
all  slumbered  and  slept.  Not  mitil  his  coming  w  as  announced  did  the  difference 
between  them  develop  itself.  In  all  outward  things  t  he  wise  and  foolish  virgins  were 
alike ;  the  difference  between  them  was  internal.  The  going  out  of  the  lamp  is 
commonly  understood  to  mean  the  making  of  a  profession,  while  the  absence  of  the 
reserve  store  of  oil  is  supposed  to  signify  the  want  of  sincerity  in  that  profession. 
This  seems  to  unduly  narrow  the  scope  of  the  parable.  For  the  foolish  virgins  had 
a  real  regard  for  the  bridegroom ;  they  had  gone  far  to  meet  him,  and  were  disap- 
pointed at  their  exclusion.  There  was  genuineness  about  them  as  far  as  they  went ; 
only  they  did  not  go  far  enough.  Hence  I  cannot  restrict  this  part  of  the  story  to 
deUberate  hypocrites.  I  regard  the  foolish  virgins  as  those  who  have  had  some 
feelings  of  attachment  to  Christ,  and  certain  impulses  Christward  to  which  they 
yielded  at  the  time ;  but  they  were  not  constant.  Their  emotion  was  a  real  thing, 
and  when  they  were  acting  upon  it  you  could  not  call  them  hypocrites ;  but  it  was 
not  the  right  thing.  They  were  animated  by  impulse,  not  principle.  Their  religion 
did  not  go  down  to  the  lowest  depths  of  their  nature ;  it  was  a  thing  on  the  surface. 
Their  seed  fell  "  upon  rocky  ground  where  it  had  not  much  earth,"  &c.  They  com- 
menced to  build  a  tower,  but  without  counting  the  cost  (Luke  xiv.  28,  32).  11.  That 
CBABACTEB  IS  BEVEALED  BY  CBIBI8.  A  man  has  Only  as  much  religion  as  he  can 
command  in  the  hour  of  trial.  The  minor  surprises  of  life  are  to  prepare  us  for 
the  last  emergency.  III.  That  chabacteb  is  a  personal  thing,  and  cannot  be  given 
by  one  man  to  another,  but  must  be  acquired  and  uanitested  bt  each  one  roB 
HIMSELF.  Character  is  not  transferable.  I  cannot  give  you  my  courage  to  fortify  yoa 
for  duty.  How  perilous  to  leave  preparation  for  these  testing  times  till  they  have 
come  upon  ub.  Every  time  we  perform  duty  the  soul  is  made  stronger.  Here  the 
store  of  oil  is  obtained.  "  Add  to  your  faith  virtue  "  (1  Peter  i.  6,  7).  IV.  That  lost 
opportunities  cannot  be  beoallbd.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Character  rmeaied 
by  crisis  : — The  great  truth  here  taught,  therefore,  is  that  character  is  revealed  by 
emergency.  It  is  in  moments  of  surprise  that  a  man's  true  self  comes  out  to  view. 
He  is  the  ablest  general  who  can  in  an  instant  find  some  resource  when  an  ambushed 
ioe  starts  up  before  him.  He  is  the  most  skilful  mariner,  who,  in  sudden  extremity, 
can  rise  to  the  occasion,  and  bring  his  vessel  and  his  crew  safely  into  port.  Nothing 
will  more  correctly  reveal  what  is  in  a  man,  than  the  coming  upon  him  of  soma 
crushing  and  unlooked-for  crisis.  Let  it  be  temporal  ruin  by  the  failure  of  all  his 
calculations,  or  the  disappointment  of  all  his  hopes ;  let  it  be  the  entrance  of  the 
death-angel  into  bis  home,  and  the  removal  from  it  of  his  nearest  and  dearest 
eartiily  friend ;  let  it  be  his  own  prostration  by  some  serious  illness  which  puts  him 
face  to  face  with  his  dissolution :  and  forthwith  the  extent  of  his  resources  is  un- 
folded, and  it  is  at  once  discovered  both  by  others  and  by  himself,  whether  he  is 
animated  by  unfailing  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  sustained  by  the  grace  o( 
the  lloly  Spirit,  or  whether  he  has  been  deceiving  himself,  and  all  the  while  relying 
on  some  other  support.   (Ibid.)        Reserve  power  the  outcome  o/  daily  disci^lim  ;•- 


CHAP,  xxv.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  559 

We  all  know  hoy  true  that  is  in  common  life.  When,  in  times  of  danger,  soma 
great  leader  comes  suddenly  to  the  front,  and  shows  that  he  has  the  very  quahtiea 
which  the  occasion  needs,  it  will  always  be  found  that  he  has  been  preparing  him- 
self— unconsciously,  perhaps,  but  really — for  years,  by  the  careful  discipline  of  daily 
labour,  for  the  work  which  is  now  so  successfully  performed  by  him.  While  others 
were  asleep,  he  was  at  his  toil :  and  by  the  study  of  many  earnest  months,  perhaps 
also  by  the  labour  of  many  midnight  hours,  he  has  beea  laying  up  that  reserve 
supply,  on  which  at  the  moment  of  necessity  he  has  been  able  to  draw-  Thus, 
though  the  revelation  of  his  ability  may  have  been  sudden,  the  growth  of  it  has 
been  gradual ;  and  because  in  times  of  quiet  and  safety  he  kept  up  the  discipline  of 
work,  the  crisis  which  swept  others  into  oblivion  only  floated  him  into  fame.  (Ibid.) 
Lost  opportunities : — You  know  the  story  of  the  ancient  sibyl  who  came  to  King 
Tarquin  offering  for  sale  nine  books  which  she  declared  would  be  of  great  value  to 
him  in  the  government  of  Eome.  She  asked  what  seemed  an  exorbitant  price, 
and  he  would  not  buy  them.  On  that  she  retired,  and  burned  three  of  the  books  : 
then  she  came  back,  and  asked  the  same  sum  for  the  remaining  six.  He  again 
refused ;  and  she  retired,  and  burned  three  more,  only  to  come  back  and  ask  the 
same  price  for  the  remaining  three.  Then,  by  the  advice  of  his  councillors,  he 
secured  them  on  her  own  terms.  Now,  beneath  that  old  fable  there  is  an  important 
truth ;  for,  the  longer  we  refuse  God's  overtures,  the  less  these  overtures  contain,  while 
the  demand  upon  us  is  still  the  same  for  the  remainder.  How  many  more  of  these 
books  of  privilege  are  you  going  to  suffer  to  be  destroyed  ?  And  what  a  motive  there 
is  in  all  this  for  immediate  acceptance  of  God's  offer  of  mercy  I  {Ibid.)  The 
ten  virgins : — I.  The  chabacters  delineated.  1.  That  the  visible  Church  ia 
composed  of -persons  of  opposite  states  and  conditions.  2.  That  it  is  not  always 
easy  to  distinguish  the  tnily  pious  from  those  who  are  destitute  of  the  root  of  the 
matter.  All  had  lamps.  Form  one  thing,  inward  life  another.  3.  That  one 
special  feature  by  which  aU  who  possess  the  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above 
ire  distinguished,  is  the  provision  they  make,  not  only  for  their  more  immediate 
wants,  but  also  for  future  contingencies.  II.  The  impobtant  event  announced — 
"While  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  all  slumbered  and  slept."  1.  A  mournful 
statement — ".My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming."  2.  An  arousing  cry — "Behold,  the 
bridegroom  cometh."  3.  A  solemn  summons — "  Go  ye  out  to  meet  him."  III.  The 
BESDLTs  WHICH  SUBSEQUENTLY  TRANSPIRED.  1.  A  hurricd  preparation — "  Then  all 
those  virgins  arose,"  &c.  2.  A  sad  discovery — "  Our  lamps  are  gone  out."  3.  A 
happy  entrance — "Went  in  with  him,"  Ac.  4.  An  unavailing  appeal.  (Expository 
Outlines.)  Torches  lighted: — I.  The  soul  needs  light.  The  fact  that  Christ 
died  to  save  siimers  is  the  only  torch  that  can  scatter  the  soul's  gloom.  II.  The 
soul  needs  a  moveable  light.  These  torches  are  in  motion.  The  gospel  can  be 
taken  anywhere.  HI.  No  man  has  any  light  to  spare.  IV.  Some  people  apply  for 
the  light  WHEN  it  is  too  late.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  The  gospel  the  only  true  soul 
torch : — Now  there  are  some  people  who  get  one  thing  out  of  this  parable,  and  there 
are  others  who  get  another  thing ;  but  I  get  this :  the  soul  needs  light-  If  you  see 
the  bridegroom's  party  coming  down  the  hill,  what  do  you  find  ?  Torches.  If  yoa 
see  the  bridal  party  coming  out  of  the  door,  what  do  you  see  ?  Torches.  What 
does  the  soul  in  its  midnight  of  sin  and  suffering  need  ?  Torches.  Confucius  tried 
to  strike  a  light  for  China,  and  he  did  kindle  it ;  but  it  went  out  and  left  her  un- 
counted millions  to  make  the  centuries  dismal  with  their  wailing.  Zeno,  Cleanthes, 
Aristotle,  each  struck  a  light  and  passed  it  along  from  hand  to  hand,  bat  it  went 
out ;  and  I  have  to  tell  you  that  the  universities  of  the  earth,  while  they  have  ia 
their  chemical  laboratories  made  the  blue  light,  and  the  green  light,  and  the  yellow 
light,  they  have  never  yet  been  abla  to  make  the  white  light  of  pardon  and  peace 
and  hope  for  a  lost  world.  Peace  1  where  is  it  ?  Diving  bells  have  gone  two 
hundred  feet  down,  and  not  found  it  in  the  depths  of  the  sea.  Astronomers'  tele- 
scopes have  -Jwept  across  the  heavens  and  not  found  it  in  the  air-  From  a  con- 
suming brand  of  Calvary  I  pick  up  the  only  light  for  a  lost  world.  The  fact  that 
Christ  died  to  save  sinners  is  the  flambeau  which,  flung  on  the  darkness  of  your 
soul,  will  scatter  its  gloom  as  by  a  daybreak.  A  good  many  years  ago  in  Washington 
there  were  two  Congressioners  who  met  once  every  week  to  talk  about  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul ;  but  they  despised  the  Bible.  They  found  no  comfort.  Their 
time  expired,  and  they  went  home.  Years  passed  along.  They  both  visited  Wash- 
ington, and  at  the  same  time,  and  happened  to  meet  at  the  President's  lev€e.  They 
saw  each  other  at  the  great  distance  across  the  room.  They  pressed  their  way 
through  the  crowd  until  they  came  to  each  other,  and,  after  years  of  absence,  tha 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt. 

flrit  thing  that  one  said  to  the  other  was :  "  John,  any  light  ?  "  V  No  light."  Then 
this  one  accosted  the  other,  and  said:  "  Henry,  any  light  ?  "  "No  light."  They 
said  nothing  more  ;  they  parted  to  meet  at  the  judgment.  Oh,  are  there  any  who 
hare  swung  off  from  this  grand  old  gospel,  thinking  to  find  rest  for  their  soul  ? 
Have  you  found  comfort,  peace,  joy,  heaven  ?  From  a  score  of  souls  there  comes 
up  to  me  the  cry  to-night :  "  No  light !  no  light  1 "  (Ibid.)  The  gospel  a  move- 
able light ; — But  I  learn,  also,  from  this  subject,  that  the  soul  needs  a  moveable 
light.  These  torches  coming  out  of  the  door  are  in  motion.  These  torches  of  the 
bridegroom's  party  on  the  hill  are  in  motion,  hoisted,  lowered,  glancing  in  and  out 
among  the  leaves,  all  moveable.  The  soul  needs  a  moveable  light,  and  in  the  gospel 
of  Christ  we  have  it.  That  gospel  is  not  a  lamp-post  standing  on  one  street.  It  is 
not  a  chandelier  hung  in  one  room.  It  is  not  a  lighthouse  set  at  one  harbour.  It 
ia  a  flambeau — a  moveable  light — something  to  be  carried.  And  we  need  to  take  it 
into  our  homes,  and  we  need  to  take  it  into  our  stores  and  shops,  and  into  our 
schools,  and  into  our  churches,  and  in  the  cellars  where  the  poor  freeze,  and  in  the 
garret  where  the  fevered  languish,  and  into  the  hospital  where  the  wounded  die,  and 
far  out  in  the  wilderness  where  the  emigrant  struggles.  Do  you  know  that  the 
lights  of  this  world  are  stationery,  and  that  soon  you  and  I  will  have  to  start  on 
a  road  where  all  these  lights  will  fail  us  ?  (Ibid.)  No  grace  to  spare  : — "  Oh," 
says  some  one  in  this  house :  "  I  had  a  very  gooa  father  and  very  good  mother ;  if 
there  ever  was  a  good  woman,  she  was ;  and  somehow  I  hope  through  their  piety  to 
get  into  heaven."  Had  they  any  surplus  of  piety?  None.  Had  they  any  good- 
ness to  spare  T  None.  You  cannot  borrow  oil  out  of  their  lamps.  There  never 
was  a  better  man  than  Jonathan  Edwards,  but  he  had  no  grace  to  spare  for  his  sofc 
Pierrepont,  who  made  an  awful  shipwreck.  President  Burr  was  a  holy  and  conse 
crated  man,  but  he  had  no  grace  to  spare  for  Aaron  Burr,  whose  life  was  a  horrid; 
debauch.  And,  I  suppose,  if  at  the  last,  all  the  redeemed  of  heaven  were  gathered 
in  a  circle,  and  some  poor  soul  should  go  round  and  say  ;  "  Have  you  olive  oil  to 
spare  ?  give  me  some  for  my  lamp  ?  "  I  suppose  they  would  all  answer :  "  Not  so, 
lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  for  you."  "  If  thou  be  wise,  thou  shalt  be  wise 
for  thyself :  but  if  thou  scornest,  thou  alone  shall  bear  it."  Every  man  for  himself, 
every  woman  for  herself.  (Ibid.)  '  Too  late  : — I  suppose  every  hour  of  the  day 
and  night  there  are  souls  going  into  eternity  unprepared.  Oh,  what  excitement  it 
must  be  about  the  death-bed,  crying  out  for  a  lamp,  and  for  the  oil,  and  for  the 
light;  throwinp-  hands  out,  throwing  them  up,  throwing  them  around,  until  tha 
nurse  asks,  "What  do  you  want,  water?"  He  says,  shaking  his  head:  "No." 
"Bathing  of  the  temples?"  He  shakes  his  head:  "No."  What  does  he  want? 
Oh,  he  cannot  get  his  light  burning.  He  must  start ;  he  is  started ;  he  comes  up  to 
the  gate  of  heaven  ;  he  knocks  ;  he  cries  :  "  Let  me  in  I  "  He  is  not  admitted.  He 
says:  "I  want  to  see  the  bridegroom."  The  voices  within  say:  "  You  can't  see 
the  bridegroom ;  he  is  busy  with  the  guests  now."  Says  the  man  :  "  I  must  oome 
in;  my  children  are  in  there.  I  must  come  in."  A  voice  within  says:  "You 
revised  the  gratse  that  would  have  brought  you  where  they  are."  "  But,"  says  the 
man,  "  I  must  come  in ;  all  my  friends  and  kindred  are  in.  Hark  1  now  I  hear  the 
sound  of  their  voices,  and  the  bounding  of  their  feet.  Let  me  in."  And  a  voice 
from  within  says :  "  You  are  too  late  1 "  It  says  to  one  man :  "  You  are  twenty 
years  too  late ;  "  to  another,  "  you  are  over  five  years  too  late  ; "  to  another,  "  you 
are  a  month  too  late  ; "  to  another,  "  you  are  a  minute  too  late;  "  and  the  mob  of 
destroyed  oues  outside  the  door  take  up  the  chorus,  and  cry:  "Too  late  1 "  And 
the  hot  wind  of  the  desert  sighs  :  "  Too  late  1  "  and  the  bell  in  the  tower  of  eternal 
midnight  tolls  and  tolls :  "  Too  late  1  too  late  1 "  And  the  torches  of  the  silly 
virgins  begin  to  flicker  and  hiss  in  the  storm,  and  one  by  one  they  go  out,  until  in 
the  suffocating  darkness  they  cry :  "  Our  lamps  have  gone  out  I "  And  they  go 
wandering  through  eternity,  ages  after  ages,  f  eling  out  for  the  light,  for  comfort,  for 
peace,  for  hope,  but  finding  none,  and  cryin  :  "Our  lamps  have  gone  out  I"  and 
then,  turning  in  another  direction,  and  wandering  on,  age  after  age,  age  after  age, 
feeling  for  hope,  and  comfort,  and  light,  and  Heaven,  but  finding  none,  and  crying  • 
"  Our  lamps  have  gone  out  I "  (Ibid.)  Tl  e  gifts  of  grace  are  ehiejly  to  be  exer- 
cised in  order  to  an  actual  preparation  for  th  coming  of  Christ  by  death  and  judg- 
ment : — Very  miserable  is  the  state  of  such  as  these  who  have  grace  to  get  when 
Christ  Cometh.  1.  All  the  profession  of  these  virgins  is  lost.  2.  All  opportunities 
and  means  of  grace  are  now  lost,  never  to  b  enjoyed  more.  8.  The  door  of  hope 
is  shut  against  them.  4.  The  door  of  grace  is  shut.  5.  They  have  now  lost  theii 
commonicn  with  the  wise  virjfins,  who  are  safe  within  the  door.    6    These  virgim 


OHAP.  XXT.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  661 

have  now  lost  their  veila.  They  Are  discovered  to  themselves,  the  king,  to  the 
world.  7.  These  who  were  in  the  midnight's  sleep,  are  now  in  their  midnight'a 
darkness.  8.  All  who  profess  to  be  the  bridesmen  must  take  heed  of  resting  in 
aught  that  is  common  to  them  with  the  foolish  virgins.  What  gifts  of  grace  are 
chiefly  to  be  in  exercise  in  order  to  an  actual  preparation  for  the  coming  of  Christ 
by  death  and  judgment  ?  (1)  There  is  always  a  general  and  habitual  preparedness 
to  meet  Christ  in  hearts  that  are  truly  godly,  but  not  always  a  particular,  actual 
fitness.  (2)  That  though  a  state  of  grace  is  here  supposed,  seeing  grace  cannot  be 
exercised  where  it  is  not ;  yet  there  may  be  need  to  have  it  cleared.  (3)  Maintain 
your  faith  in  frequent  exercise,  and  make  no  less  conscience  of  acting  daily  faith 
than  you  do  of  daily  praver.  (4)  This  faith  doth  necessarily  work  by  love. 
^5)  Keep  even  accounts  with  God,  and  still  be  perfecting  that  repentance  which 
IS  the  work  of  every  day ;  and  let  there  be  no  old  reckonings  between  God  and 
you.  (6)  Be  much  in  the  exercise  of  goodness,  mercy,  and  works  of  liberality 
towards  Christ  in  His  needy  members,  according  to  your  opportunity  and  power. 
(7)  Exercise  diligence  and  faithfulness  in  your  particular  calling.  (W.  Hook.) 
The  folly  and  danger  of  resting  satisfied  with  the  outward  form  of  godliness : — I. 
That  true  religion  consists  of  a  lively  principle  of  grace  in  the  heart.  Principle 
and  practice  are  to  work  together  in  religion.  II.  That  many  professed  Christiana 
content  themselves  with  the  mere  outward  forms  of  religion.  This  danger  arises 
from  the  natural  blindness  of  the  understanding ;  the  natural  pride  of  the  heart 
exposes  us  to  it.  III.  That  many  become  conscious  of  this  error  and  seek  to 
remedy  it  when  it  is  too  late.  (J.  Mark.)  The  misery  of  dying  unprepared: — 
"  Our  lamps  are  gone  out."  I.  What  is  implied  in  this  complaint  or  acknowledg- 
ment. II.  Consider  how  it  came  to  pass  that  the  lamps  of  some  of  these  virgins 
had  gone  out  when  the  cry  was  heard.  III.  Consider  when  it  was  that  the  foolish 
virgins  found  their  lamps  gone  out.  1.  It  was  not  till  after  they  had  burned  for  a 
considerable  length  of  time.  2.  It  was  when  their  light  was  most  needed.  The 
midnight  hour.  3.  At  an  hour  when  they  could  not  be  rekindled  in  time  for  their 
intended  purpose.      (T.   Henderson,  D.D.)  The    believer's  readiness  for  the 

heavenly  marriage : — I.  The  marriagb.  1.  It  exhibits  the  love  of  Christ  to  His 
people.  2.  The  security  of  His  people.  3.  It  furnishes  valuable  hints  to  the 
Church  of  Christ.  How  careful  should  the  bride  be  to  manifest  her  sincere  love  to 
the  bridegroom.  4.  How  many  times  we  have  appeared  weary  of  His  love.  II.  The 
PREPARATION  for  this  marriage.  1.  It  is  not  in  any  man's  excellence  in  his  natural 
Btate  above  others  of  his  fellows.  2.  It  is  not  on  account  of  any  special  dexterity 
and  judicious  skill — "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God." 
8.  The  preparation  is  by  the  instrumentality  of  the  Holy  Spirit — "  Of  Him  we  are 
in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness,"  &o.  III.  The 
END  of  us  all.  (//.  Allen,  M.A.)  The  ten  virgins  : — I.  The  preparation.  1.  All 
were  moved  by  one  desire — to  welcome  the  bridegroom,  and  partake  of  the  banquet. 
Even  the  foolish  may  be  right  in  part.  2.  The  wise  went  wholly  prepared.  3.  The 
unwise  took  lamps  and  vessels,  but  no  oil ;  perhaps  did  not  examine  the  vessel. 
Thought  they  had  enough,  &o.  The  experiment  of  many  seems  to  be,  an  attempt 
at  discovering  how  little  religibn  will  suffice  for  their  safety.  II.  The  discovert. 
1.  The  light  gone  out  1  Night  dark.  Bridegroom  coming.  Midnight  cry.  Terrible 
thing  to  have  no  light  of  truth,  hope,  Ac,  in  the  night  of  error,  sorrow,  death.  2, 
The  oil  exhausted.  Sad  for  the  heart  to  be  without  grace  in  seasons  of  perplexity 
and  peril.  3.  No  oil  to  be  borrowed.  He  who  has  most  religion,  has  none  to  spare ; 
and  cannot  impart  grace  to  empty  souls.  4.  Oil  must  be  bought.  Those  who  seek 
grace  at  last  may  find  those  who  might  guide  and  comfort  full  of  engagements.  6. 
The  door  shut.  Could  neither  meet  the  Bridegroom  or  enter  in.  HI.  The  apfeai^ 
1.  Eespectful.  2.  Earnest.  3.  Heartrending.  4.  Fruitless,  {J.  C.  Qray.)  The 
wise  and  foolish  virgins : — I.  There  was  a  common  likeness  and  resemblance 
between  the  wise  and  foolish  virgins,  that  continued  for  a  considerable  time ;  so 

THAT  THE  REAL  DIFFERENCES  WERE  NOT  DETECTED  TILL  THE  APPROACH  Ot  THE  BRIDE - 
OBOOM.      II.   THAT   THERE  WAS  A  MOST  IMPORT.VNT  AND  SERIOUS  DISTINCTION.      "  Five  of 

them  were  wise  and  five  were  foolish."  Their  wisdom  was  shown  in  making  a 
proper  preparation  for  the  future.    III.  The  delay  ra  the  final  appearance  of 

IHE   BRIDEGROOM.       IV.   BdT   THOUGH   HE   TABBIED   U3Hn,   HE    CAME   AT    LAST.        1.   At 

midnight.  2.  With  a  cry.  V.  The  case  of  the  wise  and  foolish  vxroinb  when 
niB  BRIDEGROOM  CAMB.  VI.  Thb  FINAL  RESULT.  {R.  Wutson.)  The  unconvetted 
in  danger  of  mistaking  natural  emotions  for  true  religion  : — I.  That  an  unconverted 
person  may  make  a  false  profession  of  relig  on,  as  these  "  foolish  virgins "  took 

86 


£62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiJ'.  xxr. 

their  burning  lamps  to  do  honoar  to  the  bridegroom.  2.  That  an  unconverted 
person,  making  a  false  profession  of  religion,  may  suppose  it  to  be  genuine  religion, 
as  these  five  foolish  virgins  hoped  that  their  lamps  would  be  burning  when  the 
bridegroom  came.  3.  That  those  who  make  such  a  vain  profession  are  most  un- 
wise. 4.  That  notwithstanding  the  folly  of  such  conduct  many  are  guilty  of  it — 
"Five."  {B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  The  desirableness  of  preparation  for  Christ't 
coming : — I.  The  kvent.  It  is  of  great  importance.  1.  If  we  consider  the  extent 
of  the  infiuence  of  that  event.  2.  From  the  estimation  in  which  it  was  held  by 
Jesus  Christ  Himself.  3.  From  the  estimation  in  which  it  has  been  held  by  th« 
wisest  and  best  of  the  human  race.  4.  From  the  great  design  of  it.  5.  It  will  excite 
the  deepest  possible  interest.  6.  The  excitement  produced  by  the  Saviour's  coming 
will  last  for  ever.  7.  It  is  not  an  occurrence  of  uncertain  character.  8.  It  will  be 
sudden.  II.  The  pbeparation.  1.  One  part  of  this  preparation  consists  in  previous 
intimacy  with  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  2.  Some  congeniality  of  spirit  between 
your  souls  and  the  mind  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  A  longing  desire  for  His  approach. 
4.  A  diligent  discharge  of  all  Christ's  commands.  III.  The  desikablenebs  of  this 
PREPARATION.  1.  Out  of  regard  to  tranquillity  at  the  time  of  His  coming.  2.  Out  of 
respect  of  gratitude ;  how  much  has  He  done  for  us.  3.  On  account  of  the  felicity 
of  being  received  by  Him  into  the  feast.  4.  Out  of  respect  to  the  misery  of  those 
not  found  ready.     {E.   Hull.)         The  trimming   of  tlie   lamps : — I.    OuB  fabablk 

TEACHES  THAT   HOWEVER    LONO  AND   DEEPLV  A  MAN  KAY  SLEEP,  HE  13  SURE  TO  AWAKE   AT 

LAST — "  Then."  Is  it  not  true  that  to  every  soul  comes  the  time  when  God  calls — 
calls  plainly,  audibly,  loudly — "  Then  "  ?  There  are  such  critical  moments  in  the 
history  of  lives — moments  when  we  are  justified  in  saying,  "Hark  !  that  is  the  call 
of  God."  Calls  of  God's  providence  are  like  the  calls  of  the  hours — they  repeat 
themselves  with  renewed  power  in  every  stroke ;  perhaps  I  may  say  that  God  never 
startled  and  terrified  an}'  soul  with  the  inevitable  twelve  until  it  had  been  deaf  to 
the  repeated  calls  of  the  preceding  hours.  Illness,  bereavement,  &q.  To  every 
soul  comes  the  tremendous  and  inexorable.  Then  I     II.  There  are  epochs  in  an 

AGE    WHEN   ALL   THINGS   SEEM    TO  CALL   TO    ARISE  AND   TRIM  THE  LAMPS,  AND    WHEN    THB 

Ijkidegroom  SEEMS  SO  NEAR.  Amidst  surrounding  gloom,  voices  will  seem  to 
mark  the  epoch  and  to  give  the  call.  III.  Healthiest  lives  need  warning.  They 
all  arose.  Holiest  souls  have  fears,  need  vigilance,  and  must  use  the  means.  They 
arose — they  were  all  on  their  way  to  meet  the  Bridegroom ;  they  all  passed  for  a 
professing  Church ;  they  all  testified  their  love  to  the  Bridegroom ;  they  were  all 
called  by  His  name.  How  little  is  implied  in  professions !  Not  what  I  say,  but 
what  I  am,  is  my  security.  Do  you  never  fear  for  yourselves  at  last?  Does  the 
Master  Pfiver  wake  thee  at  night  and  say,  "  Where  is  thy  lamp  7  I  gave  it  thee  to 
guard  ?  "  *c.  IV.  However  excellent  an  instrument  a  lamp  may  be,  it  is  only 
AN  instrument.  So  they  all  arose  and  trimmed  their  lamps.  The  lamp  is  the 
turning  point  of  the  parable.  Alas !  a  lamp  useless  I  a  lamp  without  oil  I  No 
lamp  is  its  own  end — and  the  profession  of  Christianity  is  not  its  own  end,  and 
none  of  the  means  employed  by  God  are  their  own  end.  Lamps  are  to  give  light, 
and  for  progress,  and  duty,  and  comfort.  And  the  trimming  implies,  obtaining 
fresh  oil,  and  removing  clogging  from  the  wick.  1.  Faith  is  a  lamp ;  and  yet  faith 
may  not  save.  It  may  be  wanting  in  love  which  purifies  the  heart,  &c.  2.  Know- 
ledge is  a  lamp.  It  is  only  instrumental — not  its  own  end,  &o.  3.  Experience  is  a 
lamp.  But  it  needs  the  oil.  Not  what  I  have  passed  through  can  avail  for  me,  not 
my  frames  and  feelings,  but  what  these  are  before  God.  V.  Every  privilege  brinoa 
duties — "  They  all  arose  and  trimmed  their  lamps."  They  had  all  slept.  From  few 
things  are  we  more  in  danger  than  from  sleep.  1.  There  is  a  statfe  of  soul,  spiritually 
so-called — indifference  of  their  danger.  Let  no  one  suppose  he  is  in  a  state  of 
security  because  he  knows  no  fear.  2.  They  all  slept ;  but  even  in  that  case  there 
must  have  been  a  difference.  The  rest  in  the  unwise,  the  proof  of  folly,  may  be,  in 
the  wise,  the  proof  of  wisdom.  Th  foolish  were  resting  and  trusting  in  the  morn- 
ing, or  in  the  dark  lamp  without  oil ;  the  wise  slept,  but  their  lamp  was  kindled  as 
a  night-light,  placed  by  their  bedside  for  fear  of  the  night.  They  watched  for  their 
Lord.  8.  Let  us  trim  our  lamps.  e  have  no  time  to  sleep.  You  have  a  lamp  to 
trim — a  soul,  a  faith.  What  vigilance  is  needed  I  In  every  other  department  of 
life  you  are  awake.  Here  you  sleep.  Arise,  and  trim  your  lamps.  (Paxton  Hood.) 
The  ten  virgins : — I.  Review  the  parable  in  its  literal  signification.  II.  Its 
spiBiTUAii  application.  1.  The  Bridegroom  is  Jesus.  This  is  one  of  the  general 
Ikriptural  representations  of  the  Saviour  (Psa.  xlv.  10,  <tc. ;  Isa.  xliv.  6  ;  Matt.  xxii. 
1*S;  iz.  15;  John  It.  29).  The  object  of  the  Bridegroom's  affection  is  th« 


OHAP.  XXV. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  561 


Church  (2  Cor.  xi.  2,  &o. ;  Eph.  v.  25).  Now  to  render  a  union  possible  between 
Christ  and  mankind— (1)  They  must  have  one  nature  (Titus  ii.  14 ;  iii.  4).  (2) 
They  must  have  one  mind.  In  our  natural  state  we  are  alienated,  &o.  Christ,  by 
the  exhibition  of  His  love  Ib  the  gospel,  overcomes  this.  (3)  In  conversion  the 
Boul  is  espoused  to  Christ  (Jer.  ii.  2).  (4)  The  marriage  celebration  is  reserved  for 
the  Second  Advent  (Kev.  lix.  7 ;  xxi.  2,  &c.).  Conclusion :  Consider  the  dignified 
Bridegroom.  His  glory  is  supreme,  Hia  riches  are  infinite.  His  beauty  unnvalled, 
His  love  unspeakable  and  passing  understanding.  Are  not  His  claims  then  irre- 
sistible? Reject  Him  not.  Congratulate  believers  on  their  choice  aud  portion. 
Expostulate  with  those  who  have  forsaken  Him.  {J.  Burns,  LL.D.)  The  ten 
virgins : — I,  In  theib  professional  probationary  character — "  Who  took  their 
lamps."  In  this,  the  profession  of  Christianity  is  exhibited.  Religion  is  to  be 
manifested.  This  profession  of  discipleship  and  friendship  with  Christ — 1.  Should 
arise  from  love  to  Christ.  2.  Must  be  public  and  open  before  men.  3.  Must  ba 
constant  and  continued.  4.  It  must  be  sustained  by  Divine  grace.  A  profession 
without  the  grace  of  God  in  the  soul  will  be  joyless,  promiseless,  transitory.  II. 
The  delay  of  the  Bridegroom,  and  the  virqins  in  their  sleeping  state.  The 
early  Christians  expected  His  Second  Advent  in  their  time.  So  in  many  ages  since. 
But  the  period  is  not  revealed.  The  virgins  "  all  slumbered  and  slept."  There  are 
no  obvious  distinctions  between  the  two  classes.  But  the  wise  prepared  for  the 
future.  The  others  were  satisfied  with  the  present — had  no  supply  for  the  coming 
exigency.  HL  The  solemn  announcement  1.  The  period.  2.  The  pomp  and 
magnificence  of  His  coming.  The  event  is  momentous,  and  the  scene  truly  sublime. 
All  beings  in  all  worlds  will  be  interested  in  it.  IV.  The  awful  deficiency  of  thh 
yoOLiSH  virgins  is  DISCOVERED.  Wliat  shall  they  do  ?  We  cannot  give  grace  to  each 
other  now.  How  much  less,  then  I  V.  The  conclusion  of  the  ceremony  and  thh 
CONSUMMATION  OF  THE  FEAST.  The  wise  acknowledged,  &c.  But  the  foolish  labour 
to  supply  the  deficiency  in  seeking  oil.  But  "  the  door  is  shut."  1.  The  door  of 
opportunities  and  means.  2.  The  door  of  mercy.  3.  The  door  of  hope.  4.  The 
door  of  heaven.  Application:  1.  Let  the  subject  lead  to  solemn  examination, 
t.  To  earnestness,  and  diligence,  and  vigilance.  {Ibid).  Preparation  for 
heaven : — The  design  of  Christ  in  the  parable  is  to  induce  watchfulness — a  state 
of  preparation  for  death  which  conducts  to  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ.  I. 
The  happiness  destined  fob  the  follower  of  christ.  This  happiness  is  heaven, 
with  all  its  enjoyments,  &o.  It  is  described  in  the  text,  "Went  in  with  Him  into 
the  marriage."  Implies — 1.  Christ's  gracions  approval  of  them  (John  zvii.  24 ;  Iba. 
xlii.  6  ;  Rev.  xix.  7,  9).  2.  His  people  will  be  introduced  by  Him  into  heaven  as 
the  purchase  of  His  blood,  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  the  gems  of  His  crown  (John 
Xiv.  1,  2).  3.  They  will  be  guests  at  the  marriage  feast.  This  denotes— (1)  The 
consummation  of  the  union  of  Chiist  with  His  Church,  of  which  they  will  not  only 
be  the  observant,  but  the  participant  (Isa.  liv.  5 ;  Hosea  ii.  19 ;  Eph.  v.  25-27). 
This  union  will  never  be  broken ;  it  is  an  everlasting  bond  (Rev.  iii.  12.)  (2)  That 
they  dwell  in  His  immediate  presence,  and  in  the  most  intimate  fellowship  and 
communion  with  Him — in  a  state  of  eternal  rest  and  joy.  (8)  High  festive  enjoy- 
ment (Rev.  vii.  14).  (4)  Social  enjoj'ment.  The  guests  may  come  from  far,  but 
they  rejoice  together  (Heb.  xii.  22,  &c.).  II.  The  preparation  necessary  for  thb 
BNJOYMENT  of  HEAVEN — "  They  Were  ready."  Alluding  to  the  wise  who  took  oU, 
&o.  This  readiness  is  illustrated  by  the  wedding  garment  (Matt.  xxii.  11).  What 
is  the  nature  of  spiritual  preparation  for  death  and  an  interview  with  our  Judge, 
&o.  ?  1.  It  is  Divine.  Not  self-righteousness ;  not  external.  2.  Spiritual  en- 
lightenment to  disccjver  our  sinful,  impure,  and  perishing  state  ;  and  the  method  of 
God'a  salvation  through  Christ ;  and  to  see  its  superiority  to  every  other  promulga- 
tion. 3.  Faith  in  the  work  of  Christ.  4.  Inlierent  righteousness,  purity,  &e.,  as 
effected  by  Divine  energy ;  developed  in  practical  conformity  to  the  will  of  God.  6. 
Constant  expectation  of,  and  preparation  for,  the  coming  of  Christ  (2  Tim.  iv.  8  ; 
Titus  ii.  13),  This  preparation  is  real  and  lasting.  It  is  both  inward  and  outward. 
Not  like  the  foolish  virgins  (ver.  7).  IH.  The  significant  iupobt  of  the  declaba- 
noN — "And  the  door  was  shut."  1.  As  an  intimation  of  the  happiness  and 
Beeority  of  the  wise  (Rev.  iii.  12).  Adam  was  placed  in  Paradise ;  but  the  door  waa 
left  open,  and  bo  he  went  out  again ;  but  in  heaven  the  glorified  saint  will  be  shut 
in.  2.  It  intimates  *he  doom  of  the  wicked.  Heaven  will  never  be  seen  and 
enjoyed  by  siimers.  Iheir  probation  is  ended ;  their  glad  time  is  over.  All  the 
means  of  grace  have  passed  away.  The  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  closed.  All 
instnunents  employed  to  convert  and  to  save  will  be  employed  no  more.  The  Spirit 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  xtt. 


will  strive  no  more.    Hope  is  for  ever  past.    Application :  1.  Be  thankful  that  the 
means  of  preparation  are  propounded  by  the  gospel ;  "  wise  "  persons  will  avail 
themselves  of  those  meaus.    2.  Let  Christians  be  watchful ;  trim  their  lamps  ;  the 
Bridegroom  is  at  hand.     3.  How  awful  to  have  the  door  shut  against  us  1    It  will 
cither  open  for  us,  or  close  against  us.     (Helps  for  the  rulpit.)        Reserves : — I. 
This  demand  touches  life  itself.     Your  doctor  will  tell  you  that  the  best  thirig  yon 
can  do  is  to  keep  as  fine  a  reserve  of  vitahty  as  you  can  possibly  store  away,  if  you 
mean  to  give  him  a  chance  when  some  day  he  has  to  pull  you  through  the  sore  con- 
flict between  life  and  death.    How  often  is  it  said,  "  Nothing  could  be  done  for  him 
because  he  had  nothing  to  fall  back  upon ;  he  used  up  all  his  life  as  he  went  along." 
Here  then  is  the  first  meaning  of  "  oil "  in  my  vessel  with  my  lamp.    II.  These 
reserves  mean  character.     We  can  store  up  character  as  we  store  up  life :  for 
searching  emergencies  we  store  up  epiritual  substance  of  manhood.    III.  These 
reserves  mean  achie\^ment.     The  power  to  do  the  grandest  thing  possible  to  your 
nature,  when  you  feel  you  must,  or  some  precious  thing  will  be  lost.    To  cube  your 
power  out  of  the  latent  stores.     IV.  We  can  biORE  up  other  and  better  thing8 
AGAINST  THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  SOUL-     We  cau  storc  up  faith,  hope,  love,  and  whatever 
makes  a  Christian.     {R.  Collyer,  D.D.)        Reserve  power  revealed  in  emergency  : — 
Reserves  of  life  or  light,  of  courage  or  character,  of  insight  or  endurance,  or  what- 
ever the  demand  may  be,  for  failing  here,  it  is  as  when  wells  fail  in  a  dry  time, 
because  they  have  no  deepness  or  power  to  reach  the  perennial  spring.    That  in  our 
common  life  we  may  do  as  well  as  those  about  us,  or  even  seem  to  be  doing  better, 
if  we  are  reckless  as  to  these  reserves,  while  others  are  carefully  storing  them  away. 
But  Buch  times  are  no  test  of  a  man  or  a  manhood,  any  more  than  the  piping 
times  of  peace,  when  they  flame  out  in  scarlet  and  gold  about  London,  are  a  test  of 
the  Queen's  guards  ;  or  than  our  own  men  were  tested  when  they  went  southward 
through  our  streets  with  their  music  and  banners.     It  is  Waterloo  and  the  Crimea, 
Chancellorsville  and  Ball's  Bluff,  and  such  grim  backgrounds  as  these  against 
which  they  must  stand,  before  the  matchless  manhood  of  such  men  can  come  into 
bold  relief  and  reveal  itself  finally.     And  so  we  can  all  run  easily  enough  through 
our  easy-going  times,  make  good  headway  as  we  imagine,  and  hold  our  own  with 
the  best,  but  these  days  have  no  virtue  in  them  to  reveal  this  secret  of  our  reserved 
power.     They  are  like  the  main  part  of  a  voyage  I  made  once  across  the  Atlantic, 
in  which  the  weather  was  so  pleasant  and  all  things  ran  so  easily  that  I  suspect  the 
most  of  us  felt  about  equal  to  the  captain,  and  concluded  it  was  no  great  thing  to 
run  a  steamer  after  all,  when  you  once  got  the  lines.    But  when  a  great  storm 
Btruck  us  as  we  passed  Cape  Eace,  and  all  night  long  the  good  ship  shuddered  and 
panted  through  the  wild  waters,  and  when,  next  morning,  peering  deckward,  we  saw 
the  faithful  fellow  standing  by  the  mainmast  with  his  arms  twisted  about  the  ropes, 
swinging  in  the  tempest,  watching  it  with  steady  eyes,  alert  and  cheerful,  though 
he  had  been  on  deck  all  night,  turning  his  ship  round  in  the  teeth  of  the  tempest 
and  the  trough  of  the  sea,  bo  that  she  might  escape  the  awful  strain  and  the 
avalanche  of  waters  which  were  filling  men  with  dismay,  then  we  knew  our  captain. 
The  reserves  were  coming  out.    Here  was  a  man  nothing  could  daunt,  and  who,  if 
the  worst  had  come,  would,  no  doubt,  have  seen  still  to  our  safety  so  far  as  he  wa« 
able,  and  been  the  last  to  leave  the  wreck.    That  man  had  light  in  him  and  life 
f  qual  to  the  demand — oil,  in  a  word,  in  the  vessel  with  his  lamp,  and  eo  he  brought 
the  good  ship,  at  last,  to  her  haven,  and  won  the  "  Well  done."    (Ibid.)        Reserve 
power  helpful  to  achievement : — When  the  great  Duke  of  Bridgewater  undertook  to 
construct  those  canals  which  lie  at  the  root  of  the  vast  wealth  of  modem  England, 
and  had  their  part  in  the  splendour  of  this  metropolis,  he  found  the  strain  bo  hard  at 
last  that  he  was  glad  to  get  a  note  accepted  for  five  pounds.    He  gave  up  his 
princely  mansion,  livpd  in  a  small  house,  and  clad  himself  so  humbly  that  one  day 
BH  he  was  standing  by  a  great  pile  of  his  own  coal,  a  boy,  thinking  he  was  a  common 
person,  cried,  "  Here,  man,  give  us  a  lift  with  this  sack  1"     He  loved  his  bit  of 
humour,  bo  took  hold  with  the  boy,  and  got  for  his  thanks,  "  Ah,  man,  thou's  big 
enough,  but  thou'a  lazy  !  "    He  came  at  last  to  the  end  of  his  reserves  of  money 
and  courage,  and  on  a  Saturday  night,  sitting  with  Brindley,  who  had  borne  the 
burden  with  him,  the  mighty  engineer  said,  "  Well,  Duke,  don't  be  cast  down,  we 
are  sure  to  pull  through."    They  did  pull  through,  and  Brindley  found  the  strength 
(or  it  in  the  last  drips  of  oil  in  the  vessel,  but  he  found  it ;  and  the  result  was  the 
first  splendid  stroke  which  set  England  on  her  feet,  and  gave  yon  the  port  yoa 
wanted  in  Liverpool.     (Ibid.)      Reserve  of  faith  .-—Because,  to  speak  first  of  faith, 
we  need  not  merely  enough  to  live  on  through  our  ordinary  experiences,  but  store! 


8HAP.  xxv.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  662 

of  it  to  fall  back  on  and  draw  on  when  ruin  and  disaster  seem  to  have  it  all  theii 
own  way.  When  we  wake  up  suddenly  to  wonder  whether  God  can  be  in  heaven 
and  we  so  forlorn  on  the  earth  ;  whether  the  Christ  was  not  mistaken  in  His  abiding 
confidence,  and  all  the  saints  ;  and  what  better  thing  there  can  be  left  than  just  to 
grit  our  teeth  and  bear  it-  Millions  have  struck  the  same  troubles,  but  have  risen 
out  of  them  through  their  reserves  into  the  very  life  and  light  of  God.  No  disaster 
has  overcome  them  utterly ;  no  trial  broken  them  clean  down.  It  was  no  matter 
that  the  heavens  were  black  as  midnight,  except  for  the  fierce  pain  of  it — or  that 
*•  from  out  waste  nature  came  a  cry  and  murmurs  from  the  dying  sun ;  "  the 
resei-ves  were  there,  and  they  drew  on  them  to  the  last,  and  went  in  to  the  joy  of 
t)ie  Lord.  Poor  creatures  some  of  them,  who  could  give  no  reason  why  they  should 
hold  on  BO  and  stay  so  cheerful,  any  more  than  the  fountain  can  give  a  reason  for 
its  flowing,  or  the  plant  you  find  in  some  deserts  for  its  store  of  cool  water  I  They 
have  been  sending  out  roots  far  and  wide,  tapping  the  secrets  of  reserved  power  and 
Btoriiig  ap  the  treasure,  and  now  nothing  can  exhaust  them.  The  old  Bible  has 
been  drawn  on,  and  the  stores  open  to  them  outside  in  thought  and  life  ;  and,  above 
all  things,  the  inward  and  inexhaustible  fountains  of  God's  own  blessing.  No 
danger  of  the  oil  giving  out ;  it  burns  clear  away  until  they  pass  beyond  the  veil.  (Ibid.) 
Two  kinds  of  parables  : — Parables  are  of  two  sorts.  1.  Argumentative ;  wherein 
Bome  notable  reason  is  couched,  or  ground  is  laid  for  some  excellent  encouragement 
in  our  converse  with  God,  by  showing  what  falleth  out  among  men.  In  these  argu- 
mentative parables,  the  parts  of  tlie  parables  are  not  to  be  strained,  but  the  scope 
and  parable  itself  is  to  be  regarded.  2.  Kepresentative.  This  sort  yields  us  a  notable 
delineation  of  some  heavenly  matter,  by  laying  the  scene  of  it  among  earthly  affairs ; 
for  God  is  feign  to  lisp  to  us  in  our  own  dialect,  and  speaks  as  we  can  understand. 
This  parable  is  of  the  latter  sort.  (T.  Manton).  Scope  of  the  parable  : — 1.  The  thing 
compared — the  •'  kingdom  of  heaven."  II.  The  comparison  itself — "  likened  to  ten 
virgins."  Who  are  described  (1)  by  their  quality  or  state ;  (2)  by  their  number — ten  (3) 
by  their  rank  or  distribution — five  wise,  five  foolish  ;  (4)  by  their  work  or  employment 
— they  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom ;  (5)  by  their  preparation  for  that  work — they 
took  their  hand-lamps.  (Ibid.)  Oil  both  in  lamps  and  vessels  : — I.  Profession  must 
not  be  neglected ;  both  the  wise  and  the  foolish  took  their  lamps  with  them.  Burn- 
ing profession  is  two-fold,  vocal  and  real ;  by  word  and  by  life.  II.  Profession  o£ 
godliness,  though  never  so  glorious,  should  not  be  rested  in,  without  a  saving  work 
of  grace  upon  the  heart  to  maintain  it.  Grace  must  show  forth,  but  withal  it  must 
have  a  bottom  within  ;  as  a  fountain  or  spring  sendeth  forth  streams  to  water  the 
ground  about  it,  or  the  heart  sendeth  forth  life  and  spirits  to  every  faculty  and  mem- 
ber,  so  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  believers  show  forth  in  their  carriage  and  behaviour, 
to  make  their  tongue  drop  that  which  is  savoury,  their  actions  orderly  and  even,  their 
carriage  in  all  relations  and  affairs  grave  and  serious.  'Tis  well  when  all  this  hath  a 
bottom,  that  there  is  a  principle  of  life  within,  to  diffuse  this  virtue  into  every  part 
of  their  conversations.  (Ibid.)  The  Spirit  as  oil: — The  Spirit  doth  not  give  a 
draught,  but  the  spring  ;  not  a  dash  of  rain  that  is  soon  dried  up,  but  a  well ;  not  a 
pond,  that  may  be  dried  up  at  length,  but  a  fountain  that  ever  keepeth  flowing,  bo 
that  we  shall  never  thirst  more.  Not  a  petty  refreshment  for  a  season,  but  His  Spirit 
to  dwell  in  us  as  a  full  fountain,  to  flow  forth  for  the  refreshment  of  himself  and 
others.  Though  the  ocean  be  in  God,  yet  there  is  a  river  in  the  saints.  (Ibid.) 
The  mistake  of  a  little  religion  : — It  may  be  good  words  without  practice  ;  or  prac- 
tice without  principle.  Many  talk  well ;  their  notions  are  high  and  strict,  but  ob- 
serve them  narrowly,  and  you  will  find  them  cold  and  careless  ;  like  the  carbuncle, 
at  a  distance  it  seemeth  all  on  fire,  but  touch  it,  and  it  is  key-cold.  ••  Be  warmed, 
be  clothed  "  will  not  pass  for  charity,  nor  opinions  for  faith,  nor  notions  and  ele- 
vated  strains  for  godliness.  You  would  laugh  at  him  that  would  think  to  pay  his 
debts  with  the  noise  of  money  ;  and  instead  of  opening  his  purse,  shake  it :  'tis  as 
ridiculous  to  think  to  satisfy  God,  or  discharge  our  duty,  by  fine  words,  or  heavenly 
language,  without  a  heavenly  heart  or  Hfe.  'Tis  not  enough  to  do  good,  but  we  must 
get  the  habit  of  doing  good  ;  to  believe,  but  we  must  get  the  habit  of  faith  :  to  do  a 
virtuous  action,  but  we  must  have  the  habit  of  virtue  ;  to  perform  an  act  of  obedience, 
but  we  must  get  the  root  of  obedience.  (Ibid.)  Formalism  easy : — A  form  ia 
easily  gotten  and  maintained.  Painted  fire  needs  no  fuel  to  keep  it  in.  Vanishing 
affections  are  soon  stirred.  All  excellent  things  have  their  incident  difficulties,  and 
nothing  is  gotten  without  diligence,  labour,  and  serious-mindedness.  (Ibid.)  Tem- 
porary grace : — The  grace  of  temporaries  is  good  of  its  kind,  but  must  not  be  rested 
m.  'Tis  like  priming  the  post,  to  make  it  receptive  of  other  colours,  'tis  an  inclioate 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt. 

imperfect  thing.  (Ibid.)  The  reserve  of  oil : — Oil,  in  Scripture,  is  the  symbol  ol 
inward  grace.  Eegarding  the  virgins  as  types  of  Christian  disciples,  whatever  ia 
merely  outward  in  Christian  profession  is  the  lamp  and  light ;  whatever  is  inward 
and  spiritual  is  the  oil  reserved  in  the  vessels.  The  leseon  is,  be  watchful  and  care- 
ful over  the  nourishing  of  the  inner  life.  The  foolish  virgins  are  not  hypocrites,  but 
those  too  easily  satisfied  with  profession,  and  too  negligent  of  soul-culture.  Illus- 
trate— 1.  Setting  out  on  profession.  Some  take  up  Christian  life  seriously,  others 
lightly  and  confidently.  Some  inquire  how  it  is  to  be  maintained,  others  rest  in 
present  emotions,  and  vaguely  hope  all  will  go  well.  2.  Waiting  on  through  years 
of  Christian  living.  Profession  has  to  be  tested,  and  the  test  is,  •'  keeping  on  living." 
Continuance  is  the  severest  of  tests.  3.  Failing  or  succeeding  when  the  waiting-time 
is  over.  All  will  be  well  now,  and  all  will  be  well  for  ever,  if  the  life  of  love,  and 
devotion,  and  trust,  be  kept  up  in  our  souls.  How  Jesus  will  find  us  when  he  comes 
depends  on  the  •'  oil  in  our  vessels."    (Selected.)      The  certainty  of  Christ's  coming : 

I.  Reason  saith  He  may  come.  Argue  from — 1.  the  nature  of  God.  2.  The  provi- 
dence of  God.  3.  The  feelings  of  conscience.  4.  Show  the  conveniency  of  such  a  day. 

II.  If  doubtful  to  reason,  'tis  sure  to  faith.  Faith  argueth — 1.  From  Christ's  merit 
and  purchase.  2.  From  Christ's  affection  to  us.  3.  From  the  affections  of  His  saints 
to  Him,  which  Christ  will  satisfy.  4.  From  the  constitution  of  His  Church.  5.  From 
His  promise.  (T.  Manton.)  The  use  of  Divine  delayiiigs  : — The  Lord  tarrieth 
sometimes  when  men  think  He  should  come  sooner.  To  come  late  is  many  times 
the  best  time.  God  keepeth  back  His  best  blessings  for  a  while,  and  detaineth  them 
long  in  His  own  hands  before  they  come  to  us.  Therefore  wait  His  leisure.  Ex- 
pectation is  tedious,  and  reckoneth  every  minute.  Strong  desires  are  importunate, 
and  usually  we  go  by  an  ill  count ;  not  by  eternity,  but  time.  The  timing  of  all 
things  is  in  God's  hand  ;  not  left  to  our  foolish  fancies,  but  His  wise  ordering.  The 
dial  sometimes  goeth  before  the  sun  ;  so  doth  our  time  before  God's  time.  We  would 
make  short  work  for  faith  and  patience,  and  so  our  graces  would  not  be  found  to 
praise  and  honour.  (Ibid.)  Ancient  lamps: — These  are  often  elegant  in  form 
and  elaborate  in  design.  They  are  covered  at  the  top,  where  there  is  a  hole  for 
pouring  in  the  oil,  while  another  at  the  side  receives  the  wick ;  there  is  often  a 
handle  large  enough  to  pass  one  finger  through,  for  the  purpose  of  holding  it.  These 
lamps  are  often  adorned  with  graceful  designs  of  heathen  deities,  or  mythological 
subjects,  of  animals,  and  birds,  and  comic  scenes.  These  were  evidently  hand-lamps, 
intended  to  be  carried  about  the  house  ;  but  when  they  were  required  to  burn  for  a 
considerable  time,  they  needed  to  be  replenished,  and  a  small  earthem  jar  filled  with 
oil  was  set  near  the  lamp,  as  it  now  is,  from  which  a  new  supply  was  added  when- 
ever the  light  grew  dim.  It  was  thus  in  the  parable  of  the  ten  virgins ;  when  the 
lamps  had  burned  down  with  the  long  delay  of  the  bridegroom,  •'  the  wise  "  virgins 
were  enabled  to  replenish  theirs,  which  "  the  foolish  "  could  not  do.  (Van  Lennep.) 
The  coming  of  the  Eastern  bridegroom : — In  Egypt,  as  well  as  other  Oriental  coun- 
tries, the  same  usage  still  prevails : — "  We  heard  the  sound  of  music  and  mirth,  and 
running  to  the  window  observed  the  glare  of  torches  in  the  street.  We  were  told 
that  it  was  '  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom  and  of  the  bride.'  Some  of  us  instantly  set  out 
to  witness  the  spectacle  of  an  Eastern  marriage.  The  bridegroom  was  on  his  way  to 
the  house  of  the  bride.  According  to  custom,  he  walked  in  procession  through  several 
streets  of  the  town,  attended  by  a  numerous  body  of  friends,  all  in  their  showy 
Eastern  garb.  Persons  bearing  torches  went  first,  the  torches  being  kept  in  full 
blaze  by  a  constant  supply  of  ready  wood  from  a  receiver,  made  of  wire,  fixed  at  the 
end  of  a  long  pole.  Two  of  the  torch-bearers  stood  close  to  the  bridegroom,  so  that 
we  had  a  view  of  his  person.  Some  were  playing  upon  an  instmment  not  unlike  our 
bagpipe,  others  were  beating  drums,  and  from  time  to  time  muskets  were  fired  in 
honour  of  the  occasion.  ...  At  length  the  company  arrived  at  the  entrance  of  the 
street  where  the  bride  resided.  Immediately  we  heard  the  sound  of  many  femala 
voices,  and  observed  by  the  light  of  the  torches  a  company  of  veiled  brides- 
maids, waiting  on  the  balcony  to  give  notice  of  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom. 
When  they  caught  sight  of  the  approaching  procession  they  ran  back  into  the  house, 
making  it  resound  with  the  cry,  •  Halil,  halil,  halil ! '  and  music,  both  vocal  and 
instrumental,  commenced  within.  Thus  the  bridegroom  entered  in,  and  the  door 
was  shut !  We  were  left  standing  in  the  street  without,  *  in  the  outer  darkness.'  In 
oar  Lord's  parable,  the  virgins  go  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom  with  lamps  in  their 
hands,  but  here  they  only  waited  for  his  coming.  Still  we  saw  the  traces  ol 
the  very  scene  described  by  our  Lord,  and  a  vivid  rcpref  entation  of  the  way  in  wbioh 
Christ  shall  come  to  His  waiting  Church,  and  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamh 


CHAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  J6T 

begin."  {Narrative  of  a  Mission  of  Inquiry  to  the  Jews.)  The  visible  Church  it 
the  kingdom  of  heaven: — I.  In  what  eespect  the  visible  Church  may  be  com- 
PAitED  TO  A  EiNODOM.  1.  Because  it  is  under  kingly  government.  2.  Because  it 
is  a  distinct  state  from  any  other  kingdom  or  sort  of  government.  3.  Because  every 
kingdom  consisteth  of  divers  sorts.  4.  Because  the  same  laws  bind  all  sorts  of  per- 
sons within  the  compass  of  the  kingdom.  5.  Because  ignorance  of  laws  is  not  al- 
lowed in  excuse  of  wrong-doing.  6.  Because  in  every  kingdom  there  is  a  statute 
book,  and  officers  to  govera.  7.  Because  in  a  kingdom  all  who  violate  the  laws  are 
called  to  account  and  punished.  II.  Why  is  the  Chubch  cALiiED  the  kingdom  or 
HEAVEN  T  Because — 1.  Its  constitution  and  laws  are  not  of  this  world.  2.  The  same 
King  reigns  as  in  heaven.  3.  The  doctrine,  faith,  order,  rule,  and  government  pro- 
mote a  heavenly  life,  and  so  lead  to  heaven.  4.  The  saints  are  the  subjects  of 
heaven.  6.  The  Church  is  the  figure  of  heaven.  6.  The  Church  ought  to  show  the 
glory  of  heaven  begun  below.  (Benj.  Keach.)  Figure  of  Christians  as  virgins  : — 
Apply  to  both  the  male  and  female  sex.  1.  They  are  chaste  and  not  defiled.  2. 
They  are  commonly  the  younger  sort,  and  are  of  yielding  or  complying  temper.  3. 
They  are  often  (perhaps)  tempted,  but  they  yield  not.  4.  They  are  often  espoused. 
6.  They  delight  to  be  clean  and  neatly  dressed.  6.  Virgins  espoused  have  cordial 
affection,  or  dear  love,  to  their  bridegroom.  7.  They  love  and  delight  in  the  company 
of  each  other.  {Hid.)  The  folly  of  the  foolish : — It  consisteth— I.  In  their  attain- 
ing to  some  degree  of  the  knowledge  of  the  way  of  salvation,  and  yet  having  no 
interest  in  the  blessed  Saviour.  II.  In  that  they  had  the  means  but  never  used  it ; 
a  price  in  their  hands,  but  no  heart  to  improve  it.  III.  To  sleep  in  harvest,  or 
come  to  the  market  when  it  is  over,  certainly  argues  great  folly  in  such  persons.  IV. 
Their  folly  consisteth  in  running  the  greatest  hazard,  and  yet  thinking  themselves 
safe.  V.  It  is  not  great  folly  to  refuse  to  cut  off  a  corrupt  and  rotten  member,  when 
told  that  death  will  inevitably  ensue,  or  their  life  must  go  if  it  be  not  done.  VI. 
Their  foUy  consisteth  in  believing  the  father  of  lies,  and  in  trusting  in  their  own 
hearts,  when  nothing  is  more  deceitful.  VII.  To  value  the  good  opinion,  and  hav- 
ing the  approbation  of  men  above  the  love  of  Christ,  and  the  approbation  of  God, 
is  folly  with  a  witness.  VIII.  Their  folly  consisteth  in  losing  the  love,  both  of  God 
and  the  world,  and  in  exposing  themselves  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  men.  (Ibid.) 
Saving  grace  likened  to  oil : — Grace  is  here  compared  to  oil,  from  the  qualities  or 
nature  thereof.  1.  Oil  is  of  a  softening,  a  mollifying  and  healing  nature.  2.  Oil  is 
contrary  to  scorpions,  and  expels  poison ;  so  is  grace  contrary  also  to  Satan,  that 
old  serpent,  and  it  also  expels  the  poison  of  sin,  and  Satan's  temptations.  3.  Oil 
will  not  mingle  or  incorporate  with  other  liquid  things,  but  it  will  be  always  upper- 
most. 4.  Oil  is  of  a  reviving  nature,  and  opens  obstructions,  causing  a  man  to 
breathe  freely,  so  grace  revives  the  soul.  5.  Oil  is  of  a  feeding  and  fattening  nature, 
as  well  as  beautifying.  6.  Oil  makes  the  lamp  bum,  feeds  it,  and  continues  its 
light ;  so  the  grace  of  God  in  a  believer  makes  his  life,  profession,  and  conversation 
to  bum,  and  give  much  light.  (Ibid.)  Slumbering  saints : — 1.  Sleep  or  spiritual 
drowsiness  riseth  from  those  gross  vapours  which  seize  on  and  clog  the  soul.  2. 
Slothfulness,  or  a  careless  and  dull  frame,  hath  a  great  tendency  to  produce  sleep. 
3.  Wearisomeness,  as  when  a  man  is  tired  out  with  his  work,  makes  him  sleepy  in 
'  religious  duties.  4.  A  dark  and  cloudy  day  easily  puts  us  into  a  drowsy  frame.  5. 
An  apprehension  that  it  is  a  great  while  to  day,  makes  a  man  settle  down  to  sleep 
again.  6.  When  a  man  apprehends  no  danger,  he  is  apt  to  slumber  in  security.  7. 
Some  distempers  or  diseases  which  seize  upon  the  body  cause  an  unusual  sleepiness. 
8.  Surfeiting  and  drunkenness  cause  immoderate  sleep.  9.  A  sleepy  company  that 
a  man  may  be  in  will  infect  him  with  sleepiness.  10.  Long  watching  tends  to  pro- 
duce immoderate  sleepiness.  (Ibid.)  Trimming  the  lamps  : — The  trimming  of  the 
lamp  denotes  the  cleansing  of  it,  and  the  taking  off  of  the  dead  ashes  that  hinder 
the  light,  or  prevent  its  burning  so  clearly  as  otherwise  it  would.  Now  what  is  this, 
but  the  putting  away  of  all  iniquity  by  faith  and  unfeigned  repentance.  Our  con- 
versation, or  lamp  of  profession,  is  subject  to  gather  filth,  and  the  dead  ashes  of 
corruption  often  hinder  the  shinings  of  our  lives,  to  the  glory  of  God.  Unbelief, 
deadness,  earthliness,  and  self-confidence  is  like  to  a  thief  in  the  candle,  or  dead 
ashes  in  the  wick  of  a  lamp,  and  therefore  must  be  snuffed  by  mortification,  lest  the 
spirit  of  God  be  grieved  and  depart  from  us,  as  to  His  quickening  and  comforting 
influences.  {Ibid.)  The  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  : — Doctrine  :  The  Lord  Jesus 
will  oome  again,  or  appear  the  second  time.  1.  Prove  that  Christ  shall  or  will  come 
again.  2.  Give  some  reasons  why  the  Lord  Christ  will  come  again.  3.  Show  how 
He  will  appear.    4.  Lay  down  a  few  of  the  signs  of  His  coining.     5.  Show  how  we 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Ichap    xxv. 

may  be  said  to  be  ready.  6.  Who  are  they  that  will  not  be  ready  ?  7.  Show  what 
may  be  meant  by  shutting  the  door.  (Ibid.)  Chrisfs  knowiiig  His  own  : — 1.  The 
Lord  Jesus  did  not  know  them  to  be  His  sheep.  2.  He  knows  them  not  so  as  to 
approve  of  them.  3.  Knowledge  sometimes  refers  to  love  and  affections.  4.  Know- 
ledge is  sometimes  taken  for  intimate  communion,  and  they  are  such  that  never  had 
this  knowledge  of  Christ,  or  Christ  of  them.       (Ibid.)  Works  of  supereroga- 

tion:— No  man  can  be  benefited  by  another  man's  grace  and  good  works  (I  mean  as  to 
his  personal  and  eternal  salvation)  ;  none  has  any  grace  to  spare  for  another,  nor,  if 
he  had,  has  he  any  right  or  capacity  to  transfer  or  communicate  it.  1.  No  mere  man 
in  this  life  can  fully  and  perfectly  obey  all  the  commandments  of  God,  for  how 
should  a  morally  imperfect  creature  yield  a  full  obedience  to  an  every  way  perfect 
law  f  n.  Though  we  cannot  perform  full  and  entire  obedience  to  the  law  of  God, 
yet  this  is  still  due  from  us  to  the  Author  of  our  being.  Though  we  have  lost  onr 
power  to  obey,  God  has  not  lost  His  right  to  command  and  require  obedience  of 
na.  III.  The  obedience  which  God  requires  of  us,  is  principally  and  chiefly  that  of 
the  soul  and  inward  man,  and  secondarily  that  of  the  body  and  outward  man ;  which 
latter  is  of  no  value,  but  as  it  flows  from,  and  is  expressive  of,  the  former.  IV.  The 
least  defect  in  our  obedience,  much  more  an  habitual  revolt  from  God,  is  death  by 
the  original  law,  the  law  of  innocency  given  to  Adam  in  and  at  his  creation ;  and 
habitual  and  final  disobedience  is  no  less  so  by  the  law  of  grace,  the  gospel  remedy, 
ing  the  law ;  and  that  with  farther  aggravation  on  account  of  unbelief,  and  our  re- 
jecting the  only  remedy,  which  infinite  wisdom  and  love  has  provided  for  us,  and 
offered  to  us.  V.  The  impotency  which  we  all  labour  under  to  fulfil  the  law  of  God, 
and  perform  His  commands,  is  owing  to  the  corruption  of  our  natures,  derived  to  ua 
from  the  fall  of  our  first  parents,  whereby  we  lost  the  image  of  God,  and  became  aa 
unstable  and  weak  as  water,  naturally  disinclined  lor  every,  and  disabled  for  any 
good  work.  VI.  Though  no  mere  man  hath,  or  ever  can,  fulfil  the  law  of  God,  yet 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  perfectly  obeyed  it,  and  hath  also  suffered  the  curse  due 
to  oar  transgression  of  it,  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  it  fit  for  God  to  forgive  all  them 
that  believe  on  His  name.  VII.  Though  believers  cannot  perfectly  obey  all  the 
commandments  of  God  in  this  life,  yet  they  are  aiming  at  it,  and  making  daily  pro- 
gress towards  it.  {John  Billingsley.)  Readiness  : — I.  Wherein  doth  this  readi- 
ness consist?  1.  Habitual  readiness  is  to  have  "oil  in  their  vessels" — that  is, 
grace  in  the  heart.  Those  who  have  a  work  of  grace  upon  their  hearts,  (1)  have 
been  effectually  called  ;  (2)  are  justified  by  His  grace ;  (3)  are  sanctified  by  the 
Spirit ;  (4)  preserve  herein  to  the  end.  2.  An  actual  readiness.  When  gracioua 
Bouls  have  notice  of  their  Lord's  coming,  they  endeavour  to  put  themselves  in  the 
best  posture  to  receive  Him.  They  are  (1)  sober ;  (2)  vigilant ;  (3)  watch  unto 
prayer.  II.  What  is  implied  in  the  saints  entering  in  with  Christ  to  the  marriage  ? 
1.  They  shall  enter  into  the  nearest  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.  2.  They  shall  enter 
into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.  III.  When  Christ  and  His  saints  are  entered  into 
heaven,  there  will  be  neither  going  out  nor  coming  in  for  ever.  Application — 
1.  There  will  be  a  certain  and  final  separation  between  empty  professors  and 
real  saints.  2.  What  a  grievous  loss  will  they  sustain,  who  do  not  thoroughly  attend 
to  religion  1  8.  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  the  door  of  the  sanctuary  is  still  open.  {S. 
Lavington.)  Points  of  likeness  and  unlikeness  in  the  ten  virgins : — They  get 
the  same  name,  virgins ;  they  wear  the  same  dress  ;  they  are  on  the  same  errand ; 
they  all  have  lamps ;  they  all  have  vessels  ;  they  all  slumber  and  sleep.  They  have 
thus  many  features  in  common.  Man  could  not  discern  the  difference,  at  least  for 
the  time.  The  peril  of  mere  esternalism  is  that  which  our  Lord  points  out  here.  No 
doubt  there  must  be  extemalism.  Religion  must  have  an  outside  as  well  as  an  in- 
side. The  lamp  must  not  only  have  oil,  but  it  must  bum  ;  the  external  must  indi- 
cate the  internal.  And  we  may  say  that  our  Lord  intimated  the  necessity  of  a 
thorough  consistency  and  completeness  in  the  outward  religious  life  of  a  man,  bo 
that,  as  a  fair  external  is  no  excuse  for  internal  unsoundness  or  incompleteness,  so 
a  sound  internal  is  no  excuse  for  an  inconsistent  life.  Our  Lord,  then,  here  depicts — 
(1)  a  complete  extemalism ;  (2)  a  beautiful  extemalism  ;  (3)  a  deceptive  extemalism  ; 
(4)  a  prolonged  extemalism  ;  (5)  an  unavailing  extemalism.  Up  to  a  certain  point 
in  a  man's  life,  or  character,  or  religion,  extemalism  may  avail ;  but  beyond  that  it 
gives  way ;  it  exhibits  its  unprofitableness.  This  extemalism  may  not  always  be 
hypocrisy,  but  it  is  imitation.  It  is  not  the  flower  in  its  natural  colour  and  growth, 
but  painted,  artificial.  .  .  .  Though  in  most  respects  they  were  all  alike,  yet  there 
was  a  difference.  It  was  within ;  it  was  imperceptible  from  without ;  it  could  only 
be  discovered  when  the  bridegroom  came.     Only  tlien  the  want  came  out  in   th» 


OHAT.  XXV.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  569 


foolish.  Then  was  it  seen  who  were  wise,  and  who  were  foolish.  Tliat  day  is  the 
day  ol  certain  and  unerring  detection.  It  is  the  day  of  weighing  in  the  balances. 
It  is  the  separation  of  the  false  from  the  true.  .  .  .  Thus  a  man  may  be  very  much 
like  a  Christian,  and  yet  not  be  one.  He  may  come  very  near  the  kingdom,  and  yet 
not  enter  in.  He  may  have  all  the  outward  features  of  a  Christian,  and  yet 
be  lacking  in  the  main  one.  He  may  have  the  complete  dress  of  the  saint,  and 
yet  not  be  one.  He  may  have  a  pood  life,  a  sound  creed,  a  strict  profession ; 
he  may  be  one  who  says  and  does  many  things  excellent ;  he  may  be  a  subscriber  to 
all  the  religious  societies  in  the  land,  a  member  of  all  their  committees,  or  a  speaker 
at  all  their  meetings,  and  supporter  of  all  their  plans  ;  he  may  profess  to  be  looking 
for  Christ's  coming,  and  going  forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom,  yet  not  necessarily  a 
Christian  I  He  may  lack  the  oil,  the  Holy  Spirit.  {H,  Bonar,  D.D.)  History  of 
a  conversion : — While  spending  a  week  recently  in  the  society  of  a  number  of  faithful 
pastors  from  the  Canton  of  Vaud,  one  of  them,  at  a  public  meeting,  related  to  us  the 
conversion  of  a  lady  in  his  parish.  She  was  one  of  those  who  live  only  for  this 
world  ;  the  thoughts  of  her  sins  had  never  caused  her  uneasiness ;  she  was  careful 
and  troubled  about  many  things,  but  neglected  the  one  thing  needful.  One  night, 
while  alone  in  her  room,  she  saw  the  lamp  which  lighted  it  suddenly  go  out.  Al- 
though she  was  alone,  she  said  aloud  (thinking  only  of  the  accident  which  left  her 
in  the  dark),  "  There  is  no  oil  in  the  lamp  !  "  The  words  thus  spoken  echoed  in  the 
room  and  sounded  in  her  ears,  but  with  a  new  sense.  She  recalled  the  parable  of 
the  five  foolish  virgins  who  had  no  oil,  and  whose  lamps  had  gone  out  at  the  coming 
of  the  bridegroom  ;  and  from  that  moment,  day  and  night,  the  word  of  God  remained 
in  her  soul,  as  an  arrow  remains  in  the  side  of  a  stag  who  flies  away  from  the 
hunters.  It  recurred  to  her  constantly — "  No,  I  have  no  oil  in  my  lamp  !  My  God  1 
what  will  become  of  me  ?  "  She  was  filled  with  fear  ;  then  she  began  to  pray,  and 
continued  in  prayer  until  God  answered  her  favourably,  and  gave  her  His  peace. 
Unreal  religion : — They  were  not  lighted  lamps,  but  sparks  of  their  own  tinder- 
boxes ;  fantastical  fire,  an  ignis  fatuus,  a  painted  flame,  which  neither  heats  nor 
lights.  The  glow-worm  seems  to  have  both  heat  and  light,  but  touch  it,  and  it  hath 
neither.  Alchemy  gold  may  seem  brighter  and  better  than  true  gold,  but  it  can  neither 
pass  the  seventh  fire,  nor  comfort  the  heart  as  a  cordial :  so  here.  A  man  may  live 
by  a  form,  but  he  cannot  die  by  it.  They  that  kindle  a  fire,  but  not  of  God's  sanc- 
tuary, and  compass  themselves  about  with  precious  sparks,  they  may  walk  here  for 
a  while  in  the  light  of  their  fire,  and  in  the  sp^trks  that  they  have  kindled.  But 
when  all  is  done,  this  is  all  they  shall  have  of  God's  hand — they  shall  lie  down  in 
sorrow  (Isa.  1.  11).  {John  Trapp.)  Half  tJie  virgins  lost : — An  army  would  be  very 
cautious  if  they  knew  beforehand  that  one-half  of  them  should  be  destroyed.  {T. 
Manton.)  Wisdom  and  folly  .-—Now  wisdom  lieth  in  providence,  and  folly  in 
negligence,  especially  in  weighty  matters.  (Ibid.)  Righteousness  cannot  be  shired  : — 
In  point  of  power,  they  have  no  power  to  transfuse  and  put  over  their  righteonsnesa 
to  another ;  as  a  man  cannot  divide  and  part  his  life  between  him  and  another. 
{Ibid.)  Christ  the  only  grace-giver : — Such  a  difference  there  is  between  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  the  saints.  He  can  give  us  of  His  oil,  and  will  do  it,  will  not  deny 
those  that  seek  it  humbly  and  seasonably,  and  have  enough  Himself ;  as  the  "  pre. 
cious  ointment  upon  Aaron's  head  and  beard  ran  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garments  " 
(Psa.  cxxxiii.  2),  so  doth  Christ  the  Head  communicate  His  gifts  and  graces  to  all 
His  members.  {Ibid.)  The  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth : — Because  here  is  the 
very  glory  of  heaven  begun,  that  look  as  the  same  sun  which  fills  the  stars  with 
glory  ;  the  very  same  beams  touch  the  earth  also,  so  the  same  glory  which  shines  in 
heaven  shines  into  the  poor  Church  here  (1  Pet.  v.  10).  God  hath  called  His  people 
into  His  eternal  glory.  (T.  Shepard.)  How  the  soul  comes  to  be  espoused  to  the 
Lord  Jesus: — 1.  The  soul  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  makes  choice  of 
Him.  (1)  With  the  whole  soul.  (2)  Everlastingly.  (3)  Above  all  others.  2.  The 
soul  hence  gives  itself,  like  one  espoused  to  her  husband,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  (Cant. 
ii.  16).  3.  The  soul  hence  takes  full  contentment  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  a  spouse 
hath  enough,  would  not  change  for  all  the  world,  as  Peter  when  he  had  a  glimpse  of 
Christ's  day.  (Ibid.)  Christ's  love : — 1.  It  is  a  real  love.  2.  It  is  fervent  and 
earnest.  3.  It  is  constant.  4.  It  is  pure.  What  His  love  will  do  for  us :  1.  It  will 
set  us  next  Himself  in  honour.  2.  He  will  enrich  thee.  3.  He  will  counsel  thee. 
4.  He  will  dwell  with  thee.  6.  He  will  rejoice  with  thee.  6.  He  will  comfort  thee. 
{Ibid.)  Faith  is  a  lamp ;  and  yet  faith  may  not  save .' — It  may  be  wanting  in 
the  love  'irhich  purifies  the  heart,  and  it  may  be  the  gift  of  logic  and  not  the  gift 
of  God,  an  mtellectual  apprehension  and  nothing  more.     A  man  may  work  out 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai   xxt. 

many  principles  and  nothing  efficiently ;  a  lamp  is  for  guidance ;  men  are  not  saved 
by  the  lamp,  nor  without  the  lamp.  Perhaps  you  remember  how  an  old  king  of 
Sweden,  walking  on  the  road  to  Upsala,  once  had  a  long  conversation  with  a  farmer 
about  religion,  and  it  haunted  him,  for  the  farmer  spoke  of  his  feelings  on  religion 
with  so  much  peace  and  rest  and  satisfaction.  When  the  king  lay  on  his  deathbed, 
and  his  mind  was  disturbed,  the  Archbishop  of  Upsala  came  to  him.  •*  What  is 
faith  ?  "  said  the  king,  and  the  archbishop  discoursed  to  him  eloquently  and  logically. 
"  Ah,"  said  the  king,  "  that  is  all  very  ingenious  1  But  it  is  not  comfortable — it  is 
not  what  I  want ;  it's  nothing,  after  all ;  what  I  want  is  the  farmer's  faith — nothing 
but  the  farmer's  faith  will  do  for  me  now."  The  lamp  of  faith  ?s  only  an  instrument. 
It  needs  the  oil ;  "  That  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in 
the  power  of  God."  Therefore  arise  and  trim  the  lamp.  (Paxton  Hood.)  Know- 
ledge  an  oilless  lamp  : — Knowledge !  Lamp  of  the  ages,  observatory  of  the  nations, 
the  torch  waving  its  fires  over  the  race  to  light  it  on.  Your  knowledge  pierces  the 
recesses  of  self,  it  cannot  be  a  statement  coldly  shining  like  a  distant  beam ;  it  ia 
inner,  inner — it  is  consciousness.  Have  you  any  knowledge  of  which  you  can  really 
say  We  know? — knowledge  like  that  I  have  of  the  bones  of  some  ancient  antedilu- 
vian creature,  knowledge  like  that  I  have  of  a  mummy,  an  hierogl}  ph  on  a  Rossetta 
stone,  knowledge  of  a  clime  I  have  never  seen,  of  a  distant  planet  or  constellation? 
This  will  not  do,  this  is  all  an  oilless  lamp — a  romance  about  Jesus  of  Nazareth  will 
not  do ;  I  must  know  Him,  and  the  power  of  His  resurrection  and  the  fellowship  of 
His  sufferings.  A  creed  about  Christianity  will  not  do.  A  philosophy  of  Christianity 
will  not  do.  Deeper,  deeper — "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed."  Oh,  be  ye  sure  of 
this,  for  there  is  much  of  the  other,  and  it  is  oilless.  This  knowledge  Uvea — is  a 
part  of  the  very  being  ;  therefore  arise  and  trim  this  lamp.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  10.  And  the  door  was  shut.—  The  shut  door : — I.  Exclusion.  1.  Necessary 
for  the  sake  of  the  redeemed.  One  guest  who  does  not  enter  into  the  spirit  of  your 
festivity  robs  your  friends  of  their  joy.  2.  Necessary  when  we  regard  the  sinner 
himself.  II.  Finality  op  exclusion.  The  word  here  used  for  "  shut "  does  not 
mean  simply  "  to  close  to,"  but  to  shut  that  it  cannot  be  opened — "  to  lock."  The 
door  is  open  now.  (D.  F.  Jarman,  B.A.)  The  closed  door : — I.  The  chabacters 
IN  DANGER  OP  THIS  GREAT  CALAMITY.  1.  The  mere  rcligious  professor.  2.  The 
procrastinating.  II.  What  is  the  door  which  is  shut.  1.  The  door  of  repent- 
ance will  be  shut.  2.  The  door  of  religious  opportunity  and  of  hope.  3.  The  door 
of  "  glory,  honour,  and  immorality  "  will  be  shut.  (Z).  Moore.)  The  door  was 
shut : — 1.  The  door  of  heaven  was  shut.  2.  The  door  of  mercy  was  shut.  3.  The 
door  of  hope  was  shut.  4.  The  door  of  hell  was  shut.  (IT'.  Har^,  M.A.)  The 
pates  closed  : — Two  readings  of  the  text.  I  am  glad  some  gates  will  be  closed.  1. 
The  persecutions  of  this  world  cannot  get  through  the  gate  of  heaven.  2.  The 
fatigues  of  life  will  not  get  through  the  gate.  3.  The  bereavements  of  life  will 
not  get  through  the  gate.  There  will  be  some  persons  who  will  come  up  to  that 
gate  at  last  who  will  not  be  admitted.  1.  The  outrageously  wicked  and  aban- 
doned most  certainly  cannot  get  in.  2.  The  door  of  heaven  will  not  open 
to  those  who  are  depending  upon  their  morality  for  salvation.  8.  The  gate  of 
heaven  will  not  open  for  the  merely  hollow  professor.  4.  All  infidels  and  sceptics 
will  be  kept  out.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  Lost  opportunities  . — 1.  Let  us  consider  how 
easily  this  may  happen  with  respect  to  outward  blessings  and  opportunities  in  life. 
Take  education ;  friendship ;  wealth ;  personal  capacity ;  the  value  of  these  is 
often  missed  till  it  is  too  late.  Thus  as  the  years  pass,  we  listen  in  life  to  the 
sound  of  the  closing  doors  as,  one  after  another,  they  strike  upon  the  ear  of  tlie 
soul  and  of  the  conscience.  2.  The  door  is  shut  for  each  of  us  as  we  draw  our  last 
breath.  There  is  no  repentance  in  the  grave.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  door  an  emblem 
of  separation : — A  door  is  a  barrier  which  often  separates  two  very  unlike  scenes. 
On  one  side,  for  instance,  are  green  fields,  and  bright  sunshine,  and  running  streams, 
and  happy  laughter.  On  the  other,  the  manacled  forms  of  listless  prisoners,  the 
dark  cell,  the  moan  of  despair,  the  vision  of  death.  Or,  outside  are  wild,  sobbing, 
wintry  winds,  driving  showers  of  hail  and  sleet,  homeless  wanderers,  friendless 
outcasts ;  inside,  bright  light,  abundant  food,  a  warm  he&rth,  and  a  cheerful  circle 
of  friends.  Between  such  opposite  scenes  as  these  there  is  only  a  door.  The  real 
question  in  all  such  cases  is,  "  Can  I  oper  that  door  ?  Can  I  pass  through  it  t "  li 
not,  all  the  waters  of  the  sea,  all  the  mountains  of  the  world,  could  not  form  a 
stronger  barrier.      (G.  Tugwell,  M.A.)  The  door  was  shut — rejection  of  the 

ificked  • — Dreadfnl  to  be  read  or  heard  ;  but  much  more  so  to  be  experienced.    Oh, 


«HAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  571 

foolish  virgins  ;  foolish  indeed.     All  their  labour  is  now  lost,  and  they  themselvei 
too.     Separated  from  the  wise  virgins,  their  fellows,  and  from  God.    1.  The  "  door  " 

Erimarily  the  door  of  heaven,  and  with  it  the  door  of  (1)  opportunity  ;  (2)  pity  ;  (3) 
ope.  n.  Awfulness  of  this.  (1)  It  is  God  who  shuts  the  door.  (2)  No  other  way 
of  entrance.  (3)  Might  once  have  entered.  (4)  Others  are  in  and  we  shut  out. 
III.  Improvement.  (1)  Terror  of  wicked.  (2)  Happiness  of  saints.  (3)  Distinction 
between  saints  and  sinners  is  a  lattiug  one.  {B.  Beddome,  AM.)  Lost  oppor- 
tunities : — In  the  spiritual  world  as  well  as  in  the  natural  world  there  is  a  seed- 
time, and  unless  you  sow  your  seed  in  the  seed-time  it  will  rot  in  the  ground. 
^Vhat  would  you  think  of  the  farmer  who  said,  "  It  is  not  quite  convenient  for  me 
to  sow  the  com  at  the  time  when  the  other  farmers  are  sowing  it.     I  very  much 

5>rofer  to  enjoy  myself,  and  go  my  own  way,  and  do  what  I  like.  God  is  a  God  of 
ove  and  mercy,  and  He  is  also  omnipotent,  and  He  certainly  would  not  wish  that 
my  wife  and  children  should  starve  for  want  of  food ;  so  I  will  sow  my  seed  in  the 
summer,  and  then  God  in  His  omnipotent  mercy  will  canse  it  to  bring  forth  a 
harvest,  and  I  shall  have  a  supply,  and  my  wife  and  children  vdll  be  provided  with 
food."  Do  you  think  this  man's  strange  idea  about  the  love  of  God  vrill  alter  the 
facts  of  the  case  ?  I  tell  you  that  while  he  is  talking  thus  he  is  deliberately  vio- 
lating the  laws  of  God  revealed  by  nature,  and  as  he  deliberately  violates  the 
laws  of  God  on  selfish  grounds,  without  the  slightest  necessity,  and  wantonly, 
that  man  shall  put  his  seed  into  the  ground  and  talk  about  the  love  of  God, 
and  his  seed  shall  rot  before  his  eyes  and  his  children  shall  die  of  starvation,  the 
love  of  God  notwithstanding.  You  must  sow  at  the  right  time,  or  it  will  not  spring 
up.  {H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Shut  doors : — Thus,  as  the  years  pass,  we  hsten  in 
life  to  the  sound  of  the  closing  doors  as,  one  after  another,  they  strike  upon  the  ear 
of  the  soul  and  of  the  conscience.  We  hear  them  proclaiming  that  a  something 
which  oBce  was  ours,  and  for  the  use  of  which  we  still  have  to  answer,  is  ours  no 
longer.  We  hear  them  more  often,  we  hear  them  louder,  as  the  time  flies  past ;  and 
thus  in  their  frequency  and  their  urgency  they  lead  us  up  towards  a  climax  when 
there  will  be  the  closing  of  a  door  and  none  beyond  it — the  door  of  our  individual 
probation  at  death,  the  door  of  all  probations  at  the  last  judgment.  Place  the  last 
judgment  in  the  light  of  that  aspect  of  life  on  which  we  have  been  dwelling,  and  it 
is  seen  in  its  essential  character  and  principle  to  be  not  an  innovating  catastrophe 
as  much  as  the  result  to  which  the  lesser  catastrophes  of  life  steadily  point  onward. 
It  is  the  final  term  of  many  experiences  which  lead  up  to  it.  As  by  a  continuous 
analogy  it  exhibits  visibly,  and  on  a  scale  of  unimagined  vastness,  that  judgment 
of  God  which  is  ever  going  forward  invisibly,  and,  with  individuals,  bringing  to  a 
close  first  one  and  then  another  sphere  and  department  of  our  responsibility,  until 
the  account  is  sufficiently  made  up  to  be  closed  in  whatever  sense,  until  the  time 
has  come  when  all  accounts  can  be  closed,  and  the  last  hour  for  the  world  of  moral 
beings  of  their  probation  has  clearly  sounded  in  the  providence  of  God.  {Canon 
Liddov.)  The  feeling  of  exclusion : — The  poet  Cowper  tells  us  that,  when  under 
conviction  of  sin,  he  dreamed  that  he  was  walking  in  Westminster  Abbey,  waiting 
for  prayers  to  begin.  "  Presently  I  heard  the  minister's  voice,  and  hastened  towards 
the  choir.  Just  as  I  was  upon  the  point  of  entering,  the  iron  gate  under  the  organ 
was  flung  in  my  face,  with  a  jar  that  made  the  Abbey  ring.  The  noise  awakened 
me  ;  and  a  sentence  of  excommunication  from  all  the  churches  upon  earth  could 
not  have  been  so  dreadful  to  me  as  the  interpretation  which  I  could  not  avoid  put- 
ting upon  this  dream."  Too  late  : — Have  you  not  felt  a  fainting  of  heart,  and  a 
bitterness  of  spirit,  when,  after  much  preparation  for  an  important  journey,  you  have 
arrived  at  the  appointed  place,  and  found  that  the  ship  or  train  by  which  you  had 
intended  to  travel  had  gone  with  all  who  were  ready  at  the  appointed  time,  and  left  you 
behind  ?  Can  you  multiply  finitude  by  infinitude  ?  Can  you  conceive  the  dismay 
which  will  fiU  your  soul  if  you  come  too  late  to  the  closed  door  of  heaven,  and 
begin  the  hopeless  cry,  "Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us  "?  {Wm.  Amot.)  The  door  of 
doom : — A  lady,  who  heard  Whitefield  in  Scotland  preach  on  these  words,  being 
placed  between  two  dashing  young  men,  but  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the 
pulpit,  witnessed  their  mirth,  and  overheard  one  say,  in  a  low  tone,  to  the  other, 
"  Well,  what  if  the  door  be  shut  ?  Another  will  open."  Thus  they  turned  off  the 
solemn  words  of  warning.  Mr.  Whitefield  had  not  proceeded  far  when  he  said, 
"  It  is  possible  there  may  be  some  careless,  tiiflin^  person  here  to-day,  who  may 
ward  oft  the  force  of  this  impressive  subject  by  lightly  thinking,  '  What  matter  if 
the  door  be  shut  ?  Another  will  open.'  "  The  two  young  men  were  paralyzed,  and 
looked  at  each  other.    Mr.  Whitefield  proceeded:  "Yes:  another  iciW  open.    And 


573  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xjS 

I  will  tell  you  what  door  it  will  be :  it  will  be  the  door  of  the  bottomless  pit  I — th« 
door  of  hell  1 — the  door  which  conceals  from  the  eyes  of  angels  the  horrors  of  dam- 
nation 1 "  The  duty  of  watching  for  the  Lord's  coming  : — Many  things  should 
make  us  look  and  long  for  the  Lord's  coming.  A  sense  of  justice  should  have  thii 
effect.  He  suffered  here  ;  should  He  not  rejoice  here  ?  He  was  put  to  shame  here  { 
should  he  not  be  glorified  here?  He  was  judged  and  condemned  here  ;  should  He 
not  rule  and  reign  here  ?  He  laboured  here ;  should  He  not  rest  here  ?  Love  to 
Christ  should  have  the  same  effect.  When  a  friend  whom  we  greatly  love  is  absent, 
don't  we  often  think  of  him  ?  and  if  we  hope  that  he  will  soon  return,  do  we  not 
long  for  it,  and  count  the  months  and  days  that  intervene  ?  If  you  are  expecting  a 
friend,  say  from  Lidia,  does  not  your  nimble  mind  seem  to  go  with  him  all  the  way 
home  ?  You  say,  Now  he  is  passing  the  Sunderbnnds,  now  crossing  the  Bay  of 
Bengal,  now  at  the  Pomt  de  Galle,  now  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  now  in  the  Red  Sea, 
now  passing  through  the  Desert,  now  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  now  sighting  our 
shores.  If  we  did  not  so  often  go  to  the  Bible,  with  a  veil  upon  our  faces — an  ex- 
tingaisher  upon  our  heads — we  should  see  that  the  thought  of  Christ's  coming  waa 
far  more  present  to  the  mind  of  the  early  Christians  than  it  is  to  ours.  {John  Milne.) 
The  benefits  of  watching  for  the  Lord's  coming  : — It  quickens  to  care  and  diligence. 
He  was  a  shrewd  man  who  said,  "  The  eye  of  the  master  is  worth  a  dozen  over- 
seers." I  remember  once  living  at  a  place  where  a  large  number  of  people  were 
constantly  employed  in  keeping  the  walks,  grounds,  and  gardens  in  order.  The 
proprietor  was  absent,  and  everything  had  a  sleepy,  slovenly  look.  But  when 
tidings  came  that  he  would  soon  return,  all  became  awake,  earnest,  and  active. 
The  pruning,  the  rolling,  the  weeding,  the  sweeping,  went  on  amain  ;  none  rested 
till  all  was  ready  ;  and  all  were  gratified  by  the  look  and  word  of  approval,  when 
the  master  came.  And  so,  if  we  constantly  felt,  "  I  know  not  the  day  or  hour  that 
my  Lord  may  come,"  it  would  exercise  a  salutary  influence  on  our  whole  character 
and  conduct.  It  would  keep  us  from  much  sin  and  folly ;  it  would  keep  us  from 
wearying  and  despondency ;  it  would  keep  us  always  ready,  in  that  frame  of  mind, 
and  that  employment  of  time,  in  which  we  should  like  Him  to  find  us.  It  would 
keep  us  from  being  absorbed  with  eatthly  things  ;  it  would  regulate  our  affections, 
connections,  and  recreations.  Shall  I  go  where  I  would  not  like  my  Lord  to  find 
me  7  Shall  I  tie  myself  to  those  whom  I  must  leave  behind  when  the  Lord  comes  ? 
If  you  were  always  watching,  you  would  have  a  constant  sense  of  readiness,  and  so 
a  constant  peace  of  mind.  If  you  were  always  watching,  it  would  have  an  effect 
on  those  among  whom  you  live ;  it  would  either  condemn  or  awaken  them.  We 
know  the  watchman  on  the  streets  at  night.  He  has  his  lamp ;  he  is  on  the  out- 
look ;  he  is  not  sauntering  idly  along  ;  he  has  an  object.  But,  you  say,  would  not 
all  these  ends  be  answered  by  thinking  of  death,  that  it  will  come,  and  may  come 
at  any  time, — oh  I  how  shadden'y  in  these  last  times,  both  on  land  and  sea?  Well, 
in  many  respects  this  would  h  tve  the  same  effect.  But  do  you  habitually  watch 
for  death  ?  Is  it  always  present  to  your  thoughts,  influencing  your  whole  character 
and  conduct?  If  your  mind  is  like  mine,  you  will  honestly  answer  No.  Death  ia 
not  a  pleasant  object  of  contemplation, — that  death-struggle,  that  death-dew,  that 
parting  with  loved  friends,  that  cold,  lonely  grave  1  But,  blessed  be  the  Lord,  He 
does  not  bid  us  watoh  for  death  ;  He  bids  us  watch  for  Himself.  (Ibid.)  Uncer- 
tainty of  the  time  of  our  Lord's  advent  a  motive  for  watching  : — Take  heed  of  slack- 
ening the  spring,  of  weakening  the  motive,  by  introducing  the  idea  that  a  long 
period  must  elapse,  that  great  changes  and  revolutions  must  take  place,  before  the 
Lord  can  come.  Take  heed  of  this,  for  it  will  certainly  diminish  your  freshness, 
spirituality,  love,  and  zeal.  I  marvel  at  the  presumption  of  mortal  men,  who  take 
it  upon  them  to  fix  how  near,  or  how  distant,  that  coming  is.  Christ,  whon  on 
earth,  said  distinctly,  No  man  knows  it ;  angels  do  not  know  it ;  I  myself  know  it 
jiot.  He  says,  •'  All  that  My  Father  hath  showed  Me,  I  have  made  known  to  yon," 
but  this  a  thing  which  My  Father  at  present  has  not  seen  fit  to  show  Me.  He  has 
kept  it  in  His  own  power.  We  can  see  the  Divine  wisdom  of  this  reticence.  The 
clement  of  uncertainty  is  just  the  tempering  of  the  spring, — what  gives  it  an  nn 
changing  elasticity  in  all  generations.  If  men  knew  the  exact  time,  the  whole 
world  would  be  on  the  qui  vive.  Flesh  and  blood  could  then  take  cognizance  of  it; 
and  this  high,  holy,  spiritual  motive  would  degenerate  into  a  mer&  oamal,  sensa- 
tional thing.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  14-30.  Who  called  his  own  servants,  and  delivered  unto  them  his  ^oods.-- 1 
Life  9  Journey  .—1.  There  is  a  variety  of  ciixumBlances  which  will  atteao  kne  beUevei 


CHAP.  XXT.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  173 

in  his  journey  throtjgh  life.  2.  Moreover  travellers  need  not  to  be  told  that  the 
weather  during  their  different  journeys  is  not  uniformly  the  same.  3.  In  point  ol 
affluence  and  fortune  all  the  travellers  to  Canaan  are  not  alike.  4,  A  passf  nger  to 
Zion,  like  most  travellers,  must  expect  to  meet  with  different  kinds  of  company  on 
the  road.  6.  When  persons  undeitake  a  journey  to  a  distant  unknown  country  it 
is  not  nnnsnal  to  have  recourse  to  a  guide.  5.  Also  a  guard  is  necessary,  as  the 
way  to  heaven  is  infested  with  robbers.  6.  There  is  no  convenient  travelling  with- 
out a  competent  supply  of  provisions.  (IF.  J.  Hall,  M.A.)  Vnrqiial  gifts: — Let 
ns  see  what  Jesus  Christ  does  not  say.  1.  He  does  not  say  that  the  Master  loves 
those  least  to  whom  He  gives  least.  2.  He  does  not  say  that  the  Master  acts  capri- 
ciously, but  in  wisdom.  3.  He  does  not  say  that  this  inequality  lasts  beyond  the 
time  of  trial,  beyond  the  present  life.  Inequality  (1)  A  fact.  (2)  A  social  bond. 
(3)  We  should  contend  against  all  the  inequalities  of  the  present  life  which  can  hurt 
the  moral  destiny  of  our  fellow  creatures.  (4)  The  attitude  which  God  takes 
towards  humanity  in  the  short  period  which  we  call  history.  He  appears  absent. 
{E.  Bersier.)  The  servants  at  work: — 1.  The  commendation  of  human  industry 
which  passed  from  the  lips  of  Christ.  2.  The  gifts  of  God  are  multiiilied  in  faith- 
ful  hands.  The  gospel  is  life  and  power:  it  is  prolific.  Christ  enlarges  man. 
(Ibid.)  The  account  to  be  rendered : — There  is  an  account  to  be  given.  Medio- 
crity has  its  temptations :  1.  Envy.  2.  Ingratitude.  3.  Contempt  of  duty.  4. 
After  indolence  the  impiety  which  blasphemes.  [Ibid.)  I.  The  office  sustained, 
a  servant  of  God.     1.  Diversity  of  talent.    2.  Diversity  of  sphere.     II.  Thk  cha- 

BACTEB  ATTACHED  TO  TEE  DISCHARGE  OF  THIS  OFFICE.      "  Gcod  and  faithful."      1.  In  a 

desire  to  be  governed  by  our  Master's  will.  2.  Love  to  our  Master's  service.  8. 
Diligence  in  our  Master's  work.  4.  Bcjoicing  in  the  Master's  triumphs.  III.  The 
RECOMPENSE  BY  WHICH  THE  OFFICE  IS  TO  BE  CROWNED.  A  recompense  of — 1.  Acknow- 
ledgment. 2.  Exaltation.  3.  Pleasure,  ••  joy  of  thy  Lord."  {J.  Parsons.)  The 
parable  of  the  talents : — I.  That  odr  Divine  Eedeemeb  is  constituted  the  bead 

AND   LOBD    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    ECONOMT.      II.    TbAT   IN    THIS   EXALTED   CAPACITY    Eb 

BESTOWS  A  VARIETY  OF  TALENTS  UPON  THE  CHILDREN  OF  MEN.  Time  is  a  talent.  In- 
tellectual power  is  a  talent.  Moral  capacity  is  a  talent.  Religious  opportunity  in 
a  talent.    Belative  influence  is  a  talent.    III.  That  He  who  has  imparted  thesr 

TALENTS  EIGHTKOUSI.Y  DEMANDS  THEIB   IMPROVEMENT.      IV.   ThE   PERIOD   WILL  ARRIVE 

WHEN  He  will  COME  TO  DEMAND  AN  ACCOUNT.  While  the  investigation  will  be  inclu- 
sive, it  will  embrace  each  individual.  It  will  be  impartial.  The  result  will  be 
joyful  and  solemn.  (G.  Smith.)  Talents : — What  is  it  to  trade  with  what  God 
has  given  us,  and  how  does  the  increase  come  7  1.  Whatever  God  commits  to  as, 
gift  or  grace,  has  within  itself  a  tendency  to  grow.  The  secret  of  worldly  success  is — 
1.  To  set  about  at  once  to  make  the  best  use  of  whatever  we  have.  God  often  puts 
a  good  thought  into  the  mind ;  do  not  trifle,  but  make  the  best  of  it.  Ghiist  will 
come  again.  Love  can  be  thus  enlarged,  the  intellect,  memory.  Consecrated  time 
becomes  larger  time.  Specially  happy  the  man  who  has  put  millions  of  minds  into 
God's  bank.  Money.  2.  Make  a  good  investment  by  investing  in  eternity.  3.  You 
are  sure  of  good  security,  the  promise  and  fidelity  of  God.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Faithful  service  and  its  reward : — This  portion  of  the  Divine  word,  while  bearing  on 
one  great  truth,  was  intentionally  fitted  to  a  great  many  truths.  Such  as  the 
following :  I.  As  Christians,  we  are  serving  an  unseen  Master.  Oar  Lord  is  here 
compared  to  one  who  hath  gone  to  a  far  country.  II.  He  hath  pone  to  BECEm  to 
Himself  a  kingdom  (Luke  xix.  12 ;  Matt.  xxv.  21,  &e.)  The  conflict  is  past  and  the 
labour  is  ended.  He  is  exalted  to  the  Father's  right  hand,  &c.  His  people  acknow- 
ledge Him  to  be  their  king.  III.  In  the  absence  of  this  heavenly  Prince  a  great 
AND  RESPONSIBLE  CHARGE  IB  DEVOLVED  UPON  His  SERVANTS  (ver.  14.)  His  Servants 
are  charged  with  perpetuating  and  administering  the  affairs  of  His  kingdom.  They 
are  the  Uving  depositories  of  His  truth.  They  are  not  only  to  conserve  the  truth, 
but  to  diffuse  it,  &o.  IV.  It  is  a  long  time  ere  the  Lobd  of  those  servants 
COMETH  AND  BECEONETH  WITH  THEU.  In  somo  of  its  aspccts  life  is  short ;  in  others 
it  is  long — very  long.  How  long  does  it  sometimes  seem  to  watch  with  your  Lord 
only  one  honr  t  And  so,  the  slothful  servant  says.  My  Master  delayeth  His  coming; 
and  the  foolish  virgins  sink  into  sleep ;  and  the  soul  who  is  like  a  bride  adorned 
for  her  husband  asks,  "  Why  are  his  chariot  wheels  so  long  in  coming  7  "  V.  Thb 
RESULTS  OF  woBK  DONE  FOB  Chbist  REMAIN.  When  the  taleuts  are  used  they  grow 
by  ase,  and  increase  for  God.  VI.  Varied  and  abundant  bewabds  are  bebebved 
FOB  the  faithful  8EBVANTS  OF  Chbibt.  He  who  had  gone  into  the  far  country 
comes  back  invested  with  honour  and  power  to  raise  others  to  honour.    He  is  abls 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tn. 

to  give  rule.  Putting  aside  the  imagery,  may  we  not  picture  what  would  be  the 
actual  blessedness  of  a  faithful  servaut  thus  applauded,  and  thus  more  than  repaid. 
No  commendation  like  the  Master's  '♦  well  done."  Every  faithful  servant  shall 
have  praise  of  God.  The  holy  felicity  has  within  it  the  means  of  its  own  replenish- 
ment. It  is  His  joy  we  go  to  share.  "  Be  thou  faithful,"  Ac.  (S.WAll.)  The 
replenishment  of  heavenly  felicity : — In  the  present  world  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
Bweet  as  peace  is,  even  peace  may  be  monotonous ;  and  coveted  as  joy  is,  it  is  tha 
very  nature  of  joy  to  subdue  the  appetite  that  gave  to  it  its  relish.  But  it  is  Ilia 
joy  we  go  to  share.  Eternity  will  seem  as  natural  to  you  as  time  seems  now, 
Heaven,  with  all  its  effulgence,  will  not  dazzle  you,  and  that  far  more  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory  will  not  for  a  moment  be  oppressive  to  your  soul.  But 
Burely  something  of  the  felicity  of  that  state  would  form  part  of  your  experience  if 
you  would  only  believe  that,  imperfect  as  you  are,  you  are  really  dear  to  Christ. 
Oh,  do  not  think  that  He  will  begin  to  love  you  when  you  reach  a  world  where  there 
is  nothing  but  love.  Your  danger,  your  struggle,  your  sorrow,  attract  at  least  the 
sympathy  of  this  Friend  in  heaven.  Your  services,  they  are  not  wholly  disregarded. 
Jesus  loves  you — loves  you  as  you  are,  and,  in  a  measure,  for  what  you  are  as  well 
as  for  what  you  shall  be.  The  potter  values  the  clay  while  it  is  yet  upon  the  wheel, 
and  when  it  is  far  from  having  reached  the  shape  of  beauty  he  designs  to  give  it. 
The  refiner  prizes  the  silver  long  before  the  dross  is  entirely  purged  away,  and  the 
master's  countenance  is  reflected  there.  Oh,  thou  afflicted  one,  tossed  to  and  fro 
and  not  comforted — poor,  timid,  heir  of  heaven — you  call  yourself  only  vileness ; 
not  thus  do  you  seem  to  your  Saviour.  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight," 
He  says,  "  thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee."  {Ibid.)  The 
entrusted  talents  : — This  parable,  a  needful  complement  to  the  story  of  the  virgins ; 
outward  exertion  must  be  combined  with  inward  character.  We  must  work  as  well 
as  wait.    I.  We  have  here  an  explanation  of  the  diversity  which  exists  between 

INDIVIDUALS  IN  THE  MATTER  OP  OPPORTDNITT  OP  SERVICE  IN  THE  CAUSE  OP  THE  RE- 
DEEMER. We  observe  the  fact  that  there  is  such  a  diversity.  These  talents  do  not 
denote  the  original  endowments  which  men  bring  into  the  world  with  them,  or  the 
possessions  into  which  they  come  by  birth.  These  are  gifts  of  God ;  but  the  refer- 
ence here  is  rather  to  those  opportunities  which  have  been  given  to  men  in  conse- 
quence of  their  abilities  and  environment.  In  His  bestowment  of  spiritual 
opportunities  Christ  has  regard  to  the  natural  abilities  and  providential  surroundings 
of  each  man ;  and  as  in  the  sovereignity  of  God  there  is  a  diversity  in  the  latter,  so 
iu  the  gracious  administration  of  Christ,  there  is  like  diversity  in  the  former.  No 
man  has  more  opportunities  of  service  than  he  can  avail  himself  of  to  the  full.  If 
Christ  has  given  you  one  talent,  it  is  because  at  present  He  sees  you  cannot  handle 
more.  II.  That  new  opportunities  come  to  us  with  our  improvement  of  thosb 
WHICH  WE  ALREADY  HAVE.  By  Utilizing  what  we  have,  we  get  what  we  have  not. 
The  foundation  of  colossal  fortunes  have  been  laid  in  the  taking  advantage  of  little 
opportunities.  The  true  method  of  increasing  our  sphere  is  to  fill  to  overflowing 
that  in  which  we  are.  So  heaven  shall  give  new  opportunities  of  service  to  men 
who  have  made  the  most  faithful  use  of  earth.  Faithful  service  widens  opportunity. 
III.  The  result  or  neglecting  opportunity.  1.  What  is  said  concerning  the  man 
with  one  talent.  It  is  not  alleged  that  he  wasted  his  master's  goods ;  he 
simply  neglected  his  opportunities.  He  was  not  notoriously  wicked,  but  left  undone 
what  he  had  ability  to  do.  Life  is  to  be  made  productive.  Many  are  content  to  do 
nothing  because  they  cannot  do  some  great  thing.  He  who  buried  one  talent  would 
have  buried  five,  his  failure  was  in  liis  character.  2.  He  cherished  wrong  views  of 
Grod.  All  wrongness  of  conduct  is  based  on  a  wrong  view  of  God.  Two  things  are 
to  be  said :  1.  The  more  rigorous  God  is-supposed  to  ba,  the  more  surely  He  will 
punish  unfaithfulness.  2.  It  is  not  true  that  God  is  thus  austere.  The  love  of 
God  must  constrain  us.  IV.  The  sentence  pronounced  on  the  unprofitable  servant. 
Here  is  a  clear  end  of  probation.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  parable  of  the 
talents: — I.  The  parable  assumes  that  all  who  call  Christ  "Lord  and  Master,"  will 
find  some  work  to  do  for  Him,  and  even  some  distinctively  spiritual  work.  We 
have  all  some  "goods"  of  Christ's  entrusted  to  us,  and  some  capacity  for  using 
them.  However  inequitably  tliis  world's  goods  may  be  divided,  in  the  spiritu^ 
realm  every  man  may  take  and  do  as  much  as  he  can.  Who  is  to  hinder  us  from 
being  as  self-denying,  as  lowly  in  spirit  as  we  care  to  be  7  Our  ability  is  the  only 
measure  and  limit  of  our  duty  as  well  as  of  our  right.  II.  That  the  term  of  service 
is  to  be  followed  by  a  day  of  judgment,  in  which  every  man's  work  will  be  tried,  and 
either  approved  or  condemned.     III.  The  reward  of  faithful  service  will  be  enlarged 


ST.  MATTHEW.  676 


capacity  and  scope  for  service.  The  Christian  reward  is  above  suspicion  ;  it  is  the 
power  to  do  more  work.  It  is  a  reward  after  which  all  must  yearn.  IV.  The  spirit 
and  character  of  our  service  will  depend  on  our  conception  of  the  Divine  character 
and  spirit.  V.  That  those  who  have  but  slender  capacities  for  service  may  turn 
them  to  the  best  account  by  associating  themselves  with  others,  and  helping  in  a 
common  work.  Help  to  work  in  some  organization.  VI.  That  the  rewards  are  not 
arbitrary,  but  reasonable  and  meritai)le.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Great  talents  and 
tmnli : — L  That  becoming  a  Christian  is  merely  goino  oot  to  service.  It  is  a 
voluntary  service  ;  not  forced.  II.  Different  qualifications  are  given  to  different 
PEOPLE.  III.  The  grace  of  God  was  intended  to  be  accumulative.  Take  the  one 
talent  and  make  it  two.  IV.  Inferiority  of  gifts  is  no  excuse  for  indolence.  V. 
There  is  going  to  be  a  day  of  solemn  settlement.  VI.  That  our  degrees  of  happi- 
ness in  heaven  will  be  graduated  according  to  oub  degrees  of  usefulness  on  earth, 
{Dr.  Talmarfe.)  Each  man  has  his  appropriate  gift : — You  are  to  understand  that 
there  are  different  qualifications  for  different  individuals.  There  is  a  great  deal  of 
ruiitous  comparison  when  a  man  pays:  "  Oh,  if  I  only  had  that  man's  faith,  or  that 
man's  money,  or-that  man's  eloquence,  how  I  would  serve  God."  Better  take  the 
faculty  that  God  has  given  you  and  employ  it  in  the  right  way.  The  rabbis  used  to 
say,  that  before  the  stone  and  timber  uere  brought  to  Jerusalem  for  the  Temple 
every  stone  and  piece  of  timber  was  marked ;  so  that  before  they  btarted  for  Jerusa- 
lem, the  architects  knew  in  what  place  that  particular  piece  of  timber  or  stone  should 
fit.  And  so  I  have  to  tell  you  we  are  all  marked  for  some  one  place  in  the  Great 
Temple  of  the  Lord,  and  do  not  let  us  complain,  saying :  "  I  would  like  to  be  the 
foundation  stone,  or  the  cap  stone."  Let  us  go  into  the  very  place  where  God 
intends  us  to  be,  and  be  satisfied  with  the  position.  (Ibid.)  Better  to  use  one 
talent  well  than  five  wickedly : — The  man  who  kindled  the  fire  under  the  burnt 
offering  in  the  ancient  temple  had  a  duty  as  imperative  as  that  of  the  high  priest,  in 
magnificent  robes,  walking  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  under  the  cloud  of  Jehovah's 
presence.  Yes,  the  men  with  one  talent  are  to  save  the  world,  or  it  will  never  be 
saved  at  all.  The  men  with  five  or  ten  talents  are  tempted  to  toil  chiefly  for  them- 
selves, to  build  up  their  own  great  name,  and  work  for  their  own  aggrandizement, 
and  do  nothing  for  the  alleviation  of  the  world's  woes.  The  cedar  of  Lebanon 
standing  on  the  mountain  seems  to  hand  down  the  storms  out  of  the  heavens  to  thvs 
earth,  but  it  bears  no  fruit,  while  faome  dwarf  pear-tree  has  more  fruit  on  its  branches 
than  it  can  carry.  Better  to  have  one  talent  and  put  it  to  full  use  than  five  hun- 
dred wickedly  neglected.  (Ihid.)  Ordinary  talents  do  most  of  the  work ; — I  am 
glad  that  the  chief  work  of  the  Church  in  this  day  is  being  done  by  the  men  of  one 
talent.  Once  in  awhile,  when  a  great  fortress  is  to  be  taken,  God  will  bring  ont  a 
great  field-piece  and  rake  all  with  the  fiery  hail  of  destruction.  But  commoa 
muskets  do  most  of  the  hard  fighting.  (Ibid.)  The  grace  of  God  was  intended  to 
be  accumulative : — When  God  plants  an  acorn,  He  means  an  oak,  and  when  He 
plants  a  small  amount  of  grace  in  the  heart.  He  intends  it  to  be  growthful  and 
enlarge  until  it  overshadows  the  whole  nature.  (Ibid.)  The  talents : — I.  What 
WAS  committed  to  them.  1.  It  was  a  responsible  trust.  2.  It  was  not  alike  in  the 
case  of  all.  It  differed  not  in  nature,  but  in  amount.  8.  It  was  regulated  by  a  cer- 
tain principle — "  To  every  man  according  to  his  several  ability."  II.  What  was  done 
Bi  THEM.  1.  The  faithful.  2.  The  slothful.  (1)  A  spirit  of  dissatisfaction  ;  (2)  or 
this  servant  may  have  felt  that  it  was  in  vain  for  him  to  exert  himself,  on  the  ground 
that  his  means  were  so  limited.  (3)  Again,  this  servant  may  have  been  one  of  those 
timid,  over-cautious  persons,  who,  lest  they  should  do  wrong,  do  nothing.  We  should 
••add  to  our  faith,  fortitude."  ILL  Tee  account  required  of  them.  1.  It  was 
delayed  for  a  considerable  period.  2.  Highly  gratifying  in  the  case  of  those  who 
were  first  summoned.  (1)  An  emphatic  expression  of  approval.  (2)  Promotion  to  a 
state  of  high  dignity  and  honour.  (3)  The  enjoyment  of  transporting  bliss.  The  case 
of  the  other  servant.  8.  Unsatisfactory  in  its  nature,  and  most  serious  in  its  results. 
(1)  A  foolish  plea.  (2)  A  withering  rebuke.  (3)  A  peremptory  command.  (4)  A 
fearful  doom.  (Expository  Outlines.)  One  talent : — I.  The  reason  op  his  con- 
duct. 1.  He  may  have  believed  he  could  do  nothing  worth  accomplishing  with  one 
talent.  2.  He  may  have  been  envious  of  others.  3.  Dissatisfaction  with  the  distri- 
bution of  the  talents  may  have  caused  his  inactivity.  4.  Want  of  interest  in  his 
master's  success.  5.  He  may  have  neglected  his  master's  work  for  his  own. 
II.  Whether  ant  of  these  motives  wlll  justify  him.  1.  Does  dissatisfaction 
with  God's  government  of  the  world  constitute  a  just  excuse  for  inactivity? 
Yes;  if  it  is  unjust     I  have  a  right  to  resent  injustice.     Is  God's  goveraraeul 


575  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  IcEkr.  txf. 

unjust.  Faith  says  "No."  Vain  excuse.  (1)  Because  God  had  a  right  to  do 
■what  He  would  with  His  own.  (2)  Because  the  responsibility  was  proportioned 
to  the  gift.  2.  Will  his  belief  that  no  very  great  thing  could  be  accomplished 
with  one  talent  justify  him.  (1)  You  misunderstand  God  if  you  think  He  takes 
no  account  of  little  things.  (2)  He  not  only  notices  but  prizes  little  things.  The 
two  mites.  (3)  One-talented  men  are  the  true  workers  of  the  world.  (4)  It  ia 
the  multitude  of  them  that  builds  up  the  mighty  result.  3.  But  is  the  servant 
justified  in  supposing  that  his  own  interests  must  first  be  considered  before  his 
master's?  Certainly  there  are  many  who  are  now  pleading  this:  "I  will  attend 
to  God'a  matters  one  day — my  own  absorb  my  attention  now."  No  justification 
in  this :  (1)  Because  God  commands  you  to  study  His  interests  first.  (2)  Because, 
you  being  merely  His  steward,  this  is  just.  (3)  Because,  you  being  the  crea- 
ture of  His  hands  and  His  servant,  it  is  doubly  just,  (i)  Because  this  is  the 
true  way  to  advance  your  own  interests.  (See  Trench  on  Parables,  p.  281,  for 
an  apt  illustration.)  lU.  Conclusion.  Have  any  of  you  buried  talents?  Dig 
them  up  and  begin  this  glorious  career  of  working.  {Tht  Southern  Pulpit.) 
Human  retpomibility : — I.  All  that  we  have,  and,  indeed,  all  that  wb  abb, 
BELONGS  TO  GoD.  1.  We  havc  nothing  that  we  can  call  our  own — ourselves,  our 
possessions,  <fec.  We  are  servants — under  authority,  &c.  God's  authority  over 
ns  is  entire  and  unlimited.  2.  God  has  entrusted  us  with  "  His  goods  " — (1)  Minds 
and  bodies  endowed  vsdth  numerous  and  admirable  powers.  (2)  More  or  less  of 
worldly  substance.  (3)  Positions  of  influence  and  authority.  (4)  The  Sabbath, 
&c.  IL  The  distbibotion  of  the  talents  in  different  nombebs  oa  pboportions. 
1.  Whether  the  term  "  talents  "  should  be  applied  to  all  the  powers,  possessions, 
and  opportunities  for  usefulness  which  the  Lord  of  heaven  confers  upon  Hia  ser. 
vants,  or  only  those  which  are  most  eminent  and  valuable  in  the  possession  of  each 
ol  them,  admits  of  doubt.  2.  Their  unequal  distribution  illustrates  in  various  ways 
the  Divine  perfections.  It  manifests  His  sovereignty,  in  doing  as  He  pleases  with 
Hia  own ;  His  goodness,  as  we  have  no  claim  or  merit ;  His  wisdom,  in  their  adap- 
tation to  each.  Ill  The  talents  abe  improvable.  They  may  be  increased  in 
value  by  wisdom  and  fidelity  in  their  consecration  to  the  Recleemer'a  service.  IV. 
The  cebtaintt  of  the  day  of  beckoning,  howeveb  it  mat  be  delayed.  The  resulta 
of  death  and  judgment  and  eternity  are  not  the  less  sure  because  some  wish  they 
were  doubtful  or  uncertain,  nor  are  they  the  less  near  because  some  choose  to  think 
of  them  as  distant.  V.  The  tbeatment  of  the  good  and  faithful  bebvants.  Aa 
their  diligence  and  their  faithfulness  had  been  alike,  a  similar  reward  is  given  to 
each,  and  both  are  commended  in  the  very  same  words.  Confessed,  unnumbered 
sins  must,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  be  rewards,  •'  not  of  debt,  but  of  grace." 
What  a  generous  Master  we  have  I  Hia  "  Well  done  I  "  will  be  honour  and  blisa 
that  shall  captivate  and  enrapture  aa  can  no  earthly  delights.  VI.  The  doom  of  thb 
bebvant  who  had  but  one  talent,  and  hid  it  in  the  eabtb,  18  minutely 
DEscBiBED.  The  ground  of  his  condemnation.  Hia  sin  was  slothfulness.  All  hia 
pleas  were  poor  pretences.  It  was  right  that  he  should  be  deprived,  while  othera 
were  enriched.  There  can  be  no  valid  excuse  for  not  serving  God.  {T.  D.  Croihers.) 
Fidelity  in  the  service  of  God : — Explain  the  nature  of  fidelity.  I.  Fidelity  requires 
A  KNOWLEDGE  OF  ODB  OBLIGATIONS,  and,  therefore,  those  who  wish  to  be  faithful  will 
endeavour  to  obtain  clear  and  correct  views  of  what  they  are  bound  to  do.  II.  It 
requires  an  enlightened  view  of  the  gbounds  of  those  oBLiaATiONS.  Without  thii 
there  can  be  no  rational  desire  or  fixed  purpose  to  discharge  them.  III.  It  requires 
8UPEBI0BITY  ovEB  ALL  CONFLICTING  TENDENCIES.  A  man  may  have  a  desire  to  do  hia 
duty,  and  he  may  have  a  general  purpose  to  perform  it,  but  theii  may  be  too  weak 
to  withstand  temptation.  Fidelity  in  the  service  of  God  requires,  therefore :  1.  A 
knowledge  of  what  He  would  have  us  do,  as  men,  in  all  our  relations  of  life,  aa 
Christians  or  as  ministers.  2.  Such  views  of  our  relation  to  Christ,  and  our 
obligations  to  Him,  as  shall  awaken  in  us  the  desire  to  do  Hia  will,  and  lead  us  to 
form  the  purpose  that  we  will  in  all  cases  endeavour  to  perform  it.  8.  Such  a 
strength  of  this  desire  and  such  firmness  of  this  purpose  aa  render  them  actually 
controlling  over  our  whale  inward  and  outward  life.  IV.  From  this  statement  of 
THE  DUTY  II  18  PLAIN— 1.  That  it  IB  a  Very  simple  one.  2.  It  is  a  very  compre 
hensive  duty.  It,  in  fact,  includes  all  others.  3.  It  is  one  of  constant  obligation. 
4.  It  is  obviously  exceedingly  difficult.  It  supposes  the  renunciation  of  ourselves  and 
of  the  world.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  master'i  approval  of  the  faithful  servant : — 
I.  Hia  CHARACTEB.  1.  A  good  and  faithful  servant  accepts  hia  position  as  a  servant, 
^th  all  that  is  inoladed  in  that  position.      3.  Ho  bears  the  work-burden  of  hia 


CH-U-.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  577 

servitude.  3.  He  renders  service  with  hearty  goodwill.  4.  He  is  obedient  to  his 
master.  5.  He  has  his  master's  interest  ever  before  him.  6.  He  is  profitable  to 
his  master.  IL  The  conduct  upon  which  this  character  is  based,  "  Thou  hast 
been  faithful  over  a  few  things."  IH.  The  commendation  and  reward.  "  Well 
done."  1.  This  is  real  commendation,  not  doubtful.  2.  This  is  complete  atd  full 
commendation.  3.  This  is  useful  commendation.  It  is  not  an  encumbrance,  like 
a  robe  of  state  or  an  official  chain  of  gold,  but  it  is  as  a  strong  girdle  for  the  loina. 
*'  Enter  thou  into  tho  joy  of  the  Lord."  1.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  on  His  return  to 
His  servants.  2.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  in  the  goodness  and  fidelity  of  His  servants. 
8.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  in  commending  and  rewarding  His  servants.  4.  The  whole 
personal  joy  of  the  Lord,  so  far  as  it  can  be  shared  by  His  servants.  5.  The  joy 
Bet  before  Him  when  He  endured  the  cross.  6.  The  joy  of  finished  work  and  completed 
suffering,  of  the  joy  provided  in  that  kingdom  vfhich  is  joy.  This  text  teaches — 
1.  What  the  Christians  are  expected  to  be — servants.  2.  What  we  are  expected  to 
do.  3.  What  we  may  expect  to  obtain.  4.  Supphes  a  present  test  of  character  and 
motive  to  service.      (S.  Martin.)  The  good  and  faithful  servant  : — I.    Thb 

APPROVED  SERVANT  DESCRIBED.  1.  Good.  (1)  Good  in  nature.  (2)  Good  in  prin- 
ciple. (3)  Good  in  motive.  (4)  In  fruitfulness.  2.  Faithful.  (1)  To  God.  (2) 
To  himself.  (3)  To  others.  II.  The  approved  servant  commended.  •'  Well  done." 
1.  Surprise.  2.  Humility.  3.  Adoration.  4.  Love.  {H.  3Iarch.)  The  good 
tervant: — 1.  He  is  commended.  2.  Promoted.  3.  Admitted  to  joys  unspeakable. 
(TT.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  faithful  servant  and  his  reward: — The  parable  of  the 
ten  virgins  shows  us  our  duty  to  ourselves  ;  the  parable  to  the  servants  our  duty  to 
others,  &c.  The  one  parable  cries  '•  Watch  I  "  The  other  cries  "  Work  1 "  I.  Look 
AT  the  faithful  SERVANT.  There  are  several  things  respecting  him  illustrating  our 
own  position,  1.  He  was  a  "  servant ; "  one  who  is  dependent  upon,  and  responsible 
to  another.  Whatever  our  position,  this  is  the  character  of  every  one  of  us.  Men 
often  speak  as  if  God  had  no  claim  upon  sinners.  The  man  who  hid  his  talent  was 
as  much  a  servant  as  he  who  by  diligent  trading  made  his  five  talents  into  ten.  We 
are  all  servants,  whether  we  own  our  Master  or  not,  &o.  Ascertain  the  character 
you  bear.  2.  He  was  entrusted  with  some  of  his  master's  property.  So  are  we. 
3.  The  talents  bestowed  upon  the  servants  varied  in  their  number.  So  it  is  with 
as.  4.  They  are  given  to  us  to  be  used  according  to  the  will  of  the  proprietor — we 
may  invest  them,  or  waste  them,  or  hide  them.  6.  They  are  entrusted  to  us  for  a 
limited  period  ;  the  extent  of  that  period  is  unknown.  II.  Let  us  look  at  thb 
CONDUCT  OF  the  bbrvant.  He  was  not  elated  with  pride  because  he  had  more  than 
others,  nor  was  he  depressed  with  envy  because  he  had  less.  He  realized  his 
responsibility,  and  at  once  set  to  work,  &o.  He  was  "  good  "  and  '•  faithful,"  referring 
to  bis  character  and  conduct.  While  faithful  to  his  master,  he  was  good  to  his 
brethren,  and  the  manifestation  of  his  goodness  is  seen  in  the  revelation  that 
follows,  "  Faith  without  works  is  dead,"  &c.  III.  Look  at  the  faithful  servant's 
BEWABD.  Gives  his  account  with  joy.  1.  Has  his  master's  approval.  2.  He  is 
raised  to  a  higher  position.  3.  He  was  admitted  to  his  master's  presence — a  honour 
beyond  our  comprehension.  Apply  the  subject.  {Charles  Garrett.)  The  unprofit- 
able servant : — ^I.  The  individual  referred  to  is  descril/ed  as  acting  in  the  capacity 
of  a  servant.  This  denotes  responsibility.  Knows  his  Lord's  will.  He  possesses 
capability.  II.  His  sin.  He  did  not  squander  the  talent.  Efis  sin  was  knowing 
to  do  good  and  doing  it  not.  He  was  of  a  phlegmatic  constitution  of  body  and 
mind.  He  did  not  seek  the  aid  of  God's  grace.  What  a  lamentable  state  of  mind 
to  wish  to  get  to  heaven,  and  yet  to  turn  in  a  bad  temper  from  the  only  path  that 
leads  to  it  1  But  is  God  a  hard  Master  f  Ask  the  Christian  who  experiences  in  his 
heart  the  power  of  the  religion  he  professes.  Ask  Nature.  III.  ELis  end.  "  Outer 
darkness."  (iJ.  Jonesy  B.A.)  The  discharged  servant: — There  is,  perhaps,  no 
position  more  painful  for  a  good  and  kind  master  to  be  placed  in,  no  duty  so  painfal 
for  him  to  fulfil,  as  the  beiug  compelled  to  discharge  a  servant  for  misbehaviour, 
whatever  the  nature  of  the  offence  may  be.  There  is  something  sad,  and  almost 
solemn,  as  the  hour  of  departure  draws  nigh  n  which  the  servant  is  about  to  quit 
the  threshold  of  the  home  where  he  has,  it  may  be,  served  for  years.  At  such  a 
moment  sins  of  omission  and  commission  can  scarcely  f'^  to  rise  up  in  memory's 
glass  slowly  and  upbraidingly  before  the  down  ast  min'i.  It  is  then  the  obstinacy 
within  relents,  the  hardness  melts,  the  pride  of  the  heart  is  abased,  when  it  is  too 
late.  How  apparent,  then,  is  the  folly  of  diso  edience.  Then  is  seen  how  useless 
were  all  those  promises  of  amendment  drown  d  in  the  opium  of  forgetfulness,  or 
■trangled  in  the  birth  by  the  complicated  infiu  noes  of  procrastination.    At  such  a*;^ 

87 


B78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit. 

hour,  too,  the  value  of  the  place  he  is  leaving  rises  up  before  the  mind's  eye  in  & 
way  never  experienced  before.  As  the  foot  is  lingering  for  the  last  time  on  the  step 
of  the  master's  door,  the  comforts  of  a  quiet  and  peaceful  home  are  then  contrasted 
with  the  cold  and  forlorn  aspect  of  things  without.  Now  if  this  be  the  case  in 
regard  to  the  affairs  of  this  world,  how  much  more  forcibly  does  it  apply  to  the  next 
ecene  of  existence  7  Here  we  must  imagine  no  longer  an  earthly,  but  a  heavenly 
Master,  about  to  dismiss,  not  a  servant  merely  that  fills  his  or  her  respective  place 
in  a  common  household,  but  a  man  considered  as  a  rational  and  accountable  being. 
{Tbid.)  The  sin  of  unprofitahlenetit : — I.  Unprofitableness  implies  a  mind  unlike 
THaT  of  God,  and  therefoke  unfit  for  communion  with  God.  1.  The  mind  of  the 
unprofitable  one  is  marked  by  indifference  to  the  welfare  of  others.  2.  The  good- 
ness of  Deity  is  not  merely  negative ;  it  seeks  to  bless  mankind.   II.  Unprofitableness 

WILL  EXCLUDE  THE  SOUL  FROM  HEAVEN  ;  IT  IS  A  FRUSTRATION  OF  THE  MERCIFUL  DESIGNS 

OF  God.  (E.  Gibbon,  M.A.)  The  unprofitable  servant : — I.  The  excuse  bet  up 
by  the  unprofitable  servant  for  his  neglect.  It  is  general.  •'  I  know  that  thou  art  a 
hard  man."  This  is  the  language  of  the  disobedient  heart  with  reference  to  the 
merciful  parent  of  the  universe.  The  service  is  framed  to  meet  our  moral  happiness. 
The  ways  of  wisdom  are  ways  of  pleasantness.  The  excuse  uses  an  audacious  tone  ; 
God  is  unreasonable,  and  expects  the  impossible,  and  does  not  put  forth  the  needful 
agonciea.  II.  The  sentence  pronounced  on  him.  1.  Supposing  there  was  truth 
in  his  accusation,  why  did  he  not  adopt  the  course  less  injurious  to  his  Master  f  2. 
Deprivation — "  Take,  therefore,  the  talent  from  him."  "  Cast  ye  the  unprofitable 
eervant  into  outer  darkness."  (D,  Moore,  M.A.)  The  wicked  and  slothful  servant: — 
I.  His  profession.  1.  The  name,  "  servant  of  the  Lord,"  is  most  honourable.  2. 
It  is  a  most  comprehensive  name.  How  comes  it  that  any  whose  dispositions  thus 
widely  differ  should  be  found  among  the  professed  followers  of  Christ  ?  1.  They 
have  false  notions  of  what  constitutes  a  genuine  servant  of  the  Lord.  2.  They  have 
low  thoughts  of  God.  II.  His  character.  1.  He  had  been  slothful.  2.  He  was 
therefore  wicked.  (1)  He  was  wicked  because  unfaithful  to  his  trust.  (2)  Because 
cherishing  dishonouring  thoughts  of  his  Master.  (3)  Because  he  acted  contrary  to 
his  own  avowed  convictions.  III.  His  doom.  1.  A  just  doom.  2.  This  will  be 
the  doom  of  many.  (1)  To  every  individual  is  given  at  least  one  talent.  (2)  Of 
even  one  talent  a  strict  account  will  be  required.  (3)  This  should  lead  us  to  self- 
examination  and  prayer.  {H.  March.)  The  capacity  of  religion  extirpated  by 
disuse : — Many  persons  read  this  parable  of  the  talents,  I  believe,  very  much  as  if 
it  related  only  to  gifts  external  to  the  person  ;  or,  if  to  gifts  that  are  personal,  to 
such  only  as  are  called  talents  in  the  lower  and  merely  man-ward  relations  and  usee 
of  Ufe,  such  as  the  understanding,  reason,  &c.  But  the  great  Teacher's  meaning 
reaches  higher  than  this,  and  comprehends  more,  namely,  those  talents  which  go 
to  exalt  the  subject  in  its  God-ward  relations.  The  main  stress  of  His  doctrine 
hinges,  I  conceive,  on  our  responsibility  as  regards  the  capacity  of  religion  itself  ; 
for  this,  in  highest  pre-eminence,  is  the  talent,  the  royal  gift  of  man.  In  pursuing 
the  subject  presented,  two  points  will  naturally  engage  our  attention.  I.  The 
capacity  fob  religion  is  a  talent,  the  highest  talent  we  have.  We  mean  by  & 
talent,  the  capacity  for  doing  or  becoming  something,  as  for  learning,  speaking, 
trade,  command.  Our  talents  are  as  numerous,  therefore,  and  various  as  the  effects 
we  may  operate.  We  have  talents  of  the  body,  too,  and  talents  of  the  mind,  or  soul.  All 
those  which  can  be  used,  or  which  come  into  play,  in  earthly  subjects,  and  apart 
from  God  and  religion,  are  natural ;  and  those  which  relate  immediately  to  God, 
and  things  .unseen  as  connected  with  God,  are  religious.  The  religious  talents  com- 
pose the  whole  God-ward  side  of  faculty  in  us.  They  are  such  especially  as  come 
into  exercise  in  the  matter  of  religious  faith  and  experience,  and  nowhere  else. 
1.  The  want  of  God — a  receptivity  for  God.  2.  Inspiration — a  capacity  to  be 
permeated,  illumined,  guided,  exalted  by  God  or  the  Spirit  of  God  within,  and  yet 
BO  as  not  to  be  any  the  less  completely  ourselves.  3.  The  spiritual  sense,  or  the 
power  of  Divine  apprehension.  4.  The  capacity  of  religious  love.  6.  The  power 
of  faith  a  power  of  knowing  God.  Their  true  place  and  order  in  the  soul  is — (1) 
At  the  head  of  all  its  other  powers,  holding  them  subordinate.  (2)  All  the  other 
talents  fall  into  a  stunted  and  partially  disabled  state  when  they  are  not  shone 
upon,  kept  in  warmth,  and  raised  in  grade  by  the  talents  of  religion.  (3)  All  th« 
greatest  things  ever  done  in  the  world  have  been  done  by  the  instigations  and  holy 
elevations  of  the  religious  capacity.  This,  therefore,  is  the  real  summit  of  our 
humanity.     II.  The  religious  talent  or  capacity  is  one  that,  by  total  disush 

ISD  THK  OVERGROWTH  OF  OTHERS,  IS  FINALLY  KXTIBPATBD.       FeW  mon  living  withoU* 


tJHAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  671 

God  are  aware  of  anj  such  possibility,  and  still  less  of  the  tremendous  fact  itself. 
On  the  contrary,  they  imagine  that  they  are  getting  above  religion,  growing  too 
competent  and  wise  to  be  longer  subjected  to  its  authority,  or  incommoded  by  its 
requirements.  The  teaching  of  Scripture,  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  he  given,"  &c 
This  spiritual  extirpation  is  referable  to  two  great  laws  or  causes.  1.  To  the  neglect 
of  the  talent  or  capacities  of  religion.  All  living  members,  whether  of  body  or 
mind,  require  use  or  exercise.  It  is  necessary  to  their  development,  and  without 
it  they  even  die.  2.  To  the  operation  of  that  immense  overgrowth  or  over-activity 
which  is  kept  up  in  the  other  powers.  Is  it  wrong  to  assume  that  your  rehgious 
senses  were  proportionately  much  stronger  and  more  active  in  childhood  than  it  is 
now  ?  Thus  onward  the  thoughts  that  crowd  upon  us,  standing  before  a  subject 
like  this,  are  practical  and  serious.  1.  How  manifestly  hideous  the  process  going 
on  in  human  souls  under  the  power  of  sin.  It  is  a  process  of  real  and  fixed 
deformity.  2.  There  is  no  genuine  culture,  no  proper  education,  which  does  not 
include  religion.  8.  Let  no  one  comfort  himself  in  the  intense  activity  of  his  mind 
on  the  subject  of  religion.  That  is  one  of  the  great  things  to  be  dreaded.  To  be 
always  thinking,  debating,  scheming  in  reference  to  the  great  question  of  religion, 
without  using  any  of  the  talents  that  belong  more  appropriately  to  God  and  the 
receiving  of  God,  is  just  the  way  to  extirpate  the  talents  most  rapidly,  and  so  to 
close  up  the  mind  in  spiritual  darkness.  4.  Make  little  of  the  hope  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  will  at  some  time  open  your  closed  or  consciously  closing  faculties.  5.  This 
truth  wears  no  look  of  promise,  in  regard  to  the  future  condition  of  bad  men.  6.  How 
clear  is  it  that  the  earliest  time  in  reUgion  is  the  best  time.  The  peculiar  blessing 
and  the  hopeful  advantage  of  youth.  A  great  share  of  those  who  believe  embrace 
Christ  in  their  youth.  (H.  Busknell,  D.D.)  God  blesses  those  who  improve  their 
privileges: — What  is  implied  in  men's  faithfully  improving  Divine  blessings. 
1.  This  implies  their  acknowledging  that  all  their  favours  come  from  God.  As  long 
BS  men  disregard  the  hand  of  the  Giver,  they  will  certainly  despise  His  gifts.  2.  A 
proper  improvement  of  Divine  favours  implies  a  grateful  sense  of  Divine  goodness. 
The  slothful  servant  did  not  thank  his  Master  for  the  one  talent.  3.  A  faithful 
improvement  of  Divine  favours  implies  a  cheerful  and  unreserved  consecration  of 
them  to  Him  who  gave  them.  4.  Faithfully  improving  Divine  favours  implies 
employing  them  in  the  service  of  God.     11.  That  those  who  faithfcllt  impbovb 

THE    blessings   WHICH   GOD   BESTOWS   UPON   THEM   MAY   REASONABLY   EXPECT  FURTHEB 

MARKS  OF  HIS  FAVOUR.  1.  The  faithful  improvement  of  Divine  favours  affords  the 
highest  enjoyment  of  them.  Men  never  enjoy  their  talents  buried  or  abused.  2. 
The  faithful  improvement  of  Divine  favours  in  time  past  prepares  men  for  the 
reception  of  more  and  richer  blessings  in  time  to  come.  Masters  bestow  their  best 
favours  upon  their  best  servants.  3.  God  has  promised  to  reward  past  fidelity  with 
future  favours.  4.  God's  conduct  confirms  the  declarations  of  His  Word.  He  has 
in  all  ages  bestowed  peculiar  advantages  upon  those  who  have  improved  the  temporal 
and  spiritual  blessings  He  has  given.  1.  All  the  blessings  we  possess  have  been 
sent  in  mercy.  2.  If  God  will  reward  only  those  who  improve  His  favours  in  His 
eervice,  then  men  are  unwise  and  criminal  in  converting  them  to  their  own  use. 
8.  Men  ought  to  be  more  concerned  to  improve  God's  favours  than  to  gain  the 
possession  of  them.  4.  Those  who  abuse  God's  favours  have  reason  to  expect  that 
Ho  will  diminish  them.  {N.  Evimons,  D.D.)  Laying  ourselves  out  for  God: — 
therefore  you  should  keep  a  constant  reckoning  how  you  lay  out  yourselves 
for  God.  (r.  Manton.)  Christ  absent  from  ua  : — It  was  needful  that  Christ 
should  go  from  ub  for  a  while ;  for  He  would  not  govern  the  world  by  sense,  but  by 
faith.  (Ibid.)  Diversity  in  service: — Every  one  hath  his  service  and  oppor- 
tunity to  do  something  for  God ;  all  offered  to  the  tabernacle  gold,  or  silver,  or 
brass,  or  shittim-wood,  or  goats'  hair,  or  badgers'  skins.  So,  as  Christ  went  to 
Jerusalem,  some  strewed  the  way  with  garments,  others  cut  down  branches,  some 
cried  "Hosanna";  that  was  all  they  could  do.  (Ibid.)  Diversity  inability: 
— There  is  a  diversity  as  to  the  measure  and  degrees.  Every  barque  that  saileth  to 
heaven  doth  not  draw  a  like  depth.  (Ibid.)  Our  account  with  God : — Who  made 
thee  to  differ  ?  (Eomans  xii.  35).  "  For  of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to  Him, 
are  all  things."  The  sun  oweth  nothing  to  the  stars,  nor  the  fountain  to  the 
streams.  Our  account  must  be  answerable  to  our  receipts  ;  there  is  a  proportion 
of  return  expected.  (Ibid.)  Diversity  of  talent  helpful  to  service : — God  will 
have  this  difference  for  the  beauty  and  order  of  the  whole ;  variety  is  more  grate- 
ful. ELills  and  valleys  make  the  world  beautiful ;  bo  do  distinct  orders,  ranks,  »nd 
degrees  of  men.    All  eye  or  all  belly  is  monstrous ;  difference  with  proportion 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

maketh  beauty  ;  therefore  one  excelleth  another,  and  several  gifts  and  ranks  ther« 
are  for  the  service  of  the  whole.  (Ibid.)  As  divers  countries  have  divers  com- 
modities, and  one  needeth  another ;  one  aboundeth  with  wines,  some  have  epices, 
others  have  skins,  and  commodities  in  other  kinds,  that  by  commerce  and  traffic 
there  might  be  society  maintained  among  mankind ;  so  God  in  His  Church  hath 
given  to  one  gifts,  to  another  grace,  to  maintain  a  holy  society  and  spiritual  com- 
merce among  themselves.  (Ibid.)  Use  the  talent  we  have: — It  was  a  good 
Baying  of  Epictetus  in  Arrian,  Si  essem  Inscinia,  &o.  If  I  were  a  nightingaU,  I 
would  sing  as  a  nightingale :  Si  essem  alauda,  &g.  If  I  were  a  lark,  I  would 
piere  as  a  lark ;  but  now  I  am  a  man,  I  will  glorify  God  as  a  man.  But  alas  I  how 
often  do  men  of  the  best  endowments  miscarry.  [Ibid.)  Satanic  abuse  of  great 
taUnts  : — The  devil  loveth  to  go  to  work  with  the  sharpest  tools.  God  hath  given 
great  abilities  to  some  above  others,  to  enable  them  for  his  service.  Now  the  devil, 
to  despite  God  the  more,  turneth  his  own  weapons  against  himself.  {Ibid.) 
Talents  given  for  activity  ;^-Strength  is  not  to  be  wasted  in  sin  and  vanity,  but 
employed  for  God.  It  is  better  it  should  be  worn  out  with  labours  than  eaten  out 
with  rust,  (Ibid.)  Trading  for  God,  rM  self : — Applause,  vainglory,  and  such- 
like carnal  motions  and  ends  may  set  some  men  on  work,  and  make  them  prostitute 
the  service  of  Christ  to  their  own  lusts.  This  is  not  to  trade  as  factors  for  God, 
but  to  set  up  for  ourselves.  (Ibid.)  A  gift  and  a  trust : — As  a  gift,  they  call 
for  our  thankfulness  ;  as  a  trust,  for  our  faithfulness.  (Ibid.)  Dread  of  God 
natural  in  the  carnal  mind: — Fear  is  more  natural  in  the  carnal  mind,  because  a 
bad  conscience  is  very  suspicious,  and  our  sense  o£  God's  benefits  is  not  so  great 
as  the  sense  of  our  bad  deservings  is  quick  and  lively.  (Ibid.)  A  picture  of  the 
devil : — The  best  picture  that  could  be  taken  of  the  devil  would  be  by  the  character* 
of  malice,  falsehood,  and  envy.  But  God  is  justice  itself,  goodness  itself,  mercy 
itself,  as  it  is  expressed  in  Scripture.  (Ibid.)  The  unprofitable  are  destroyed:^— 
(Matthew  iii.  20),  "  Every  tree  that  bringethnot  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down  and 
cast  into  the  fire."  Not  only  the  poisonous,  but  the  barren  tree.  (Ibid.)  Thtt 
sinner  self-condemned : — Grant  the  sinner's  supposition,  it  bindeth  the  duty  upon 
him,  and  so  he  cuts  his  throat  with  his  own  sword.  (Ibid.)  Doing  better  than 
excusing  : — Certainly  it  is  better  be  doing  than  excusing.  Doing  is  safe,  but  excuses 
are  but  a  patch  upon  a  sore  place.  (Ibid.)  Private  conceits: — You  must  ncfc 
lift  up  your  private  conceits  against  the  wisdom  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Nothing  idle 
in  nature : — In  the  whole  course  of  nature  nothing  is  idle ;  the  sun  and  the  stars  do 
perpetually  move  and  roll  up  and  down  ;  the  earth  bringeth  forth ;  the  seas  have 
their  ebbings  and  fiowings,  and  the  rivers  their  courses  ;  the  angels  are  described 
with  wings,  as  ready  to  fulfil  God's  commandment,  and  run  to  do  His  pleasure.  It 
were  an  unworthy  thing,  among  so  many  examples  and  patterns  of  diligence,  for 
man  alone  to  be  idle.  (Ibid.)  The  sovereignty  of  the  Divine  endowments : — Now, 
most  men  quarrel  with  this.  But  mark,  the  thing  that  you  complain  of  in  God  is 
the  very  thing  that  you  love  in  yourselves.  Every  man  likes  to  feel  that  he  has  a 
right  to  do  with  his  own  as  he  pleases.  We  all  Uke  to  be  little  sovereigns.  You 
will  give  your  money  freely  and  liberally  to  the  poor;  but  if  any  man  should 
impertinently  urge  that  he  had  a  claim  upon  your  charity,  would  yon  give  unto 
him  ?  Certainly  not ;  and  who  shall  impeach  the  greatness  of  your  generosity  in  so 
doing  ?  It  is  even  as  that  parable,  that  we  have  in  one  of  the  Evangelists,  where, 
after  the  men  had  toiled,  some  of  them  twelve  hours,  some  of  them  six,  and  some  of 
them  but  one,  the  Lord  gave  every  man  a  penny.  Oh  1  I  would  meekly  bow  my 
bead,  and  say,  "  My  Lord,  hast  Thou  given  me  one  talent  ?  then  I  bless  Thee  for  it, 
and  I  pray  Thee  bestow  upon  me  grace  to  use  it  rightly.  Hast  Thou  given  to  my 
brother  ten  talents  ?  I  thank  Thee  for  the  greatness  of  Thy  kindness  towards  him  ; 
but  I  neither  envy  him,  nor  complain  of  Thee."  Oh  1  for  a  spirit  that  bows  always 
before  the  sovereignty  of  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Variety  God's  law : — God 
gives  to  one  five,  and  to  another  two  talents,  because  the  Creator  is  a  lover  of 
variety.  It  was  said  that  order  is  heaven's  first  law ;  surely  variety  is  the  aecond ; 
for  in  all  God's  works,  there  is  the  most  beautiful  diversity.  Look  ye  towards  tlie 
heavens  at  night :  all  the  stars  shine  not  with  the  same  brilliance,  nor  are  they 
placed  in  straight  lines,  like  the  lamps  of  our  streets.  Then  turn  your  eyes  belor : 
see  in  the  vegetable  world,  how  many  great  distinctions  there  are,  ranging  from  the 
cedar  of  Lebanon  to  the  hyssop  on  the  wall,  or  the  moss  that  is  smaller  still.  See  how 
from  the  huge  mammoth  tree,  that  seems  as  if  beneath  its  branches  it  might  shade  an 
army,  down  to  the  tiny  lichen,  God  hath  made  everything  beautiful,  but  everything 
toll  of  variety.    Look  on  any  one  tree,  if  you  please :  see  how  every  leaf  differ! 


OJiAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  581 

from  its  fellow — how  even  the  little  tiny  buds  that  are  at  this  hoar  bursting  at  the 
Boent  of  the  approaching  perfume  of  spring,  differ  from  each  other — not  two  of 
them  alike.  Look  again,  upon  the  animated  world :  God  hath  not  made  every 
creature  hke  unto  another.  How  wide  the  range — from  the  colossal  elephant  to  the 
coney  that  burrows  in  the  rock — from  the  whale  that  makes  the  deep  hoary  with  its 
lashing,  to  the  tiny  minnow  that  skims  the  brook ;  God  hath  made  all  things 
different,  and  we  see  variety  everywhere.  I  doubt  not  it  is  the  same,  even  in 
heaven,  for  there  there  are  "  thrones,  and  dominions,  and  principalities,  and  powers  " 
— different  ranks  of  angels,  perhaps,  rising  tier  upon  tier.  •'  One  star  different  from 
another  star  in  glory."  And  why  should  not  the  same  rule  stand  good  in  manhood  ? 
(Ibid.)  Talents  for  small  spheres: — God  hath  a  deeper  reason  than  this.  God 
gives  to  some  men  but  few  talents,  because  He  has  many  small  spheres,  and  He  would 
have  these  filled.  There  is  a  great  ocean,  and  it  needs  inhabitants.  0  Lord,  Thou 
hast  made  Leviathan  to  swim  therein.  There  is  a  secret  grotto,  a  hidden  cavern, 
far  away  in  the  depths  of  the  sea ;  its  entrance  is  but  small ;  if  there  were  nought 
but  a  Leviathan,  it  must  remain  nntenanted  for  ever :  a  Uttle  fish  is  made,  and  that 
email  place  becomes  an  ocean  unto  it.  There  are  a  thousand  sprays  and  twigs 
upon  the  trees  of  the  forest ;  were  all  eagles,  how  would  the  forests  be  made  glad 
with  song,  and  how  oould  each  twig  bear  its  songster?  But  because  God  would 
have  each  twig  have  its  own  music,  He  has  made  the  little  songster  to  sit  apon 
it.  Each  sphere  must  have  the  creature  to  occupy  it  adapted  to  the  size  of  the 
sphere.  God  always  acts  economically.  [Ibid.)  Few  talents  will  have  to  be 
accounted  for : — If  you  had  but  Uttle,  God  required  but  Uttle  of  you ;  why,  then,  did 
you  not  render  that  f  If  any  man  holds  a  house  at  a  rental  of  a  pound  a  year,  let 
it  be  never  so  small  a  house  for  the  money,  if  he  brings  not  his  rent  there  is  not  one 
half  the  excuse  for  him  that  there  would  be  if  his  rent  had  been  a  hundred  pounds, 
and  he  had  failed  to  bring  it.  You  shall  be  the  more  inexcusable  on  account  of  the 
little  that  was  required  of  yon.  Let  me,  then,  address  you,  and  remind  you  that 
you  must  be  brought  to  account.  (Ibid.)  Improvement  of  talents : — The  right  use 
of  the  Divine  blessings  is  well  represented  by  his  trading  or  occupying  with  his 
Master's  property.  This  not  to  be  understood  in  a  way  of  merit,  for  when  we  have 
done  all,  we  are  unprofitable  servants.  But  the  image  of  trading  fitly  sets  forth  the 
course  oJE  active  improvement  of  every  gift,  which  the  true  Christian  pursues,  hia 
diligence  and  industry  in  his  calling,  and  the  common  utility  which  is  thereby 
promoted.  Whatever  is  bestowed  on  him,  he  considers  not  as  his  own,  but  as  hi> 
Lord's.  He  employs  it,  therefore,  with  the  scrupulous  conscientiousness  of  a  faith- 
ful servant.  He  does  not  waste  his  gifts  in  idleness,  abuse  them  to  self-confidence  and 
pride,  or  lessen  and  destroy  them  by  rash  and  ambitious  schemes.  He  does  not  rest 
with  complacency  in  the  barren  thought  that  he  possesses  them.  He  does  not  display 
them  with  ostentation .  He  does  not  compare  himself  with  others,  or  endeavour  to 
ascertain  whether  his  talents  are  more  or  less  than  those  of  his  neighbour.  He  does 
not  interfere  with  a  province  not  assigned  to  him,  or  hinder  the  work  of  his  fellow- 
servants,  or  require  everything  to  be  done  in  his  own  way,  or  quarrel  with  those 
who  differ  from  him  in  their  mode  of  acting.  But  his  concern  is  to  trade  with  his 
talents.  Whatever  wiU  tend  to  the  discharge  of  his  personal  and  relative  duties, 
whatever  will  instruct  the  ignorant,  reUeve  the  distressed,  assist  the  needy,  guide 
the  inquiring,  comfort  the  sorrowful,  reclaim  the  wandering,  and  confirm  and 
encourage  the  sincere— all  this,  with  a  due  regard  to  circumstances,  and  in  the  fear 
of  God,  he  considers  his  proper  vocation.  Whatever  use  he  can  make  of  any  cir- 
cumstances in  which  he  is  placed,  any  office  he  holds,  any  influence  he  has  gained, 
any  knowledge  he  acquires,  any  parts  or  accomplishments  which  he  possesses,  any 
favour  God  has  given  him  with  others,  any  occasions  or  incidents  which  present 
themselves  he  straightway  turns  to  account,  even  as  the  merchant  traffics  with  his 
commodities.  Above  all,  he  employs  the  means  of  salvation  to  his  own  personal 
benefit.  He  repents  of  his  sins,  and  trusts  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  for  pardon  and 
justification  before  God.  He  values  the  Bible,  prizes  the  Sabbath,  derives  improve- 
ment from  pious  example,  profits  by  Divine  chastisement,  and  learns  from  the 
mistakes  and  sins  of  others,  and  thus  uses  every  advantage  for  spiritual  instruction 
with  fidelity  and  thankfulness.  If  he  be  a  minister  of  the  sanctuary  he  considers 
all  his  opportunities  for  saving  souls,  all  his  ability  for  discharging  his  high  office, 
as  a  solemn  trust  deposited  with  him,  and  for  which  he  must  give  an  account. 
(Bishop  Daniel  Wilson.)  Multiplied  talent: — It  is  not  only  enjoined  upon  us  U 
we  would  be  Christians  to  occupy  with  our  gifts,  but  to  multiply  them.  The 
tndastrioos  servant  of  God  will  do  this.    He  learns  as  he  goes  on  ;  he  gains  mor« 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap,  xxf, 

experience ;  he  overcomes  difficulties.  He  not  only  does  more  than  when  he  first 
began,  but  he  does  things  better.  He  contrives  to  do  more  good  continually.  Ha 
does  not  rest  contented  with  the  ordinary  plans  of  others,  but  enters  on  undis- 
covered ground  and  marks  out  new  regions  of  usefulness.  He  looks  around  him 
for  occasions  of  doing  good  to  others  and  getting  good  himself,  of  learning  or 
teaching,  acting  or  enduring  for  God  and  his  neighbour.  (Ibid.)  The  hoiiseholder 
and  his  servants : — I.  The  talents  entrusted  to  the  management  of  the  servakts. 
1.  The  man  travelling  represents  our  Lord,  the  absolute  Owner  of  all  things,  Lord 
and  Redeemer  of  His  Church.  2.  The  servants  represent  the  professed  disciples  and 
members  of  Christ,  the  visible  body  of  the  faithful,  particularly  the  ministers  and 
fltewards  of  I^s  mysteries.  3.  The  talents  represent  the  various  powers  and 
blessings  which  Christ  has  assigned  to  us  for  the  salvation  of  our  souls,  the  benefit 
of  our  fellow-men,  and  the  glory  of  His  name.  II.  The  right  employment  of  thib 
TALENTS  BY  THE  FAITHFUL  SERVANTS.  1.  The  faithful  Servant  of  Christ  studies  to  do 
his  Lord's  will,  and  has  a  delight  in  the  work.  2.  Shrinks  from  no  trouble  or 
danger,  estimating  all  he  can  do  for  such  a  Master  as  nothing.  3.  Aims  at  approving 
himself  to  his  Master,  not  to  the  world.  4.  Laments  lost  opportunities,  6.  Walks 
wisely  in  the  management  of  his  concerns.  6.  Begins  immediately,  proceeds  dili- 
gently,  works  contentedly,  and  perseveres  cheerfully.  III.  The  faithful  servant's 
REWARD.  1.  He  receives  the  commendation  of  his  Master.  2.  Made  ruler  over 
many  things.  3.  Enters  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.  IV.  The  slothful  servant. 
1.  His  character.  It  is  not  said  that  he  wasted  his  Lord's  goods  ;  simply  that  he 
buried  them — made  no  use  of  them,  and  this  was  enough  to  condemn  him.  2.  Hifl 
doom.  {Ibid.)  Well  used  talents  prepare  for  enjoyment  in  heaven: — This  parable 
shows  plainly  enough  that  your  talents  are  to  be  put  to  use  and  gain  usury  for  the 
Lender.  They  must  be  kept  well  rubbed  with  work  if  they  are  to  shine  brightly  in 
their  heavenly  setting.  I  do  not  believe  with  those  people  who  seem  to  think  it 
will  be  all  as  one  a  thousand  years  hence,  whether  we  cultivate  our  minds  in  this  life 
or  not,  and  that  it  matters  nothing  how  small  our  knowledge  may  be.  All  is  good  if 
turned  to  a  right  account,  and  the  acquirements  of  this  life  may  enlarge  our  spiritual 
capacities  for  another.  And  I  cannot  help  thinking  that,  to  some  extent,  our  power 
of  seeing  and  appreciating  the  hidden  things  of  the  next  life  will  depend  on  the 
exercise  and  growth  of  our  faculties  in  this.  {N.  Macleod,  D.D.)  God  is  never 
niggardly  in  His  gifts  : — In  considering  our  life,  with  its  duties  and  responsibilitieg^. 
there  are  two  mistakes,  into  both  of  which,  though  they  are  contradictory  the  one 
to  the  other,  we  commonly  fall.  1.  We  often  feel  that  very  little  has  been  entrusted 
to  us,  that  our  gifts  are  few,  our  opportunities  of  cultivating  them  fewer  still.  We 
need  therefore  to  remember  that  in  the  parable  even  the  slave  who  is  least  gifted 
and  trusted  receives  one  talent,  and  that  a  Hebrew  talent  was  equivalent  to  some 
£350 — a  very  large  sum  to  be  entrusted  to  a  slave.  Our  Master  is  no  niggard,  He 
gives  liberally  to  all.  All  things  are  ours — the  pure,  bright  heaven,  the  fruitful 
earth,  the  golden  splendours  of  the  sun  and  the  silver  splendours  of  the  moon,  the 
fragrant  flowers  and  the  songs  of  birds,  the  social  affections,  the  Word  of  Life,  and 
the  common  salvation;  and,  though  the  capacity  to  appropriate  and  use  these 
heavenly  gifts  may  vary,  yet  what  man  is  there,  capable  of  using  them  at  all,  but 
will  confess  that  he  has  received  many  things,  and  things  of  inestimable  value,  at 
the  Master's  hand  1  2.  But  then,  if  we  acknowledge  that  we  have  received  many 
and  great  gifts,  wo  are  too  apt  to  forget  that  the  large  sum  of  good  in  which  we 
rejoice  is  made  up  of  many  trivial  contributions.  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  the 
one  talent  of  the  parable  was  equivalent  to  sixty  minoe,  to  three  thousand  shekels, 
to  some  eighty  thousand  of  our  pence,  and  that  the  only  way  to  get  its  full  profit 
out  of  the  talent  was  to  nse  every  shekel  and  every  penny  well.  Great  single  oppor- 
tunities are  very  rare  ;  we  cannot  often  find  a  good  investment  for  heavy  sums ; 
but  we  may  wisely  employ  a  few  pence  or  a  few  shekels  every  day.  The  talents  of 
the  parable  may  stand  for  high  gifts,  such  as  faith,  love,  obedience;  but  we  cannot 
keep  these  faculties  always  at  their  utmost  stretch,  nor  live  at  the  heroic  level  day 
after  day.  It  is  by  a  perpetual  use  of  them  in  the  daily  round  and  common  task 
of  life,  in  the  discharge  of  small  recurring  duties  and  the  endurance  of  the  little 
temptations  which  are  never  absent,  that  we  develop  them  to  the  fulness  of  their 
stature.  And  it  surely  is  a  verj'  comfortable  and  helpful  thought,  that  if  hour  by 
hour  we  try  to  do  the  work  of  the  hour  well,  to  be  honest  and  diligent  in  business, 
to  rule  our  tempers  in  the  home,  to  help  a  needy  or  sympathize  with  an  aflflicted 
neighbour,  to  teach  onr  class  with  patient  care,  to  sing  a  song  of  praise  with  the 
heart  and  the  understanding— that  in  the  discharge  of  these  and  the  like  trivial 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  68» 

duties  we  are  serving  God,  trading  with  the  Master's  money  ;  that  by  these  small 
gradual  accumulations  we  are  doubling  the  talent  which  He  has  put  into  our  hands. 
(S.  Cox,  D.D.)        The  man  with  one  talent  needed: — The  world  greatly  needs  men 
of  one  talent,  and  there  are  ways  in  which  such  men  are  often  of  surpassing  useful- 
ness.    Hur  was  probably  a  man  with  only  one  talent,  and  yet  it  was  partly  through 
his  help  that  the  prayers  of  Mosea  prevailed  against  the  enemies  of  Israel.     The 
heroes  of  Thermopylae  were  for  the  most  part  also  men  of  one  talent,  yet  the 
splendour  of  their  glorious  heroism  still  illumines  the  world.     In  the  case  of  many 
a  shipwreck  the  man  with  one  talent,  the  rough,  honest  sailor  who  helps  the  women 
and  children  to  escape  and  then  himself  remains  behind  to  die  is  in  truth  "  not  far 
from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  not  far  from  its  inner  shrine,  not  far  from  the  great 
Cross  of  Calvary.  ...  As  a  matter  of  fact,  men  with  one  talent  are  often  sur- 
prisingly near  to  the  men  with  five  talents.    In  the  realm  of  the  spirit  extremes 
often  meet.      Men  with  one  talent  are  often  vicarious  sufferers.     Nature  makes 
experiments  on  them,  as  on  some  worthless  body,  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  human 
race.     They  are  used  as  stepping-stones  on  which  others  may  rise  to  higher  things. 
They  act  as  humble  pioneers  to  the  loftiest  and  most  successful  pilgrims.  ...  It 
is  easy  enough  to  see  that  there  is  often  something  sublime  in  the  devotion  of  the 
man  with  one  talent.     Great  in   nothing  else,   he  is  often   really  grand  in   his 
unswerving  and  unlimited  loyalty  to  a  nature  higher  than  his  own.    And  this  devo- 
tion has  a  vast  uplifting  influence.     {A.  H.  Crawfurd,  M.A.)        Latent  possibilitiet 
in  the  man  with  one  talent: — We  never  really  know  what  onr  talents  are  till  we 
begin  to  use  them.     The  noblest  powers  are  often  the  most  slowly  developed.     Saul 
is  amongst  the  prophets  sometimes.    Elisha  is  often  called  from  the  plough.     The 
dance  acquires  undying  fame.     The  very  same  want  of  depth  in  the  soil  which 
causes  the  good  seed  to  spring  up  quickly  also  causes  it  ere  long  to  wither  away. 
When  there  is  little  to  evolve  evolution  is  a  rapid  process,  but  when  there  is  much 
to  evolve  the  process  is  a  slow  one.     Cathedrals  are  not  built  in  a  day.     The  soul 
is  like  the  phoenix — from  the  withered  ashes  of  a  wasted  past  it  soars  aloft  into  the 
glad  strength  of  an  immortal  life.     (Ibid.)        Encouragement  for  the  man  with  one 
talent: — All  men  have  at  least  one  talent.     The  elements  of  the  noble  and  the 
sublime  exist  to  some  extent  in  each  of  us.     Even  now,  in  the  midst  of  his  humble 
work,  on  the  rough  face  of  the  man  with  one  talent  there  is  cast  from  time  to  time 
the  sublime  and  awful  shadow  of  his  inescapable  destiny,  of  that  great  day  of  the 
Lord  when  all  created  souls  shall  be  transfigured  and  glorified  by  the  splendours  of 
the  Eternal,  when  •♦  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God."    If  the  poor  man 
with  one  talent  shall  hereafter  stand  there,  surely  he  is  good  enough  to  stand  hand 
in  hand  with  any  of  his  brethren  now  on  earth  I     {Ibid.)        Importance  of  little 
things : — Human  endowment  and  human  performance,  the  "  few  things,"  get  their 
significance  from  their  relation  to  the  "many  things  " — the  great,  thronging  facts  and 
principles  and  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God.    The  most  persistent  and  varied  activity 
and  the  largest  achievements  of  the  greatest  men  are  but  small  in  themselves  con- 
sidered, but  they  are  points  where  the  vast  economy  of  the  kingdom  of  God — that 
something  which  is  vaguely  indicated  by  "  many  things,"  "the  joy  of  the  Lord  " — 
emerges  into  the  region  of  our  human  life  and  touches  it.     That  which  is  out  of 
sight  is  more  and  greater  than  that  which  pushes  out  into  our  view.     That  point 
of  rock  which  rises  out  of  the  hillside  is,  to  the  geologist,  not  merely  a  distinct 
stone — it  tells  him  the  dip  and  quality  of  the  great  strata  underground  which 
buttress  the   hills.     Obedience,  responsibility,  duty,  work,  love,   trust — all  that 
makes  up  Christian  hfe  here — are  sides  and  manifestations  of  the  unseen,  spiritual 
universe.    Godliness  has  promise,  not  only  of  the  life  that  now  is,  but  of  that  which 
is  to  come — has  the  promise  which  one  part  of  a  thing  gives  of  the  other  part. 
Godliness  is  a  part  of  the  life  to  come.     Godliness  is  God  revealing  Himself  in 
human  character.      Follow  back  godliness   and   you   come  to  God.     The  boy 
who  is  learning  his  alphabet  is  handling  the  same  elements  which  enter  into 
the  plays  of    Shakespeare  or  the  dialogues  of    Plato.      He    has    begun    upon 
literature  when  he  has  learned  ABC.     It  is  a  little  thing  in  itself  for  him  to  learn 
twenty-six  letters,  but  it  is  a  very  great  thing  when  you  consider  the  alphabet  as 
the  medium  of  the  world's  thought.    Even  so  the  largest  endowment  and  result  are 
but  "  a  few  things,"  but  they  acquire  a  tremendous  and  eternal  importance  as 
integral  parts  of  the  great  moral  economy  of  God.     (Marvin  B,  Vincent,  D,D.) 
FaithfvlnetB  is  on  tlie  direct  line  of  mastery : — Fidehty  tends  and  leads  np   to 
mastery.     Success  is  a  thing  of  stages  and  aggregations,  and  it  is  of  vastly  mora 
consequence  that  the  man  should  be  rightly  pointed  —set  in  the  direction  of  a  larger. 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «v. 

Divine  success,  than  that  he  should  achieve  what  he  undertakes  here.     If  there  ia 
no  larger,  purer,  more  spiritual  kingdom  than  this  there  is  no  such  thing  as  real 
success.     If  there  is  such  a  Idngdom,  and  if  the  earthly  sphere  of  Christian  life  and 
work  is  a  part  of  it,  then  the  success  may  well  lie  beyond  the  line  of  our  human 
vision,  and  be  too  large  for  our  little  inch-rules.    The  great  principle  holds — fidelity 
leads  up  to  mastery.     You  see  it  illustrated  daily.     You  see  the  faithful  journeyman 
advanced  to  the  foiemanship,  the  plodding  student  become  an  authority;  you  see 
men  of  moderate  ability  becoming  powers  in  business  or  in  manufacturing  by  steady 
devotion  to  one  thing.     The  thing  itself  may  be  small;  their  perseverance  magnifies 
it :  and  they  themselves  grow  into  the  ability  to  handle  larger  things  through  their 
fiuelity  to  the  smaller  interest.      (Ihid.)        Faithfulness  the  main  thing  : — Thit 
parable  turns  on  moral  quality  rather  than  on  ability.    Its  key-note  is  not  five 
talents,  nor  two  talents,  nor  one  talent,  but  faithfulness  to  all  three.     It  is  faith- 
fulness, and  not  amount,  which  links  the  talent  to  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  the  "  few 
thin^  "  to  the  "  many."     The  amount  of  ability  is  not  the  first  thing  for  us  to 
consider ;  it  is  the  faithful  use  of  whatever  ability  we  have.     To  use  aright  we  must 
be  right.     Vigorous  use  of  talent  is  not  necessarily  right  use,  for  unfaithfulness  is 
vigorous  also.    (Ibid.)      The  unused  talent  passes  from  the  servant  who  would  not  use 
it   to  the  one  who  will: — A  landlord  has  two  farms  lying  together — the  one  ia 
admirably  managed,  the  other  is  left  almost  to  itself,  with  the  least  possible  manage- 
ment, and  becomes  the  talk  of  the  whole  country-side  for  poor  crops  and  untidiness. 
No  one  asks  what  the  landlord  will  do  when  the  leases  are  out.     It  is  a  matter  ol 
course  that  he  dismisses  the  careless  tenant,  and  puts  his  farm  into  the  hands  of 
the  skilful  and  diligent  farmer.     He  enforces  the  law  of  the  text.     In  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  this  law  is  self-acting.     To  bury  our  talent  and  so  keep  it  as  originally 
given  is   an   impossibility.      To  have  just   so  much  grace  and   no  more  is  an 
impossibility.      It   must   either  be  circulating  and   so  multiplying,   or  it  ceasea 
to  be.     It  must  grow  or  it  will  die.     Hence  it  is  that  in  your  own   souls  you 
perhaps  are  finding  that,  no  matter  what  effort  you  make,  you  cannot  toter  aa 
heartily  into  holy  services  and  occupations  as  once  you  did,  but  are  finding  your 
old  joy  and  assurance  honey -combed  by  unbelieving  thoughts.    Hence  it  is  that  the 
susceptibiHty  to  right  feeling  you  had  in  boyhood  has  gone  from  you.     You  did  not 
mean  to  become  unfeeling,  but  only  shrank  from  acting  as  feeUug  dictated.     But 
he  who  blows  out  the  flame  finds  that  the  heat  and  the  glow  die  out  of  themselves^ 
{Marciti  Dads,  D.D.)        The  late  of  spiritual  capital : — It  is  a  law  with  the  opera- 
tion of  which  we  are  familiar  in  nature  and  in  the  commercial  world.    It  is  he  who 
has  even  a  little  capital  to  begin  with,  and  who  makes  a  right  use  of  it,  who  soon 
leaves  far  behind  the  man  who  has  none,  or  who  neglects  to  invest  what  he  has. 
And  the  more  this   capital  grows,  the  more  rapidly  and  the  more  easily  is   it 
increased.      After   a  certain  point  it  seems  to   increase  by  virtue  of    its  own 
momentum.     So  in  certain  sicknesses,  as  soon  as  the  crisis  of  the  disease  is  past 
and  a  little  health  has  been  funded  again  in  the  patient's  constitution,  this  rapidly 
grows  to  complete  recovery.     So  with  popularity,  it  begins  one  scarce  knows  how, 
but  once  begun,  the  tide  flows  apace.     You  may  scarcely  be  able  to  say  why  one 
statesman  or  one  author  should  be  so  immeasurably  more  popular  than  others ; 
but  so  it  is  that,  when  once  a  beginning  is  made,  tribute  flows  in  naturally,  aa 
water  from  all  sides  settle  in  a  hollow.     It  is  this  aame  law  which  regulates  our 
attainment  in  the  service  of  Christ.    However  little  grace  we  seem  to  have  to  begin 
with  it  is  this  we  must  invest,  and  so  nurse  it  into  size  and  strength.     Each  time 
we  nse  the  grace  we  have  by  responding  to  the  demands  made  upon  it,  it  returns  to 
us  increased.     Our  capital  grows  by  an  inevitable  law.     The  efforts  of  young  or 
inexperienced  Christians  to  give  utterance  to  the  life  that  is  in  them  may  often  hf 
awkward,  like  the  movements  of  most  young  animals.     They  may  be  able  to  begia 
only  in  a  very  small  way,  so  small  a  way  that  sensitive  persons  are  frequently 
ashamed  to  begin  at  all.     Having  received  Christ  they  are  conscious  of  new  desires 
and  of  a  new  strength ;  they  have  a  regard  for  Christ,  and  were  they  to  assert  this 
regard  in  the  circtlmstances  which  call  for  its  assertion  their  regard  would  be 
deepened.     They  have  a  desire  to  serve  Him,  and  were  they  to  do  so  in  those  small 
matters  with  which  they  have  daily  concern  their  desire  and  ability  would   be 
increased.     Grace  of  any  kind  invested  in  the  actual  opportunities  of  life  cannot 
come  back  to  us  as  small  as  it  was,  but  enlarged  and  strengthened.     Such  yjr^ce, 
then,  as  we  have,  such  knowledge  as  we  have  of  what  is  due  to  others,  to  ourselves, 
and  to  God,  let  us  give  free  expression  to.     Such  investments  of  Christian  prin- 
ciple aa  are  wichin  our  reach  let  us  make;  such  manifestations  of  a  Christian 


CHAj-.  ixv.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  685 


temper  and  mind  as  our  ciicumstarces  daily  demand  let  ub  exhibit,  and  it  mnst 
come  to  pass  that  we  inciease  in  grace.  There  is  no  other  way  whatever  of 
becoming  richly  endowed  in  spirit  than  by  trading  with  whatever  we  have  to  begin 
with.  We  cannot  leap  into  a  fortune  in  spiritual  things ;  rich  saints  cannot 
bequeath  us  what  their  life-long  toil  has  won ;  they  cannot  even  lend  us  so  that 
we  may  begin  on  borrowed  capital.  In  the  spiritual  life  all  must  be  genuine  ;  we 
must  \rork  our  own  way  upwards,  and  by  humbly  and  wisely  laying  out  whatever 
we  now  possess  make  it  more  or  be  for  ever  poor,  (Ibid.)  The  man  with  two 
talents : — He  has  his  own  peculiar  interest  as  he  stands  in  the  little  group  of  three 
before  the  master.  He  is  significant,  we  may  almost  say,  because  of  his  insig> 
nificanoe.  As  the  master  puts  the  money  in  their  hands  we  can  see  them  look  at 
it,  and  can  guess  what  they  think  about  it.  The  man  to  whom  five  talents  are 
given  is  surprised  that  he  should  receive  so  much.  He  is  exhilarated  and  in- 
spired, or  perhaps,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  paralyzed  and  overcome.  The  man  to 
whom  one  talent  is  given  is  startled  at  the  smallness  of  the  trust.  He,  too,  feels  a 
positive  emotion.  Either  he  is  stung  to  energy  and  determines  that  he  will  do 
something  strong  and  good  even  with  this  little  gift,  or  else  he  is  crushed  into 
despair.  Is  this  then  all  of  which  his  master  thinks  him  worthy  ?  Both  of  these 
men  are  interesting.  They  represent  extremes.  But  the  man  of  two  talents  stands 
and  looks  at  his  trust,  and  it  is  just  about  what  he  might  have  expected.  It  is 
neither  very  great  nor  very  small.  It  does  not  exalt  him,  and  it  does  not  make 
him  ashamed.  He  turns  away,  and  goes  out  to  use  it  with  a  calm,  nnexcited  face.  He 
is  the  type  of  common  mediocrity.  He  is  the  average  man.  He  presents  the  type 
to  which  we  almost  all  belong.  There  are  none  of  us  probably  who  are  conscious 
of  anything  which  separates  us  as  notably  superior  to  the  great  mass  of  our  fellow- 
men.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  probable  that  many  of  us  count  ourselves  dis- 
tinctly  below  the  average  of  human  Ufe.  We  do  not  lay  claim  to  the  five  talents ; 
we  will  not  confess  to  the  one.  It  is  as  men  and  women  of  two  talents  that  we 
ordinarily  count  ourselves  and  ask  to  be  counted  by  our  brethren^  Therefore  this 
quiet,  commonplace,  unnoticed  man,  going  his  faithful  way  in  his  dull  dress  which 
makes  no  mark  and  draws  no  eye,  doing  his  duty  insignificantly  and  thoroughly, 
winning  so  unobtrusively  at  last  his  master's  praise,  ought  to  be  interesting  to  us 
all,  (Phillips  Brooks,  B.D.)  The  predominance  of  mediocrity  : — The  average  man 
is  by  far  the  most  numerous  man.  The  man  who  goes  beyond  the  average,  the  man 
who  falls  short  of  the  average,  both  of  them,  by  their  very  definition,  are  exceptions. 
They  are  the  outskirts  and  fringes,  the  capes  and  promontories  of  humanity.  The 
great  continent  of  human  life  is  made  up  of  the  average  existences,  the  mass  of 
two-talented  capacity  and  action.  1.  It  is  so  even  in  the  simplest  and  most  super- 
ficial matter  of  the  possession  of  wealth.  The  great  fortunes,  with  their  splendid 
opportunities  and  their  tremendous  responsibilities,  rise  like  gigantic  mountains 
which  everybody  sees  out  of  the  general  level  of  comfortable  life.  On  the  other 
Iiand,  excsssive  poverty,  actual  suffering  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  terrible  as  it  is, 
is  comparatively  rare.  A  part  of  its  terribleness  comes  from  its  rarity.  The  great 
multitude  of  men  are  neither  very  rich  nor  very  poor.  The  real  character  and 
strength  of  a  community  lies  neither  in  its  millionaires  nor  in  its  paupers,  but  in 
the  men  of  middle  life  who  neither  have  more  money  than  they  know  how  to  spend, 
nor  are  pressed  and  embarrassed  for  the  necessities  of  life.  2.  The  same  is  true  in 
the  matter  of  joy  and  sorrow.  The  great  mass  of  men  during  the  greater  part  of 
their  lives  are  neither  exultant  and  triumphant  with  delight,  nor  are  they  crushed 
and  broken  down  with  grief.  They  do  not  go  shouting  their  rapture  to  the  skies, 
and  they  do  not  go  wailing  their  misery  to  the  sympathetic  winds.  They  are 
moderately  happy,  Joy  flecked  and  toned  down  by  troubles;  troubles  constantly 
relieved  and  lighted  up  by  joy ;  that  is  their  general  condition ;  that  seems  to  be 
their  best  capacity.  The  power  of  the  intensest  joy  and  the  intensest  pain  belongs 
only  to  rare,  peculiar  men.  3,  Mental  capacity.  Most  men  are  neither  sages  nor 
fools.  Few  men  are  either  scholars  or  dunces,  4,  Popularity  and  fame.  Those 
whom  the  world  praises  and  those  whom  all  men  despise  are  both  of  them  excep. 
tional.  You  can  count  them  easily.  The  great  multitude  whom  you  cannot  begin 
to  count,  who  fill  the  vast  middle-ground  of  the  great  picture  of  humanity,  is  made 
ap  of  men  who  are  simply  well  enough  liked  by  their  fellow-men.  They  are  crowned 
with  no  garlands,  and  they  are  pelted  with  no  stones.  They  have  their  share  of  kindly 
interest  and  esteem.  You  cannot  well  think  of  them  as  either  losing  that  or  as 
gaining  much  beyond  it.  6.  Character  and  religion.  Here,  too,  it  is  the  average 
that  fills  the  eye.     Where  are  the  heroes  ?    You  can  find  them  if  you  look.    Where 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

are  the  rascals?  You  can  find  them  too.  Where  are  the  saints?  They  shina 
where  no  true  man's  eyes  can  fail  to  see  them.  And  the  blasphemers  likewise  no 
one  can  shut  out  of  his  ears.  But  the  great  host  of  men  :  do  you  not  know  how  Utile 
reason  they  give  you  to  expect  of  them  either  great  goodness  or  great  wickedness  ? 
You  do  not  look  to  see  their  faces  kindle  when  you  talk  to  them  of  Christ.  You  do 
not  either  look  to  see  them  grow  scornful  or  angry  at  His  name.  You  do  not  count 
upon  their  going  to  the  stake  for  principle.  But  you  do  count  upon  their  paying 
their  honest  debts.  You  have  to  shut  your  thoughts  about  them  in  to  this  world, 
for  when  you  think  of  them  in  eternity  heaven  seems  as  much  too  good  for  them 
as  hell  seems  too  bad.  (Ibid.)  Dangers  of  mediocrity  : — It  is  not  always  an  easy 
thing  for  men  to  make  up  their  minds  to  mediocrity.  It  is  a  young  man's  right, 
almost  his  duty,  to  hope,  almost  to  believe,  that  he  has  singular  capacity,  and  is 
not  merely  another  repetition  of  the  constantly  repeated  average  of  men.  To  seo 
those  dreams  and  visions  of  youth  gradually  fade  away  ;  little  by  little  to  discover 
that  one  has  no  such  exceptional  capacity  ;  to  try  one  and  another  of  the  adven- 
turous ways  which  lead  to  the  highest  heights  and  the  great  prizes,  and  find  the 
feet  unequal  to  them ;  to  come  back  at  last  to  the  great  trodden  highway,  and  plod 
on  among  the  undistinguished  milUons — that  is  often  very  hard.  The  fight  la 
fought,  the  defeat  is  met,  in  silence ;  but  it  is  no  less,  it  is  more  terrible.  The 
hour  in  which  it  becomes  clear  to  a  young  man  that  that  is  to  be  his  life,  that  there 
is  nothing  else  for  him  to  do  except  to  swell  the  great  average  of  humanity,  is  often 
filled  with  dangers.  Let  us  see  what  some  of  them  are.  1.  He  has  to  make  up  hia 
mind  to  do  without  both  of  the  different  kinds  of  inspiration  which  come  to  the 
men  who  are  better  off  and  the  men  who  are  worse  off  than  he  is.  The  man  of  five 
talents  excites  admiration  and  expectation  ;  the  man  of  one  talent  has  an  incentive 
to  do  great  things  in  spite  of  difficulties  ;  but  to  the  middle  man,  the  man  who  is 
neither  very  much  nor  very  little — the  man  who  has  two  talents,  but  only  two — 
both  of  these  forms  of  impulse  are  denied.  He  is  neither  high  enough  to  hear  the 
calling  of  the  stars,  nor  low  enough  to  feel  the  tumult  of  the  earthquake.  What 
wonder,  then,  if  he  often  falls  asleep  for  sheer  lack  of  sting  and  spur  ?  What 
wonder  if  he  does  the  moderate  things  that  seem  to  be  within  his  power  unen- 
thusiastically,  and  then  stops,  making  no  demand  upon  himself  since  other  men 
make  no  demand  upon  him  ?  2.  A  want  of  deflniteness  and  distinctness.  Genms, 
by  its  very  intensity,  decrees  a  special  path  of  fire  for  its  vivid  power.  Conscious 
limitation,  on  the  other  hand,  knows  there  is  no  hope  for  it  except  in  one  direction. 
Both  have  the  strength  which  comes  by  narrowness.  But  the  man  who  knows  him- 
self to  be  only  modeiately  strong  is  apt  to  think  that  his  strength  has  no  peculiar 
mission.  The  commonplace  man  is  the  discursive  man.  He  has  neither  the 
impetuosity  of  the  torrent  nor  the  direct  gravitation  of  the  single  drop  of  water.  He 
Ues  a  loose  and  sluggish  pool,  and  flows  nowhither,  and  grows  stagnant  by  and  by. 
3.  The  constant  danger  of  being  made  ligbt  of  by  other  men.  Becoming  unin- 
teresting  to  others,  he  loses  interest  in  himself.  He  attracts  no  reverence,  and  he 
enlists  no  pity.  He  finds  himself  unnoticed.  He  must  originate  out  of  himself  all 
that  he  comes  to.  He  hangs  between  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  is  fed  out  of 
neither.  What  he  does  seems  to  be  of  no  consequence,  because  it  wakens  no  emo- 
tion in  his  brethren.  He  has  no  influence  on  other  men,  and  so  there  is  no  effluence, 
no  putting  ioxih.  of  life  from  him.  {Ibid,)  The  advantages  of  mediocrity  : — It  is 
in  the  quality  more  than  in  the  quantity  of  talents  that  their  true  value  lies.  Given 
by  God  they  constitute  a  true,  direct,  and  sacred  connection  and  channel  of  inter- 
course between  your  soul  and  His.  Forget  your  brethren  and  think  of  Him,  and 
realize  your  direct  relationship  to  Him.  When  you  have  done  that  you  may  come 
back  into  the  mass  again  and  see  what  are  the  special  advantages  which  belong  to 
a  faithful  life  lived  in  the  average  condition,  hved  with  the  average  capacities  of 
man.  1.  Such  a  life  brings  out  and  makes  manifest  the  solid  strength  which 
belongs  to  the  simple  qualities  of  manhood.  Types  of  power  which  can  only  be 
developed  in  supreme  joy  or  supreme  sorrow  enthrall  our  imagination  ;  and  then 
some  plain  man  comes  who  knows  not  either  rapture  or  despair,  who  simply  has 
liis  daily  work  to  do,  his  friends  to  help,  his  enemies  to  forgive,  his  children  to  love 
and  train,  his  trials  to  bear,  his  temptations  to  conquer,  his  soul  to  save ;  and  what 
a  healthiness  he  brings  into  our  standards,  with  what  a  genuine  refreshment  hb  fills 
our  hearts.  Behold  how  great  are  these  primary  eternal  qualities — patience,  hope, 
kindness,  Intelligence,  trust,  self-sacrifice.  We  do  not  accept  them  because  we 
cannot  have  something  finer.  They  show  us  their  intrinsic  fineness,  and  we  do 
them  reverence.     The  arctic  frost  1     The  torrid  heat  I    Behold  the  tru(:  strength^ 


CHAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  587 

the  real  life  of  the  planet  is  not  in  these.  It  is  in  the  temperate  lands  that  the 
grape  ripens  and  the  wheat  turns  calmly  yellow  in  the  constant  sun.  2.  The  maa 
conscious  of  mediocrity  has  the  advantage  of  displaying  in  his  life  and  chai-acter 
the  intrinsic  and  essential  life  of  human  nature.  He  is  one  with  his  fellow-men, 
and  it  is  he  who — being  faithful,  pure,  serene,  brave,  hopeful — has  power  to  make 
his  brethren  all  that  he  tries  himself  to  be.  3.  May  not  the  average  life  find  a  self- 
surrender  to  the  help  of  other  lives  more  easy,  and  make  that  surrender  mora 
complete,  just  in  proportion  as  it  is  released  from  that  desire  for  self-assertion,  that 
consciousness  of  being  something  which  is  worthy  of  men's  observation,  that  self- 
love  which  must  haunt  the  lives  of  those  who,  in  any  way,  on  either  side,  find 
themselves  separated  from  the  great  bulk  of  their  fellow-creaturos  ?  4.  And  is  it 
not  true  that  all  that  assertion  of  the  intrinsic  value  of  every  life  which  is  the  very 
essence  of  our  Christian  faith,  all  that  redemption  of  the  soul,  in  the  profoundest 
and  the  truest  sense,  which  was  the  work  of  Christ,  must  come  with  special  wel- 
come and  appreciation  and  delight  to  any  man  who  feels  his  insignificance  and  is 
In  danger  of  losing  himself  in  the  vague  mass  of  his  fellows?  Christ  redeems 
him.  Christ  says,  *'  Behold  yourself  in  Me,  and  see  that  you  are  not  insig- 
nificant." Christ  says,  "  I  died  for  you."  Set  thus  upon  his  feet,  made  a 
new  man,  or  made  to  be  the  man  he  is,  with  what  gratitude  and  faith  and 
obedience  must  that  man  follow  the  Christ  who  is  bis  Saviour  I  (Ibid.)  Tha 
average  man : — I.  His  dangers.  1.  He  will  be  surely  tempted  to  ape  greatness. 
2.  He  will  be  tempted  to  underrate  himself.  3.  He  may  lose  himself  in  the  crowd. 
II.  The  ENCOOBAGEMENTS.  1.  He  has  the  necessary  talcnts.  2.  God  designed  to  do 
most  of  His  work  in  the  world  through  the  average  man.  3.  The  magnificent  reward 
that  awaits  him.  {F.  E.  Clark.)  A  hard  man: — The  servants  in  our  parables  seem 
to  have  erred  from  an  opposite  excess  of  temperament.  His  melancholy  broodinga 
prevented  the  unprofitable  servant  from  a  right  use  of  his  master's  talent;  the 
virgins  were  over  sanguine  that  their  oil  would  hold  out.  I.  Observe  this  man. 
1.  He  has  begun  with  less  than  the  others  had.  The  melancholic  mind  is  apt  to 
exaggerate  this  fact.  2.  Yet  he  was  treated  according  to  his  ability.  He  was  not 
expected  to  render  more  than  he  could.  3.  We  see  the  influence  of  his  tempera- 
ment in  disparagement  of  the  largeness  of  his  Lord's  purposes  and  dealings ;  he 
interprets  everything  after  his  own  spirit.  Toil  for  such  a  master  must  be  thankless 
and  graceless  indeed.  II.  Looking  at  the  man,  therefore,  as  representing  the  pecu- 
liar dangers  attaching  to  certain  temperaments,  I  think  we  see  sufficiently  thk 
NATURE  OF  THE  WARNING  HE  FOBNI3HE8  US.  1.  It  is  essential  to  all  profitable  ser- 
vice of  our  Master,  that  it  shall  be  hearty  service.  What  heart  can  there  be  in  any 
such  labour  as  shall  have  no  generous  thoughts  of  Him  for  whom  it  is  done.  Wa 
mast  get  a  better  conception  of  God,  and  create  in  oar  souls  a  healthful  moral 
incentive  to  doing  right.  2.  Again,  to  be  a  profitable  service,  it  must  be  felt  also  to 
be  a  service  that  shall  react  upon  oarselves.  It  must  improve  us  as  well  as  glorify 
God.  God  puts  joy  and  consolation  into  any  duty  ;  he  who  does  the  duty  has  the 
joy.     III.  The  wronq  conception  or  God  which  gave  strength  to  the  melan- 

OHOLT  AND  ENERVATING   TENDENCIES  OP  THIS  DARK-SOULED  SERVANT  IN   HIS  RELATIONS 

WITH  HIS  MASTER.  Havo  we  put  this  •'  hard  man  "upon  the  throne  of  the  universe? 
This  conception  of  God  is  at  the  bottom  of  most  of  the  hindrances  in  the  way  of 
Divine  faith.  It  is  the  •'  hard  man  "  that  comes  to  throw  a  false  light  upon  our 
conception  of  the  atonement ;  so  much  suffering  for  so  much  sin.  Is  this  the  God 
that  Jesus  Christ  depicted  ♦  IV.  The  phrases  introduced  to  darken  the  pictubb 
ABE  WORTHY  OF  NOTICE.  "  Eeaping  where  thou  hast  not  sown."  "  Gathering  where 
thoa  hast  not  strawed."  What  »  contrast  to  the  "Kefiner"  in  Malachi.  To  the 
diseased  vision  all  things  are  distorted.  1.  We  may  all  at  times  have  intervals  of 
gloom  corresponding  to  those  which  our  text  has  suggested.  2.  Do  not  darken  your 
life  by  fear.  "  Ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear."  3.  God 
is  love.  {G.  J.  Prtctor.)  Christ's  talents: — In  Eastern  lands,  and  ancient  times, 
slaves  were  artizans,  workmen,  whose  profit  belonged  to  their  master.  The  apostle 
Paal  thought  of  himself  as  a  slave  put  in  trust,  placed  under  trusts.  L  Christ's 
talents.  Such  we  are  to  regard  all  gifts,  powers,  or  possessions  that  are  entrusted 
to  us.  Our  special  talent  is  that  one  thing  in  which  we  stand  out  distinct  from 
others.  II.  Christ's  apportionment  of  His  talents.  Two  rules  decide  the  appor- 
tionment. 1.  The  talent  must  match  the  capacity.  2.  The  talents  put  together 
must  secure  ability  for  all  the  work  which  Christ  wants  done.  III.  Christ's  expeo- 
tation  concerning  His  talents.  1.  Service  by  their  use.  2.  Culture  by  their  use. 
lY,  Christ's  judgment  of  those  entrusted  with  His  talents.    1.  Judgment  is  tht 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ixf, 

same  for  all  trusts.  2.  It  is  based  on  quality,  not  results.  8.  The  judgment  it 
■evere,  not  on  those  who  tried  and  failed,  but  on  those  who  never  tried.  4.  The 
reward  is  simply  other  and  larger  trusts.  {Selected.)  Trading  with  talents  : — A 
trader  either  trades  with  his  own,  or  with  another  man's  stock,  whose  servant  he  is. 
Now  no  man  hath  any  stock  or  talent  of  his  own,  but  all  their  talents  which  thej 
»re  required  to  improve  and  trade  with  are  the  Lord's.  1.  Hast  thou  a  rational 
soul,  wisdom,  knowledge,  and  great  understanding  ?  It  was  given  unto  thee  by  the 
Lord.  2.  Hast  thou  riches,  or  much  wealth  ?  It  is  the  Lord's  money.  3.  Hast 
thou  acquired  parts,  great  learning  ?  This  is  also  thy  Master's  goods.  4.  Have  you 
the  gospel  and  the  ministration  of  the  word  ?  It  is  the  Lord's  trust.  5.  Have  voo 
faithful  ministers  ?  They  are  the  Lord's.  6.  Have  you  precious  talent  of  time  and 
the  opportunities  of  time  ?  This  you  are  entrusted  with  by  the  Lord.  7.  Have  you 
health,  strength,  and  advantages  to  attend  upon  the  word  and  means  of  grace  above 
many  ?  All  this  is  from  the  Lord.  8.  Have  you  spiritual  gifts  and  saving  grace  1 
Those  talents  you  have  received  from  the  Lord.  9.  Are  you  fathers  or  masters,  and 
BO  have  authority  over  families,  children,  servants  7  These  are  the  Lord's  trusts. 
Traders  ought  to  know  the  worth  of  those  commodities  put  into  their  hands. 
Traders  must  not  be  timorous  in  laying  out  their  money.  Traders  should  know 
where  to  buy,  of  whom,  and  who  to  trade  with.  Traders  must  know  the  terms  on 
which  they  are  to  trade.  Traders  must  know  in  whose  name  they  trade.  Traders 
must  trust,  or  they  will  have  little  or  no  trade  at  all.  Traders  must  keep  their 
accounts  well.  Some  traders  give  more  attention  to  their  private  affairs  than  to 
their  business.  Some  traders  break,  and  expose  such  that  are  faithful  dealers  to 
loss  and  shame.  (Benjamin  Keach.)  Our  trust  of  talents  : — I.  God  has  com- 
mitted to  men  a  variety  of  gifts  or  talents.  By  what  is  here  called  talents,  is  to  be 
understood  all  such  blessings  and  privileges  as  providence  favours  us  with.  What 
God  requires  from  every  man  is  according  to  what  His  providence  has  imparted  to 
him.  II.  All  our  talents,  more  or  less,  all  the  gifts  of  God  to  men,  may  and  musk 
be  improved.  They  were  conferred  for  this  very  purpose.  The  blessings  of  provi- 
dence are  no  blessings  to  us  if  we  want  wisdom  or  will  to  make  a  right  use  of  them. 
III.  The  reward  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  actual  improvement  which  men  make 
of  the  talents  entrusted  to  them.  IV.  In  the  day  of  judgment  Divine  justice  will 
be  displayed  in  such  manner  as  will  strike  every  sinner  dumb,  as  will  silence  every 
excuse,  and  quite  confound  him.  {E.  Sandercock.)  The  joy  of  the  Lord's  service : 
When  Richard  Cameron,  one  of  the  noblest  of  our  Scottish  martyrs,  had  fallen 
mortally  wounded  on  Airdsmoss,  he  said,  "I  am  dying,  happy,  happy;  and  if  I  had 
a  thousand  lives  I  would  willingly  lay  them  all  down  one  after  another  for  Christ. 
Oh,  He  is  near  me  ;  I  think  I  see  Him  !  I  am  just  coming,  Lord  Jesus."  And  he 
added,  "  Tell  my  parents  not  to  weep,  but  continue  steadfast  in  the  faith,  and  not 
to  fear  a  suffering  lot  for  Christ."  The  reward  of  fidelity  : — I.  The  different  capa- 
sities,  advantages,  and  situations  of  men,  are  owing  in  general  to  the  wise  provi- 
dence of  God.  II.  It  is  of  little  importance  to  us  what  our  station  in  life  is,  or 
what  the  duties  belonging  to  it;  but  of  the  greatest  whether  we  lerform  or  neglect 
them.  III.  It  is  not  of  so  great  moment  how  long,  or  how  short,  our  time  and  ser- 
vice are,  as  how  well  we  have  fulfilled  them.  (S.  Brown.)  Divers  talents: — 
Some  have  abilities  superior  in  kind,  others  in  degree;  some  excel  in  strength  of 
body,  others  of  mind;  some  in  judgment,  others  in  imagination  and  memory; 
some  are  fit  for  contemplation,  others  for  action;  some  to  design,  others  to  execute; 
some  to  govern  nations,  enact  laws,  and  administer  justice,  others  for  inferior  and 
private,  yet  necessary  and  useful  employments.  This  variety  is  designed  to  fill  up 
the  various  places  and  oflicefl,  which  are  proper  in  the  great  community  of  the 
world.      {Ibid.)  Parable  of  talents: — Doctrine    I.  That  Christ  Jesus  is  the 

great  Lord  and  Owner.  II.  That  Christ,  at  His  departure,  appointed  every  man  his 
work  ;  and,  at  His  ascension,  gave  gifts  unto  men,  to  be  employed  for  His  glory  till 
Ho  come  again.  III.  That  it  pleases  the  Lord  to  dispense  His  gifts  variously 
among  His  people;  to  some  more,  to  some  fewer,  talents.  AJl  have  some  talent 
There  is  diversity,  however  (1)  Of  employments  and  offices ;  (2)  In  the  kind  of  gifts ; 
(3)  As  to  the  measures  and  degrees.  The  account  must  be  answerable  to  our  receipts, 
(T.  Manton.)  Varieties  of  gifts  : — Some  are  able  to  lay  down  the  truth  soondly; 
others  able  to  apply  it  forcibly.  Some  have  the  gift  of  prayer  and  utterance,  others 
are  able  to  inform  the  judgment  and  convince  gainsayers.  Some  to  clear  op  doc- 
trines, others  to  stir  affections.  Among  hearers,  some  have  more  wisdom,  some 
more  knowledge,  some  more  affection.  Amongst  the  penmen  of  Scripture  there  iM 
A  great  variety  ;  John  is  sublime  and  seraphical ;  Paul  spiritual  and  argumentative  { 


CHAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  689 

Peter,  in  an  easy,  fluent,  and  mild  way;  Isaiah  more  court-like  and  lofty;  Jeremiah 
more  priest-like  and  grave.  Among  the  saving  gifts  there  is  a  diversity  of  graces, 
though  all  have  all  in  some  measare.  The  new  creature  is  not  maimed,  yet  some 
are  more  eminent,  some  for  one  grace  some  for  another.  Abraham  for  faith,  Job 
for  patience,  Moses  for  meekness,  Timothy  for  temperance.  Every  grace  working 
according  to  the  diversity  of  tempers,  some  are  modest  and  mild,  others  bold  and 
Eealous  ;  some  are  mourning  for  sin,  others  raised  in  the  admiration  of  the  grace  of 
God  iii  Christ;  others  exemplary  for  strictness  and  weaneilaess  from  the  delights  of 
the  animal  life.  {Ibid.)  Hiding,  not  wasting,  God's  trusts  : — Mark,  'tis  not  said 
ho  did  embezzle  his  talent,  as  many  waste  their  substance  in  riotous  living,  quench 
brave  pai-ts  in  excess,  sin  away  many  precious  advantages  of  ordinances  and  edu- 
cation and  powerful  convictions.  He  did  not  misemploy  his  talent,  as  some  do  their 
wealth,  others  their  wit,  to  scoff  at  reUgion,  or  to  put  a  varnish  on  the  devil's  causey 
their  power  to  oppress  and  crush  the  good.  The  precious  gifts  that  many  have,  we 
like  the  sword  in  a  madman's  hand,  they  use  them  to  hurt  and  mischief.  No  such 
thing  is  charged  upon  this  evil  and  naughty  servant.  'Tis  fault  enough  to  hide  our 
talents,  though  we  do  not  abuse  them.  {Ibid.)  Modesty  not  to  invalidate  talent : — 
It  is  true  that  the  violet  loves  the  Bhade,  but  then  it  manages  to  bloom  there — ^to 
thrive  and  multiply.  It  makes  itself  known  by  its  delicate,  agreeable  perfume.  It 
does  not  hide  itself  in  the  earth.  No  flower  is  more  sought  for,  and  in  an  invalid's 
room  none  more  grateful.  There  are  some  Christians  like  towering  cedars,  some 
like  branching  oaks,  some  like  willows  by  the  water-courses.  There  are  others  like 
epring  flowers  ;  they  are  so  modest  and  bashful  that  you  must  seek  them  and  bring 
them  into  the  light.  They  much  prefer  the  shade.  But,  as  we  none  of  us  live  to 
ourselves,  such  a  disposition  must  not  be  looked  upon  with  too  much  favour. 
Modesty  may  become  a  disease.  If  a  lady  is  so  bashful  that  she  never  dare  venture 
into  the  streets  without  a  thick  veil  over  her  features,  her  sensitiveness  of  organiza- 
tion must  be  diseased.  So  in  Christian  congregations,  there  is  a  reserve  about  some 
which  needs  to  be  broken  down.  They  never  emerge  into  the  daylight.  They  arc 
timid,  full  of  distrust — a  distrust  which  almost  amounts  to  self- excommunication. 
Now,  the  subject  which  suggested  itself  to  my  mind  as  I  read  these  words  was  tins 
— The  temptation  to  depreciate  small  abilities  and  scanty  opportunities.  (iJ.  Tliomas.) 
The  increase  of  talent : — A  merchant  going  abroad  for  a  time  gave  respectively  to 
two  of  his  friends  two  sacks  of  wheat  each,  to  take  care  of,  against  his  return. 
Years  passed ;  he  came  back,  and  appUed  for  them  again.  The  first  took  him  into 
bis  storehouse,  and  showed  him  the  bags  of  grain  ;  but  they  were  mildewed  and 
worthless.  The  other  led  him  out  into  the  open  country,  and  pointed  out  field  after 
field  of  waving  com,  the  produce  of  the  two  sacks  given  to  him.  Said  the  merchant, 
as  he  gazed,  •*  You  have  indeed  been  a  faithful  friend ;  give  me  two  sacks  of  thei; 
wheat.  The  rest  shall  be  thine."  I  leave  you  to  make  your  own  application  of  the 
allegory.  {Ibid.)  The  law  of  use  and  neglect  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven : — The 
other  day  I  met  with  a  curious  myth  illustrative  of  this  point.  It  comes  from  the 
East,  from  Mohammedanism  ;  but  it  is  very  expressive.  A  tribe  of  men  dwelt  on 
the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea.  They  had  forgotten  all  about  truth,  and  had  taken  np 
with  hes  ;  and  were  fast  verging  towards  the  saddest  possible  condition.  Whereupon 
it  pleased  a  kind  Providence  to  send  them  the  prophet  Moses  with  an  instructive 
word  of  warning.  But  no — the  men  of  the  Dead  Sea  discovered  that  there  was  no 
comeliness  in  this  Moses — no  truth  in  his  words  ;  they  received  him  with  scoffs  and 

i'eers.  Moses  withdrew,  but  the  laws  of  nature  did  not  withdraw.  The  men  of  the 
)ead  Sea,  says  the  narrative,  when  next  he  visited  them,  were  all  "  changed  ii^to 
apes ; "  sitting  on  the  trees  there,  grinning  now  in  the  most  unaffected  manner, 
gibbering  and  chattering  very  genuine  nonsense.  There  they  sit  and  chatter  to  this 
hour,  "  only,  I  believe,  every  Sabbath  there  returns  to  them  a  bewildered,  half 
consciousness,  half  reminiscence,"  seeming  to  have  some  distant  idea  that  once 
they  were  of  another  order.  They  made  no  use  of  their  souls,  and  so  they  have 
lost  them.  Their  worship  on  the  Sabbath  now  is  to  roost  there,  and  half  remember 
that  they  once  had  souls.  There  is  no  Uttle  truth  in  this  old  Moslem  myth.  They 
made  no  use  of  their  souls,  and  so  have  lost  them.  Brethren,  that  is  God's  law. 
We  keep  what  we  use.  We  lose  what  we  neglect  to  use.  {Ibid. )  The  pleasure  of 
$nuill  abilities : — Why  is  it  not  possible  for  us  to  acknowledge  the  abilities  God  has 
given  to  others,  and  render  them  their  due  without  our  coveting  them  ourselves  ? 
We  have  none  of  us  been  overlooked.  If  He  has  not  given  us  the  greater.  He  has 
given  as  the  less,  and  if  not  the  less  then  the  least,  and  for  each  there  is  the  fit  and 
natural  sphere  of  exercise.    It  is  as  much  pleasure  to  the  linnet  to  ang  its  anpre< 


590  TUE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxt, 

tentious  song  as  for  the  lark  to  mount  high  above  the  com  fields  on  a  bright  sinny 
morning,  and  pour  down  its  flood  of  melody  on  the  earth.  It  is  as  much  pleasure 
to  the  sparrow-hawk  to  steal  along  the  hedgerows  as  for  the  eagle  to  cleave  the  sky 
in  the  wildest  storm.  If  God  has  given  us  small  capabilities,  He  has  likewise  given 
us  the  position  adapted  to  them,  and  in  that  position  we  may  find  the  sweetest 
pleasure  and  the  greatest  usefulness  of  which  we  are  capable.  (Ibid.)  Talentt 
for  service  not  ornament : — Man  is  not  placed  upon  the  earth  merely  to  be  a  passive 
recii)ient  of  the  favours  of  heaven.  He  is  here  in  the  capacity  of  a  servant ;  and 
what  is  a  servant  for  if  not  to  serve  ?  Some  of  us  imagine  sometimes,  I  fear,  that 
we  are  here  to  occupy  a  kind  of  ornamental  position  in  the  church.  I  remember  to 
have  read  of  Oliver  Cromwell  that,  on  one  occasion  he  was  visiting  one  of  the  great 
churches  of  our  land,  and  discovered  in  the  niches  of  one  of  its  side  chapels  a  num- 
ber of  silver  statues.  "  What  are  these  ?  "  demanded  he  sternly  of  the  trembling 
dean  who  was  showing  him  round  the  church,  "  Please  your  highness,"  was  the 
reply,  "  they  are  the  twelve  apostles."  '•  The  twelve  apostles  are  they  ?  Well  take 
them  away  at  once,  and  melt  them  down  and  coin  them  into  money  that,  like  their 
Master,  they  may  go  about  doing  good."  Such  is  the  mission  that  God  has  given 
to  each  one  of  us.  The  world  we  live  in  is  not  a  great  play-ground,  but  a  vast  har- 
vest field,  where  every  man,  each  in  his  own  particular  sphere,  must  thrust  in  the 
sickle  and  reap.  None  of  us  can  say,  like  those  of  whom  our  Saviour  speaks, 
standing  in  the  market-place,  "No  man  bath  hired  me."    (R.  Morton.) 

Ver.  81.  Wlien  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  In  His  glory. — The  righteous  at  the 
judgment.  I.  The  kingly  chabacteb  of  the  Lobs  Jesds.  II.  The  character  o» 
THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.  1.  Blesscd  of  God.  2.  Bepresented  as  being  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  III.  That  to  which  the  people  of  God  are  introduced.  1.  A  kingdom. 
2.  A  prepared  kingdom.  (B.  W.  Bucke,  31. A.)  The  peculiar  character  of  the 
general  judgvient : — I.  Who  are  to  be  judged? — "  All  nations."  II.  The  Judob 
OF  man.  1.  The  Judge  will  be  righteous  in  His  decisions.  2.  The  Judge  Himself 
having  been  the  witness  of  all  the  moral  actions  of  men  will  require  no  evidence. 
8.  Then  why  do  we  live  so  thoughtlessly  T  III,  The  issue  of  the  judgment.  Final 
separation  of  the  wicked  and  the  righteous.  (R.  Jones,  B.A.)  The  last  judg- 
ment:— I.  The  personal  glory  and  majesty  of  the  Judge.  1.  He  will  appear  in  that 
nature  which  He  assumed  as  the  Saviour  of  men.  2.  The  attributes  of  a  suffering 
and  degraded  humanity  will  not  be  requisite  to  identify  the  Judge.  3.  Heaven's 
innumerable  inhabitants  will  accompany  the  Son  of  Man.  4.  Then  shall  He  set 
up  the  throne  of  His  glory.  II.  The  supreme  peerogatives  of  the  Son  of  Man  as 
DISPLAYED  IN  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  woBLD.  1.  The  Veil  has  bccu  icmoved  which 
conceals  His  dignity.  2.  His  unsearchable  wisdom  and  power  is  further  exhibited 
in  the  separating  process.  IH.  The  principle  on  which  the  awards  of  thb 
JXTDGMENT  WILL  BE  DISTRIBUTED.  1.  The  Judgfi  speaks  from  His  throne  as  King  in 
Zion.  2.  He  proceeds  to  assign  reasons  for  the  Father's  having  thus  received 
them.  8.  The  language  of  surprise  on  the  lips  of  the  righteous.  IV.  The  finaxi 
STATE  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS.  1.  Exprcss  our  solcmu  Satisfaction  in  the  assurance  that 
Christ  will  sit  as  Judge  of  the  race.  2.  Let  us  daily  demonstrate  our  love  to  Christ 
by  abounding  in  works  of  mercy,  3.  If  through  self-Laterest  any  Christian  be 
undone,  he  will  be  found  without  apology.  {J.Dixon.)  The  judgvient : — L  Thk 
VAST  ASSEMBLAGE.  1.  All  the  holy  angels.  2.  All  nations,  8.  All  classes.  4.  All 
ages.  5.  All  characters.  6.  We  shall  be  there.  7.  All  must  obey  the  summons. 
Each  must  answer  to  his  name.  II.  The  final  separation.  1.  Here,  this  separa- 
tion is  impossible.  The  tares  grow  with  the  wheat.  2.  Here,  while  many  unions 
are  injurious,  many  separations  are  painful.  There,  all  will  feel  that  the  separation 
is  right.  3.  It  will  be  based  on  character.  Here  wealth,  «fec.  sunders  men.  There, 
all  will  belong  to  one  of  two  classes — sheep  or  goats.  4.  Viewed  from  our  present 
standpoint,  many  of  those  separations  will  be  painful.  III.  The  solemn  sen- 
tence. 1.  Even  to  the  good.  2.  Still  more  to  the  wicked.  There  will  be  no 
i^versalof  the  sentence.  3.  Execution  will  promptly  follow  the  sentence.  (J.  C. 
Oray.)  The  great  day  of  the  Lord: — Contrast  the  first  and  last  coming  of 
Christ.  I.  Its  great  revelations.  II.  Its  great  account.  III.  Its  great  separation. 
IV.  Its  great  decision.      (D.    Gerok,  D.D.)  The    final    separation: — I.  Its 

AuttHOB,  1.  His  ability.  2.  His  prerogative.  II.  Its  nature.  1.  Its  exactness. 
2.  Its  completeness,  3.  Its  consequences  in  respect  to  place  and  employment  and 
interest.  4.  Its  duration.  IH.  Its  peinciplb.  1.  On  the  ground  of  character. 
2.  The  teit  of  character  being  the  state  of  mind  and  heart  toward  the  Bedeemerc 


CHAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  593 

3.  The  evidence  of  a  right  state  of  mind  and  heart  toward  the  Redeemer  being  the 
treatment  of  His  people.  "  If  we  would  judge  ourselves  we  should  not  be  judged." 
(G.  Brooks.)  The  final  separation: — I.  The  impoetant  pebiod  referred  to— 
"  When  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come."  1.  What  this  statement  implies.  It  is  the 
certainty  of  the  Saviour's  second  coming  ;  no  intimation  given  of  the  precise  time. 

2.  What  this  statement  announces — It  tells  us  how  He  will  come.  (1)  The  manner 
of  His  appearing — ♦*  in  His  glory."  (2)  His  numerous  retinue — "  and  all  the  holy 
angels."  (3)  The  dignified  position  He  will  assume — "Then  shall  He  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  His  glory."  II.  The  solemn  transactions  described.  1.  The  persons 
who  will  appear  before  Him — "  all  nations."  2.  The  division  that  will  take  place 
— "  and  He  shall  separate  them."  III.  The  separate  awards  pronounced.  1.  The 
righteous.  (1)  The  ineffable  welcome  they  receive.  (2)  The  special  reasou6 
adduced.  (3)  The  questions  which  the  favoured  throng  propose.  (4)  The  explanation 
which  is  given  in  reply.  2.  The  wicked.  (1)  Their  awful  doom.  (2)  The  grounds 
on  which  it  rests.  IV.  The  final  issue  declared — "And  these  shall  go  away," 
Ac.  (Expository  Outlines.)  The  great  separation  : — I.  Let  us  contemplate  it 
AS  A  revealed  fact.  II.  The  nature  of  this  separation.  1.  It  will  be  made  by 
the  Judge  Himself.     2.  It  will  be  made  wholly  on  the  ground  of  moral  character. 

3.  It  will  take  place  at  the  judgment  day.  4.  It  will  be  a  separation  in  place  and 
residence.  5.  It  will  be  a  separation  in  interest  and  employment.  6.  It  will  be 
eternal.  III.  On  what  ground  it  will  be  made.  1.  Upon  our  moral  character 
formed  in  this  state  of  probation.  8.  This  has  an  important  bearing  upon  our 
earthly  friendships.  3.  What  must  be  done  in  order  to  avoid  being  separated  with 
the  wicked.  {G.  Coad.)  The  great  separation:— I.  The  coming.  II.  The 
sitting.  III.  The  gathering.  IV.  The  separating.  V.  The  convicting.  VI.  The 
sentencing.  VH.  The  executing.  (Dr.  Bonar.'j  Christ  come  in  His  glory  : — The 
Judge  of  this  world  is  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  mqnire — I.  How  Christ  cometh  to  be 
the  world's  Judge;  and  with  what  conveniency  and  agreeableness  to  reason  this 
honour  is  put  upon  Him.  To  a  judge  there  belongeth  these  four  things — (1)  Wis- 
dom ;  (2)  justice ;  (3)  power ;  (4)  authority.  II.  Why  is  Christ  the  Judge  of  the 
■world  rather  than  the  Father,  and  the  Spirit,  who  made  us  and  gave  the  law_  to 
as  ?  These  have  one  common  nature,  and  the  operations  that  are  with  the  Divine 
essence,  are  common  to  them  all.  There  is  also  an  order  and  economy,  according 
to  which  all  their  operations  are  produced,  and  brought  forth  to  the  creature  . 
according  to  which  order  their  power  of  judging  fell  partly  to  the  Father, 
and  partly  to  the  Son.  {T.  Manton.)  Christ's  appearance: — Doctrine.  That 
Christ's  appearance  for  the  judgment  of  the  world  shall  be  glorious  and  full  of 
majesty.  I.  His  personal  glory.  1.  The  dignity  of  His  person.  2.  The  quality 
of  Hia  office.  3.  The  greatness  of  His  work.  4.  The  foregoing  appearances  of 
Chrif  t.  Why  will  He  come  in  this  great  glory  ?  (1)  To  take  off  the  scandal  and 
ignominy  of  the  cross.  (2)  To  beget  a  greater  reverence  and  fear  in  the  hearts  of 
qU  those  that  shall  be  judged  by  Him.  (3)  For  the  comfort  of  His  people ;  for 
Christ  is  a  pattern  and  pledge  of  what  shall  be  done  in  them.  II.  His  botal 
attendance — "  Holy  angels  with  Him."  1.  Partly  for  a  train.  2.  Partly  that,  by 
their  ministry,  the  work  of  the  day  may  be  more  speedily  dispatched.  {Ibid.) 
Christ  the  Shepherd  :—A  shepherd  among  men  is  not  lord  of  the  flock,  but  a  servant 
to  take  charge  of  them.  I.  Christ  is  a  good  Shepherd.  1.  Knowii  by  His  care 
and  vigilancy.  2.  Shown  by  His  pity  and  wisdom,  to  deal  tenderly  with  the  flock, 
ad  their  state  doth  require.  3.  Seen  in  His  constantly  performing  all  parts  ol  a 
shepherd  to  them.  4.  Proved  in  His  giving  His  life  for  them.  II.  Christ  is  a 
GREAT  Shepherd.  1.  Great  in  His  person ;  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Great  in  regard 
to  the  excellency  of  His  gifts  and  qualifications.  3.  Great  in  regard  of  His  flock  ; 
He  is  the  Shepherd  of  souls,  millions  of  them  are  committed  to  His  charge,  and 
one  soul  is  more  worth  than  all  the  world.  {Ibid.)  The  godly  are  as  sheep:— 
1.  Sheep  are  such  kind  of  creatures  as  naturally  gather  themselves  together,  and 
unite  themselves  in  a  flock.  2.  They  are  innocent  and  harmless  creatures. 
8.  They  are  obedient  to  the  shepherd.  4.  They  are  poor,  dependent  creatures — 
(a)  because  of  their  erring  (wandering)  property ;  (6)  because  of  their  weakness. 
(Ibid.)  The  wicked  are  as  goats: — They  are  as  goats  both  for  their  unrulinesa 
and  uncleanness.  Unruliness  ;  they  have  not  the  meekness  of  sheep  ;  are  ready  to 
break  through  all  fence  and  restraint ;  so  a  wicked  man  is  yokelese.  They  are  also 
wanton  and  loathsome — 'tis  a  baser  sort  of  animal  than  the  sheep— therefora 
ehoMu  to  set  forth  a  wicked  and  ungodly  man.     (Ibid.) 


693  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxt. 

Vers.  34—14.  Then  sbaU  the  Kin^  say  unto  them  on  His  right  hand,  Com*, 
ye  blessed.  I.  Consider  the  reference  made  to  the  conduct  of  the  righteous.  II. 
Their  station — •*  the  right-hand."  III.  The  sentence.  IV.  The  order  o?  it.  The 
righteous  receive  their  sentence  first.  1.  The  King  will  bless  before  He  curses.  That 
their  slanderers  may  witness  the  honour  which  the  King  confers.  2.  Let  us  now 
kneel  to  Him  by  whom  it  shall  be  pronounced.  V.  The  language  of  the  seni,ince — 
1.  The  language  of  welcome.  2.  Of  benediction.  3.  Of  munificent  communica- 
tion— "  Inherit  the  kingdom,"  &o.  (1)  How  astonishing  the  grace  of  God  to  provide 
such  an  inheritance  for  sinful  creatures.  (2)  How  we  are  indebted  to  the  grace  of 
Christ  for  giving  us  a  precious  acquaintance  with  these  things.  (3)  How  should  we 
value  the  Scripture  which  makes  the  discovery.  (4)  Remember  that  there  is  another 
sentence  at  that  day.    (J.  A.  James.)       Christ  inviting  His  sainU  to  His  kinpdom : — 

1.  The  time  when  this  invitation  will  be  given.  1.  After  our  Lord  has 
assembled  round  Him  the  whole  world.  2.  He  will  give  us  this  invitation  before 
He  condemns  the  ungodly.  II.  The  character  in  which  Christ  will  give  this 
INVITATION — "  Then  shall  the  King,"  &o.  III.  The  persons  to  whom  this  invi- 
tation will  be  given.     1.  Those  who  have  abounded  in  good  and  charitable  works. 

2.  They  tiiink  nothing  of  their  good  works.  8.  They  are  those  whom  the  Father 
has  blessed.  IV.  The  kingdom  to  which  Christ  calls  His  redeemed.  1.  It  ia 
really  a  kingdom.  2.  A  prepared  kingdom.  3.  A  kingdom  prepared  long  ago.  4. 
It  is  one  which  we  are  to  inherit  ;  our  possession  of  heaven  will  be  full  and 
free.  5.  We  are  to  inherit  this  kingdom  with  Christ  our  Lord.  (C  Bradley.) 
Heaven : — I.  The  perfected  natcre  and  being  of  the  righteods.  A  new  body 
to  which  they  will  be  united.     Its  identity  with  the  former.    II.  The  btatb  and 

condition  in  which  it  will  be  enjoyed,  and  to  which  TirET  WIIiL  BE  SUM- 
MONED. It  must  be  a  place,  and  not  merely  a  state.  Epithets  by  which  this 
heavenly  country  is  designated.  III.  The  inhabitants  of  this  fdtdbb  abode.- 
The  great  object  of  their  contemplation  and  source  of  their  happiness,  infinitely 
surpassing  all  the  rest,  will  be  the  Deity  Himself.  Their  worship  will  be  of  the 
highest  order.  They  will  have  the  most  extensive  intercourse,  and  be  in  the  most 
intimate  fellowship.  There  will  be  different  orders  and  societies  among  them. 
The  happiness  of  all  will  be  continually  progressive,  according  to  the  degree  in 
which  it  is  possessed  by  each.  {J.  Leifchild,  D.D.)  A  call  to  glory : — 
The  call  is  not  arbitrary.  It  signifies — (1)  Sympathy ;  (2)  Service ;  (3)  Sovereignty. 
{J,  Vanghan,  ^l.A.)  The  unavailing  declinatures  of  praise  and  blame  : — The  true 
principle  of  Christian  benevolence  rests  on  the  identifications  of  Christ  with  His 
people  ;  and  in  the  transactions  of  the  great  judgment  this  principle  is  brought  out 
and  wielded  by  the  Judge,  to  the  surprise  alike  of  the  righteous  and  tlie  wicked. 
The  righteous,  to  their  astonishment,  hear  themselves  commended  for  loving  ser- 
vices to  the  King,  which  they  are  quite  unconscious  of  ever  having  rendered.  The 
wicked,  on  the  other  hand,  to  their  amazement  and  dismay,  hear  themselves  con- 
demned for  having  refused  to  the  King  services  which  they  are  quite  unconscious 
ol  ever  having  had  opportunities  to  render  or  refuse.  I.  The  identification  of 
Christ  with  His  members.  1.  Christ  for  me.  2.  Cbrist  with  me.  3.  Christ  in 
me.  II.  Its  surprising  influence  on  the  judgmrnt.  1.  The  plea  of  the  un- 
righteotio  in  exculpation  seems  to  involve — (1)  A  professed  ignorance  of  Christ  and 
His  people;  (2)  a  complaint  that  if  they  had  the  opportunity  it  was  not  made 
plain  and  palpable ;  (3)  a  profession  that  had  they  seen  their  opportunity  they 
would  have  embraced  it.  2.  The  righteous  modest  declinature  of  praise.  It  is  to 
be  explained  on  the  ercnnda,  on  their  part,  of  a  certain  want  of — (1)  Recollection; 
(2)  Recognition  ;    (3)  Realization.      (H.  Martin,  M.A.)  The  testi  of  the  Jiiial 

judgrnent : — I.  The  terms  of  judgment.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  Not  the  mere  rightnesa 
ol  a  creed.  (2)  Not  any  inwrought  impression  upon  the  man's  own  mind,  if  unat- 
tended by  the  outward  marks  of  a  converted  heart.  (3)  That  which  is  furnished  in 
the  life.  II.  The  justice  which  is  manifested  in  the  appointment  of  these 
TERMS.  Love  to  Christ  is  the  principle,  without  which  there  can  be  no  present 
enjoyment  and  no  hope  of  future  glory.  Thus  we  hold  it  to  bo  a  test  of  final 
judgment,  an  evidence  of  love  to  the  Saviour,  to  have  honoured  the  people  of 
Christ,  especially  those  without  rank  or  standing  in  society.  All  the  riches  of 
providential  gift  are  intended  to  be  the  materials  whereon  stated  Christian  prin- 
ciple shall  work.  But  mark  the  considerati  n  of  the  Saviour :  He  has  so  brought 
down  this  exhibition  of  charity  that  it  is  within  the  reach  of  all,  a  cup  of  cold 
water.  {S.  Robins,  M.A.)  I.  Consider  the  union  which  subsists  between  the 
Bedeemer  and  His  people,  and  the  happy  pri  ilege  it  implies — "  these  My  brethren." 


CHAP.  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  593 

n.  The  indispensable  duties  which  the  brethren  of  Christ  owe  to  each  other. 
{W.  Clarke.)  I.  Gdard  against  mistake.  Men  think  that  if  only  they  are 
generous  they  will  be  saved.  That  we  cannot  be  justified  by  the  merit  of  alms- 
giving. II.  The  lessons  heke  tauoht.  1.  That  though  men  are  not  justified  by 
our  works  they  shall  be  judged  by  them.  That  the  Judge  will  pay  especial  attention 
to  works  of  charity.       (A.  McCatil,  D.D.)  The  objects,  source,  and  dignity  of 

Christian  liherality  : — I.  The  objects  of  Christian  bounty.  The  least  of  the  brethren 
of  Christ.  1.  Least  in  consideration.  2.  In  civil  station.  3.  In  age.  The 
brethren  of  Christ  demand  our  first  care.  II.  Its  nature.  1.  It  is  essentially 
humble.  2.  It  is  tender  in  its  exercise.  3.  It  is  appropriate.  III.  Its  souHce. 
1.  Its  source  is  the  love  of  Christ.  2.  The  magnitude  of  His  love ;  its  activity.  IV 
Its  diqnitt.  Christ  considers  Himself  your  debtor.  {T.  Robinson,  M.A.)  The 
disabilities  of  selfishnens : — 1.  Selfishness  is  incompatible  with  the  fundamental 
principles  and  purposes  of  human  society.  2.  Selfishness  is  inimical  to  the  proper 
development  and  perfection  of  thy  own  individual  life.  3.  Selfishness  is  a  diiect 
contradiction  of  the  entire  mission  and  character  of  Christ.  4.  What  emphasis  He 
gives  to  the  least  of  My  brethren,  as  if  He  would  sternly  exclude  mixture  of  motive. 
6.  The  unconsciousness  of  the  selfish  man  is  striking.  (1)  It  blinds  the  soul.  (2) 
It  makes  sympathy  unintelligible.  (3)  What  grand  opportunities  for  the  service  of 
love  and  rewaid  it  loses.  We  are  all  familiar  with  the  excuses  of  selfishness.  (H.  Allan.) 
The  Divine  law  of  compassion : — Without  this  principle  of  love  men  have  not  the 
temper  of  Christ.  His  kingdom  is  meaningless  to  them.  Pure  philanthropy  owes 
its  noblest  spirit  to  Christ.  From  what  other  source  could  it  have  sprung  T  1,  Is  it 
a  legacy  to  us  fiom  the  ancient  world  ?  The  temper  of  humanity  could  not  have 
been  wholly  lacking  in  ancient  times.  2.  It  is  impossible  that  Judaism,  so  happily 
conspicuous  in  ancient  times  for  the  tender  springs  of  mercy  which  God's  ham! 
cleft  for  it  out  of  the  rock  of  Sinaitic  Law,  should  have  slowly  leavened  Gentile 
society  with  the  spirit  of  compassion.  3.  If  we  turn  to  the  voluminous  instructious 
of  the  great  ethical  systems,  we  are  no  nearer  an  answer  to  our  question.  We  are 
compelled  to  trace  to  Christ  the  development  o(  that  spirit  of  humanity,  of  which 
compassion  is  one  of  the  vital  elements.  The  foundations  of  the  Christian  doctrine 
of  compassion.  I.  Much  stress  must  be  laid  on  the  impression  produced  by  Christ's 
earthly  hfe.  II.  A  second  fruitful  element  was  Christ's  revelation  of  the  nature  of 
sin.  It  was  not  based  on  a  misconception  of  the  character  of  those  on  whom  it 
was  poured.  III.  This  power  was  given  to  us  by  Christ,  for  He  has  cleansed  and 
sanctified  human  nature.  VI.  Christ's  revelation  of  the  dignity  of  man.  V. 
Christ's  revelation  of  immortality.  Let  nothing  tempt  ns  to  forget  the  spiritual 
and  supernatural  ground  on  which  all  adequate  sympathy  with  our  fellow  men  Jiust 
stand.  The  most  effectual  benevolence  rests  on  the  mystery  of  Christian  faith. 
(T.  R.  Evans.)  There  is  more  in  our  deeds  than  we  are  aware  of : — Dear  people, 
the  law  and  conditions  under  which  human  life  grows  and  works  are  the  same 
whether  we  make  for  good  or  whether  we  make  for  evil.  We  cannot  complain  of 
them  in  the  one  case  without  protesting  against  them  in  the  other.  If  we  deem  the 
«onditions  under  which  our  life  may  go  down  hill  to  the  pit  to  be  hard  and  cruel, 
we  must  take  into  account  that  we  are  incriminating  also  the  conditions  under  which 
our  life  can  now  climb  upwards  towards  the  blessed  hills  of  heaven.  Both  stand  and 
fall  together.  If,  in  this  case  of  sin,  we  find  ourselves  to  be  handling  and  discharging 
powers  that  lie  behind  and  within  ns,  unsuspected,  incalculable  in  range,  yet,  sub- 
ject to  our  will,  set  loose  and  in  action  ;  so,  in  the  case  of  goodness,  there  lie  with- 
in us  and  behind  us  stores  of  energy  immeasurable,  beyond  belief,  such  as  eye  hath 
not  seen  nor  heart  conceived — energies  which  wait  on  our  little  volitions  to  liberate 
and  discharge  themselves  also.  In  both  cases  we  find  ourselves  to  be  creatures  that 
move  under  the  influence  and  pressure  of  higher  and  deeper  agencies  than  our- 
selves. Neither  our  evil  nor  our  good  dates  from  our  own  petty  life,  or  has  its 
origin  in  our  tiny  scope  of  wilL  Both  were  bom  long  ago ;  both  are  ancient  and 
immense  ;  both  occupy  this  dim  and  unknown  background  on  the  surface  of  which 
our  Uttle  day  plays  itself  out.  "Kingdoms"  they  are  named  of  our  Lord,  king- 
doms— a  kingdom,  on  the  one  hand,  of  this  world,  of  Satan,  worked  and  pushed 
and  animated  and  fed,  built  and  bonded  together,  by  principalities  and  powers,  by 
workers  of  wickedness  in  high  places ;  a  kingdom  charged  with  mysterious  forces 
and  fall  of  dark  and  dreadful  hosts ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  a  kingdom  of  God,  of 
heaven,  of  Christ,  of  righteousness,  set  over  against  the  other,  with  its  own  patient 
and  unwearied  armies,  who  watch  and  war  there  with  swords  of  victory  and  helms 
af  flame  and  wide  unslumbering  eyes  ;  a  kingdom  behind  us,  weighted  with  acoa- 

as 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XTf. 

Tnulated  glories,  and  thick  with  bonded  ministries,  and  rich  with  memorial  honours; 
a  kingdom  of  Christ,  filled  with  His  breath,  and  fed  with  His  body,  and  aUve  with 
His  promise,  and  aglow  with  His  hopes,  and  built  with  His  headship,  and  expanded 
by  His  pleadings,  and  miglity  in  His  intercessions.  These  are  the  two  kingdoms, 
on  the  mere  skirts  of  which  we  walk,  and  move  and  live.  {Canon  Scott-Holland.) 
Self-forgetfulne$a : — In  the  text  the  thought  is  not  that  the  just  failed  to  discern  the 
Master  in  the  men  they  helped,  but  that  Christ  is  to  be  the  motive  of  all  action. 
Let  us  consider  for  a  fow  moments  this  ideal  of  a  Christian  worker.  I.  The  beauty 
OP  SKLP-FORGETFDLNEss.  In  nature  we  see  this  lack  of  self-consciousness.  There 
is  no  deeper  tint  to  the  bloom  of  the  flower  because  there  is  an  admiring  crowd. 
The  stars  look  down  as  beautifully  in  the  silent  desert,  etc.  The  sea  breaks  and 
scatters  its  treasures  on  a  dead  shore,  etc.  There  is  an  utter  self-obliviousness. 
How  this  self-forgetfulness  adds  to  the  charms  of  a  child.  A  saint  loses  his  sanctity 
when  we  see  that  he  thinks  himself  saiutly.  II.  Self-foroetfdlness  contributes 
TO  power,  a  traveller  says,  while  climbing  an  ice-bridge  in  the  Alps,  he  had  to 
cut  in  the  ice  rests  for  his  feet.  There  was  no  trouble  in  doing  this  so  long  as  his 
mind  was  centred  on  his  work,  and  he  forgot  self  and  danger.  When  he  thought 
of  self  he  trembled,  and  to  tremble  there  was  death.  The  man  wIjo  loses  all  thought 
of  self  in  a  grand  work,  enlarges  his  nature  until  he  seems  to  circle^  beyond  the 
stars.  III.  Self-fokoetfdlness  contributes  to  happiness.  There  is  joy  in  an 
unselfish  ministry.  Look  at  the  steps  by  which  we  attain  to  this.  1.  The  first 
feeling  in  looking  to  Christ  is  that  of  shame,  because  of  our  sinfulness  and  in- 
sincerity. 2.  The  next  thought :  "  How  can  I  attain  to  the  exalted  life  of  Christ  ?  " 
3.  Then  our  thoughts  of  self  are  lost  in  admiration  of  the  excellences  of  Jesua. 
Christ  becomes  enthroned  within  us,  and  He  is  a  force  that  manifests  Himself  con- 
stantly. The  Christian  shines  unconsciously — as  the  jewel  sparkles,  as  the  bird 
sings.  Love  thinks  nothing  of  the  sacrifice  it  makes.  Told  of  what  it  has  done,  it 
blushes  at  what  it  deems  unmerited  praise.  Self-forgetfulness  is  the  first  sign  that 
we  are  doing  work  for  the  God  above  us.  {C.  D.  Bridgeman,  D.D.)  Christian 
sympathy  : — I.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  are  oftentimes  found  in  circum- 
stances which  pathetically  cl.'^im  the  sympathy  of  their  fellow  creatures.  1. 
tor  the  sake  of  correction.  2.  For  the  sake  of  preservation.  From  what  dangers 
are  we  snatched  by  that  poverty  at  which  we  murmur.  3.  For  the  sake  of  example 
to  others,  and  that  God  may  be  glorified  in  them.  4.  That  we  may  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  exhibiting  our  love  to  the  Redeemer  by  extending  the  necessary  relief  to 
them.     II.  Jesus  so  identifies  Himself  with  His  disciples,  as  to  beoard  every 

EXPRESSION  OF  SYMPATHY  WITH  THEM  AS  AN  ACT  OF  KINDNESS  TO  HiMSELF.       III.    EvOry 

act  of  kindness  to  a  suffering  disciple,  flowing  from  the  simple  motive  of  love  to  the 
Master,  He  will  most  assuredly  acknowledqe  and  recompense.  Here  is  conso- 
lation for  the  poor ;  Jesus  Christ  is  the  companion  of  their  distress.  (/.  Gnskin, 
M.A.)  The  principle  by  which  men  shall  be  judged : — I.  Christ's  identifying  Him- 
self WITH  MEN — "Ye  have  done  it  unto  Me."  1.  Who  are  Christ's  brethren  to  whom 
these  acts  are  done,  and  which  are  counted  as  having  been  done  to  Him?  They  are 
humble  afiBicted  Christians  ;  but  the  word  brother  must  have  a  wider  meaning  ;  cold- 
heartedness  will  not  be  excused  because  those  who  we  bo  treated  were  not  of 
Christ's  family.  The  spirit  of  pity  is  not  confined  by  the  knowledge  we  have 
that  this  man  or  that  is  one  of  Christ's  brethren.  Christ  acknowledges  as  Hia 
brethren  men  whom  nobody  ever  acknowledged  before.  We  shall  not  recognize  the 
"  brethren  "  unless  we  have  the  brotherly  spirit  witliin  us ;  that  will  open  our  eyes 
and  work  marvels  within  us.  II.  That  our  Lord  is  giving  an  outline  of  thb 
principles  of  judgment  by  which  men  shall  be  tried  who  do  not  know  and  have 
not  known  or  seen  Him.  Its  connection  between  Him  and  His  brethren  is  not 
arbitrary,  it  is  founded  in  nature  and  fact.  In  all  ages,  and  in  all  nations,  there 
are  circumstances  sufficient  to  test  and  prove  the  character  of  man.  Jesus  here 
tears  asunder  every  false  covering  under  which  men  claim  to  be  accounted  religious, 
when  they  omit  the  common  calls  on  mercy  and  kindness.  Great  duties  are  not  open 
to  all;  go  were  you  will,  opportunity  for  pity  can  be  found,  (A.  Watson,  D.D.) 
The  final  teat : — I.  The  person  by  whom  the  last  trial  is  to  be  conducted.  It 
is  the  King:  who  is  also  spoken  of  as  the  "  Son  of  Man."  The  combined  justic* 
and  mercy  in  His  appointment,  who  is  to  decide  our  portion  for  eternity.  The 
equity  of  the  trial  depends  mainly  on  the  character  and  capacity  of  the  being  who 
presides.  An  angel  would  not  guarantee  a  just  verdict ;  the  Omniscient  will.  Oh 
for  a  judge  who  can  have  a  fellow  feeling  with  us.  It  is  a  beautiful  arrangement 
of  the  gospel  that  the  offer  of  Judge  and  Redeemer  should  meet  in  the  same  Persoa 


Chap,  xxv.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  691 

II.  The  test.  Relieving  or  not  the  distressed.  The  power  of  being  charitable 
not  limited  to  the  richer  classes.  So  that  we  show  you  the  lower  ranks  of  society 
are  no  more  excluded  than  the  higher  from  the  alleged  blessedness  of  givers ;  and 
that  those  who  seem  to  you  to  have  nothing  to  bestow,  may  as  well  abide,  at  the 
last,  a  scrutiny  into  ministrations  to  the  necessitous,  as  others  who  have  large  in- 
comes at  their  disposal,  and  can  take  the  lead  in  all  the  bustle  of  philanthropy.  Ay, 
and  we  reckon  it  a  beautiful  truth,  that,  from  the  fields  and  workshops  of  a  country 
may  bo  sent  to  the  platform  of  judgment  the  most  active  and  self-denying  of  the 
benevolent ;  and  that  however  in  this  world  the  praise  of  liberality  is  awarded  only 
to  those  who  can  draw  out  their  purses  and  scatter  their  gold,  our  labourers  and 
artizans  may  be  counted  hereafter  amongst  the  largest  contributors  to  the  relief  of 
the  afflicted.  The  donations  which  they  have  wrung  from  overtasked  limbs,  or 
which  they  may  be  said  to  have  coined  out  of  their  own  flesh  and  blood,  may  weigh 
down  in  the  balances  of  the  judgment  the  more  showy  gifts  which  the  wealthy  dis- 
pense from  their  superfluities,  without  trenching,  it  may  be,  on  their  luxuries — 
yea,  and  thus  is  there  nothing  to  prove  to  us  that  there  may  not  be  poured  forth 
from  the  very  hovels  of  our  land,  numbers  who  shall  as  well  abide  the  searching 
inquiries  of  the  Judge,  as  the  most  munificent  of  those  who  have  dwelt  in  its 
palaces,  and  be  as  justly  included  within  the  summons,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My 
Father,"  though  none  are  to  be  thus  addressed  but  such  as  have  fed  the  hungry, 
and  clothed  the  naked,  and  succoured  the  sick.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  reasons 
for  Christ's  sentence : — (1)  Good  works  are  the  reasons  of  this  sentence.  (2)  The 
good  works  only  of  the  faithful  are  mentioned,  and  not  the  evil  they  have  com- 
mitted. (3)  Only  works  of  mercy,  or  the  fruits  of  love,  are  specified.  '  (4)  All  can- 
not express  their  love  and  self-denial  in  this  way.  (T.  Manton.)  Judgment 
upon  works: — 1.  At  the  general  judgment  all  men  shall  receive  their  doom,  or 
judgment  shall  be  pronounced  according  to  their  works.  2,  Christ  hath  so  ordered 
His  providence  about  His  members,  that  some  of  them  are  exposed  to  necessities 
and  wants,  others  in  a  capacity  to  relieve  them.  3.  Works  of  charity,  done  out  of 
faith,  and  love  to  Christ,  are  of  greater  weight  and  consequence  than  the  world 
usually  taketh  them  to  be.  (Ibid)  The  surprise  of  the  righteous: — These  blessed 
of  the  Father,  brethren  of  the  Son,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom,  stand  amazed  that 
the  Son  of  Man  should  so  overwhelm  their  trifling  services  with  a  glorious  reward. 
Nay,  they  can  hardly  recollect  any  service  at  all.  The  ministries  were  so  trifling, 
and  were  bestowed  on  objects  so  inconsiderable,  often  with  such  mixture  of  bad 
motives,  and  such  deficiency  of  good,  that  it  amazes  them  to  find  every  transient 
item  legible  in  the  book  of  the  Judge,  now  seated  upon  the  throne  of  His  glory. 
Mark  how  He  receives  them,  how  He  gathers  up  the  bruised,  withered,  scattered 
flowers  which  seemed  dying  in  our  hands,  and  makes  of  them  a  garland ;  binds 
them  on  His  brow  as  a  diadem ;  points  to  them  before  His  angels  as  an  honour. 
(J.  W.  Alexander.)  Christian  benevolence  : — I.  Whv  is  the  exercise  of  Chris- 
tian BENEVOLENCE  80  IMPORTANT  ?  1.  Christian  benevolence  is  the  image  of  God — 
the  nearest  approach  we  can  make  to  His  likeness.  2.  Peculiarly  an  imitation  of 
Christ.  3.  The  distinguishing  bond  of  Christian  profession.  4.  Is  the  fulfilling  of 
the  law,  and  contains  every  kind  of  virtue  that  has  our  fellow-creatures  for  its 
«bject.  6.  Is  the  spirit  of  heaven.  II.  Observations  on  the  mode  of  doing  good. 
1.  Secure  the  principle  of  charity  by  some  system.  2.  Visit  the  sick  and  tho  poor, 
Ac.  (Anon.)  True  benevolence  of  Christianity  : — "  Pagan  philosophy/'  says 
Bobert  Hall,  "  soared  in  sublime  speculation,  wasted  its  strengtli  in  endless  subtle- 
ties and  debates ;  but  among  the  rewards  to  which  it  aspired,  it  never  thought  of 
*  the  blessedness  of  him  that  considereth  the  poor. '  You  might  have  traversed  the 
Roman  empire,  in  the  zenith  of  its  power,  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Atlantic,  with- 
out meeting  with  a  single  charitable  as.ylum  for  the  sick.  Monuments  of  pride,  of 
ambition,  of  vindictive  wrath,  were  to  be  found  in  abundance  ;  but  not  one  legible 
record  of  commiseration  for  the  poor."  The  primitive  Christians,  it  is  evident, 
taught  this  lesson  of  philanthropy  to  the  world.  Hospitals  were  referred  to  as  in 
existence  at  the  Council  of  Nice,  a.d.  325.  Sins  of  omission : — The  wicked  are 
described  by  sins  of  omission.  I.  Explain  sins  of  omission.  II.  Some  sins  of 
omission  are  greater  than  others.  III.  In  many  cases,  sins  of  omission  may  be 
more  heinous  and  damning  than  sins  of  commission  ;  partly  because  these  harden 
more,  and  partly  because  omissions  make  way  for  commissions.  {T.  Manton.) 
Done  to  my  friends  is  done  to  me : — Cicero  writes  thus  to  Plautius,  "  I  would  have 
yon  think  that  whatever  friendly  service,  or  good  advice,  you  shall  bestow  upon  my 
friend  Famius,  I  shall  take  it  as  kindly  aa  if  it  had  been  done  to  myaelf."       Kind- 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rxt; 

nest  to  Christ's  servants  : — After  telling  us  of  the  arrival  of  himself  and  his  com- 
panions at  a  heathen  village  on  the  banks  of  the  Orange  River,  Dr.  Moffat  says: 
*'  We  had  travelled  far,  and  were  hungry  and  thirsty  and  fatigued.  We  asked 
water,  but  they  would  not  supply  it.  I  offered  three  or  four  buttons  that  still 
remained  on  my  jacket  for  a  little  milk.  This  also  was  refused.  We  had  the  pros- 
pect  of  another  hungry  and  thirsty  night.  When  twilight  drew  nigh,  a  wom&n 
approached  from  the  height  beyond  which  the  village  lay.  She  bore  on  her  head 
ft  bundle  of  wood,  and  had  a  vessel  of  milk  in  her  hand.  She  laid  them  down,  and 
returned  to  the  village.  A  second  time  she  approached  with  other  and  larger  sup- 
plies. We  asked  her  again  and  again  who  she  was.  She  remained  silent,  till 
affectionately  entreated  to  give  us  a  reason  for  such  unlooked-for  kindness  to 
strangers.  The  solitary  tear  stole  down  her  sable  cheek  when  she  replied,  *  I  love 
Him  whose  servants  ye  are,  and  surely  it  is  my  duty  to  give  you  a  cup  of  cold  water 
in  His  name.  My  heart  is  full,  therefore  I  cannot  speak  the  joy  I  feel  to  see  you 
in  this  out-of-the-world  place  1 '  I  asked  her  how  she  kept  the  life  of  God  in  her 
soul,  in  the  absence  of  all  communion  with  saints.  She  drew  from  her  bosom  a 
copy  of  the  Dutch  New  Testament  she  had  received  in  a  school  some  years  before. 
•This,'  she  said,  *  is  the  fountain  whence  I  drink;  this  the  oil  which  makes  my 
lamp  bum.' "  Christ's  representatives : — A  rich  young  man  of  Eome  had  been 
suffering  from  a  severe  illness,  but  at  length  he  was  cured,  and  received  his  health. 
Then  he  went  for  the  first  time  into  the  garden,  and  felt  aa  if  he  were  newly  born. 
Full  of  joy,  he  praised  God  aloud.  He  turned  his  face  up  to  the  heavens  and  said 
"  0  Thou  Almighty  Giver  of  all  blessings,  if  a  human  being  could  in  any  way  re 
pay  Thee,  how  willingly  would  I  give  up  all  my  wealth  I  "  Hermas,  the  shepherd, 
listened  to  these  words,  and  he  said  to  the  rich  young  man,  "  All  good  gifts  com« 
from  above ;  thou  canst  not  send  anything  thither.  Come,  follow  me."  The  youth 
followed  the  pious  old  man,  and  they  came  to  a  dark  hovel,  where  there  was  nothing 
but  misery  and  lamentation ;  for  the  father  lay  sick,  and  the  mother  wept,  whilst  the 
children  stood  round  naked  and  crying  for  bread.  Then  the  young  man  was  shocked 
at  this  scene  of  distress.  But  Hermas  said,  "Behold  here  an  altar  for  thy  sacrilice! 
Behold  here  the  brethren  and  representatives  of  the  Lord !  "  The  rich  young  man 
then  opened  his  hand,  and  gave  freely  and  richly  to  them  of  his  wealth,  and  tended  the 
sick  man.  And  the  poor  people,  relieved  and  comforted,  blessed  him,  and  called  him 
an  angel  of  God.  Hermas  smiled  and  said,  "  Ever  thus  turn  thy  grateful  looks  first 
towards  heaven,  and  then  to  earth."  {Translated  from  the  German  of  Krummachcr.) 
Practical  beneficence  the  true  Christian  life : — To  be  servant  of  humanity  is  to  be 
servant  of  Christ.  The  love  of  God  cannot  be  where  compassionate  love  of  man  ia 
wanting.  From  gospel  truths  such  as  these  start  here  is  made.  The  exclusive 
emphasis  laid  in  tlae  text  on  practical  beneficence  shows  that  it  alone  is  accepted  as 
evidence  of  devotion  to  Christ.  With  Christ  religion  is  simply  goodness;  personal 
devotion  to  Him  ia  the  very  heart  of  goodness.  I.  Christ's  relation  to  mbn 
FROM  WHICH  His  and  otjr  true  attitude  to  them  BPRiNos — "My  brethren." 
All  are  His  brethren.  The  least  are  included.  Their  poverty  and  destitution,  pain 
and  sorrow,  are  His  own.  Relief  of  their  wants  is  relief  to  Him,  &o.  Those  who  are 
Christ's  brethrea  should  be  ours.  We  should  be  so  lifted  up  into  the  spirit  of  His 
life,  that  His  attitude  towards  all  men  becomes  ours.  Our  best  love  of  Christ  ii 
evidenced  in  love  to  man.  II.  Service  of  the  least  is,  in  a  special  way, 
EVIDENCE  o»  NOBLE  LOVE.  His  greatest  love  was  shown  towards  the  v/orst  of  men, 
and  the  most  genuine  evidence  of  our  love  to  Christ  is  in  our  stooping  to  the  least. 
This  attitude  to  men  must  spring  from  a  deep  interpretive  sympathy — from  a  love 
which  helieveth  all  things — "  the  enthusiasm  of  humanity."  Service  of  God,  which 
separates  us  from  service  of  the  least  among  the  brethren  of  Christ,  is  monkish  and 
not  Christian.  We  need  faith  in  self-sacrificing  love  as  mighty  to  redeem.  God'g 
supreme  demand  is  that  we  live  to  bless  His  children.  The  Christian  principle  and 
life  have  their  place  in  all  the  concerns  of  our  daily  existence.  We  need  to  be  con- 
tinually reminding  ourselves  that  we  are  dealing  with  brothers.  III.  What  is  not 
DONE  to  Christ's  brethren  is  defective  of  service  rendered  to  Him.  Every 
opportunity  which  business  life  affords  of  reaching  out  to  other  souls  to  bless  them, 
and  which  is  neglected,  is  something  positively  not  done  to  Christ.  The  redeeming 
principle  must  rule  us  in  our  attitude  towards  all  the  great  social  questions  which 
arise  for  solution  to-day — questions  between  capital  and  labour,  landlord  and 
tenEmt,  seller  and  buyer.  What  is  needed  to-day  is  not  a  sentimental  adherence  t^ 
the  principle  of  beneficence,  Ac,  but  an  enthusiastic  devotion  to  Christ,  Buch  that 
we  shall  seek  with  all  our  might  His  ends,  and  even  be  willing  to  make  sacrifice  (a 


CHAP,  XXV.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  597 

the  death  for  their  attainment.  (R.  Veitch,  M.A.)  Necessity  of  good  works: — 
Be  warned  against  that  fatal  fanaticism  which  has  devastated  a  great  part  ol 
Christendom  in  these  latter  days,  which  takes  its  stand  upon  one  half  of  the  truth 
in  order  to  deny  the  other  half,  which  calls  justification  by  faith  only  "  the  gospel," 
just  as  if  judgment  according  to  works  were  not  equally  '*  the  gospel,"  just  as  if 
every  fundamental  truth  revealed  in  Scripture  were  not  equally  a  part  of  the 
"  everlasting  gospel."  There  was  a  certain  clergyman  (in  Ireland)  who  preached  aL' 
his  life  that  we  never  can  be  saved  by  good  works,  and  that  all  our  good  works  are 
as  filthy  rags,  and  so  on.  At  last  a  neighbour  remonstrated  with  him  after  thia 
manner :  "  Why  do  you  always  preach  against  good  works  ?  there  is  not  one  of 
them  in  your  parish  !  "  Doubtless  this  anecdote,  which  might  savour  of  the 
ridiculous  if  it  were  not  so  sad,  is  only  too  true  in  fact ;  there  are,  we  must  fear, 
not  a  few  places  where  justification  by  faith  is  preached  every  Sunday — where 
neither  priest  nor  people  ever  do  any  good  works  of  piety  and  charity — whence, 
therefore,  both  priest  and  people  will  certainly  go  into  everlasting  fire  unless  they 
lepent  and  amend.  God  forbid  I  should  say  that  justification  by  faith  only  is  not 
true,  is  not  part  of  the  gospel ;  but  I  do  say — and  observation  of  mankind  fully 
confirms  me  in  saying — that  tiie  teaching  of  justification  by  faith,  as  though  it  were 
the  whole  of  the  gospel,  is  simply  the  most  ruinous  error  that  could  be  committed. 
If  that  be  the  gospel  which  is  plainly  and  clearly  laid  down  in  the  New  Testament, 
then  salvation  by  faith  is  the  gospel,  salvation  by  works  is  the  gospel,  and  salvation 
by  sacramental  incorporation  in  Christ  is  the  gospel  too.  The  faithful  preacher  will 
preach  these  doctrines  all  round,  without  dwelling  on  any  one  or  two  to  the  practical 
exclusion  of  the  others  or  other ;  a  faithful  Christian  will  believe  them  aU 
round,  and  strive  to  live  by  them,  not  staggered  because  they  seem  to  be  incon- 
Bifitent,  because  in  human  systems  they  are  made  to  mutually  exclude  one 
another,  but  knowing  that  what  God  hath  joined  together  man  has  no  right  to  put 
Blunder,  whether  in  doctrine  or  in  practice.  I  do  not  ask  thee  for  one  moment  to 
forget  the  law  by  which  thou  must  be  justified  before  thy  God,  the  law  of  faith 
in  Him  who  freely  justifieth  the  unrighteous ;  but  I  do  ask  thee  to  remember,  O 
man,  the  rule  by  which  tbou  shalt  be  tried  before  thy  Saviour  and  thy  Judge. 
Those  that  treat  Him  well  He  will  reward,  those  that  treat  Him  ill  He  will 
condemn.  (R.  Winterbotham,  M.A.)  Relation  of  good  works  to  Christianity  :— 
Good  works  do  not  make  a  Christian ;  but  one  must  be  a  Christian  to  do  good 
works.  The  tree  bringeth  forth  the  fruit,  not  the  fruit  the  tree.  None  is  made  a 
Christian  by  works,  but  by  Christ,  and  being  in  Christ,  he  brings  forth  fruit  for 
£lim.  (Martin  Luther.)  Faith  to  the  power  of  good  works  is  sa\'ing  faith.  (F. 
«*.  Proctor,  M.A.)  Christ  reproaching  the  wicked  : — It  was  I  who  formed  you, 
klvd  ye  clave  to  another.  I  created  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  things  for  your 
•likes,  and  yon  misused  them  to  My  dishonour.  Depart  from  Me,  ye  workers  of 
ttiquity,  I  know  you  not.  Ye  have  become  the  workmen  of  another  master,  even 
Vie  devil.  With  him  possess  darkness,  and  the  fire  which  shall  not  be  quenched, 
wid  the  worm  which  sleepeth  not,  and  the  gnashing  of  teeth.  I  formed  your  ear* 
that  you  should  hear  the  Scriptures,  and  you  applied  them  to  songs  of  devils,  to 
harps,  to  jokes.  I  created  your  eyes  that  ye  might  behold  the  light  of  My  com- 
mandments, and  follow  them  ;  but  ye  opened  them  for  adultery,  and  immodesty, 
and  all  uucleanness.  I  ordained  your  mouth  for  the  praise  and  glory  of  God,  and 
to  sing  psalms  and  spiritual  songs  ;  but  ye  applied  it  for  the  utterance  of  revihngs, 
perjuries,  and  blasphemies.  I  made  your  hands  that  you  should  lift  them  up  ia 
pravers  and  supplications ;  ye  have  stretched  them  out  in  thefts  and  murders. 
\Hippolytus.)  The  blessed  sometimes  think  tliemselves  cursed,  forgotten,  and 
forsaken: — The  cloud  that  casts  its  cold  and  its  freezing  shadow  over  your  home 
broke  into  innumerable  blessings.  Those  things  that  pained  you  when  they 
touched  your  flesh  no  sooner  approached  the  chancel  of  the  soul,  the  immortal 
spirit,  than  they  became  the  very  soil  on  which  character  grew  up,  and  ripened  into 
nappiness  and  heaven.  There  is  not  a  line  of  suffering  visible  upon  your  road  that 
has  not  had  parallel  with  it  a  Une  of  glory,  of  happiness,  and  joy.  When  you 
thought  you  were  cursed,  you  were  really  blessed ;  what  you  dreamt  in  your 
ignorance  were  calamities  were  the  very  credentials  of  the  people  of  God ;  and  il 
Qod  had  not  so  dealt  with  you,  you  had  never  been  in  that  happy  group  to  whom 
he  speaks  those  thrilling  words,  "  Come,  ye  blessed,"  Do  you  see  a  mother  with  an 
infant  in  her  arms  T  The  infant  in  its  ignorance  put  forth  its  hands  to  touch  the 
flame  of  the  candle,  as  if  it  were  a  bright  and  beautiful  plaything.  The  mother 
draws  back  its  hand,  or  puts  away  the  candle ;  much  to  the  child's  disappoint' 


598  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap,  xxt, 

ment,  but  much  to  the  child's  happiness  and  comfort.  So  God  deals  with  children 
of  a  larger  growth.  We  in  our  ignorance  would  seize  the  llaming  thing  that  would 
burn  to  the  quick  ;  He  in  His  compassion  puts  it  away,  and  bids  the  heart  be  still ; 
and  what  you  know  not  now  He  tells  you  you  shall  know  hereafter.  (J,  Cumming, 
D.D.)  The  final  separation  : — I.  The  division.  1.  They  shall  be  divided  into 
two  parts — the  sheep  and  goats.  Thf  re  shall  be  two  positions,  on  the  right  and  oa 
the  left  hand.  There  will  be  no  third  class.  There  is  no  state  between  being  con- 
verted and  unconverted.  2.  They  will  be  divided  readily.  It  is  not  everybody  that 
could  divide  sheep  from  goats.  They  are  extremely  like  each  other :  the  wool  of 
some  sheep  in  a  warm  climate  becomes  so  like  hair,  and  the  hair  of  a  kind  of  goat 
so  like  wool,  that  a  traveller  scarcely  knows  which  is  which;  but  a  shepherd  who 
has  lived  amongst  them  knows  the  difference  well.  The  eye  of  fire  will  soon 
separate  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  3.  They  will  be  divided  infallibly.  Not  one 
poor  trembling  sheep  will  be  found  amongst  the  goats.  4.  That  division  will  be 
keen  and  sharp.  The  husband  torn  away  from  the  wife.  6.  It  will  be  very  wide 
as  well  as  keen.  The  distance  between  happiness  and  misery.  6.  The  separation 
wiU  be  final.  II.  The  Divider.  "  7/e  shall  separate."  Jesus  will  be  the  Divider. 
1.  This  will  assure  the  saints  of  their  ri^ht  to  heaven.  He  said  "  Come."  2.  This 
will  increase  the  terror  of  the  lost,  that  Christ  shall  divide  them.  Christ,  so  full  of 
love,  would  not  destroy  a  sinner  unless  it  must  be.  He  also  has  power  to  carry  out 
the  sentence.  III.  Tue  rule  of  the  division.  The  great  division  between  the 
sons  of  men  is  Christ.  He  is  the  divider  and  the  division.  The  rule  of  the  division 
is — 1.  Actions.  2.  Actions  about  Christ.  3.  The  actions  which  will  be  mentioned 
at  the  judgment  day,  as  the  proof  of  our  being  blessed  of  the  Lord,  spring  from  th« 
grace  of  God.  They  fed  the  hungry,  but  sovereign  grace  had  first  fed  them.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  reward  of  tfu  righteous : — I.  There  is  much  of  teaching  in  thb 
SDBRODNDiNQ  ciRcniisTANCES.  *'  When  the  King  shall  come  in  His  glory."  Then 
we  must  not  expect  our  reward  till  by  and  by.  When  the  King  shall  come  in  His 
glory,  then  is  your  time  of  recompense.  Observe  with  delight  the  august  Person 
by  whose  hand  the  reward  is  given — "  When  the  King."  It  is  Christ's  own  gift. 
The  character  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus  shall  appear  is  significant.  The  King.  He 
will  come  in  His  glory ;  the  cross  is  exchanged  for  the  crown,  II.  The  pobtiok 
ITSELF.  The  reward  of  the  righteous  is  set  forth  by  the  loving  benediction  pro- 
nounced by  the  Master,  but  their  very  position  gives  some  foreshadowing  of  it. 
The  righteous  the  objects  of  Divine  complacency,  revealed  before  the  sons  of  men. 
The  welcome  uttered — "Come."  It  is  the  gospel  symbol,  "  Come  ye  blessed,"  which 
is  a  clear  declaration  that  this  is  a  state  of  happiness ;  from  the  great  primary 
source  of  all  good — "  Blessed  of  My  Father."  It  is  a  state  in  which  they  shaU 
recognize  their  right  to  be  there;  a  state  therefore  of  ease  and  freedom.  It  is 
•'  inherit  the  kingdom."  A  man  does  not  fear  to  lose  that  which  he  wins  by  descent 
from  his  parent.  It  denotes  full  possession  and  enjoyment.  The  word  "  kingdom  " 
indicates  the  richness  of  the  heritage  of  the  saints.  It  is  no  petty  estate,  no  happy 
corner  in  obscurity  ;  but  a  kingdom.  Your  future  joy  will  be  all  that  a  royal  soul 
desires.  According  to  the  word  "prepared"  we  may  conceive  it  to  be  a  condition 
cf  surpassing  excellence.  III.  The  persons  who  shall  come  there.  1.  Their 
name — "Blessed  of  the  Father."  2.  Their  nature.  Sons  to  inherit.  3.  Tlieir 
appointment.  4.  Their  doings.  Actions  of  charity  selected — 1.  Because  the 
general  audience  assembled  around  the  throne  would  know  how  to  appieciate  this 
evidence  of  their  new-born  nature.  2.  They  may  have  been  chosen  as  evidences  of 
grace,  because  as  actions,  thty  are  a  wonderful  means  of  separating  between  the 
hyjjocrite  and  the  true  Christian.  (Ibid.)  jCharitable  actions  reveal  an  inward 
giace  • — When  you  read  "  for  "  here,  you  must  not  understand  it  to  be  that  their 
reward  is  because  of  this,  but  that  they  are  proved  to  be  God's  servants  by  this  ; 
and  BO,  while  they  do  not  merit  it  because  of  these  actions,  yet  these  actions  show 
that  they  were  saved  by  grace,  which  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ 
wrought  such  and  such  works  in  them.  If  Christ  does  not  work  such  things  in  you, 
you  have  no  part  in  Ilim  ;  if  you  have  not  produced  such  works  as  these  you  have 
not  believed  in  Jesus.  Now  somebody  says,  "  Then  I  intend  to  give  to  the  poor  in 
future  in  order  that  I  may  have  this  reward,"  Ah,  but  you  are  very  much  mistaken 
if  you  do  that.  The  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  waited  upon  by  a  poor  man,  a  very 
loyal  subject,  who  brought  him  a  very  large  root  which  ho  had  grown.  He  was  a 
very  poor  man  indeed,  and  every  root  he  grew  in  his  garden  was  of  consequence  it 
him  ;  but  merely  as  a  loyal  offering  he  brf>u;.'ht  to  his  prirce  the  largest  his  littk 
garden  produced.     The  prince  was  so  pleased  with  the  man's  evident  loyalty  aud 


OHJLP.  xrv.J  fir.  MATTHEW.  699 

affection  that  he  gave  him  a  very  large  sum.  The  steward  thought,  •'  Well,  I  see 
this  pays  ;  this  man  has  got  fifty  pounds  for  his  large  root,  I  think  I  shall  make  the 
duke  a  present."  So  he  bought  a  horse  and  he  reckoned  that  he  should  have  in 
return  ten  times  as  much  for  it  as  it  was  worth,  and  he  presented  it  with  that 
view :  the  duke,  like  a  wise  man,  quietly  accepted  the  horse,  and  gave  the  greedy 
steward  nothing.  That  was  all.  So  you  say,  "  WeU,  here  is  a  Christian  man, 
and  he  gets  rewarded.  He  has  been  giving  to  the  poor,  helping  the  Lord's  Church, 
the  thing  pays,  I  shall  make  a  like  investment."  Yes,  but  you  see  the  steward 
did  not  give  the  horse  out  of  any  idea  of  loyalty,  and  kindness,  and  love  to 
the  duke,  but  out  of  very  great  love  to  himself,  and  therefore  had  no  return  ;  and  i^ 
you  perform  deeds  of  charity  out  of  the  idea  of  getting  to  heaven  by  them,  why  it 
is  yourself  that  you  are  feeding,  it  is  yourself  that  you  are  clothing ;  all  your  virtue 
is  not  virtue,  it  is  rank  selfishness,  it  smells  strong  of  seifbood,  and  Christ  will 
never  accept  it ;  you  will  never  hear  Him  say,  "  Thank  you  "  for  it.  You  served 
yourself,  and  no  reward  is  due.  (Ibid. )  Heaven  prepared  for  the  saints  : — If  I 
might  so  speak,  God's  common  gifts,  which  he  throws  away  aff  though  they  were 
but  nothing,  are  priceless ;  but  what  vsill  be  these  gifts  upon  which  the  infinite 
mind  of  God  has  been  set  for  ages  of  ages  in  order  that  they  may  reach  the 
highest  degree  of  excellence?  Long  before  Christmas  chimes  were  ringing,  mother 
was  so  glad  to  think  her  boy  was  coming  home,  after  the  first  quarter  he 
had  been  out  at  school,  and  straightway  she  began  preparing  and  planning  all 
sorts  of  joys  for  him.  Well  might  the  holidays  be  happy  when  mother  had  been 
contriving  to  make  them  so.  Now  in  an  infinitely  nobler  manner  the  great  God 
has  prepared  a  kingdom  for  His  people ;  He  has  thought  "  that  will  please  them, 
and  that  will  bless  them,  and  this  other  will  make  them  superlatively  happy." 
He  prepared  the  kingdom  to  perfection ;  and  then,  as  if  that  were  not  enough, 
the  glorious  man  Christ  Jesus  went  up  from  earth  to  heaven;  and  you  know 
what  He  said  when  He  departed — "I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  {Ibid.) 
Hard  to  see  Christ  in  the  poverty  of  the  saints : — Do  not  judge  amiss  of  others. 
God's  people  are  a  poor,  despised,  hated,  scorned  company  in  the  world  as  to 
visible  appearance ;  and  what  proof  of  Christ  is  there  in  them  J  Who  can  see 
Christ  in  a  hungry  beggar  f  or  the  glorious  Son  of  God  in  an  imprisoned  and 
scorned  believer  7  or  one  beloved  of  God  in  him  that  is  mortified  with  continual 
sicknesses  and  diseases.  A  pearl  or  a  jewel  that  is  fallen  into  the  dirt,  you  cannot 
discern  the  worth  of  it  till  you  wash  it,  and  see  it  sparkle.  A  prince  in  disguise 
may  be  jostled  and  affronted.  To  a  common  eye  things  go  better  with  the  wicked 
than  with  the  children  of  God.  If  you  see  the  image  of  Christ  in  them,  you  will 
one  day  see  them  other  manner  of  persons  than  now  you  see  them,  or  they  appear 
to  be.  (T.  Manton.)  Charity  7ninisters  to  self-enjoyment : — Wells  are  sweeter  for 
draining  '.  so  are  riches,  when  used  as  the  fuel  of  charity.  {Ibid.)  God  rewards 
charity: — The  poor  cannot  requite  thee;  therefore  God  will.  {Ibid.)  Destiny 
determined  by  serviceableness : — The  judgment  will  go  according  to  our  serviceable- 
ness  or  otherwise.  **  Every  man  according  to  his  works,  whetlier  they  be  good  or 
evil."  We  are  apt  to  imagine  that  true  religion  consists  in  extraordinary  frames  of 
mind,  ecstatic  moods.  It  consists  in  nothing  of  the  kind,  but  in  the  faithful  dis- 
charge, in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  of  the  human  duties  of  our  every-day  existence. 
Many  are  the  legends  concerning  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Grail,  the  traditional  Cup  of 
Healing  from  which  the  Saviour  drank  the  Sacramental  wine  the  night  He  was 
betrayed.  But  the  prettiest  of  them  all,  prettiest  because  truest,  is  that  which 
represents  a  bold  knight  of  the  Kound  Table  travelling  far  over  mountains  and 
through  deserts  in  search  of  the  mysterious  Grail.  His  protracted  and  exhaustive 
journeys,  however,  turned  out  fruitless.  At  length,  wan  in  countenance,  depressed 
m  spirit,  and  fatigued  in  body,  he  resolved  to  return  to  Arthur's  Hall,  a  sadder  but 
not  a  wiser  man.  However,  as  he  was  nearing  the  gate  of  Camelot,  he  saw  a  poor 
man  writhing  in  the  ditch,  evidently  in  the  last  agonies  of  death.  Moved  with  com- 
passion, the  sworn  defender  of  the  rights  of  the  poor  and  the  weak  dismounted  from 
his  steed,  sought  a  cup  of  water,  and  handed  it  to  the  suffering  man  ;  when  lo  I  the 
cup  glowed  as  if  it  were  a  thing  alive,  flamed  as  if  it  were  the  sapphire  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.  The  knight  at  last  saw  the  Holy  Grail,  not,  however,  in  traversing 
barren  wildernesses  or  performing  deeds  of  prowess,  but  in  succouring  the  poor  and 
forlorn.  •*  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  one  of  these  little  ones,  ye  have  done  it 
unto  Me."  "  Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  ol 
cold  water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  shall  not  lose 
his  reward."  A  little  gift  to  a  little  one— it  will  be  honourably  mentioned  in  tha 
judgment  day.     {J.  G.  Jones.) 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xm 

Ver.  46.  And  these  shall  go  away  Into  everlasting  punishment.— Tfc*  final 
state  of  thi  saints  in  heaven : — There  is  a  state  of  happiness  which  the  spirits  of  just 
men  enter  into  immediately  after  their  separation  from  the  body.  But  after  the 
resurrection  and  the  general  judgment,  then  the  righteous  shall  go  into  life  eternal. 
I.  The  state  of  happiness  itself.  That  good  men  shall  enjoy  a  state  of  happiness 
in  the  world  to  come  is  evident.  1.  From  the  light  of  nature  and  reason.  General 
notion  among  the  wiser  heathens.  Universal  desire  in  mankind.  The  unequal  dis- 
tribution of  things  in  the  present  state.  2.  From  Divine  revelation.  II.  The 
eternity  of  this  happiness.  Testimony  of  Scripture.  (Outlines  of  Sermons.)  h 
The  parties  sentenced.  II.  The  penalties  awarded.  1.  Positive  infliction.  2. 
Incited  passions.  3.  Bitter  reflection.  4.  Painful  associations.  5.  Mutual  recog- 
nition. III.  Thb  perpetoity  determined.  1.  Necessary.  2.  Just.  3.  Certain. 
(J.  Blackburn.)  For  ever : — Your  opinion  about  "  for  ever  "  can  have  no  manner 
of  effect  upon  the  reality  of  that  "  for  ever."  A  party  of  boatmen  on  the  Niagara  river 
may  have  a  very  strong  opinion  when  they  are  caught  by  the  rapids,  that  it  is  very 
pleasant  rowing ;  but  neither  their  shouts  nor  their  merriment  will  alter  the  fact 
that  the  world's  cataract  is  close  at  hand.  You  have  a  strong  opinion  that  hell-fire 
is  a  delusion ;  that  they  are  superstitious,  and  cruel,  and  ignorant  who  ask  you  to  , 
pause,  and  awake,  and  prepare  for  this  coming,  this  continued  retribution ;  but 
your  opinions  will  not  have  the  slightest,  the  remotest,  the  minutest  influence  on 
the  tremendous  fact.  {Reynolds.)  Heaven  and  hell: — I.  The  everlasting  state 
of  the  righteous.  It  will  consist  of :  (1)  Perfect  knowledge  ;  (2)  Perfect  love ;  (3) 
Perfect  purity ;  (4)  Perfect  felicity.  II.  The  eternal  state  of  the  wicked.  Includes : 
1.  The  privation  of  infinite  good.  (1)  They  have  lost  heaven  and  all  its  blessedness 
at  once.  (2)  They  are  strangers  to  the  endearments  and  consolations  of  friendship. 
(3)  Nor  is  there  any,  the  smallest,  rest  from  pain.  2.  The  infliction  of  infinite  evil. 
Tormentors  in  hell:  (1)  *  Conscience ;  (2)  Satan;  (3)  Fellow-damned;  (4)  The 
sufferer  will  be  his  own  tonnentor ;  (5)  Memory;  (6)  Anticipation.  {T.  Raffles.) 
The  nature  of  true  righteousness : — The  following  four  particulars  are  necessary  to 
entitle  us  to  the  denomination  and  character  of  righteous  men.  I.  The  establish- 
ment  within  us  of  good  principles,  and  acting  from  them.  II.  The  superior  efiicacy 
of  such  principles  within  us  to  the  efiicacy  of  all  other  principles.  III.  Themanifes- 
tation  of  their  superiority  by  avoiding  all  habitual  guilt,  and  practicing  all  known 
duties  ;  and  IV.  A  constant  endeavour  to  grow  better.  {Richard  Price.)  Eternal 
life  :—l.  Eternal  life,  what  it  is.  1.  It  is  life  in  the  most  perfect  existence.  2.  It 
is  life  in  its  fullest  enjoyment.  The  intellect  in  its  highest  fiights,  the  will  in  its 
most  entire  subjugation,  and  the  affections,  shall  be  fully  enjoyed  there.  3.  It  is 
life  in  its  eternal  duration.  II.  The  persons  who  are  to  enjoy  eternal  life — "  the 
righteous."  They  have  been  stripped  of  their  own  righteousneas,  and  are  olad  in 
the  righteoofinets  oi  Christ.    (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


VEBg.  1-5.  That  they  might  take  Jesus  toy  subtUty,  and  kill  Bim.— Craft  and 
enuelty  coupled  in  the  Church's  adversaries  : — Neither  of  them  "  wants  their  mate," 
as  the  Scripture  eays  of  those  birds  of  prey  and  desolation  (Isa.  xxxiv.  16).  These 
priests  and  elders  were  so  bitterly  bent  against  Christ,  that  nothing  would  satisfy 
them  but  His  blood.  All  plants  and  other  creatures  have  their  growth  and  increase 
to  a  period,  and  then  their  declination  and  decay,  except  only  the  crocodile,  who 
grows  bigger  and  bigger,  even  till  death.  So  have  all  passions  and  perturbations 
in  man's  mind  their  intentions  and  remissions,  except  only  malicious  revenge. 
This  dies  not,  many  times,  but  with  the  man  (if  that),  as  nothing  can  quench  the 
combustible  slime  in  Samosaris,  nor  the  burning  fiame  of  the  hill  Chimaera,  but 
on}y  earth.  St.  Peter  tells  us  (1  Peter  ii.  23),  that  our  Saviour,  being  reviled, 
did  not  only  commit  His  cause  to  God,  but  Himself  to  God  :  as  expecting  the  in 
creaae  of  His  enemies'  opposition  till  they  had  put  Him  to  death.    {John  Trapp.) 

Vers.  6-13.  Now  when  Jesus  was  in  Bethany,  In  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper.— 
Christ  anointed  for  His  burial : — Let  us  endeavour  to  find  out  what  was  the  latenl 
Tirtne  in  the  apparently  simple  act  which  won  so  noble  a  reward.    I.  There  can  b4 


CHAP.  XXVI. J  ST.  MATTHEW.  601 

no  doubt  that  the  majority  of  Christians  wonld  express  suepeise  at  tbtb  high 
HONOUR  PROMISED  TO  Mart  FOR  80  SLIGHT  A  SERVICE.  She  did  Dot  resign  wealth. 
What  she  did  was  of  no  utility.  In  these  days  and  in  this  land  we  have  a  narrow 
and  prejudiced  way  of  judging  of  the  character  and  actions  of  men.  There  is  a 
national  character,  our  likes  and  dislikes ;  we  are  disposed  to  try  evsrythiug  by 
this  standard.  Our  national  qualities  are  industry,  prudence,  regularity.  There 
is  "another  class  of  national  qualities  also — warm  affections,  enthusiasm,  high  un- 
earthly devotion — these  are  contrary  to  our  mental  constitution.  You  find  them 
in  excess  in  warmer  climates.  Both  of  these  characteristics  have  their  faults  and 
excellences.  What  is  our  ideal  of  a  religious  character  f  That  a  man  should  be 
upright,  sober;  hence  our  religious  temper  is  not  enthusiastic.  The  conduct 
of  the  woman  was  the  result  of  overpowering  love.  May  not  this  narrative  teach 
us  that  God  above  all  things  values  love  to  Himself,  that  one  outgoing  of  the  soul 
to  Himself  is  worth  hundreds  of  acts  of  duty  apathetically  rendered.  IL  So  also 
did  she  offer  an  illustrious  example  of  implicit  faith.  She  had  in  view  His 
burial,  and  did  it  to  that  end.  A  marvellous  effort  of  faith.  The  apostles  were 
not  equal  to  it,  though  Christ  had  told  them  of  His  death  and  resurrection.  (J.  R. 
Woodford,  M.A.)  True  principles  of  Christian  economy: — I.  Let  us  seek  to 
challenge  and  correct  the  world's  charge  of  waste  brought  against  this  and 
aU  similar  acts  of  homage  to  Christ.  Waste  is  useless  and  prodigal  expenditure. 
Sm  is  the  parent  of  extravagance.  There  are  notions  in  the  world  on  the  subject 
ol  giving  to  God  which  we  can  correct : — 1.  Let  us  mark,  in  opposition  to  selfish 
p«  lioy,  that  as  hoarding  is  not  always  saving,  so  neither  is  expenditure  always 
w>\ste.  So  the  Divine  method.  The  sunshine  streams  down  from  heaven  with  no 
sfcnt,  yet  without  waste;  because  all  this  vast  outcome  of  goodness  returns  in 
richest  blessing  to  its  Parent  Benefactor.  The  same  principle  of  generous  expen- 
diture forms  the  life  and  success  of  commerce.  A  man  of  sordid  habits  toils  with 
old  worn-out  machinery,  because  he  dreads  expense  of  repairs,  only  to  find  that 
his  inferior  goods  have  fallen  out  of  demand.  Again,  does  the  selfish  man  con- 
gratulate himself,  when  he  has  refused  some  urgent  opportunity  of  doing  good, 
that,  whatever  conscience  or  the  world  may  say  of  him,  he  has  at  least  saved  his 
money  f  He  is  mistaken.  There  is  no  safe  keeping  of  that  which  vexes  and 
displeases  God.  But  there  is  another  fallacy  of  the  ungenerous  and  selfish, 
suggested  by  the  text,  viz.,  that  everything  is  wasted  that  is  given  to  Christ. 
Finally,  it  is  the  fallacy  of  the  selfish  that,  while  they  will  not  make  sacrifices  for 
Clurist,  they  think  they  have  a  right  to  prevent  others ;  but  this  will  not  exempt  us 
fr(im  doing  our  own  duty.  H.  What  the  world  calls  waste,  as  done  to  Christ  and 
H»s  cause,  the  Saviour  Himself  commends  as  duty,  which  secures  our  truest 
interest  and  honour.  {J.  R.  McGavin,  D.D.)  The  problem  of  poverty,  and  how 
to  deal  with  it : — What  are  the  cardinal  principles  of  the  problem  7  1.  The  essen- 
tial claim  which  this  class  of  mankind  has  upon  the  common  brotherhood  is  not 
one  of  charity,  but  is  founded  in  religion.  It  is  not  a  humane  sentiment  to  be 
gratified,  but  a  law  of  Christianity  to  be  obeyed.  2.  The  poor  may  be  considered 
in  the  hght  of  Christ's  legacy  to  His  Church  in  all  ages.  Had  there  been  no  poor 
claiming  our  sympathy  and  kindly  ministry,  what  a  lack  there  had  been  in  the 
training  of  the  Christian  graces.  3.  We  are  to  perform  this  high  and  sacred  duty 
in  testimony  of  our  love  to  Christ,  and  in  gratitude  for  His  love  and  services  in 
our  behalf.  {American  Homiletic  Review.)  The  worth  of  life  enhanced  by  kindly 
acts,  which  serve  no  direct  practical  purpose : — Indeed  in  many  of  the  sweetest 
and  purest  relationships  of  life,  the  half  of  those  deeds  of  kindness  and  interest 
which  are  wrought,  and  often  wrought  at  much  cost  and  with  labour,  are  of  this 
Bort.  They  are  not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  wellbeing  or  existence  of  those  in 
whose  behalf  they  are  done.  Probably  life  could  ba  spent  happily  enough  without 
the  gifts  which  such  deeds  bring.  But  life  is  not  mere  subsistence ;  life  is  made 
up  of  a  thousand  little  slender  veins  and  channels  through  which  affection  flows 
noiselessly  and  unseen.  Life  and  the  inner  power  of  life  are  made  up  of  infinite 
little  gleams  of  sympathy,  and  are  not  to  be  measured  and  weighed  like  beams  of 
timber  by  their  size.  Life  is  a  great  and  living  tree,  with  countless  twigs  and 
foliage  which  render  it  fair  and  attractive.  And  in  all  the  relationships  of  life, 
day  by  day  all  persons  are  conscious  that  a  large  portion  of  their  thoughts  and 
lime  and  care  is  bestowed  on  what  serves  no  other  purpose  than  merely  to  express 
what  is  within  the  heart,  and  seeks  for  utterance.  "To  what  purpose  thix 
waste  ?  "  one  might  say  when  one  sees  how  much  is  thus  given  and  done — not 
because  it  is  essential  to  maintain  life,  but  because  it  is  simply  the  outcome  of 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciup.  XTi*. 

friendly  interest  and  affection,  and  because  to  stifle  it  would  be  to  prevent  the  £re« 
breathing  of  a  pure  and  warm  heart.  {A.  Watson,  D.D.)  Spiritual  emotion  not 
to  be  S7ippressed: — Is  there  no  religion  except  what  is  called  the  practical?  and 
must  everything  you  say  and  do  and  give  have  a  direct  religious  purpose?  May 
that  not  be  true  in  the  sacred  region  of  religious  life,  which  I  have  already  indi- 
cated as  true  in  the  daily  home-life?  May  there  not  be  great  religious  emotiima 
and  desires  which  seek  for  utterance,  and  nothing  more  ?  May  there  not  be  a  deep 
gratitude  for  spiritual  blessings  which  longs  to  show  itself,  and  which  only  wania 
to  express  its  force  towards  Him  from  whom  the  blessings  have  come  ?  I  am  not 
encouraging  a  mere  sentimental  religion,  or  a  religion  which  has  nothing  but 
emotion  in  it;  but  I  desire  to  destroy  nothing  which  God  has  formed,  and  to 
suppress  no  genuine  spiritual  aspiration.  And  I  wish  that  all  should  feel  how 
natural  it  is,  and  how  true  to  the  religious  instincts,  tliat  there  should  be  times 
and  seasons  when  the  devout  soul  finds  pleasure  and  satisfaction  in  what  seems  to 
effect  no  direct  purpose.  There  are  occasions  when  the  very  essence  of  religion 
consists  in  words  and  works  of  worship  and  praise.  To  what  purpose  this  waste 
of  time,  or  thought,  or  language?  some  may  ask.  And  the  answer  is,  that  good- 
ness in  religion  is  often  whit  goodness  is  in  the  home-life  of  men  ;  it  is  goodness, 
not  for  what  it  accomplishes,  but  for  what  it  expresses  of  the  state  of  the  heart.  (Ibid.) 
The  universal  memorial : — 1.  This  memorial  affords  an  instance  of  the  Saviour's 
foreknowledge,  and  of  His  fidelity  aad  power  in  the  accomphshment  of  His  predic- 
tions. 2.  It  reminds  us  that  as  we  possess  this  gospel  ourselves  it  is  our  duty  to 
impart  the  knowledge  of  it  to  others.  The  text  implies  that  the  gospel  is  for  the 
world.  3.  It  sanctions  and  encourages  the  efforts  of  Christian  females,  as  well  as  ol 
others,  to  serve  the  cause  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  It  teaches  us  that  a  desire  to  supply 
the  temporal  necessities  of  the  poor  is  not  to  supersede  a  devout  regard  to  the 
claims  of  Christ,  and  to  the  welfare  of  souls.  5.  It  directs  us  to  serve  Christ 
according  to  our  ability,  and  intimates  that  no  sacrifices  are  too  costly  to  be  made 
for  Him.  6.  It  reminds  us  that  Jesus  Christ  sometimes  bestows  upon  us  Buch 
peculiar  mercies,  as  demand  peculiar  and  extraordinary  expressions  of  gratitude. 
7.  It  shows  that  those  things  are  the  most  agreeable  to  Christ  which  are  done  with 
a  devout  regard  to  His  death.  8.  It  admonishes  us  that  such  opportunities  as  are 
peculiarly  favourable  for  testifying  our  regard  for  Christ,  and  to  the  salvation  of 
our  souls,  if  they  are  neglected  never  may  return.  (J.  Alexander.)  Mary  anoint- 
ing  Christ,  h  Who  was  this  woman  ?  She  was  a  blessed  woman,  had  the  favour 
of  Christ  in  no  ordinary  way.  Blessed  in  her  deed  and  in  the  approbation  of  it. 
She  was  Mary  of  Bethany.  II.  The  estimate  which  Christ  formed  of  this 
woman's  act.  It  was  not  elicited  by  the  act  itself  immediately,  but  by  the  estimate 
formed  by  others.  What  determines  the  moral  character  of  a  work  ?  Not  the  work 
itself,  its  amount,  but  the  motive.  Love  was  her  motive.  The  act  itself  was  self- 
denying.  It  was  an  act  of  clear  preference.  There  were  other  objects  on  which 
she  might  have  bestowed  the  ointment.  It  was  a  striking  act  of  faith.  She  did  it 
for  His  burial.  Our  Lord  marked  the  deed  of  the  woman  not  only  in  the  credit  He 
gave  her,  but  in  the  comfort  He  imparted.  She  only  wanted  His  approval.  The 
honour  He  gave — "  Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be  preached,"  &c.  Why  should 
not  we  love  Jesus  as  did  this  woman  ?  Mary  anointed  to  His  burial.  To  what  shall 
we  anoint  Him  ?  Let  us  employ  our  talents  for  Him  and  suffering  humanity.  (C. 
Molyneux,  B.A.)  A  woman's  memorial : — I,  Let  us  observe  the  woman  hergelf. 
1.  This  act  was  the  impulse  of  a  loving  heart.  2.  What  this  woman  did  was  done 
purely  to  Christ  and  for  Christ.  3.  She  did  an  extraordinary  thing  for  Chiist. 
4.  Her  act  was  beautifully  expressive  of  her  broken  heart.  II.  Look  into  the  fack 
OF  EEB  LOVING  LoRD.  HI.  APPEAL  PERSONALLY  TO  YOU.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Tht 
originality  of  service : — You  and  I  generally  look  to  see  whether  the  thing  our  new 
heart  tells  us  to  do  has  ever  been  done  before ;  and  then,  if,  like  Martha,  we  love 
Christ,  we  still  think  it  will  be  the  proper  mode  of  showing  our  love  to  prepare  Elm 
a  supper,  and  go  and  stand  and  wait  at  the  table.  We  look  for  a  precedent.  We 
recollect  that  the  Pharisee  gave  Christ  a  supper ;  we  remember  how  many  others  of 
the  disciples  have  given  Him  a  dinner ;  and  then  we  think  that  is  the  proper 
orthodox  way,  and  we  will  go  and  do  the  same.  "Mr.  So-aud-so  gives  ten  guineas ; 
I  shall  give  ten  guineas.  Mrs.  So-and-so  teaches  in  the  Sunday-school ;  I  shall 
teach  in  the  Sunday-school.  Mr.  This  or  That  is  in  the  habit  of  having  prayer  with 
his  servants ;  I  shall  do  likewise."  You  see,  we  look  to  find  out  whether  anybody 
else  has  set  us  an  example,  and  then  we  get  into  the  habit  of  doing  all  these  things 
as  a  matter  of  form.    But  Mary  nerer  thought  of  that ;  ahe  never  asked  whethei 


CHAP,  xrvi.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  608 

there  was  anybody  else  that  had  ever  broken  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment  on  that 
Bacred  head.  No,  she  goes  her  way ;  her  heart  says,  '*  Do  it,"  and  she  does  it. 
(Ihid.)  Jesus  Christ  deserves  to  be  served  after  an  extraordinary  manner  : — Was 
there  ever  a  people  that  had  such  a  leader  or  such  a  lover  as  we  have  in  the  person 
of  Christ?  And  yet,  my  dear  friends,  there  have  been  many  impostors  in  the 
world,  who  have  had  disciples  more  anlently  attached  to  them  than  some  of  you 
are  to  Christ  Jesus.  When  I  read  the  Ufe  of  Mohamed,  I  see  men  who  loved  liim 
60,  that  they  would  expose  their  persons  to  death  at  any  moment  for  the  false 
prophet,  dash  into  battle  almost  naked,  cut  their  way  through  hosts  of  enemies,  and 
do  exploits  out  of  a  passionate  zeal  for  him  whom  they  verily  believed  to  be  sent 
of  God.  And  even  that  modern  delusion  of  Joe  Smith  lacks  not  its  martyrs. 
When  I  read  the  history  of  the  Mormonite  emigrants,  and  of  all  the  miseries  they 
endured  when  driven  out  of  the  city  of  Nauvoo ;  how  they  had  to  pass  over  track- 
less snows  and  pathless  mountains,  and  were  ready  to  die  under  the  guns  of  the 
United  States  marauders,  and  how  they  suffered  for  that  false  prophet,  I  do  stand 
ashamed  of  the  followers  of  Christ,  that  they  should  permit  the  followers  of  an 
impostor  to  suffer  hardships,  and  loss  of  limb  and  life,  and  eveiything  else  that 
men  count  dear,  for  an  impostor,  while  they  themselves  show  that  they  do  not  love 
their  Master,  their  tnie  and  loving  Lord  half  so  well,  else  would  they  serve  Him  in 
an  extraordinary  manner,  as  He  deserves.  When  the  soldiers  of  Napoleon  performed 
Buch  unexampled  deeds  of  daring  in  his  day,  people  ceased  to  wonder.  They  said, 
**  No  wonder  that  they  do  that ;  see  what  their  leader  does."  When  Napoleon,  sword 
in  hand,  crossed  over  the  bridge  of  Lodi,  and  bid  them  follow,  no  one  wondered  that 
every  common  soldier  was  a  hero.  Bat  it  is  wonderful,  when  we  consider  what  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation  hath  done  for  us,  that  we  are  content  to  be  such  everyday 
nothings  as  the  most  of  us  are.  Ah  !  if  we  did  but  think  of  His  glory,  and  of  what 
He  deserves — if  we  did  but  think  of  His  sufferings,  and  of  what  He  merits  at  our 
hands,  surely  we  should  do  something  out  of  the  common  ;  we  should  break  our 
alabaster  box,  and  pour  the  pound  of  ointment  on  His  head  again.  (Ibid.) 
Things  of  highest  value  have  not  a  marked  price ; — To  valae  only  what  can  be 
•'  sold  "  is  to  appreciate  least  what  in  nature  and  man  is  most  glorious,  and  most 
capable  of  affording  exquisite  and  perfect  satisfaction.  The  gold  and  purple  of  the 
Bunset,  the  flushing  tenderness  of  the  dawn,  the  rippling  songs  of  birds,  the  full- 
voiced  chorus  of  breaking  billows,  the  pure  air  fresh  with  the  fragrant  breavh  of 
wild  flowers,  the  rain  pouring  its  living  draught  into  every  arid  blade  and  leaf,  are 
God's  free  gifts  to  men.  The  innocent  joy  of  childhood,  the  generous  enthusiasm 
of  youth,  the  strength  of  wisdom,  the  serenity  of  a  holy  trust  in  God — in  what 
earthly  market  can  these  blessed  things  of  the  Spirit  be  bought  or  sold  7  Witii 
what  coin  minted  by  man  can  you  purchase  the  tenderness  of  sympathy,  the  con- 
fidence of  friendship,  the  devotion  of  love  7  Only  to  be  won  are  they  by  the 
onselfish  blending  of  your  own  lives  with  the  hves  of  others.  The  things  that 
cannot  be  bartered,  the  price  of  which  no  merchant  quotes,  the  value  of  which  no 
figures  can  express,  which  no  thief  can  steal,  and  no  moth  or  rust  corrupt,  alone 
form  the  wealth  of  the  soul.  (J.  li.  S.  Haringlon.)  The  Saviour's  defence  of 
sublime  devotion: — The  action  of  Mary  was  deeply  symbolicah  There  may  often 
be  more  in  oar  actions  than  we  imagine.  It  may  be  by  loving  instinct  she  almost 
antedated  the  death  of  our  Lord.  It  was  the  gospel  in  figure  ;  in  Mary's  offering 
He  saw  symbolized  the  greater  offering  He  was  about  to  make,  prompted  by  a 
deeper  love  than  hers.  I.  The  woman's  sublime  devotion.  1.  She  was  com- 
pletely under  the  sway  of  devoted  love  to  Christ's  person — "Unto  Me."  The  pro- 
minent feature  of  Mary's  character  was  her  power  of  loving.  This  caught  the  eye 
of  Christ,  and  gained  His  admiration.  Here  is  an  ideal  of  what  a  follower  of  Mine 
should  be.  Devotion  to  the  Lord's  person  is  the  chiefest  of  Christian  wtues. 
Now  in  making  love  the  test  of  excellence  Chiist  differs  from  all  the  rest  of  the 
world.  2.  Her  devotion  was  original  and  fearless.  It  was  her  own  way  of  mani- 
festing her  love.  It  shocked  the  twelve.  Let  a  person  only  love  and  he 
becomes  a  genius  in  manifesting  it.  Mary  was  unmindful  of  criticism.  3.  Her 
devotion  was  magnificent.  She  did  not  think  how  little  she  could  give.  II.  Christ's 
CHIVALROUS  CHAMPIONSHIP  OF  THIS  WOMAN.  Notc  the  resemblauces  that  exist  between 
the  action  of  the  woman  and  our  Lord's  action  in  a  few  hours  afterwards.  1.  There 
is  a  resemblance  in  motive.  Love  led  to  both  offerings.  He  died  because  He  loved. 
He  intercedes  because  He  loves.  There  is  a  sweet  savour  in  love.  In  His  body  there 
is  an  alabaster  box  that  contains  the  ointment,  a  salve  for  every  wound.  2.  There 
is  a  resemblanoe  of  self-devotion.    She  could  not  have  given  more.    Christ  gave 


fOt  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSIRATOE.  [cn.vp.  xxvi 

all  that  He  conld.     He  emptied  Himself.     3.  In  the  broken  box  Christ  saw  Hia 
end.     That  was  the  gfjspel.     4.  The  magnificence  of  Christ's  work.     It  is  "  plen- 
teous redemption."     (.4.  G,  Broicii.)        Mediocrity  in  religion  best  liked  by  the 
world : — The  general  verdict  will  be,  ♦•  It  is  very  romantic — very  sentimental,  and 
quite  unnecessary."     The  world  likes  a  dead  level  of  mediocrity  in  the  things  ol 
God.    Its  perpetual  cry  is,  "  Now,  do  be  moderate  I  "     There  are  not  a  few  who 
"Would  like  the  religious  experience  of  the  Church  to  bo  something  like  Norfolk 
■cenery.    When  I  was  preacliing  there  some  time  back  a  farmer  went  out  with  me 
for  a  walk,  and  just  as  I  was  inwardly  thinking  that  it  was  about  the  most  de- 
plorable bit  of  country  I  had  ever  seen — as  flat  as  a  billiard  table  with  here  and 
there  a  ditch,  he  suddenly  stopped,  and  said,  "  Now,  sir,  this  is  what  I  call  a  really 
fine  view."     I  looked  at  him  with  astonishment;  but  with  all  simplicity  he  said, 
♦'  I  call  this  really  a  fine  view ;  for  whichever  way  you  look  there  is  nothing  to 
break  it.  Now  in  Kent  and  many  other  counties  wherever  you  look  there  is  some  big 
hill  or  tree  that  stops  the  view,  but  here  there  is  nothing."     This  is  the  idea  ol 
Christian  beauty  which  many  entertain.     Its  charm  lies  in  there  being  nothing  to 
attract  attention.     In  fact  it  has  become  quite  a  compliment  now  to  say,  "  Oh, 
fco-and-Bo  is  a  fine  man.    He  never  forgets  himself."    The  man  who  never  forgets 
himself  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  man.    A  man  who  never  forgets  himself  is,  ta 
say  the  least,  a  miserably  selfish  mortal.     What  Christ  asks  at  your  hands  and 
mine  is — not  a  love  which  only  sometimes  makes  me  forget  myself,  but  a  love 
which  will  put  self  out  of  court  entirely — a  love  which  will  raise  me  out  of  myself — 
•  love  which,  in  other  words,  will  be  superior  to  all  calculation  as  to  consequences. 
It  was  BO  with  Mary.     She  had  spent  all  her  little  earnings  upon  her  gift.     {Ibid.) 
L(n)e  the  great  energy  in  religion  : — Although  this  spirit  of  boundless  consecration 
may  often  make  mistakes,  and  it  does — though  it  may  often  run  into  some  strange 
extravagances,  and  it  does — yet,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  end  it  accomplishes  far 
more  than  the  very  wise  but  very  cold  spirit.    The  author  to  whom  I  have  previously 
referred  makes  this  remark  on  the  point,  and  it  is  very  true — "  One  rash  but  heroic 
Luther  is  worth  a  thousand  men  of   the  Erasmus  tvpe,  unspeakably  wise,  but 
passionless  and  time-serving."    The  men  who  leave  their  mark  on  the  world,  and 
the  men  who  really  extend  the  empire  of  Christ's  kingdom,  are  not  generally  the 
men  who  are  very  calculating  and  very  profe-sional,  but  men  who,  whatever  else 
they  may  lack,  have  their  hearts  surcharged  with  love.     Oh  would  ye  be  a  real 
power?    Ye  must  have  a  love  that  scorns  all  meanness.     How  different  does  Mary 
•ppear  from  the  disciples  ?    She  does  a  noble  deed  :  they  criticize  it.     It  dues  not 
tiquire  love  to  criticize.    Indeed,  love  will  not  criticize.     Love  is  too  noble  a  thing 
«o  condesceud  to  it,  specially  when  criticism  means  perpetual  fault-finding.  If  there 
lb*  good,  love  deligbts  to  take  down  her  harp  aud  praise  it  to  her  utmost,  but  if 
ttoere  is  nothing  to  praise,  love  prefers  to  be  silent  rather  than  cavil.     Only  mean 
enirits  find  pleasure  in  finding  fault.     {Ibid.)         Originality  in  religion  : — The 
Church  wants  a  number  of  original  workers — those  who  will  not  merely  run  in  the 
rut  that  is  already  made  in  the  road,  but  strike  out  for  themselves  si  me  new  ways 
of  honouring  Christ.     It  has  been  well  remarked  that  when  the  stream  is  low  it 
runs  along  the  channel  that  is  already  made  ;  but  let  there  be  a  downfall  of  rain, 
let  the  river  only  rise,  and  it  fills  up  all  the  channels,  and   then   the   banks, 
not  able  to  restrain  the  stream,  will  overflow  and  run  far  and  wide.     The  new 
wine  of  a  passionate  love  to  Christ  can  never  be  contained  in  old  bottles.     (Ibid.) 
Imviortality  of  good  deeds  : — There  is  nothing,  no,  nothing,  innocent  or  good,  that 
dies  and  is  forgotten :  let  us  hold  that  faith,  or  none.     An  infant,  a  prattling  child, 
lying  in  its  cradle,  will  live  again  in  the  better  thoughts  of  those  who  loved  it;  and 
plays  its  part,  through  them,  in  the  redeeming  actions  of  the  world,  though  its 
body  be  burned  to  ashes,  or  drowned  in  the  deepest  sea.     There  is  not  an  angel 
added  to  the  host  of  heaven  but  does  its  blessed  work  on  earth  in  those  that  loved 
it  here.     Forgotten  1 — oh  1  if  the  good  deeds  of  human  creatures  could  be  traced  to 
their  source,  how  beautiful  would  even  death  appear  1  for  how  much  charity,  mercy, 
and  purified  affection  would  be  seen  to  have  growth  in  dusty  graves  I     (C.  Dickens.) 
Superiority  of  Christian  to  huiiianitarian  virtues : — The  doing  good  may  be  a  mere 
humanitarian  virtue.    It  may  be  the  cultivation  of  a  virtue  which  is  to  help  our 
kind.    It  may  arise  from  the  feeling  of  kindred,  from  sympathy,  from  compassion. 
When  it  has  only  this  origin,  it  is  a  virtue  worthy  of  all  honour.    It  tends  to  make 
ns  think  better  of-  our  race.     It  shows  the  nobleness  which  by  nature  is  implanted 
in  the  human  heart.    It  exhibits  and  tei-tifies  to  the  godlike  qualities  of  the  being 
who  was  made  in  the  image  of  his  Maker.     The  world  is  full  of  such  actt.     The 


BBAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  605 

book  of  "  Golden  Deeds  "  in  which  Charlotte  Tonge  has  emt  aimed  the  memory  of 
many  an  act  of  humanity,  of  patience,  of  self  endurance,  of  bravery,  tends  to  make 
us  think  better  of  humanity,  helps  to  kindle  the  affections,  and  inspires  us  with 
emulation  of  imitating  those  deeds.  But  the  act  of  Mary  has  another  significancy. 
There  is  a  quality  in  it  which  we  put  into  our  acts  of  mercy,  self-sacrifice,  and 
bravery.  There  is  a  quality  in  it  which  may  be  the  very  mark  which  is  to  dis- 
tinguish our  act  as  it  distinguished  hers ;  and  that  quaUty  was  the  faith  and  love 
which  were  directed  to  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Without  it  the  act  was  nothing. 
Without  this  quality  we  could  not  understand  the  commendation  of  the  Saviour, 
and  why  it  should  be  a  memorial  to  all  generations.  It  was  the  affections  going 
forth  to  the  Saviour ;  it  was  the  homage  which  was  paid  Him  as  the  Redeemer  ;  it 
was  the  clinging  to  Him  as  the  altogether  lovely.  A  distinct  act  of  faith  to-day  is 
a  witness  to  the  world  in  favour  of  Christian  redemption.  It  was  the  great  truth 
which  was  then  dawning  upon  the  world,  that  there  was  a  Saviour,  the  Son  of  God, 
who  had  come  to  save  man.  Wherever  this  gospel  was  to  be  preached,  wherever  it 
was  to  be  proclaimed  that  there  are  good  tidings,  wherever  it  was  to  be  made  known 
that  there  is  mercy  and  life  for  man,  there  was  this  significant  act  of  this  woman 
to  be  told,  because  she  saw  this  truth,  because  she  tbus  proclaimed  herself  a 
believer  in  Him,  a  disciple  of  Him.  She  paid  homage  to  Him  in  this  character 
and  office.  (R.  B.  Fairbaim,  D.D.)  The  anointing  at  Bethany : — Great  love  can 
impose  great  obligations.  I.  Thk  deed.  II.  The  significance  of  the  deed.  One 
only  of  those  present  at  this  transaction  was  competent  fully  to  declare  its  import. 
1.  It  was  a  useful  work.  Such  is  the  first  inscription.  The  word  translated  good 
means,  primarily — fair,  goodly,  beautiful,  as  to  external  form  and  appearance 
This  it  was,  but  the  language  implies  more.  It  was  moral  excellence  that  dis 
tinguished  the  miracles  and  teachings  of  the  Saviour,  and  the  quality  pertaining  to 
them  He  ascribes  to  this  humble  performance.  More  piecisely,  however,  tha 
epithet  refers  to  the  effect  and  influence  of  the  work  possessing  tliis  quality.  This 
is  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  where  it  is  used  to  characterize  the  practice  of 
piety  among  the  followers  of  Christ.  2.  It  was  a  great  work.  "  She  hath  done 
what  she  could."  The  deed  was  co-extensive  with  her  ability.  To  the  eye  that 
looked  only  upon  the  outward  appearance,  it  seemed  an  act  which  nothing  but  its 
wasteful  extravagance  raised  above  insignificance.  To  the  eye  that  searcheth  hearts, 
it  was  grand,  august,  important.  The  value  of  a  deed  wrought  upon  Christ,  or  for 
the  sake  of  Christ,  though  relative  to  us,  is  absolute  to  Him.  If  it  be  our  best, 
though  it  were  another's  least,  it  is  great  and  precious  when  its  perfume  ascends 
to  heaven.  3.  It  was  an  act  of  faith  in  a  crucified  Saviour.  III.  The  commemo- 
ration of  the  deed.  For  the  most  delicate  service  that  mortal  rendered  Him 
on  earth,  our  gracious  Redeemer  provides  the  most  delicate  reward.  Upon 
the  immediate  disciples  of  our  Lord  the  accomplishment  of  this  declaration  first 
devolved.  1.  How  exceedingly  precious  to  Christ  is  the  love  of  His  people !  2. 
How  precious  to  Christ  is  the  memory  of  His  people  !  3.  How  great  the  jealousy 
of  Christ  for  the  good  fame  of  His  people !  4.  How  generously  Christ  estimates 
the  offerings  and  services  of  His  people  I  Mary  was  not  so  lavish  of  her  ointment 
as  Jesus  of  His  praise.  Be  very  sure  that  whatever  others  may  do.  He  will  put  the 
best  construction  upon  a  work  of  faith  and  love  wrought  for  His  sake.  5.  Learn 
how  Christ  would  have  us  cherish  the  memory  of  His  people.  Records  of  good 
men's  lives  are  among  the  means  which  God  hath  most  emphatically  approved  and 
blessed  for  the  sanctification  of  believers.  (C.  W.  Baird.)  The  woman  that 
anointed  Jesus : — I.  From  the  words  of  this  text  we  evidently  perceive  that  our 
Lord  distinctly  foresaw  the  great  progress  which  the  gospel  would  soon  make  in  the 
world.  II.  From  the  text  we  learn  that  reputation  for  good  works  is  desirable  and 
valuable.  III.  Also  we  learn  that  some  seasons  and  circumstances  may  justify 
uncommon  expense.  IV.  What  this  woman  now  did  in  anointing  the  body  of  Jesus 
was  very  commendable.  V.  With  all  His  great  and  transcendent  wisdom,  Jesus 
did  not  disdain  what  we  call  the  weaker  sex ;  but  allowed  them  to  be  capable  of 
true  and  distinguished  worth  and  excellence.  VI.  The  text  gives  no  encouragement 
to  those  honours  approaching  to  idolatry  or  altogether  idolatrous,  which  some  have 
since  given  to  departed  saints,  both  men  and  women.  VII.  We  have,  in  thia 
history,  an  instance  of  the  favour  of  our  Lord  for  virtue.  VIII.  This  text  teaches 
ns  to  think  and  judge  for  ourselves,  and  to  act  according  to  the  liglit  of  our  own 
judgment  and  understanding,  after  having  taken  due  care  to  be  well  informed, 
without  paying  too  great  deference  to  the  favourable  or  the  unfavourable  sentencea 
of  others.    {N.  Lardner.)        True  fame : — No  one  likes  to  be  forgotten.    Oar  Lord 


r.06  THS  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 


was  not  indaced  to  pronounce  this  eulogy- — 1.  By  Mary's  social  position.  2.  By  the 
intrinsic  value  of  that  which  was  presented  to  Him.  .8.  By  the  opinion  of  those 
who  were  present  with  Him  at  the  time.  4.  The  great  thing,  the  one  thing  to 
which  Jesus  looked,  was  the  motive  from  which  the  action  was  performed.  What  a 
Bublime  prophecy  that  eiilogium  is  !  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  ITie  anointing  of 
the  feet  of  Jesus : — Lessons;  1.  Man's  gifts  to  God  are  consecrated  by  love,  2. 
Profusion  is  not  necessarily  waste.  3.  Amid  the  conflicting  duties  of  life  the 
•mmediate  is  best.  "  She  hath  done  what  s3ie  could  " — not  all  that  she  could,  but 
toat  which  her  hand  found  presently  to  do.  4.  Our  Lord  not  only  accepts  and 
commends  the  act  and  gift,  but  recompenses  them  in  a  royal  manner,  (JET.  M. 
Jackson.)  Profitable  waste: — That  is  profitable  waste  which — I.  Makes  solid, 
although  often  unseen,  preparation  for  the  future.  H.  Sacrifices  worldly  advan- 
tages at  the  call  of  God  and  duty.  IH,  Spends  labour,  and  parts  with  possessions, 
in  exchange  for  spiritual  attainment.  IV.  Surrenders  life  for  a  blessed  immor- 
tality.   (Anon.) 

Vers.  14-19,  Then  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Judas  Iscartot,  went  unto  the  cbief 
priests. — Judas,  the  truth  sold  for  money  : — What  was  his  prompting  principle?  (1) 
Not  a  Divine  impulse  ;  (2)  or  sense  of  public  duty  ;  (3)  or  malicious  feeling  towards 
Christ ;  (4)  but  avarice.  A  man,  to  commit  this  sin,  must  have — (1)  Truth  at  his 
disposal.  (2)  A  tempting  offer.  (3)  Deliberately  accept  the  offer.  {Homilist.) 
Men  may  sell  the  truth  for  money  who — (1)  Have  no  dislike  to  it ;  (2)  feel  them-^elves 
under  an  obligation  to  it ;  (3)  have  no  intention  of  doing  any  injury  to  it.  {Ibid.) 
Emblem  of  avarice  : — Gotthold's  sons  had  purchased  a  savings-box,  to  keep  the  little 
sums  of  money  they  occasionally  received.  They  soon  found  that,  however  easy 
to  drop  the  pieces  in,  it  was  much  more  difficult  to  bring  them  out.  He  thereupon 
observed,  "  That  is  an  emblem  of  the  hearts  and  coffers  of  the  vast  majority  of  the 
men  of  these  times.  They  are  very  greedy  to  take,  but  vei-y  backward  to  give, 
especially  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  relief  of  the  poor.  Oh,  how  long  we  must 
shake,  and  how  many  arts  we  must  try,  before  w«  can  extract  even  a  penny 
from  a  hard  and  penurious  man,  for  the  service  of  God  or  his  neighbours  I 
So  long  as  he  lives,  he  imagines  that  the  business  for  which  he  came  into  the  world 
is  to  collect  and  keep  money ;  but  when  he  has  to  leave  the  world,  and  when  death 
breaks  the  savings-box  to  pieces,  and  he  must  resign  his  hoard  to  others,  he  does  it 
with  reluctance  and  displeasure.  I  really  believe  that,  were  it  not  too  absurd  and 
useless,  many  a  miser,  in  making  his  will,  would  do  what  a  miser  once  actually  did 
— appoint  himself  his  own  heir.  How  dreadful  a  folly  to  hoard  up  gold,  and  to  lose 
heaven." 

Vers.  20-25.  And  ai  they  did  eat,  He  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of 
you  shall  betray  Me. — Self-distrust: — Every  man  is  a  mystery  to  himself.  In 
every  soul  there  lie,  coiled  and  dormant,  like  hybemating  snakes,  evils  that  a  very 
slight  rise  in  the  temperat are  will  wake  up  into  poisonous  activity.  Let  no  man  say,  in 
foolish  self-confidence,  that  any  form  of  sin  which  his  brother  has  ever  committed,  is 
impossible  for  him.  Temperament  shields  us  frommuch,no  doubt.  There  aresinsthat 
we  are  "inclined  to,"and  there  are  sins  that  we  "have  no  mind  to."  But  the  identity 
of  human  nature  is  deeper  than  the  diversity  of  temperament.  I.  All  sinb  auk  at 
BOTTOM  BUT  VARYING  FORMS  OF  ONE  ROOT.  The  esseuce  of  ovcry  evil  is  selfishnflSB ; 
and  when  you  have  tliat,  it  is  exactly  as  with  cooks  who  have  the  "  stock  "  by  the 
fireside — they  can  make  any  kind  of  soup  out  of  it,  with  the  right  flavouring.  All 
sin  is  living  to  oneself  instead  of  to  God,  and  it  may  easily  pass  from  one  form  of 
evil  into  another,  just  as  light  and  heat,  motion  and  electricity,  are  all  various  forma 
of  one  force.  Doctors  will  tell  you  there  are  forma  of  disease  which  slip  from  one 
kind  of  sickness  into  another ;  so,  if  we  have  got  the  infection  about  ub,  it  is  a  matter 
very  much  of  accidental  circumstances  what  shape  it  takes.  II.  Ailsin  isoBEOARioDS. 
The  tangled  mass  of  sin  is  like  one  of  those  great  fields  of  sea-weed  that  you  some- 
times come  across  upon  the  ocean,  all  hanging  together  by  a  thousand  slimy 
growths  ;  which,  if  lifted  from  the  wave  at  any  point,  drags  up  yards  of  it  inextric- 
ably grown  together.  No  man  commits  only  one  kind  of  transgression.  All  sint 
hunt  in  couples.  III.  All  bin  is  but  tieldino  to  tendencies  common  to  ca  all, 
The  greatest  transgressions  have  resulted  from  yielding  to  tendencies  which  are 
common  to  ns  all.  Cain  killed  his  brother  from  jealousy ;  David  befouled  hie 
Dame  and  his  reign  by  animiil  passion  ;  Judas  betrayed  Christ  because  he  was  fond 
of  money.  Many  a  man  has  murdered  another  simply  because  he  had  a  hot  temped 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  607 

And  you  have  got  a  temper,  and  love  of  money,  and  animal  passions,  and  that  which 
may  stir  you  up  into  jealousy.  Tour  neighbour's  house  has  caught  fire  and  been 
blown  up.  Your  house,  too,  is  built  of  wood,  and  thatched  with  straw,  and  you  have 
as  much  dynamite  in  your  cellars  as  ha  had  in  his.  Do  not  be  too  sure  that  you 
are  safe  from  the  danger  of  explosion.  IV.  All  tbanboression  is  yieldino  ro 
TEMPTATIONS  THAT  ASSAIL  ALL  MEN.  Here  are  oue  hundred  men  in  a  plague-stricken 
city ;  they  have  all  got  to  draw  their  water  from  the  same  well.  If  five  or  six  of  them 
died  cf  cholera,  it  would  be  very  foolish  of  the  other  ninety-five  to  say,  "  There  is  no 
chance  of  my  being  touched."  And  we  all  Uve  in  the  same  atmosphere  ;  and  tbe 
temptations  that  have  overcome  these  men,  that  have  headed  the  count  of  crimes 
•ppeal  to  you.    V.  Men  will  gradually  drop  down  to  thk  level  which,  before  they 

BEOAN   THE   DESCENT,   SEEMED   TO   BE   IMPOSSIBLE   TO   THEM.      Flrst,   ths   imagination 

is  inflamed,  then  the  wish  begins  to  draw  the  soul  to  the  sin,  then  conscience  pulls  it 
back,  then  the  fatal  decision  is  made,  and  the  deed  is  done.  Sometimes  all  the 
stages  are  hurried  quickly  through,  and  a  man  spins  downhill  as  cheerily  and  fast 
as  a  diligence  doiivn  the  Alps.  Sometimes,  as  the  coast  of  a  country  may  sink  an 
inch  in  a  century,  until  long  miles  of  the  flat  sea-beach  are  under  water,  and  towers 
and  cities  are  buried  beneath  the  barren  waves,  so  our  lives  may  be  gradually 
lowered,  with  a  motion  imperceptible  but  most  real,  bringing  us  down  witnin  high- 
water  mark,  and  at  last  the  tide  may  wash  over  what  was  solid  land.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Is  it  I .' — Sinful  pomibilities : — A  moment  of  dismay  among  the  disciples. 
The  Master  had  just  declared  that  one  of  them  should  commit  an  act  of  the  basest 
treachery,  and  betray  Him  to  His  enemies.  How  do  they  take  His  words?  Do  they 
breakout  in  indignant  remonstrance?  Do  they  fall  to  accusing  one  another?  Does 
each  draw  back  from  his  brother  apostle  in  horror  at  the  thought  that  possibly  that 
brother  apostle  is  he  who  is  to  do  this  dreadful  thing  ?  No ;  they  are  all  self-en- 
grossed ;  each  man's  anxiety  is  turned,  not  towards  his  brother,  but  towards  himself. 
Now,  there  are  times  in  the  Uvea  of  all  of  us,  when  that  comes  to  us  which  came 
here  to  Christ's  disciples.  I.  When  we  see  deep  and  flagrant  sin  in  some  otheb 
MAN.  While  the  act  from  which  we  recoil  is  repugnant  to  our  conscientiousness, 
the  powers  that  did  it  and  the  motives  that  stirred  those  powers  into  action  are 
human,  and  such  as  we  possess  and  feel.     II.  When  wb  do  some  small  sin,  and 

BECOGNIZK    THE    DEEP    POWER    OF    SINFULNESS    BY    WHICH    WB    DO    IT.      The    sHghtCSt 

crumbling  of  the  earth  beneath  your  feet  makes  you  aware  of  the  precipice.  The 
least  impurity  makes  you  ready  to  cry  out,  as  some  image  of  hideous  lust  rises 
before  you,  "  Oh,  is  it  I  ?  Can  I  come  to  that  ?  "  HI.  The  expression  or  any  sus- 
picion ABOUT  UB  BY  ANOTHER  PERSON.  Perfectly  unwarrantable  and  false  we  may 
know  the  charge  to  be  ;  but  the  mere  fastening  of  the  sin  and  our  name  together, 
must  turn  our  eyes  in  on  ourselves  and  set  us  to  asking,  "  Is  it  possible  f  I  did  not 
do  this  thing,  indeed.  My  conscience  is  clear.  But  am  I  not  capable  of  it?  Is 
there  not  a  fund  of  badness  in  me  which  might  lead  me  almost  anywhere  ?  And  if  so, 
can  I  blaze  up  into  fiery  indignation  at  men's  daring  to  suspect  me?  Can  I  resent 
suspicion  as  an  angel  might,  who,  standing  in  the  light  of  God,  dreaded  and  felt  no 
sin  ?  No ;  our  disavowal  of  the  sin  would  be  not  boisterously  angry,  but  quiet,  and 
solemn,  and  humble,  vdth  a  sense  of  danger,  and  gratitude  for  preservation.     IV. 

By  a  strange    but  very   natural  process,  the   same  RESULT  OFTEN   C0JIE3  FROM  JUST 

THE  OPPOSITE  CAUSE.  Unmerited  praise  reveals  to  us  our  unworthiness.  A  man 
comes  up  to  our  life,  and,  looking  round  upon  the  crowd  of  our  fellow  men,  he  sayH, 
•'  See,  I  will  strike  the  life  of  this  brother  of  ours,  and  you  shall  hear  how  true  it 
rings."  He  does  strike,  and  it  does  seem  to  them  to  ring  true,  and  they  shout  their 
applause ;  but  we  whose  life  is  struck  feel  running  all  through  us  at  the  stroke  the 
sense  of  hoUowness.  Our  soul  sinks  as  we  hear  the  praises.  They  start  desire,  but 
they  reveal  weakness.  No  true  man  is  ever  so  humble  and  so  afraid  of  himself  as 
when  others  are  praising  him  most  loudly.  V.  Every  temptation  which  comes  to 
ns,  however  bravely  and  successfully  it  may  be  resisted,  opkns  to  us  the  sight  op 
bomb  of  oub  human  capacity  for  sin.  The  man  who  dares  to  laugh  at  a  temptation 
which  he  has  felt  and  resisted  is  not  yet  wholly  safe  out  of  its  power.  (Phillips  Brooks, 
D.D.)  The  apostles'  doubt  of  themselves  : — The  form  of  the  question  in  the  original 
suggests  that  tliey  expected  a  negative  answer,  and  might  bo  reproduced  in  Euglish, 
"  Surely  it  is  not  I  ?"  None  of  them  could  think  that  he  was  the  traitor,  yet  none 
of  them  could  be  sure  that  he  was  not.  Their  Master  knew  better  than  they 
did  ;  and  so,  from  a  humble  knowledge  of  what  lay  in  them,  coiled  and  slumbering, 
but  there,  they  will  not  meet  His  words  with  a  contradiction,  but  with  a  question. 
{A.  Madarer.,  D.D.)        Need  for  self-control : — Do  not  say.  "  I  know  when  to  stop," 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU81EAT0R.  [chap.  xxn. 

Do  not  say,  ••  I  can  go  so  far ;  it  will  not  do  me  any  harm."  Many  a  man  has  said 
that,  and  been  ruined  by  it.  Do  not  say,  "It  is  natural  to  me  to  have  thes« 
inclinations  and  tastes,  and  there  can  be  no  harm  in  yielding  to  them."  It  is 
perfectly  natural  for  a  man  to  stoop  down  over  the  edge  of  a  precipice  to  gather  the 
flowers  that  are  growing  in  some  cranny  in  the  cliS  ;  and  it  is  as  natural  for  him 
to  topple  over,  and  be  smashed  to  a  mummy  at  the  bottom  I  God  gave  you  your 
dispositions,  and  your  whole  nature  under  lock  and  key;  keep  them  sol  (Ibid.) 
Reward  of  treason : — Philip,  Duke  of  Austria,  paid  the  ambassadors  of  Charles  IV. 
(who  had  betrayed  their  trust)  in  counterfeit  coin ;  and  when  they  complained, 
made  reply,  that  faUe  coin  is  good  enough  for  false  knaves.  James  I.,  king  of 
Scotland,  was  murdered  in  Peith  by  Walter,  Earl  of  Athol,  in  hope  to  have  the 
crown  ;  and  crowned  he  was  indeed,  but  with  a  crown  of  red-hot  iron  clapped  upon 
his  head,  being  one  of  the  tortures  wherewith  he  ended  at  once  his  wicked  days  and 
devices.  And  Guy  Gawkes,  that  Spanish  pioneer,  should  have  received  his  reward 
of  five  hundred  pounds  at  an  appointed  place  in  Surrey,  but  instead  thereof,  he  had 
been  paid  home  with  a  brace  of  bullets  for  his  good  service,  if  justice  had  not  come 
in  with  a  halter  by  way  of  prevention.  Thus  traitors  have  always  become  odious, 
though  the  treason  were  commodious.  (Spencer.)  Apostates  : — In  the  long  line 
of  portraits  of  the  Doges,  in  the  palao*  at  Venice,  one  space  is  empty,  and  the 
semblance  of  a  black  curtain  remains  as  a  melancholy  record  of  glory  forfeited. 
Found  guilty  of  treason  against  the  State,  Marino  Falieri  was  beheaded,  and  his 
image  as  far  as  possible  blotted  from  remembrance.  As  we  regarded  the  singular 
memorial  we  thought  of  Judas  and  Demas,  and  then,  as  we  heard  in  spirit  the 
Master's  warning  word,  *•  One  of  you  shall  betray  Me,"  we  asked  within  our  soul 
the  solemn  question,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  f  "  Every  one's  eye  rests  longer  on  the  one 
dark  vacancy  than  upon  any  one  of  the  many  fine  portraits  of  the  merchant  monarch* ; 
and  so  the  apostates  of  the  Church  are  far  more  frequently  the  theme  of  the  world'i 
talk  than  the  thousands  of  good  men  and  true  who  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our 
Saviour-in  all  things.  Hence  the  more  need  of  care  on  the  part  of  those  of  us 
whose  portraits  are  publicly  exhibited  as  saints,  lest  we  should  one  day  be  painted 
oat  of  the  Church's  gallery,  and  our  persons  only  remembered  as  having  been 
detestable  hypocrites.  (C.  H.  Sptirgeon.)  Treachery,  audacity,  and  hypocrisy  : — 
We  have  here  an  example  of  fixed  determination  to  do  evil,  unshaken  by  the  clearest 
knowledge  that  it  is  evil.  Judas  heard  his  crime  described  in  its  own  ugly  reality. 
He  heard  his  fate  proclaimed  by  lips  of  absolute  love  and  truth ;  and  notwithstard. 
ing  both,  he  comes  unmoved  and  unshaken  with  his  question.  The  dogged  determi- 
nation in  the  man,  that  dares  to  see  his  evil  stripped  naked  and  is  not  ashamed,  ia 
even  more  dreadful  than  the  hypocrisy  and  sleek  simulationof  friendship  in  his  face. 
Most  men  turn  away  with  horror  from  even  the  sins  that  they  are  willing  to  do,  when 
they  are  put  pl&lily  and  bluntly  before  them.  We  have  two  sets  of  names  for 
wrong  thiiLg3 ;  one  of  which  we  apply  to  our  brethren's  sins  and  the  other  to  the 
same  sins  in  ourselves.  What  I  do  is  "  prudence,"  what  you  do  of  the  same  sort 
is  ••  covetousness  ;  "  what  I  do  is  "  sowing  my  wild  oats,"  what  you  do  is  "  im- 
morality" and  "dissipation;"  what  I  do  is  "generous  living,"  what  you  do  ia 
"drunkenness"  and  "gluttony;"  what  I  do  is  "righteous  indignation,"  what 
you  do  is  "  passionate  anger."  And  so  you  may  go  the  whole  round  of  evil.  Very 
bad  are  the  men  who  can  look  at  their  deed,  described  in  its  own  inherent  deformity 
and  yet  say,  "  Yes,  that  is  it,  and  I  am  going  to  do  it."  "  One  of  you  shall  betray 
Me."  Yes,  I  will  betray  you."  It  must  have  taken  something  to  look  into  the 
Master's  face,  and  keep  the  fixed  purpose  steady.  This  obstinate  condition  of 
dogged  determination  to  do  a  wrong  thing,  knowing  it  to  be  a  wrong  thing,  is  a 
condition  to  which  all  evil  steadily  tends.  We  may  not  come  to  it  in  this  world,  but 
wo  are  getting  towards  it  in  regard  of  the  special  wrong  deeds  and  desires  that  we 
cheriali  and  commit.  And  when  a  man  has  once  reached  the  point  of  saying  to 
evil,  "  Be  thou  my  good,"  then  he  is  a  "  devil,"  in  the  true  meaning  of  the  word; 
and  wherever  he  is,  he  is  in  hell !  (A.  Maclnren,  D.D.)  Supper  with  the 
twelve  : — On  the  eve  of  the  crucifixion  Jesus  sat  down  to  supper  with  the  twelve, 
in  the  room  which  had  been  provided  and  prepared  for  them.     I.  A  picture  of  thi 

POVKBTT   OF  JESUS  ON   THB    EVB   OF   DIBCHABOINO   THE   GREATEST  DEBT   EVEB  OWED   BT 

MAN.  He  must  borrow  a  room  and  accept  the  hospitality  of  a  stranger.  But  in  a 
moral  sense  he  was  rich  and  able  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  men.  We  most  nc) 
judge  the  worth  of  a  person  by  outward  circumstances.     II.  A  picture  of  rva 

CALMNESS   OF  JESUS   OH   THE    EVS   OF  ENDUBINO    THB   QBEATEST  ANQDISH   EVEB   BOBNB 

BY  MAN.     With  calmness  he  sat  down  with  the  twelve  on  the  ce  of  the  greatest 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  609 

Buffering.       III.  A  picture  of  the  friendlessness  of  Jesus  on  the  eve  op  expe- 

BIENCING    THE    GREATEST   DESERTION    EVER    KNOWN    BY   MAN.  He    Sat  doWD  with    the 

very  men  who  were  to  forsake  him  ;  but  He  utters  no  word  of  stern  rebuke.  (F,  W. 
Brown.)  Christ  foretelling  the  treachery  of  Judas  : — I.  There  is  the  prediction 
and  it  discovers  to  us—  1.  The  close  and  constant  view  which  the  Lord  Jesus  seems 
to  have  taken  of  His  final  sufferings.  2.  The  naturalness  of  our  Lord's  mind  ;  by 
this  I  mean  its  resemblance  to  our  own  minds.  He  has  our  inward  nature.  He 
felt  treachery.  3.  The  exceeding  tenderness  of  Christ.  He  cared  for  the  love  of 
the  men  around  Him.  4.  The  wonderful  self-denial  of  our  Lord.  He  did  not  treat 
Judas  differently  from  the  other  disciples,  though  so  long  false.  IL  The  effect 
PRODUCED  ON  THE  DISCIPLES  BT  THIS  PREDICTION.  1.  Their  simple  faith  in  their 
Lord's  prediction.  2.  Their  warm  love  for  Christ.  3.  Their  great  self -distrust. 
(C.  Bradley.)  Is  it  I .» — When  the  wind  is  rising  it  is  good  for  each  ship  at  sea 
to  look  to  its  own  ropes  and  sails,  and  not  stand  gazing  to  see  how  ready  the  other 
ships  are  to  meet  it.  We  all  feel  that  we  would  rather  hear  a  man  asking  about 
himself  anxiously  than  to  see  him  so  sure  of  himself  that  the  question  never 
occurred  to  him.  We  should  be  surer  of  his  standing  firm  if  we  saw  that  he  knew 
he  was  in  danger  of  a  fall.  Now,  all  this  is  illustrated  in  Christ's  disciples. 
{Phillips  Brocks.)  Judas  rebuked  by  Christ : — You  have  here  an  account  of  how 
our  Lord,  whilst  partaking  of  the  last  supper  with  His  disciples,  predicted  His 
betrayal.  The  disciples  were  greatly  moved  by  the  declaration :  it  is  a  good  sign 
when  we  are  less  suspicious  of  others  than  of  ourselves — '*  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  I.  We 
regard  the  sayings  of  our  Lord  at  this  time  as  uttered  with  special  reference  to 
Judas,  with  the  merciful  design  of  warning  him  of  the  enormity  of  his  pro- 
jected CRIME,  and  thus,  if  possible,  of  withholding  him  from  its  commission.  It  is 
easy  to  see  an  adaptation  between  the  words  used  by  Christ  and  the  feelings  which 
may  have  been  working  in  Judas.  "  The  Son  of  Man  goeth  as  it  is  written  of 
Him."  Judas  may  have  thought  that  he  was  helping  foi-ward  the  work  of  the 
Messiah  ;  the  crucifixion  was  a  determined  thing.  ••  Woe  unto  that  man  by  whom 
the  Son  of  Man  is  betrayed."  Judas  was  free  in  his  treachery,  acted  from  his  own 
will,  in  obedience  to  his  depraved  passions,  as  if  there  had  been  no  Divine  fore- 
knowledge. Oh  I  the  vanity  of  the  thought  that  God  ever  places  us  under  a  neces- 
sity of  sinning,  or  that  because  our  sins  may  turn  to  His  glory  they  will  not  also 
issue  in  our  shame.  II.  Let  us  now  glance  at  another  delusion  to  which  it  is  likely 
that  Judas  gave  indulgence ;  this  is  the  delusion  as  to  the  consequences,  the 
punishment  of  sin  being  exaggerated.  There  is  such  energy  in  conscience  that 
it  would  hardly  let  a  man  run  on  flagrant  acts  of  sin  if  there  were  not  some  drug 
by  which  it  were  lulled.  It  may  be  that  Judas  could  hardly  persuade  himself  that 
a  Being  so  beneficent  as  Christ,  whom  he  had  seen  healing  the  sick,  could  lay  aside 
the  graciousness  of  His  nature,  and  avenge  a  wrong  by  surrendering  the  evil  doer 
to  interminable  woe.  But  our  Lord's  words  meet  this  delusion — "  It  had  been  good 
for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  born."  We  expect  to  find  Judas  overawed  by  this 
saying.  III.  It  reveals  his  utter  moral  hardness.  Christ  had  said,  "  Woe 
unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  Man  is  betrayed. "  At  this  saying  Judas  askg, 
"  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  Numbers  bear  themselves  proudly  against  Christ  and  Hisgospel 
and  go  forth  from  the  very  sanctuary,  with  the  words  of  condemnation  in  their  ears, 
to  do  precisely  the  things  by  which  that  sentence  is  incurred.    {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  26-29.  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  It — 
Relation  oftJie  Holy  Communion  to  Christ: — The  bread  and  cup  are  His  body  and 
blood,  because  they  are  causes  instrumental,  upon  the  receipt  whereof  the  participa- 
tion of  His  body  and  blood  ensueth.  Every  cause  is  in  the  effect  which  groweth 
from  it.  Our  souls  and  bodies  quickened  to  eternal  life  are  effects,  the  causa 
whereof  is  the  person  of  Christ ;  His  body  and  blood  are  the  true  well-spring  out 
of  which  this  life  floweth.  .  .  .  What  merit,  force,  or  virtue  soever  there  is  in  Hia 
sacrificed  body  and  blood  we  freely,  fully,  and  wholly  have  by  this  sacrament ;  and 
"because  the  sacrament  itself,  being  but  a  corruptible  and  earthly  creature,  must 
needs  be  thought  an  unlikely  instrument  to  work  so  admirable  effects  in  men,  we 
are  therefore  to  rest  ourselves  altogether  upon  the  strength  of  His  glorious  power, 
who  is  able  and  will  bring  to  pass  that  the  bread  and  cup  which  He  giveth  us  shall 
be  truly  the  thing  He  promiseth.  (R.  Hooker,  D.D.)  The  Eucharist  the  great 
feast  of  the  Church : — I.  A  true  feast — for  the  nourishment  of  the  spiritual  life. 
TT,  A  sacred  feast — sanctifying  from  all  carnal  enjoyment.  III.  A  covenant  feast — 
teaUng  redemption.    IV.  A  love  feast — uniti  g  the  redeemed,    V.  A  supper  feast'* 

&9 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  3txvt 

fore-festival  of  death,  of  the  end  of  all  things,  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  (J.  P. 
Zjange,  D.D.)  Sacrificial  aspect  of  Christ's  death  shown  in  the  Lord's  Supper: — 
This  rite  shows  us  what  Christ  thought,  and  would  have  us  think,  of  His  death. 
jij  it  He  points  out  the  moment  of  His  whole  career  which  He  desires  that  men 
Ehould  remember.  Not  His  words  of  tenderness  and  wisdom ;  not  His  miracles, 
amazing  and  gracious  as  these  were;  not  the  flawless  beauty  of  His  character, 
shough  it  touches  all  hearts,  and  wins  the  most  rugged  to  love  and  the  most 
degraded  to  hope ;  but  the  moment  in  which  He  gave  His  life  is  that  which  He 
would  imprint  for  ever  on  the  memory  of  the  world.  And  not  only  so,  but  in  the 
rite  He  distinctly  tells  us  in  what  aspect  He  would  have  that  death  remembered. 
Not  as  the  tragic  end  of  a  noble  career  which  might  be  hallowed  by  tears  such  as 
are  shed  over  a  martyr's  ashes ;  not  as  the  crowning  proof  of  love ;  not  as  the 
supreme  act  of  patient  forgiveness ;  but  as  a  death  for  us,  in  which,  as  by  the 
blood  of  the  sacrifice,  is  secured  the  remission  of  sins.  And  not  only  so,  but  the 
double  symbol  in  the  Lord's  Supper — whilst  in  some  respects  the  bread  and  wine 
speak  the  same  truths,  and  certainly  point  to  the  same  cross — has  in  each  of  its 
parts  special  lessons  entrusted  to  it,  and  special  truths  to  proclaim.  The  bread 
and  the  wine  both  say,  "  Kemember  Me  and  My  death."  Taken  in  conjunction 
they  point  to  the  death  as  violent ;  taken  separately  they  each  suggest  various 
aspects  of  it,  and  of  the  blessings  that  will  flow  to  us  therefrom.  I.  A  Divine  treaty 
or  covenant.  II.  The  forgiveness  of  sins.  III.  A  life  infused.  IV.  A  festal 
gladness.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  New  Testament :  God's  covenants  with  His 
people : — Ancient  Israel  had  lived  for  nearly  2000  years  under  the  charter  of  their 
national  existence,  which  was  given  on  Sinai  amidst  thunderings  and  lightnings 
(Exod.  xix.  5,  &c.).  And  that  covenant,  or  agreement,  or  treaty,  on  the  part  of 
God  was  ratified  by  a  solemn  act,  in  which  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  divided  into 
two  portions,  was  sprinkled,  half  upon  the  altar,  and  the  other  half,  after  their 
acceptance  of  the  conditions  and  obligations  of  the  covenant,  on  the  people  who 
had  pledged  themselves  to  obedience.  And  now  here  is  a  Galilean  peasant,  in  a 
borrowed  upper  room,  within  four-and-twenty  hours  of  His  ignominious  death, 
which  might  seem  to  blast  all  His  work,  who  steps  forward  and  says,  "  I  put  away 
that  ancient  covenant  which  knits  this  nation  to  God.  It  is  antiquated.  I  am  the 
true  offering  and  sacrifice,  by  the  blood  of  which,  sprinkled  on  altar  and  on  people, 
a  new  covenant,  built  upon  better  promises,  shall  henceforth  be."  What  a  tremen- 
dous piece  of  audacity,  except  on  the  one  hypothesis  that  He  who  spake  was  indeed 
the  "Word  of  God,  and  that  He  was  making  that  which  Himself  had  established  of 
old  to  give  way  to  that  which  He  establishes  now.  The  new  covenant,  which  Christ 
seals  in  His  blood,  is  the  charter,  the  better  charter,  under  the  conditions  of  which 
the  whole  world  may  find  a  salvation  which  dwarfs  all  the  deliverances  of  the  past. 
Between  us  and  the  infinite  Divine  nature  there  is  established  a  firm  and  unmove- 
able  agreement.  He  has  limited  Himself  by  the  utterance  of  a  faithful  word,  and 
we  can  now  come  to  Him  with  His  own  promise,  and  oast  it  down  before  Him,  and 
say,  *•  Thou  hast  spoken,  and  Thou  art  bound  to  fulfil  it."  We  have  a  covenant ; 
God  has  shown  us  what  He  is  going  to  do,  and  has  thereby  pledged  Himself  to  the 
performance.  (Ibid.)  The  Lord's  Supper : — I.  The  kature  of  the  institution. 
It  is  a  supper — strictly  and  essentially  in  its  own  particular  nature  it  is  nothing 
else.  Was  apparently  in  connection  with  another  supper,  and  it  seemed  to  be 
almost  a  part  of  that  other  supper.  The  supper  was  significant  and  emblematic — 
a  representation  of  something  else.  II.  The  object  and  design.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  brought  before  us.  The  death  of  Christ  as  an  offering  for  sin  is  brought 
before  us.  The  death  of  Christ  as  the  seal  of  the  everlasting  covenant  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son  is  brought  before  us.  IH.  The  observance  of  the  rite.  Just 
as  simple  as  its  nature  and  object.  The  frequency  of  reception  is  left  open.  The 
posture  may  be  considered  indifferent.  The  positive  directions  and  the  actual 
practice  of  our  Lord.  [C.  3Iolyneux.)  The  last  supper: — I.  The  time  of  thb 
INSTITUTION.  1,  During  the  feast  of  the  Passover.  Christ  the  true  Passover 
(Exod.  xii.  3,  6,  7,  and  others  ;  with  John  i.  29 ;  Key.  v.  6).  2.  On  the  eve  of  His 
being  offered.  The  meaning  and  purpose  of  the  Passover  lamb  transferred  to  Jesus, 
and  the  sense  widened.  That  for  the  Jews  only,  this  for  the  true  Israel  of  God,  &o. 
li.  The  method  of  the  institution.  1.  With  thanksgiving.  2.  The  bread— ^ 
broken,  distributed,  eaten.  Christ  the  bread  of  life.  Eeceived  by  faith.  8.  The 
wine.  All  were  to  drink  it.  The  blood  of  Christ  shed  for  the  remission  of  siil. 
4.  They  sung  a  hymn — left  the  table  with  joy  and  thankfulness.  III.  The  purposi 
OF  THE  iNSTiiDTiOM.     1.  To  Supersede  the  Jewish  Passover.     2.  A  memorial  feast. 


CHAP.  XXVI, J  ST.  MATTHEW.  61% 

No  less  binding  upon  Christians  than  any  other  law  of  Christ.  A  dying  command. 
Sacredness  of  last  words.  3.  A  bond  of  union  among  Christians,  and  public 
acknowledgment  of  indebtedness  to  and  faith  in  Christ.  (J.  G.  Gray.)  Th6 
Fassover  feast: — Relate  the  history  of  this  feast.  I.  The  Passover  feast  com. 
UEMOBATED  A  OBEAT  DELIVERANCE.  1.  A  deliverance  from  what  ?  From  Egyptian 
bondage — the  destroying  angel — God's  judgment  upon  sin,  2.  How  was  this 
deliverance  effected  ?  3.  Why  was  this  deliverance  commemorated  every  year  ? 
II.  The  Passover  feast  pointed  to  a  greater  deliverance.  1.  A  deliverance  from 
what  ?  From  a  worse  bondage  than  that  of  Egypt,  &c.  (John  viii.  34  ;  Peter  ii ,  19). 
And  from  a  judgment  more  terrible  than  came  upon  the  first-born  (Rom.  ii.  3,  5, 8  ; 
Matt.  XXV.  41).  2.  How  was  this  greater  deliverance  to  be  effected  ?  Also  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb  (1  Peter  i.  18,  19  ;  Rev.  v.  8,  9).  Who  is  this  Lamb?  (John'i.  29  ; 
Col.  i.  13,  14  ;  Heb.  ix.  12,  14).  We  must  come  to  Christ  and  have  heart  sprinkled 
(Heb.  X.  19,  22  ;  1  Peter  i.  2),  Each  must  have  his  own  sin  put  away,  &c.  3.  How 
did  the  yearly  feast  point  to  this  greater  deliverance?  Would  show  how  deliverance 
from  death  could  only  be  by  death  of  another  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  III.  Christ  instituted 
THE  Lord's  Supper  to  commemorate  this  greater  deliverance.  In  the  Lord's 
Supper  two  things  done — I.  We  commemorate  Christ's  death  for  us.  2.  We  feed 
npon  Him  by  faith.  (E.  Stock.)  The  Lord's  Supper : — Nature  and  design.  LA 
COMMEMORATION.  Includes — (1)  Adoration.  Adoration  due  to  God  in  fashion 
of  a  man.  It  is  this  that  makes  Him  the  central  point  of  the  universe,  to  whom  all 
eyes  are  turned.  (2)  Gratitude.  The  benefits — deliverance  from  hell,  power  of 
Satan,  and  sin  ;  restoration  to  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  God ;  fellowship  with 
Christ,  including  participation  with  His  life  and  glory.  The  cost  at  which  these 
benefits  were  secured — Christ's  humiliation  and  suffering.  II.  A  communion.  1.  An 
act  and  means  of  participation.  We  participate  in  His  body  and  blood,  i.e.,  of  their 
eacrificial  virtue.  2.  The  effect  of  this  makes  us  one  with  Him  ;  one  body.  Illus- 
tration from  the  Jewish  rites.  In  this  ordinance  our  union  with  Christ  and  with 
each  other  is  far  more  intimate.  III.  Consecration.  We  cannot  commemorate 
Christ  as  our  Saviour  without  thereby  acknowledging  ourselves  to  be  His — the 
purchase  of  His  blood,  and  devoted  to  His  service.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  TheinstU 
lution  and  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper : — I.  A  remembrance  of  the  atonement 
of  Christ.  1.  How  much  He  suffered.  2.  How  well  He  suffered.  3.  How  patiently 
He  suffered.  II.  A  proclamation  of  the  atonement  of  Christ.  Ill,  A  participation 
in  the  atonement  of  Christ.  1.  Great  facilities  granted.  2.  A  direct  communication 
from  Christ  to  His  people.  (B.  Noel,  M.J.)  The  new  wine  of  the  kingdom: — I, 
The  words  of  the  Saviour  as  they  regard  the  act  in  which  Himself  and  His 
toUjOWers  were  then  engaged.  They  were  drinking  of  "the  fruit,"  or,  more 
properly,  "  the  product "  of  the  vine.  Not  a  mere  ordinary  social  communion,  but 
in  (Urect  connection  with  the  Passover.  Christ  did  not  design  to  honour  a  Jewish  rite 
as  commemorating  a  national  deliverance,  but  as  typical,  holding  a  relationship  to 
Him  and  the  economy  of  which  He  was  the  head.  1.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  led  His 
followers  to  regard  the  Passover  as  being  representative  of  His  mediatorial  suffer- 
ings and  death.  2.  The  Saviour  led  His  followers  to  consider  the  Passover  as 
originating  an  ordinance  to  be  perpetuated  for  important  purposes  throughout  all 
*he  ages  of  the  Christian  Church.  IL  The  words  of  the  Saviour  as  they  regard  thb 
events  He  taught  Hjs  followers  to  anticipate,  1.  An  event  of  approaching 
reparation — •*  I  will  not  henceforth  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  until "  a  certain 
period  afterwards-named  ;  He  and  His  disciples  were  bound  to  part.  2.  An  event 
of  ultimate  re-union — "  When  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  My  Father's  kingdom." 
8,  All  the  followers  of  the  Saviour  shall  be  brought  to  "  the  Father's  kingdpm." 
4.  The  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  which  the  Paschal  rite  is  to  be  regarded  as  a 
permanent  and  symbolical  pledge,  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  secure  that  all  those 
who  have  possessed  a  personal  interest  in  that  mediatorial  work  shall  be  brought 
into  a  state  of  glorious  redemption  in  the  bright  worlds  which  lie  beyond  the  grave. 
6.  The  followers  of  the  Sa\iour  shall  possess  unspeakable  and  everlasting  joy.  The 
drinking  of  wine  indicates  the  fruition  of  all  delight.  6.  The  pleasures  which  are 
to  be  enjoyed  by  the  followers  of  the  Saviour  in  the  Father's  kingdom  are  especially 
to  be  regarded  as  associated  with  His  presence.  How  pre-eminently  in  the  New 
Testament  is  the  presence  of  Christ  set  forth  as  constituting  the  happiness  of  the 
celestial  world  (John  xii.  26).  Learn  (1)  How  vast  and  wonderful  is  the  love  of 
Christ  to  man.  (2)  The  vast  importance  of  being  numbered  amongst  the  followers 
of  Christ  ourselves.  {J.  Parsons.)  The  new  covenant : — I.  The  new  covenant  of 
forgiveness  and  life.     On  God's  side  is  pledged  forgiveness,  remission  of  sins, 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxtj. 

sustained  acceptance.  On  man's  side  is  pledged  the  obedience  of  faith.  Christ,  ai 
mediator  for  man,  receives  God's  pledge ;  and,  as  mediator  for  God,  He  receives 
man's  pledge.  As  representative  for  man,  He  offers  to  God  the  perfect  obedience, 
and  pledges  us  to  a  like  obedience ;  as  representative  for  God,  He  brings  and  gives 
to  us  forgiveness  and  life,  pledging  God  therein.  II.  The  blood  which  seals  the 
covenant.  The  blood  represents  the  yielding  or  taking  of  life.  1.  In  surrendering 
His  Ufe,  Christ  sealed  our  pledge  that  we  will  give  our  life  to  God  in  all  holy 
obedience.  2.  In  giving  His  blood,  His  life,  for  us,  as  it  were,  to  eat,  He  gives  us 
the  strength  to  keep  our  pledge.  III.  The  wine  that  recalls  to  mind  and  renews  the 
covenant.  God  does  not  need  to  be  reminded  of  His  pledge,  but  frail,  forgetful, 
busy-minded  man  does.  (Selected.)  ChritVs  own  account  of  His  blood-shedding  : — 
I.  Whose  blood  was  this  ?  *'  My  blood."  It  is  a  man,  who  sits  at  that  table  with 
others,  not  an  argel.  But  He  is  also  the  living  God.  II.  By  whom  wab  this 
BLOOD  SHED  ?  1.  Himself,  to  speak  with  deepest  reverence.  Jesus  shed  His  own 
blood — was  the  offe)er  as  well  as  the  sacrifice.  He  freely  laid  down  His  life.  2.  In 
some  respects  the  principal  party  in  this  mysterious  blood-shedding,  even  the  holy 
loving  Father,  as  it  is  written,  "  God  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him 
np  for  us  all ;  "  "  This  commandment  have  I  received  of  My  Father ;  "  "  The  cup 
which  My  Father  hath  given  Me."  3.  We,  believers  in  .Jesus.  Our  sins  were  the 
guilty  cause.  III.  To  what  end  and  issue  was  this  blood-shedding?  "For  the 
remission  of  sins."  Our  Lord  singles  out  from  all  the  benefits  of  redemption  the 
remission  of  sins,  not  only  because  it  is  that  which  stands  most  intimately  related 
to  His  blood-shedding,  but  because  it  is  the  foundation  of  all,  carrying  the  others 
along  with  it  by  necessary  consequence  (Jer.  xxxi.  33,  34).  To  what  effect  as  well 
as  design  ?  A  sure  salvation  for  a  great  multitude  whom  no  man  can  number. 
{C.  J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Substitution  : — Let  me  mention  here  a  circumstance  in  the 
last  days  of  the  distinguished  Lord  Chancellor  Lyndhurst,  who,  at  an  extreme  age, 
l)ut  in  full  possession  of  all  his  rare  mental  powers,  was  brought  to  know  the 
Saviour.  He  said,  "  I  never  used  to  be  able  to  understand  what  these  good  people 
meant  when  they  spoke  of  so  much  blood,  the  blood.  But  I  understand  it  now  ; 
it's  just  substitution."  Ay,  that  it  is,  in  one  word,  '*  substitution;  "  "  My  blood 
shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins  ;  "  Christ's  blood  instead  of  ours ;  Christ's 
death  for  our  eternal  death  ;  Christ  "  made  a  curse,  that  we  might  be  redeemed 
from  the  curse  of  the  law."  Once,  in  conversation,  my  beloved  friend.  Dr.  Duncan, 
expressed  it  thus  in  his  terse  way,  "A  religion  of  blood  is  God's  appointed  religion 
for  a  sinner,  for  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  80. — And  when  they  had  sung  an  hymn. — The  parting  hymn: — Our  Lord 
commemorated  the  Passover  as  His  countrymen  were  wont  to  do  ;  and  we  may  justly 
conclude  that  He  sung  what  they  were  used  to  sing  in  finishing  the  solemn  celebra- 
tion. When  the  Passover  was  instituted  on  the  night  of  the  destruction  of  the  firstborn 
of  the  Egyptians,  various  forms  and  practices  were  enjoined  (Exod.  xii.).  But  in 
after  times,  especially  in  those  of  our  Saviour,  when  traditions  came  to  their  height, 
numerous  circumstances  were  added  to  the  celebration,  so  that  the  original  ritea 
formed  but  a  small  part  of  what  were  practised  by  the  Jews.  And  learned  men 
have  well  observed  that  Christ  commemorated  the  Passover  without  rejecting  such 
customs  as  could  not  distinctly  plead  the  authority  of  the  law.  For  instance,  the 
Jews  altered  the  posture  in  which  it  was  eaten.  Also  wine  came  to  be  taken  aa  well 
BS  unleavened  bread.  In  like  manner,  with  regard  to  the  singing  of  a  hymn  or 
psalm,  there  is  nothing  said  of  this  in  Exodus.  Yet  the  huudred  and  thirteenth 
and  fij?*  following  psalms  were  selected.  I.  We  observe  that  our  Lord,  by  conforming 
to  certain  customs  of  the  Jews  in  the  eating  of  the  Passover,  qavs  His  sanction  to 
ceremonies  which  may  not  be  able  to  plead  a  Divine  institution.  We  venture 
to  take  our  Lord's  conduct  with  regard  to  the  ceremonies  at  the  Passover  as  eatab- 
lishing  the  authority  of  the  Church  to  ordain  and  alter  ceremonies  and  rites,  and  aa 
strongly  condemning  those  who  would  make  mere  ceremonies  the  excuse  for 
disunion.  Our  Lord  conformed  to  customs  and  alterations  for  which  no  Divine 
warrant  could  be  produced,  and  against  which  specious  objections  could  have  been 
advanced.  We  agree,  therefore,  that  the  Church  is  not  bound  to  chapter  and  verse 
for  any  ceremony  she  may  enjoin.  The  apostles  might  have  said,  "What  au 
unnatural  moment  for  singing  joyous  hymns,"  aa  they  grew  sorrowful  at  the  Lord's 
departure.    But  they  kept  to  the  ordinances  of  the  Church.     II.  We  may  perhapa 

say    that   it   was   with     the     singing   of   a   HTMN    that   ChBIST   PREPABED   HiMSBIi* 

FOB  His  UNKNOWN  AGONT.     They  were  joyous  hymns  in  which  they  joined.     Was  it 


CHAP.  rxTi.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  U» 

a  strange  preparation  for  the  Mount  of  Olives  thus  to  oommemorate  the  mercies  aiid 
chant  the  praises  of  God  ?  We  should  join  praise  with  prayer  and  recounf 
God's  mercies  when  face  to  face  with  new  trials.  For  many,  like  the  captives  in 
JJabylon,  hang  their  harps  upon  the  willows,  when  they  find  themselves  in  a  strange 
land ;  whereas,  if  they  would  sing  "  One  of  the  eongs  of  Zion "  it  would 
remind  of  home  and  encourage  them  to  expect  deliverance.  Paul  and  Silas 
sang  in  the  prison.  We  may  fairly  say  that  the  power  of  singing  has  not  been 
eufficiently  considered  as  one  of  the  Creator's  gifts  to  His  creatures,  and  therefore 
intended  to  be  used  for  His  glory.  Singing,  like  music,  has  been  too  much  given 
up  by  the  Church  to  the  world.  [H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Music  not  merely  a  human 
invention : — We  are  too  apt  to  regard  music  as  a  human  art,  or  invention,  just 
because  men  make  certain  musical  instruments,  and  compose  certain  musical  pieces. 
And  hence  there  are  Christians  who  would  banish  music  from  the  pubhc  worship  of 
God,  as  though  unsuited  to,  or  unworthy  of,  so  high  and  illustrious  an  employment. 
But  it  is  forgotten,  as  has  been  obsei-ved  by  a  well-known  writer,  that  the  principles 
of  harmony  are  in  the  elements  of  nature,  that,  "  the  element  of  air  was  as  certainly 
ordained  to  give  us  harmonious  sounds  in  due  measure,  as  to  give  respiration  to  the 
limgs."  God  has  given  us  "  music  in  the  air  as  He  hath  given  us  wine  in  the 
grape ;  "  leaving  it  to  man  to  draw  forth  the  rich  melody,  as  well  as  to  extract  the 
inspiriting  juice,  but  designing  that  both  should  be  employed  to  His  glory,  and  used 
in  His  service.  (Ibid.)  Song  more  marvellous  than  speech: — But,  to  quote 
again  from  the  writer  already  referred  to,  "the  faculty,  by  which  the  voice  forms 
musical  sounds,  is  as  wonderful  as  the  flexure  of  the  organs  of  speech  in  the  articula- 
tion of  words."  Considered  as  the  result  of  certain  mechanical  arrangements, 
ninging  is  perhaps  even  more  marvellous  than  speaking,  or  gives  a  strouger  witness 
to  the  skill  and  the  power  of  the  Creator.  This  is  not  the  place  for  bringing  proof  of 
such  assertion  ;  but  they  who  have  considered  the  human  throat  as  a  musical 
instrument,  and  have  examined,  on  this  supposition,  its  structure  and  capacity, 
declare  that  it  presents  "  such  a  refinement  on  mechanism  as  exceeds  all  descrip- 
tion." And  we  are  not  to  doubt  that  God  gave  this  faculty  to  man,  that  he  might 
employ  it  on  His  praises.  (Ibid.)  The  spiritual  benefit  of  improved  psalmody  : — 
I  do  not  merely  mean  that  there  is  a  humanizing  power  in  music,  and  that  the  poor, 
taught  to  sing,  are  likely  to  be  less  wild,  and  less  prone  to  disorder,  and  therefore 
more  accessible  to  the  ministrations  of  reUgion.  Not,  indeed,  that  I  would  make 
no  account  for  this,  for  I  thoroughly  believe  that,  in  improving  the  tastes  of  a  people, 
yon  are  doing  much  for  their  moral  advancement.  I  like  to  see  our  cottagers 
encouraged  to  train  the  rose  and  the  honeysuckle  round  their  doors,  and  our 
weavers,  as  is  often  the  fact,  dividing  their  attention  between  their  looms  and  their 
carnations  ;  for  the  man  who  can  take  care  of  a  flower,  and  who  is  all  alive  to  its 
beauty,  is  far  less  likely  than  another,  who  has  no  delight  in  such  recreations,  to 
give  himself  up  to  gross  lusts  and  habits.  But,  independently  on  this,  if  singing 
were  generally  taught,  the  psalmody  in  our  churches  could  not  fail  to  be  generally 
improved.  And  I  am  quite  sure  that  this  could  not  take  place  without,  by  the 
blessing  of  God,  a  great  spiritual  benefit.  (Ibid.)  The  closing  hymn: — 1.  It 
bears  testimony  to  the  inspiration  of  Christian  song.  2.  It  bears  testimony  to  the 
comfor«^>  of  Christian  song,  3.  It  bears  testimony  to  the  brotherhood  of  Christian 
Bong  •*.  This  act  bears  testimony  to  the  power  of  song.  Consider  the  nature  of 
thif  f  .ymn.  Jesus  kept  the  Passover.  He  conformed  to  the  Jewish  custom.  They 
UKtr  {he  hundred  and  thirteenth  psalm,  and  five  following  psalms.  1.  It  was  a  song 
rj  praise.  2,  It  was  a  song  of  victory.  3.  It  was  a  song  of  joy.  (J.  A.  Gray.) 
the  hymn  of  the  Eucharist: — In  some  respects  this  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
statements  in  the  life  of  our  Saviour.  Jesus  sang.  What  was  the  subject  of  their 
song?  The  presumption  is  strong  that  they  sung  one  of  the  inspired  psalms.  1. 
In  these  words  there  is  a  fearful  meaning.  They  went  out  to  the  scene  of  agony. 
2.  Is  it  not  a  fair  conclusion,  that  sacred  song  adapts  itself  to  seasons  of  the  deepest 
grief  ?  Songs  of  praise  are  not  to  be  intermitted  or  silenced  by  seasons  of  great 
affliction.  3.  That  our  emotions  are  increased  or  relieved  by  due  utterance.  4. 
The  particular  mention  of  this  hymn  by  two  of  the  Evangelists,  amidst  the  very 
record  of  our  Lord's  death,  shows  clearly  that  sacred  praise  harmonises  well  with 
all  the  facts  and  all  the  doctrines  of  the  atoning  work.  What  can  be  a  stronger 
argument  for  the  authority  and  fitness  of  sacred  song,  in  connection  with  sacra- 
mental communions  I  There  is  greatly  needed  a  revival  of  the  e,pirit  of  worship. 
(J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.)  The  memorable  hymn  : — I.  Thk  fact  that  Jesos  sang 
AT  SUCH  A  TIME  AS  THIS.    What  docB  He  teach  us  by  it  ?     1.  My  religion  is  one  of 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvt 

happiness  and  joy.  2.  Our  Lord's  complete  fulfilment  of  the  law  is  even  mora 
worthy  of  our  attention.  It  was  customary  when  the  Passover  was  held,  to  sing, 
and  this  is  the  main  reason  why  the  Saviour  did  so.  3.  The  holy  absorption  ol 
the  Saviour's  soul  in  His  Father's  will.  4.  His  whole-heartedness  in  the  work  Ha 
was  about  to  do.  II.  The  singing  or  the  disciples.  Like  true  Jews  they  joined 
in  the  national  song.  Israel  had  good  cause  to  sing  at  the  Passover.  What  shall 
I  say  of  those  who  are  the  Lord's  spiritually  redeemed  ?  III.  How  barnesily  I 
DESIRE  YOU  TO  "  siNO  A  HYMN."  Let  your  hearts  be  brimming  with  the  essence  of 
praise.  "  What  hymn  shall  we  sing  ?  "  Many  sorts  of  hymns  were  sung  in  the 
olden  time;  look  down  the  list,  and  you  will  scarce  find  one  which  will  not  suit  ua 
now — the  war  song,  the  pastoral,  the  festive  songs,  the  love  song,  &o.  IV.  What 
shall  THE  TUNE  bo  ?  The  tune  must  have  all  the  parts  of  music.  It  must  be  very 
soft,  sweet,  strong,  &c.  V.  Who  shall  bino  this  hymn?  All  the  Father's 
children.     They  only  can.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  33-35.  Though  all  men  shall  be  offended  because  of  Thee,  yet  will  I 
never  be  offended. — EntJnisiasm  and  its  dangers : — I.  The  confidence  of  inex- 
perience, AIDED  BY  lack  OF  IMAGINATION.  How  oftsn  is  this  repeated  before  our 
eyes  1  Castles  in  the  air  are  built  by  inexperienced  virtue,  to  be  demolished,  alas  1 
at  the  first  touch  of  the  realities  of  vice.  The  country  lad  who  has  been  brought 
up  in  a  Christian  home,  and  is  coming  up  to  some  great  business  house  in  London, 
makes  vigorous  protestations  of  what  he  will,  and  will  not,  do  in  a  sphere  of  Ufs, 
of  the  surroundings  of  which  he  can,  as  yet,  form  no  true  idea  whatever;  the 
emigrant,  who  is  looking  forward  to  spend  his  days  in  a  young  colony,  where 
the  whole  apparatus  of  Christian  and  civilized  life  is  as  yet  in  its  infancy,  or  is 
wanting  altogether,  makes  plans  of  a  situation,  of  which  he  cannot  at  all  aa 
yet,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  take  the  measure ;  the  candidate  for  holy 
orders,  who  anticipates  his  responsibilities  from  afar,  gathering  them  from  hooka 
and  from  intercourse  with  clergymen,  makes  resolutions  which  he  finds  have  to  be 
revised  by  the  light  of  altogether  unforeseen  experiences.  II.  An  insufficknt  sensb 
OF  the  power  of  new  forms  of  temptation,  a  man  living  in  a  comparatively 
private  position  is  exemplary.  His  little  failures  do  but  serve  to  set  forth  the 
sterling  worth  of  his  general  character.  He  seems  to  be  marked  out  for  some  pro- 
motion. All  predict  that  he  will  be  a  great  success,  since  he  has  shown  on  a  small 
scale  excellencies  which  will  certainly  distinguish  him,  and  will  adorn  a  larger  sphere. 
He  is  promoted,  and  he  turns  out  a  hopeless  failure.  •'  How  extraordinary  1 "  cries 
out  the  world.  •'  Who  could  have  anticipated  this  ?  "  exclaim  his  friends.  And 
yet  the  explanation  may  be  a  very  simple  one.  He  may  have  been  brought,  by  the 
change  of  circumstances,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  under  the  influence  of  a  temp- 
tation hitherto  unknown  to  him.  He  may  have  been  tempted  in  his  earlier  years 
by  appeals  to  avarice,  illicit  desires,  or  personal  vanity  ;  but  never,  as  yet,  has  he 
felt  the  pressure  of  the  fear  of  man.  In  that  place  of  prominence  he,  for  the  first 
time,  feels  the  fear  of  a  mass  of  human  opinion  which  he  does  not  in  his  conscience 
and  his  heart  respect,  but  which  he  fears  only  because  it  is  a  mass.  And  this  fear  is  too 
much  for  him,  too  much  for  his  sense  of  justice,  too  much  for  his  consistency  and  his 
former  self.  Alas  I  that  new  temptation  has  found  a  weak  place  in  his  moral  nature ; 
it  has  sprung  a  leak  in  him  ;  and  the  disai'pointment  is  as  keen  to-day  as  the  ex- 
pectations  of  yesterday  were  unduly  sanguine.  III.  St.  Peter's  over-confidence 
would  seem  to  have  been  due  in  part  to  his  natural  temperament,  and  to  his 
reliance  on  it.  a  sanguine  impetuosity  was  the  basis  of  his  character.  In  this 
instance,  there  was  probably  a  mixture  of  these  dispositions — genuine  love  of  our 
Lord,  stirred  to  vehemence  by  the  recent  defection  of  Judas,  combined  with  eager- 
ness, the  product  of  temperament.  The  exact  proportions  of  the  conibinations 
we  know  not ;  but,  at  any  rate,  nature  had  more  to  do  with  his  language  than  grace. 
And  while  grace  is  trustworthy  in  times  of  trial,  nature  may  be  expected  to  give 
way.  An  instance  of  this  confusion  between  grace  and  nature  is  to  be  found  in  the 
enthusiasm  which  led  to  the  Crusades.  No  well-informed  and  fair-minded  man  can 
question  the  genuine  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  filled  such  men  as  Peter 
the  Hermit,  and  still  more  that  great  teacher  and  writer,  St.  Bernard.  They  exerted, 
these  men,  some  seven  centuries  ago,  an  influence  upon  the  populations  of  Central 
Europe,  to  which  the  modern  world  affords  absolutely  no  sort  of  parallel,  and  aft 
their  voice  thousands  of  men,  in  all  ranks  of  life,  left  their  homes  to  rescue,  if  it 
might  be,  the  sacred  soil  on  which  the  Eedeemer  had  hved  and  died,  from  the  hands 
of  the  infidel.    Who  can  doubt  that  of  these  not  a  few  were  animated  by  a  lor* 


CHAP.  xxvi.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  6U 

which  is  always  noble — that  of  giving  the  best  they  had  to  give  from  their  lives  to 
the  God  who  had  made  and  redeemed  them.  But  alas  I  who  can  doubt  that  many, 
perhaps  a  larger  multitude,  were  really  impelled  by  very  different  considerations 
which  gathered  round  this  certral  idea,  and  seemed  to  receive  from  it  some  sort  of 
consecration,  and  that  a  love  of  adventure,  a  love  of  reputation,  a  desire  to  escape 
from  the  troublous  times  at  home,  the  ambitious  hope  of  acquiring  influence  or 
power  which  might  be  of  use  elsewhere  than  in  Palestine,  which  might  found  or 
consolidate  a  dynasty,  also  entered  into  the  sum  of  moral  forces,  which  precipitated 
the  crusading  hosts  on  the  coasts  of  Syria?  And  how  many  a  crusader  could 
analyse,  with  any  approach  to  accuracy,  the  motives  which  swayed  him  in  an  enter, 
prise  where  there  was,  indeed,  so  much  of  the  smoke  and  dust  of  earth  to  obscure 
the  love  and  light  of  heaven  ?    IV.  The  lessons  to  be  leabnt  from  this  event. 

1.  Estimate  enthusiasm  at  its  proper  value.  It  is  the  glow  of  the  soul ;  the  lever 
by  which  men  are  raised  above  their  average  level  and  enterprise,  and  become 
capable  of  a  goodness  and  benevolence  which  would  otherwise  be  beyond  them. 

2.  Measure  well  our  religious  language,  especially  the  language  of  fervour  and  devo- 
tion. When  religious  language  outruns  practice  or  conviction,  the  general  character 
is  weakened.  If  Peter  had  said  less  as  they  left  the  supper-room,  he  might  have 
done  better  afterwards  in  the  hall  of  the  palace  of  the  high  priest.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Ficklene»s  of  the  hitman  heart : — In  a  vessel  filled  with  muddy  water,  the  thicknesa 
visibly  subsides  to  the  bottom,  and  leaves  the  water  purer  and  clearer,  until  at  last 
it  seems  perfectly  limpid.  The  slightest  motion,  however,  brings  the  sediment  again 
to  the  top,  and  makes  the  water  thick  and  turbid  as  before.  Here  we  have  an  emblem 
of  the  human  heart.  The  heart  is  full  of  the  mud  of  sinful  lusts  and  carnal  desires, 
and  the  consequence  is,  that  no  pure  water — that  is,  good  and  holy  thoughts — can 
flow  from  it.  It  is,  in  truth,  a  miry  pit  and  slough  of  sin,  in  which  all  sorts  of 
ugly  reptiles  are  bred  and  crawl.  Many  a  one,  however,  is  deceived  by  it,  and  never 
imagines  his  heart  half  so  wicked  as  it  really  is,  because  at  times  its  lusts  are  at 
rest,  and  sink,  as  it  were,  to  the  bottom.  On  such  occasions  his  thoughts  appear 
to  be  holy  and  devout,  his  desires  pure  and  temperate,  his  words  charitable  and 
edifying,  and  his  works  useful  and  Christian.  But  this  lasts  only  so  long  as  he  is 
not  moved ;  I  mean,  so  long  as  he  is  without  opportunity  or  incitement  to  sin.  Let 
that  occur,  and  worldly  lusts  rise  so  thick  that  his  whole  thoughts,  words,  and 
works  show  no  trace  of  anything  but  slime  and  impurity.  This  man  is  meek  as 
long  as  he  is  not  thwarted ;  but  cross  him,  and  he  is  like  powder,  ignited  by  the 
emallest  spark,  and  blazing  up  with  a  loud  report  and  destructive  force.  Another  is 
temperate  so  long  as  he  has  no  social  companions ;  a  third  chaste,  while  the  eyes 
of  men  are  upon  him.  (Scriver.)  Dangers  of  impulsiveness  : — I.  Prone  to  over- 
estimate self,  and  underrate  others — "  though  all  men — yet  not  I."  II.  Natural 
instability — frequent  reactions — can  do,  but  not  wait.  III.  Violence  and  rapidity 
of  its  changes.  IV.  Keadiness  with  which  it  takes  its  character  from  immediately 
surrounding  circumstances.  Learn:  1.  Let  the  cool  and  prudent  be  gentle  in 
judging  of  the  more  fiery.    2.  Let  the  impulsive  take  warning  from  this  example. 

3.  Let  the  man  who  repents  some  sin  of  haste,  take  encouragement  and  hope. 
(Analyst.)  I.  No  strenglh  of  attachment  to  Jesus  can  justify  such  confident  pro- 
mises of  fidelity,  made  without  dependence  upon  Him.  II.  That  all  promises  to 
adhere  to  Him  slionld  be  made  relying  on  Him  for  aid.  Ill,  That  we  little  know 
how  feeble  we  are  till  we  are  tried.  IV.  That  Christians  may  be  left  to  great  and 
disgraceful  sins  to  show  them  their  weakness.  {A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Peter's  Keif- 
confidence : — It  is  a  common  remark  that  in  the  absence  of  danger  ail  men  ar« 
heroes.  Self-distrust  does  not  enter  into  our  calculations.  Presuming  upon  the 
strength  and  permanence  of  present  emotion,  we  hurl  defiance  at  danger,  and  chal 
lenge  circumstances  to  shake  our  magnanimity.  Peter  was  not  alone  in  this  boast, 
but  his  conduct  was  marked  by  a  more  signal  exhibition,  both  of  self-confidence  and 
of  frailty,  than  that  of  his  fellow-disciples.  Fully,  however,  to  estimate  his  fall — 
I.  Look  at  some  of  thb  concomitant  chicumstances  by  which  his  offence  was 
aggravated.  1.  He  was  one  of  the  three  disciples  whom  Jesus  honoured  with  a 
peculiar  intimacy.  2.  He  appears  to  have  had  an  earlier  and  a  stronger  conviction 
of  our  Saviour's  Messiahship  than  his  brother  disciples  (Matt.  xvi.  13-17).  3.  The 
particular  crisis  at  which  his  offence  was  committed.  Almost  immediately  after 
another  of  the  twelve  had  betrayed  Him,  and  when,  humanly  speaking,  his  Master 
stood  most  in  need  of  his  support.  U.  These  facts  serve  to  illustrate  the  extent  of 
bis  self-deception,  and  to  impress  more  forcibly  this  most  important  lesson,  that  Na 

BXA80MABLB  OBrENDSNCK  IS  XO  BK   PLACED  ON  OUB   UEBE  UMTBIED  FEELINGS  AKD  BB- 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

B0LUTI0N8 ;  BUT  THAT  THE  ONLY  8ATI8FACT0BY  EVIDENCE  WE  CAN  POSSESS  OF  THH 
OENUINENEBa  AND  STABILITY  OF  OUR  11ELIOIOU3  PRINCIPLES,  IS  THAT  WHICH  OUR  CON- 
DUCT AFFORDS.  When  Peter  protested  his  fidelity,  his  constancy  had  not  been  put 
to  the  test.  His  eharacter  rendered  him  in  an  especial  degree  liable  to  this  species 
of  celf-doception,  still,  his  case  may  be  selected  as  a  strilung  illustration  of  the 
fallaciousuess  of  mere  untried  feelings  and  resolutions,  as  a  satisfactory  evideuca 
of  religious  character,  and  of  the  folly  and  danger  of  trusting  to  them  as  any 
security  for  future  conduct.  Few  things  are  more  common.  Let  ub  not  mistaka 
passion  for  principle  (John  xiv.  21 ;  1  John  v.  3).  (J.  H.  Smith.)  Protesting 
too  much  : — When  the  subtle  and  ambitious  John,  of  Gischala,  pursuing  his  own 
dark  course,  as  it  is  traced  in  the  •'  History  of  the  Jews,"  joined  outwardly  the  party 
of  Arianus,  and  was  active  beyond  others  in  council  and  camp,  he  yet  kept  up  a 
secret  correspondence  with  the  Zealots,  to  whom  he  betrayed  all  the  movements  of 
the  assailants.  "  To  conceal  this  secret  he  redoubled  his  assiduities,  and  became  so 
extravagant  in  his  protestations  of  fidelity  to  Arianus  and  his  party,  that  he  com- 
pletely overacted  his  part,  and  incurred  suspicion."  His  intended  dupes  began 
gradually  to  look  with  a  jealous  eye  on  their  too  obsequious,  most  obedient,  an^ 
must  devoted  servant.  {F.  Jacox.)  Hawthorne  remarks  that  Italian  asseverationa 
of  any  questionable  fact,  though  uttered  with  rare  earnestness  of  manner,  never 
vouch  for  themselves  as  coming  from  any  depth,  like  roots  drawn  out  of  the  sub- 
stance of  the  soul,  with  some  of  the  soil  clinging  to  them.  Their  energy  expends 
itself  in  exclamation.  The  vaulting  ambition  of  their  hyperboles  overleaps  itself, 
and  falls  on  the  other  side.  Truth  not  in  need  of  an  oath : — Reality  cares  not 
to  be  tricked  out  with  too  taking  an  outside ;  and  deceit,  when  she  intends  to  cozen, 
studies  disguise.  Least  of  all  should  we  be  taken  with  swearing  asseverations.  Truth 
needs  not  the  varnish  of  an  oath  to  make  her  plainness  credited.  (Owen  Feltham.) 
Lie  following  lie: — Lie  engenders  lie.  Once  committed,  the  liar  has  to  go  on  inhia 
course  of  lying.  It  is  the  penalty  of  his  transgression,  or  one  of  the  penalties.  To 
the  habitual  liar,  bronzed  and  hardened  in  the  custom,  till  custom  becomes  second 
nature,  the  penalty  may  seem  no  very  terrible  price  to  pay.  To  him,  on  the  other 
hand,  who,  without  deliberate  intent,  and  against  his  innermost  will,  is  overtaken 
with  such  a  fault,  the  generative  power  of  a  first  lie  to  beget  others,  the  necessity  of 
supporting  the  first  by  a  second  and  a  third,  is  a  retribution  keenly  to  be  felt,~while 
penitently  owned  to  be  most  just.     {F.  Jacox.) 

Vers.  36-39.  A  place  called  Gethsemane. — The  language  and  tone  befitting  our 
l)ray£Ts  to  God  : — To  a  thoughtful  and  inquiring  mind,  nothing  will  be  more  mani- 
fest than  the  decorum  of  our  Saviour's  addresses  to  the  throne  of  grace.  He  ia 
never  betrayed  into  flights  and  ecstasies;  never  uses  any  phrase  which  is  not  marked 
by  the  atrictest  rules  of  soberness  and  truth.  In  His  agony  in  the  garden,  when, 
if  ever,  the  mind  of  an  afflicted  and  sorrowful  man,  overwhelmed  with  grief,  and 
preparing  for  trial  and  for  death,  might  be  expected  to  break  forth  into  piteous  criea 
and  strong  phrases,  there  is  not  one  word  which  betrays  the  slightest  excess.  Hia 
soul  is  wrung  with  pain.  He  is  very  sorrowful.  He  is  sorrowful  even  unto  death. 
His  agony  is,  perhaps,  unspeakable ;  but  not  one  impassioned  cry,  not  one  in- 
decorous expression,  not  one  familiar  word,  escapes  his  lips.  His  prayer  is  such  aa 
befits  a  son  who  honours  his  father,  and  who  seems  to  have  ever  present  to  bis 
mind  the  dignity  of  that  parent.  Now  compare  this  with  the  prayers  of  ignorant 
and  uneducated  men — with  the  loud  cry,  the  coarse  phrases,  the  vehement  gesticu 
lations,  the  monstrous  apostrophes  they  employ ;  above  all,  with  the  familiar  way 
in  which  they  speak  of  God  and  address  themselves  to  Him,  and  judge  between 
them  and  Jesus  Christ.  Jesus  came  to  set  us  an  example,  aa  well  in  what  lie  said 
as  in  what  He  did.  He  taught  us  how  to  pray.  He  showed  on  this  great  occasion, 
an  occasion  which  none  besiile  will  ever  experience,  what  is  to  be  the  tone  and 
manner  of  our  addresses  to  God.  He  was  dignified  in  the  midst  of  His  distress. 
His  holy  father  was  an  object  of  the  devoutest  reverence,  so  devout  that  He  never 
preaumea  either  then,  or  at  any  time,  to  use  familiar  language  to  Him.  His  prayer 
was  such  that  it  might  have  been  listened  to  by  the  greatest  prince  or  the  pro- 
foundest  scholar,  yet  it  was  a  prayer  so  simple  that  any  one  can  use  it.  Every 
aentence,  every  word,  every  syllable,  is  suitable  to  the  majesty  of  heaven  and  the 
weakness  of  man.  He  never  descends  to  low  phrases  and  conversational  terms, 
nor  forgeta,  for  one  moment,  that  He  is  in  intercourse  with  the  Father  of  spirits. 
{George  Wray,  M.A.)  Submixaion  to  the  Divine  will : — Payson  was  asked,  wheo 
under  great  bodily  affliction,  if  he  could  see  any  particular  reason  for  the  dispen- 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  ttT 

eation,  "  No,"  he  replied ;  "  but  I  Rm  as  well  satisfied  as  if  I  could  see  ten  thou- 
band;  God's  will  is  the  very  perfection  of  all  reason."  Duty  of  submission : — I 
know  no  duty  in  religion  more  generally  agreed  on,  nor  more  justly  reijuired  by 
God  Almighty,  than  a  perfect  submission  to  His  will  in  all  things  ;  nor  do  I  think 
any  disposition  of  mind  can  either  please  Him  more,  or  become  us  better,  than  that 
of  being  satisfied  with  all  He  gives,  and  contented  with  all  He  takes  away.  None, 
I  am  sure,  can  be  of  more  honour  to  God,  nor  of  more  ease  to  ourselves.  For  if 
we  consider  Him  as  our  Maker,  we  cannot  contend  with  Him ;  if  as  our  Father,  we 
ought  not  to  distrust  Him  ;  so  that  we  may  be  confident,  whatever  He  does  is  in- 
tended for  our  good ;  and  whatever  happens  that  we  interpret  otherwise,  yet  we 
can  get  nothing  by  repining,  nor  save  anything  by  resisting.  {Sir  IVm.  Temple.) 
*'  My  will,  not  thine,  be  done,"  turned  Paradise  into  a  desert.  "  Thy  will,  not^ 
mine  be  done,"  turned  the  desert  into  Paradi^^e,  and  made  Gethsemane  the  gate  of  > 
heaven.  (E.  de  Pressense,  D.D.)  A  visit  to  Gethsemane  : — The  interest  attached  to' 
the  events  belonging  to  the  course  of  our  Redeemer  becomes  more  touching  and  more 
absorbing  as  they  advance  towards  the  close,  dkc.  I.  What  was  the  "place 
CALLED  Gethsemane  ? "  There  were  reasons  why  this  garden  should  be  selected,  at 
once  obvious  and  important.  Knowing  what  He  had  to  undergo,  the  Lord  Jesua 
wanted  privacy;  the  disciple  who  was  to  betray  Him  knew  the  place,  &o.    II.  Thb 

EMOTION  OF   WHICH    THE    "  PLACE   CALLED  GeTHSEMANK  "   WAS  THE  SCEKE.      It  WaS  the 

emotion  of  sorrow.  1.  Its  intensity.  Formerly  His  sorrow  had  been  chastened  and 
subdued,  while  now  it  burst  forth  irrepressibly  and  without  reserve.  Presented  in 
tlie  Evangelical  narratives.  2.  Its  cause.  The  solitude  of  the  cause  of  the 
Saviour's  emotion,  is  exclusively  this,  that  He  was  not  only  a  martyr,  but  a 
Vediator,  and  that  He  sufi'ered  as  an  expiation  on  behalf  of  human  sin.  He  was 
fteling  the  immense  and  terrible  weight  of  propitiation.  3.  Its  relief  and  end. 
Support  conveyed  as  an  answer  to  His  prayers,  through  the  ministration  of  an 
angel,  invigorating  Him  for  the  endurance  of  the  final  and  fearful  crisis  which  was 
before  Him.     He  is  enthroned  in  the  loftiest   elevation.     HI.  The  impkessions 

VHICH  OtJB  BESOET  TO  THE    "  PLACE  CALLED  GeTHSEMANE  "  OUGHT  TO  SECURE,       1.   The 

enormous  evil  and  heinousness  of  sin.  2.  The  amazing  condescension  and  love  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  3.  The  duty  of  entire  reliance  upon  the  Saviour's  work,  and  entire 
Ci>nsecration  to  the  Saviour's  service.  For  that  reliance,  genuine  and  implicit 
fitith  is  what  is  required — faith  being  the  instrument  of  applying  to  whole  per- 
fection of  His  work,  &c.  Who  can  do  other  than  recognize  at  once  the  obligation 
and  the  privilege  of  entire  consecration?  (/.  Parsons.)  The  soul-sorrow  oj 
Jesus : — I.  That  the  bodily  bufferings  of  Jesus,  however  acute  and  proti  acted, 
COULD  NOT  constitute  A  EUFTiciENT  ATONEMENT  FOR  SIN.  Nor  meet  the  demands  of 
a  violated  law.  The  bodily  euffering  is  no  adequate  compensation  for  the  evil  com- 
mitted. The  soul  is  the  chief  sinner.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  in  His  body  could 
not  be  a  sufiicient  atonement  for  sin  because  they  did  not  exhaust  the  curse  pro- 
nounced by  the  law  against  transgression.  H.  The  severity  of  the  Mediator's 
noBBOW.  When  He  made  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin.  1.  He  suffered  much  from 
the  temptations  by  which  He  was  assailed.  2.  From  the  ingratitude  and  mahpnity 
of  man.  3.  The  soul-sorrow  of  Christ  was  produced  by  the  sensible  withholding 
of  all  comforting  communication  from  heaven,  and  by  the  feeling  of  forsakenness 
in  the  hour  of  distress.  4.  Tlie  sorrow  of  the  Redeemer's  soul  rose  to  its  height 
when  he  did  actually  endure  the  wrath  of  God  due  to  our  sins.  (J.  Macnaughton.) 
Tits  representative  human  conflict : — Our  Savour's  conflict  in  Gethsemane  was  a 
representative  conflict,  and  it  reveals  to  us  the  meaning  of  human  life,  and  the 
struggle  through  which  we  must  pass.  I.  There  are  only  two  wills  in  the  world — 
God's  will,  and  man's  will.  II.  The  blessedness  of  man,  the  creature,  must  lie  in 
the  harmonious  working  together  of  these  two  wills.  III.  These  two  wills  are  at 
present  in  antagonism.  IV.  How  can  these  two  wills  be  brought  together  into 
harmony?  Answer — I.  Not  by  any  changing  of  the  perfect  will  of  God.  2.  Man's 
will  is  wrong,  imperfect,  misguided,  it  may  be  changed,  it  ought  to  be  changed,  it 
must  be  changed.  Here  is  the  proper  first  sphere  of  a  redeeming  work.  Wliat 
shall  change  it  ?  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  The  work  wrought  out  for  ns  by 
Jesns.  The  grace  won  for  us  by  Jesus.  The  constraining  of  the  love  of  Jesus. 
The  power  of  the  risen   and  living    Jesus.     (Selected.)  The  soul-passion  oj 

Christ : — What  is  the  explanation  we  are  to  give  of  this  passage  in  our  Lord's  life  ? 
One  explanation  which  has  been  offered  is  that  Gethsemane  witnessed  a  last  and 
more  desperate  assault  of  the  evil  One ;  but  for  this  the  Bible  gives  no  cleat 
warrant.    Certainly,  the  evil  One,  after  his  great  defeat  on  the  mountain  of  th< 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

Temptation,  ia  said  to  have  departed  from  our  Lord  "  for  a  season,"  an  expression 
which  seems  to  imply  that  he  afterwards  returned  ;  but,  so  far  as  the  text  of  Scrip- 
ture can  guide  us,  he  returned  to  assail  not  the  Workman  but  the  work.  What  took 
place  in  Gethsemane  is  totally  unlike  the  scene  in  the  Temptation.  At  the  Temp- 
tation, our  Lord  is  throughout  calm,  firm,  majestic.  He  repels  each  successive 
assault  of  the  tempter  with  a  word  of  power.  The  prince  of  this  world  came,  and 
had  nothing  in  Him.  But  in  Gethsemane  He  is  overcome  by  that,  whatever  it  wac, 
which  pressed  on  Him.  He  is  meek,  prostrate,  unnerved,  dependent  (as  it  seems) 
on  the  sympathy  and  nearness  of  those  whom  He  had  taught  and  led.  There  Ho 
resists  and  vanquishes  with  tranquil  strength  a  porsoijal  opponent;  here  He 
sinks  as  if  in  fear  and  bewilderment  to  the  very  earth,  as  though  a  prey  to  some 
inward  sense  of  desolation  and  collapse.  His  own  words,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding 
sorrowful,"  point  to  some  great  mental  trouble ;  and  if  He  was  suffering  from  a 
mental  trouble,  what,  may  we  dare  to  ask,  was  its  provoking  cause  ?    I.  Was  rr 

NOT,  FIRST    OF  ALL,    AN  APX'REHENSION,    DISTINCT,  VIVID,   AND    OVERPOWEBINO,  OF   WHAT 

WAS  PRESENTLT  COMING  ?  In  Gethsemane,  by  an  act  of  His  will,  our  Lord  opened 
upon  His  human  soul  a  full  view  and  apprehension  of  the  impeuding  sufferings  of 
His  passion  and  df-ath ;  and  the  apprehension  was  itself  an  agony.  The  whole 
scene,  the  succession  of  scenes,  passed  before  His  mental  eye ;  and  as  He  gazea  on 
it,  a  heart  sickness — outcome  and  proof  of  His  true  Humanity — seizes  on  Him, 
and  He  shrinks  back  in  dread  from  this  dark  and  complex  vision  of  pain.  II. 
He  was,  bo  to  speak,  mentally  robing  Himself  for  the  great  sacrifice — 
laying  upon  His  sinless  soul  the  sins  of  a  guilty  world.  To  us,  indeed,  the  burden 
of  sin  is  as  natural  as  the  clothes  we  wear ;  but  to  Him  the  touch  of  that  which 
we  take  so  easily  was  an  agony,  even  in  its  Hghtest  form ;  and  when  we  think  of 
the  accumulated  guilt  of  all  the  ages  clinging  around  and  most  intimately  pre- 
sent to  Him,  can  we  wonder  that  His  bodily  nature  gave  way,  that  His  Passion 
seemed  to  have  been  upon  Him  before  its  time,  and  that  "His  sweat  waa 
as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  ground."  {Canon  Liddon.)  Tht 
Christian's  Gethsemane :  —  Surely  He  did  not  address  these  words,  at  once  so 
imperative  and  so  plaintive,  to  His  apostle  alone.  They  were  words  for  all  time, 
warning  us  not  so  to  remember  Calvary  as  to  forget  Gethsemane.  Good  indeed  it 
is  to  retire  to  this  inmost  sanctuary  of  the  human  soul,  to  retire  from  a  world  of 
men,  a  world  which  chiefly  fixes  its  eye  on  the  outward  and  the  material,  and  which 
passes  its  years  in  struggles  and  efforts  that  often  leave  no  more  traces  upon  any- 
thing that  really  lasts,  then  do  the  busy  little  children  on  the  seashore,  who  dili- 
gently pile  up  their  sand  castles  in  face  of  the  rising  tide.  The  soul  of  Jesus  in 
Gethsemane  was,  above  all  things,  in  contact  with  realities,  but  they  are  the  realities 
of  the  world  of  spirits  at  the  least  not  one  whit  less  real  than  the  stones  and  the 
gases  of  the  world  of  matter.  The  soul  of  Jesus  in  Gethsemane  was  engaged  in  A 
fearful  struggle,  but  it  was  a  struggle  with  issues  reaching  not  into  the  next  few 
weeks  or  years  of  some  puny  human  life  here  below,  but  into  the  most  distant 
vistas  of  the  eternal  world.  It  is  not  at  all  times  that  even  good  Christians  can 
enter  into  the  meaning  of  this  solemn  scene,  but  there  are  mental  trials  which  in- 
terpret it  to  us,  and  which  in  turn  are  by  it  (if  we  will)  transfigured  into  heavenly 
blessings.  I.  Tuebe  is  the  inward  conflict  which  often  precedes  oub  under- 
taking HARD  OB  unwelcome  DUTY  OB  SACRIFICE.  The  eye  measures  the  effort  re- 
quired, the  length  and  degree  of  endurance  which  meat  be  attempted  ere  the  work 
is  really  done;  and,  as  the  eye  traverses  the  field  before  it,  all  the  quick  sensibilities 
of  feeling  start  up  and  rehearse  th^-ir  parts  by  anticipation,  and  cling  to  and  clog 
and  embarrass  the  will,  holding  it  back  from  the  road  of  duty.  Struggles  such  as 
this  between  inclination  and  duty  may  be  at  times  sorrowful  to  the  so«l,  even  unto 
death.  When  they  come  on  you,  brace  yourselves  by  watching  and  praying  with 
JesuB  in  Gethsemane,  that  you  may  learn  to  say  with  Him,  "  Not  my  will,  but 
Thine,  be  done."     II.  There  are  forms  of  doubt  respecting  God's  goodness  and 

PROVIDENCE,    WHICH   ARE   A    GREAT   TROUBLE   AT   TIMES.       Not    Self-CaUSed   doubtS,    but 

embarrassments  which  beset  earnest  and  devout  souls  under  stress  of  great  sorrow 
or  cakmity.  The  best  remedy  for  these  is  to  kneel  in  spirit  side  by  side  with  Jesus 
in  Gethsemane;  it  is  prayer  such  as  His  was  that  struggles  under  a  darkened 
heaven  into  the  light  beyond.  III.  Desolateness  or  soul,  making  God's  sebvich 
DISTASTEFUL.  Prayer  becomes  insipid  and  unwelcome,  duty  is  an  effort  against  the 
grain,  the  temper  ia  dejected.  Tempted  to  give  up  all  in  disgust,  and  let  things 
take  their  chance  for  time  or  eternity.  They  who  experience  this  can  but  kneel  in 
Gethsemane  with  the  prayer,  "  0,  my  Father,  let  this  cap  pass  from  me ;  neTel^ 


OSAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  619 

thelesa,  not  what  I  will,  but  what  Thou  wilt."  IV.  The  approach  of  death.  Thia 
may  indeed  come  upon  us  suddenly  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  but  may  also  be  ushered 
in,  as  it  generally  is,  by  a  preface  of  weakened  health  and  lingering  sickness.  In 
many  oases  it  has  happened  that  at  the  very  beginning  of  an  illness  which  ^as  to 
end  with  life,  a  clear  presentiment  of  this  has  been  graciously  vouchsafed.  "  I  was 
sitting  at  luncheon,"  said  one  of  the  best  of  Christ's  servants  in  this  generation, 
•'  and  I  suddenly  felt  as  never  before  :  I  felt  that  something  had  given  way.  I  knew 
what  it  meant,  whiit  it  must  mean.  I  went  up  into  my  room  ;  I  prayed  God  that 
He  would  enable  me  to  bear  what  I  knew  was  before  me,  and  would  at  the  last  re- 
ceive me  for  His  own  Son's  sake."  It  was  the  close  of  a  life  as  bright  as  it  was 
beautiful,  in  which  there  was  much  to  leave  behind — warm  and  affectionate  friends, 
and  an  abundance  of  those  highest  satisfactions  which  come  with  constant  and  un- 
selfish occupation ;  but  it  was  the  summons  to  another  world,  and  as  such  it  wa8 
obeyed.  Death  is  always  awful,  and  the  first  gaze  at  the  break-up  of  all  that  we 
.have  hitherto  called  life  must  ever  have  about  it  a  touch  of  agony.  And  yet,  if 
Jesus  in  Gethsemane  is  our  Shepherd,  surely  we  shall  lack  nothing ;  yea,  though 
we  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  we  shall  fear  no  evil,  for  He 
is  with  us  who  has  gone  before,  His  rod  and  His  staff  comfort  us.  (Ibid.) 
GhrisVs  agony  in  the  garden : — I.  Wk  dwell  more  on  the  bodilt  anguish  of  oub 
Lord  than  the  mental.  We  figure  to  ourselves  the  external  woes  of  which  flesh 
was  the  subject  rather  than  those  griefs  which  were  within  the  soul.  We  must  not 
forget  that  others  besides  Christ  have  died  the  most  cruel  deaths  with  fortitude. 
The  bodily  sufferings  of  Christ  were  but  an  inconsiderable  part  of  His  endurances. 
It  was  in  soul  rather  than  in  body  that  our  Saviour  made  atonement  for  trans- 
gression. You  must  be  aware  that  anguish  of  soul  more  than  of  the  body  is  the 
everlasting  portion  which  is  to  be  awarded  to  sinners  ;  so  we  may  expect  that  the 
soul-agony  of  a  surety  or  substitute  would  be  felt  more  than  the  bodily.  Indeed, 
in  the  garden  there  was  no  bodily  suffering,  no  spear,  nails.  II.  Exceeding  bob- 
BOwruL  UNTO  death.  The  soul  cannot  die,  yet  so  exceeding  was  Christ's  sorrow  that 
He  could  speak  of  it  as  nothing  less  than  actual  death.  The  soul  was  the  sin- 
offering.  1.  We  would  have  you  be  aware  of  the  enormous  cost  at  which  you  have 
been  ransomed.  2.  It  gives  preciousness  to  the  means  of  grace  thus  to  consider 
them  as  brought  into  being  by  the  agonies  of  the  Redeemer.  Will  you  trifle  with 
them?  3.  Having  spoken  not  only  of  the  exceeding  sorrowfulness  of  Christ's  soul, 
but  of  the  satisfaction  which  that  sorrowfulness  yields,  I  would  not  conclude  with- 
out a  vision  of  His  glorious  triumphs.       (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Divine  sorrow  : — 

1.  The  causes  of  His  sorrow.  1.  That  gloom  may  have  been  ths  sense  of  the 
near  approach  of  death  with  all  the  dread  misgivings  which  beset  the  spirit  in  that 
supreme  hour.  2.  It  may  have  been  the  sense  of  loneliness,  of  the  ingratitude,  the 
failure  of  His  disciples  and  countrymen,  3.  Or  it  was  the  sense  of  the  load  of 
human  -wickedness  entering  into  His  soul,  so  as  almost  to  take  possession  of  it. 
"  He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made  sin  for  us."  These  troubled  His  soul.  4.  Thia 
scene  is  the  silent  protest  against  the  misery  of  wrong-doing,  against  the  exceeding 
sinfulness  of  sin.  II.  The  great  example  op  how  and  in  what  spirit  we  ought 
TO  PBAT.  There  is  something  higher  in  the  efficacy  and  in  the  answer  of  prayer 
than  the  mere  demanding  and  receiving  the  special  blessings  for  which  we  ask. 
The  cup  did  not  pass  from  Him ;  but  in  two  ways  His  prayer  was  granted.  1.  In 
the  heavenly  strength  that  was  given  to  Him  to  bear  all  the  sorrows  laid  upon  Him. 
The  very  act  of  prayer  gives  strength,  will  open  our  souls  to  supporting  angels. 

2.  Not  the  substitution  of  the  will  of  Christ  for  the  will  of  the  Eternal  God,  but 
the  substitution  of  the  will  of  the  Eternal  God  for  the  will  of  His  most  dearly  be- 
loved Son.  Great  as  is  the  will,  holy  as  are  the  desires.  Divine  as  are  the  aspira- 
tions that  go  up  from  earth,  there  is  something  greater,  holier,  Diviner  yet ;  and 
that  is  the  will  that  rules  the  universe,  the  mind  which  embraces  within  its  scope 
the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future,  this  world  and  the  next,  the  seen  and  the 
unseen.  Without  the  agony,  without  the  cross,  Christianity  and  Christendom 
would  not  have  been.  If  any  act  or  event  in  the  world's  history  was  essential  to 
its  onward  progress,  essential  to  the  elevation  and  purification  of  the  individual 
man,  it  was  the  anguish  which  this  night  represents  to  us.  This  is  the  apparent 
conflict,  but  real  unity  of  the  sorrows  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary  with  the  perfect 
wisdom  and  mercy  of  the  Supreme  Intelligence.  It  is  this  conflict  and  this  unity 
which  lend  such  a  breathless  interest  to  the  whole  story  of  this  week,  which  breathes 
at  once  the  pathos  and  the  triumph,  the  grief  and  the  joy,  through  its  example  and 
its  doctrine,  through  all  its  facts  and  all  its  poetry,  through  all  its  stirring  masi« 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap    xxtu 

and  all  its  famous  pictures.     And  it  is  a  conflict  and  a  unity  which  still  in  its 

measures  continue,  and  shall  continue,  as  long  as  the  will  of  humanity  struggle* 

and  toils  on  earth  to  accomplish  the  will  of  Divinity.     Not  our  will,  but  God's  wiU 

be  done.    Not  our  will,  for  we  know  not  what  is  best  for  us.    We  still  see  at 

through  a  glass  very  darkly,  the  end  is  not  yet  visible.  But  God's  will  be  done,  for  He 

knows  our  necessities  before  we  ask,  and  our  ignorance  in  asking.    His  will,  His 

eixpreme  will  in  nature  and  in  grace,  let  us  learn  to  know ;  and  having  learned,  to 

do  it.      Thy  will  be  done.      Make  Thy  will  our  vrill.      Make  Thy  love  our  love. 

Make  Thy  strength  perfect  in  our  weakness,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Bedeemer. 

{Bean  Stanley.)         Prayer: — I.  The  bight  or  petition.      We  infer  it  to  be  a 

right.      1.  Because  it  is  a  necessity  of  our  nature.     Prayer  is  a  necessity  of  our 

humanity  rather  than  a  duty.      The  necessity  to  (1)  that  of  sympathy ;    (2)  the 

necessity  of  escaping  the  sense  of  a  crushing  fate.     2.  We  base  this  request  on  our 

privilege  as  children — "My  Father."    3.  Christ  used  it  as  a  right,  therefore  we 

may.     You  cannot  help  praying  if  God's  Spirit  is  in  yours.    II.  Ereoneous  notions 

OF  WHAT  PKAYEB  IS.     They  are  contained  in  that  conception  which  He  negatived, 

"As  I  will."    A  common  conception  of  prayer  is,  that  it  is  the  means  by  which 

the  wish  of  man  determines  the  will  of  God.     The  text  says  clearly,  "  Not  as  I 

will."    The  wish  of  man  does  not  determine  the  will  of  God.     Tiy  this  conception 

by  four  tests.     1.  By  its  incompatibility  with  the  fact  that  this  universe  is  a  system 

of  laws.     2.  Try  it  by  fact.     3.  Try  it  by  the  prejudicial  results  of  such  a  belief. 

Gives  unworthy  ideas  of  God.     Consider  the  danger  of  vanity  and  supineness 

resulting  from  the  fulfilment  of  our  desires  as  a  necessity.    4.  It  would  be  most 

dangerous  as  a  criterion  of  our  spiritual  state  if  we  think  that  answered  prayer  is  a 

proof  of  grace.  We  shall  be  unreasonably  depressed  and  elated  when  we  do  or  do  not 

get  what  we  wish.     III.    The  tkdb  efficacy  of  pbatek — "  As  Thou  wUt."     All 

prayer  is  to  change  the  will  human  into  submission  to  the  will  Divine.     Hence  we 

conclude — (1)  That  prayer  which  does  not  succeed  in  moderating  our  wish,  in 

changing  the  passionate  desire  into  still  submission,  is  no  true  prayer ;  (2)  That 

life  is  most  holy  in  which  there  is  least  of  petition  and  desire,  and  most  of  waiting 

upon  God ;  in  which  petition  often  passes  into  thanksgiving.      (F.  W.  Robertson, 

M.A.)        Prayer  to  seek  God's  will,  not  man's  wish: — Practically  then,  I  say.  Pray 

as  He  did,  till  prayer  makes  you  cease  to  pray.    Pray  till  prayer  makes  you  forget 

your  own  wish,  and  leave  it  or  merge  it  in  God's  will.     The  Divine  wisdom  has 

given  us  prayer,  not  as  a  means  whereby  to  obtain  the  good  things  of  earth,  but  as 

a  means  whereby  we  learn  to  do  without  them  ;  not  as  a  means  whereby  we  escape 

evil,  but  as  a  means  whereby  we  become  strong  to  meet  it.     *'  There  appeared  an 

angel  unto  Him  from  heaven,  strengthening  Him."    That  was  the  true  reply  to 

His  prayer.     (Ibid.)  Submission  a  progress : — Let  us  come  into  the  presence  ol 

the  Suppliant — this  most  human,  yet  most  Divine  Person,  who  is  wrestling  here  in 

an  agony  even  more  spiritual  than  mortal.     It  is  night.    Christ  has  left  the  guest* 

chamber.     He  has  crossed  the  brook  Kedron.    He  has  entered  a  garden,  oftentimes 

His  resort  during  His  visits  to  Jerusalem,  at  the  foot  of  the  slope  of  Olivet.    He 

has  come  hither  to  pray.     Such  prayer  must  be  secret.    He  leaves  His  disciples  at 

the  entrance.     Even  secret  prayer  may  be  the  better  for  having  friends  near.     So 

with  a  touching  union  of  love  and  humility  He  entreats  His  three  disciples  to  watch 

with  Him.     See  the  example  of  suffering  which  is  here  set  before  us  in  Christ.    I. 

That  all  sorrow,  all  suffering,  even  if  it  be  anguish,  is  a  cdp.     It  is  something 

definite,  of  a  certain  measure.    It  is  of  the  Father's  mingling ;  the  cup  of  medicinal 

love.    II.  Concerning  this  cup  itself  you  may  pray.     There  is  not  the  distress  upon 

earth  as  to  which  we  ought  not  to  pray.    III.  But  how  pray.     1.  As  to  a  Father. 

2.  Again  with  an  "  If."    You  must  recognize  the  possible  impossibility.    3.  With 

an  earnest  confession  of  the  comparative  value  of  two  wills — your  will  and  God's. 

Jesus  went  away  the  second  time,  and  prayed.    And  what  was  this  second  prayer  t 

"  O  My  Fathir,  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  Me,  except  I  drink  it,  Thy  will 

he  done."     This  second  prayer  asks  not  at  all  for  the  removal  of  the  cup.     The  first 

was  prayer  with  submission  ;   the  second  is  submission  without  even  prayer.    Herb 

is  an  example,  set  us  by  our  Lord,  of  a  progressive,  growing  submission  to  the 

mighty  hand  of  God.    I  do  not  mean  that  our  Lord  had  to  learn,  in  the  garden  of 

Gethsemane,  a  lesson  of  obedience  unknown  before.     How  was  Christ  made  perfect, 

but  in  the  sense  of  a  transition  from  disobedience  to  obedience.     Yet,  thus,  in  a 

constant  development  of  obedience  under  a  course  of  increasing  difficulty.     The 

earthly  life  of  Christ  was  a  perpetual  going  forward.     "  Let  this  cup  pass."    Was  it 

not  an  added  trial  that  the  Saviour,  like  an  apostle  (2  Cor,  xii.  8,  9)  had  asked 


HBkP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  CJl 

relief,  and  not  been  answered  ?  Beyond  the  submission  of  the  will  lies  the  Eilenoing 
of  the  will ;  beyond  the  desire  to  have  only  if  God  will,  the  desire  that  God  only 
may  will,  whether  I  have  or  not.  All  of  us  have  wishes,  strong  impalses  of  thg 
will  towards  this  and  that;  it  is  a  part  of  our  nature.  By  what  steps  ;  h  II  thty 
pass  unto  our  final  good  f  1.  We  must  turn  them  into  prayers.  Everything  evil 
will  refuse  that  test.  Yon  cannot  turn  a  sinful  wish  into  prayer.  2.  The  next 
step  is  not  only  to  pray  your  wishes,  but  to  pray  them  in  a  spirit  of  submiesiop. 

3.  Tlien  nothing  reinainB  but  the  aot  of  submission,  pure,  simple,  uncouditioae J, 
absolute.  No  longer,  '•  Let  this  cup  pati,"  but  "  If  this  cup  may  not  pass.  Thy  will 
be  done.'*  All  this  I  leave  to  Thee;  I  ask  not ;  I  desire  not;  I  pray  not  longer 
concerning  it,  only  Thy  will  be  done.  (C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The  figure  of  the 
cup : — Do  we  not  use  the  same  kind  of  language  ourselves,  having  still  no  such  thought 
as  that  the  cup  of  anguish  we  speak  of,  or  pray  to  be  taken  away,  is  a  judicial  inflic- 
tion ?  This  figure  of  the  cup  is  used  in  Scripture  for  all  kinds  of  experience,  whether 
joyful  or  painful.  Thus  we  have  "  the  cup  of  salvation,"  *•  the  cup  of  consolation," 
"  the  cup  of  trembling,"  •♦  of  fury,"  "  of  astonishment,"  "  of  desolation."  Whatever 
God  sends  upon  man  to  be  deeply  felt,  and  by  whatever  kind  of  providence,  whether 
benignant,  or  disciplinary,  or  retnbutive,  is  called  his  cup.  {Horace  BushTieU.) 
Jesus  praying : — There  are  several  instructive  features  in  our  Saviour's  prayer  in 
His  hour  of  trial.  1.  It  was  lonely  prayer.  He  withdrew  even  from  His  three 
favoured  disciples.  Believer,  be  much  in  solitary  prayer,  especially  in  times  of 
trial.  2.  It  was  humble  prayer.  Luke  says  He  knelt,  but  another  evangelist  aays 
He  "  fell  on  His  face."  Where,  then,  must  be  thy  place,  thou  humble  servant  of 
the  great  Master  ?  What  dust  and  ashes  should  cover  thy  head  ?  Humility  givea 
us  good  fuot-hold  in  prayer.  There  is  no  hope  of  prevalence  with  God  unless  we 
abase  ourselves  that  He  may  exalt  us  in  due  time.  3.  It  was  filial  prayer — "  Abba, 
Father."  You  will  find  it  a  stronghold  in  the  day  of  trial  to  plead  your  adoption. 
You  have  no  rights  as  a  subject,  you  have  forfeited  them  by  your  treason,  i.  It 
was  persevering  prayer.  He  prayed  three  times.  Cease  not  until  you  prevail.  6. 
It  was  the  prayer  of  resignation — "  Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt." 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Getlisemane : — I.  .Gethsemane  suggests  our  blessed  Be- 
deemer's  longing  for  human  sympathy.  "  Tarry  ye  here  and  watch  with  Me."  It 
is  a  purely  human  feeling.  II.  Reminds  us  of  the  sacredness  of  human  sorrow  atsn 
Divine  communion.  III.  Reveals  the  overwhelming  depth  and  fulness  of  the 
Redeemer's  sorrow.  Reminds  us  of  the  will  of  Christ  yielded  to  the  will  of  the 
Father.  IV.  Has  its  lessons  and  influences  for  all  our  hearts.  How  it  condenmo 
sin  I  How  it  reveals  the  chiefest  human  virtue,  and  the  power  by  which  it  may  bs 
attained  I  How  it  brings  the  Father  close  to  our  hearts  in  their  sorrow  and  ex- 
tremity 1  (JT.  H.  Davison.)  The  prayer  in  Getlisemane  : — I.  The  occasion  of 
these  words.  IL  The  matter  of  these  words.  1.  The  person  to  whom  He  makes 
His  address.    2.  The  matter  of  His  request.    3.  The  manner  or  earnestness  of  it. 

4.  The  submission  of  it.  Enforce  two  things :  I.  There  is  an  aversion  in  human 
nature  from  the  pangs  and  bitterness  of  death.  II.  Notwithstanding  that,  there 
are  grounds  of  submission  to  the  will  of  God  in  it.  {E.  Stillingfleet.)  The 
Father's  cup: — It  is  a  Father  that  gives  the  cup.  1.  A  Father  who  knows  what  is 
fittest  to  be  given  us.  2.  A  Father  who  stands  by  His  children  to  help  and  auiet 
them.  8.  A  Father  who  will  abundantly  reward  the  taking  of  what  He  gives. 
(Ibid.)  Our  Lord's  example  of  resignation: — To  show  how  the  Son  of  God 
exercised  this  virtue  here  upon  earth.  1.  We  all  desire  the  conveniences  of  life, 
and  to  be  above  dependence.  For  our  sakes  He  became  poor,  and  never  complained 
on  that  account.  2.  Hard  labour  attended  with  weariness  is  disagreeable.  Our 
Saviour's  life,  during  His  ministry,  was  a  life  of  hardship  and  fatigue.  3.  Hunger 
and  thirst,  when  long  endured,  are  enemies  to  our  nature,  and  put  us  to  violent  un- 
easiness till  they  are  satisfied.  These  our  Lord  often  suffered.  4.  To  those  who 
have  the  instructions  of  others  committed  to  their  care,  it  is  agreeable  to  meet  with 
persons  teachable  and  of  good  capacities,  and  tiresome  to  inform  slow  understand- 
ings. 5.  Return  of  baseness  and  treachery  from  our  intimates  whom  we  have 
loaded  with  benefits,  are  most  grievous  to  be  borne,  and  will  wring  from  the 
mildest  tempej  complaints.  Even  to  Judas,  Jesus  showed  great  lenity.  6.  A  good 
man,  whose  olBce  it  is  to  instruct  others  in  religion,  will  be  grieved  when  ids 
charitable  labours  are  lost,  and  he  hath  to  do  with  stubborn  offenders,  who  are 
deaf  to  all  reproofs  and  admonitions.  7.  To  be  injured  in  our  reputation,  and 
exposed  to  malicious  calumny,  is  a  great  trial  of  human  patience.  This  our 
Saviour  endored.    8.  To  see  multitudes  involved  in  a  great  calamity  is  a  giief  to  a 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvfc 

charitable  man.  9.  Future  evils,  when  we  see  them  coming  and  are  sure  we  cannot 
escape  them,  torment  us  near  if  not  quite  as  much  as  when  they  are  present.  10. 
Men  love  life  and  are  unwilling  to  lose  it.  Most  painful  and  ignominious  was  the 
death  which  Christ  endured.  (J.  Jortin.)  Inducements  to  resignation: — 1.  A 
belief  in  the  goodness  of  God.  2.  The  reward  in  heaven  which  we  may  secure.  3. 
The  behaviour  of  our  Lord  which  we  should  be  anxious  to  imitate.  (Ibid.) 
Christ's  agony  : — In  the  garden  Christ  is  exhibited  to  us  in  a  two-fold  character — 
as  our  surety  and  as  our  example.  As  our  surety,  suffering  for  us,  and  as  our 
example,  teaching  us  how  to  suffer.  I.  Our  surety.  1.  How  great  were  the  suffer- 
ings of  the  Eedeemer,  and  what  was  their  true  character.  2.  How  terrible  the 
wrath  of  God  is.  3.  How  great  the  guilt  of  sin  is.  4.  How  great  is  the  love  of 
the  Father  and  of  the  Son  for  sinners.  II.  Our  example.  From  it  we  learn — 1.  Thai 
our  being  severely  afflicted  is  no  proof  that  we  are  not  the  children  of  God.  2. 
That  it  is  not  sinful  to  shrink  from  affliction  or  suffering  of  any  kind,  and  to  plead 
exemption  from  it.  3.  The  duty  of  submission  to  the  will  of  God  even  under  the 
greatest  trials.  4.  The  efficacy  of  prayer  in  bringing  support  and  comfort  under 
affliction.  {A.  L.  R.  Foote.)  Storms  beat  round  mountain  souls: — It  has  been 
said  by  a  great  poet,  that  great  characters  and  great  souls  are  like  mountains — they 
always  attract  the  storms  ;  upon  their  heads  break  the  thunders,  and  around  their 
bare  tops  flash  the  lightnings  and  the  seeming  wrath  of  God.  Nevertheless,  they 
form  a  shelter  for  the  plains  beneath  them.  That  marvellous  saying  finds  an  illus- 
tration in  the  lowliest,  saddest  soul  the  world  has  ever  had  living  in  it — the  Lord 
Christ.  Higher  than  all  men,  around  His  head  seemed  to  beat  the  very  storms  of 
sin ;  yet  beneath  the  shelter  of  His  great,  consoling,  sustaining  spirit,  what  lowly 
people,  what  humble  souls,  what  poor  babes  as  to  wisdom,  what  sucklings  as  to  the 
world's  truth,  have  gained  their  life  in  this  world  and  eternal  rest  in  God.  (Oeorge 
Dawson.)  The  broken  will : — Man  must  be  thrown  down  that  his  will  may  be 
broken ;  and  his  will  must  be  broken  that  God  may  reign  within  him.  The  will  of 
God  in  man  is  life  eternal.  (Ibid.)  Falling  on  His  face  : — His  great  life  lies 
before  us,  that  we  may  strive  to  follow  Him ;  and  then,  though  falling  on  our  faces 
as  He  fell,  we  may  find  ourselves  able  to  rise  np  as  He  did.  For  in  rising.  He  laid 
aown  His  own  wiU  and  took  God's  will  in  its  place.  (Ibid.)  God's  providence  an 
argument  for  submission : — His  providence  is  comprehensive  and  complete ;  no  un- 
foreseen accidents  in  the  freest  and  most  contingent  things,  no  unvoluntary  obstruc- 
tion in  the  most  necessary  things  can  break  the  entireness,  or  discompose  the  order 
of  His  providence.  How  exactly  and  easily  does  He  manage  and  over-rule  all 
things  ?  The  whole  world  is  His  house,  and  all  the  successive  generations  of  men 
His  family ;  some  are  His  sons,  and  by  voluntary  subjection ;  others  His  slaves, 
and  by  just  constraint  fulfil  His  pleasure.  'Twas  the  saying  of  a  wise  king, 
instructed  by  experience,  that  the  art  of  government  was  like  the  laborious  travail 
of  a  weaver,  that  requires  the  attention  of  the  mind  and  the  activity  of  the  body  ; 
the  eyes,  bands,  and  feet  are  all  in  exercise.  And  how  often  is  the  contexture  of 
human  councils,  though  woven  with  great  care,  yet  unexpectedly  broke  ?  So  many 
cross  accidents  interpose,  so  many  emergencies  beyond  all  prevention  start  up,  that 
frustrate  the  designs  and  hopes  of  the  most  potent  rulers  of  this  world.  But  God 
disposes  all  things  with  more  facility  than  one  of  us  can  move  a  grain  of  sand. 
(W.  Bateg.)  Emblem  of  providence : — The  sun  applies  its  quickening  influences 
for  the  production  and  growth  of  a  single  plant,  as  particularly  as  if  there  were  no 
other  things  in  the  world  to  receive  them ;  yet  at  the  same  time  it  passes  from  sign 
to  sign  in  the  heavens,  changes  the  scenes  of  the  elements,  produces  new  seasons, 
and  its  active  and  prolific  heat  forms  and  transforms  whatsoever  is  changed  in 
nature.  This  is  a  fit  resemblance  of  the  universal  and  special  operations  of  Divine 
providence.  (Ibid.)  Present  comforts  in  affliction: — The  gracious  soul  has  a 
taste  and  sight  how  "  good  the  Lord  is,"  as  an  earnest  of  the  fulness  of  joy  in 
heaven.  Hope  brings  some  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life  to  refresh  us  with  their  farag- 
ranoy  ;  but  love,  of  its  fruits  to  strengthen  us.  As  transplanted  fruits,  where  the  soil 
is  defective  and  the  sun  less  favourable,  are  not  of  that  beauty  and  goodness  as  in 
their  original  country  ;  so  heavenly  joys  in  this  Ufe  are  inferior  in  their  degree  to 
those  of  the  blessed  above,  but  they  are  very  reviving.  (Ibid.)  Resignation: — 
The  entire  resignation  of  our  wills  to  the  disposing  will  of  God  is  the  indispensable 
duty  of  Christians  under  the  sharpest  afflictions.  I.  What  is  consistent  with  this 
resignation  f  1.  An  earnest  deprecation  of  an  impending  judgment  is  reooncilabla 
with  our  salDmission  to  the  pleasure  of  Ood,  declared  by  the  event.  2.  A  monrufuJ 
ocnse  ol  afflictions  sent  from  God,  is  consistent  with  a  dutiful  resignation  of  oux- 


mAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  «23 

eelves  to  His  will.  II.  What  is  included  in  the  resignment  of  ourselves  to  God  in 
times  of  afiSiction.  1.  The  understanding  approves  the  severest  dispensations  of 
Providence  to  be  good,  that  is,  for  reasons,  though  sometimes  unsearchable,  yet 
always  righteous,  and  for  gracious  ends  to  the  saints.  2.  This  resignment  prin- 
cipally consists  in  the  consent  and  subjection  of  the  will  to  the  orders  of  heaven. 
3.  The  duty  of  resignation  consists  in  the  composure  of  the  aii'ections  to  a  just 
measure  and  temper,  when  under  the  sharpest  discipline.  III.  The  reasons  to  con- 
vince us  of  this  duty  of  resigning  ourselves  and  all  our  interests  to  God.  1.  The 
first  argument  arises  from  God's  original  supreme  right  in  our  persons,  and  all 
things  we  enjoy.  2.  The  righteousness  of  God  in  all  His  ways,  if  duly  considered, 
will  compose  the  afflicted  spirit  to  quiet  and  humble  submission.  3.  His  power  is 
immense  and  uncontrollable,  and  it  is  a  vain  attempt  to  contend  with  Him,  as  if 
the  eternal  order  of  His  decrees  could  be  altered  or  broken.  4.  His  paternal  love 
in  sending  afflictions  is  a  sufficient  argument  to  win  our  compliance  with  His  will. 
(1)  All  His  sons  are  under  the  discipline  of  the  rod  ;  and  who  would  be  so  unhappy 
as  to  be  exempted  from  that  number  for  all  the  prosperity  in  the  world?  (2)  Chas- 
tisement is  the  effect  of  His  parental  love.  (Ibid.)  Comforts  in  trial: — The 
historian  tells  of  a  clear  vein  of  water  that  springs  from  Mongibel,  that  great 
furnace,  that  always  sends  forth  smoke  or  flames,  yet  is  as  cool  as  if  it  distilled 
from  a  snowy  mountain.  Thus  the  saints  in  the  fiery  trial  have  been  of  ten  refreshed 
with  Divine  comforts,  and  such  humble  submissions  and  gracious  thanksgivings 
have  proceeded  from  their  lips,  as  have  been  very  comfortable  to  those  about  them. 
{Ibid.)  Man's  evil  nature : — Proud  dust  is  apt  to  fly  in  God's  face  upon  every 
motion  of  the  afflicting  passions ;  and  by  the  resistance  of  self-will  He  is  provoked 
to  more  severity.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  40-45.  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation. — Christian 
caution: — Who  sleeps  by  a  magazine  of  gunpowder  needs  to  take  care  even  of 
eparks.  Who  walks  on  ice,  let  him  not  go  star-gazing,  but  look  to  his  feet,  and 
take  care  of  falling.  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation,"  is  a 
warning  which  no  good  man  should  disregard.  (Sunday  Teacher's  Treasury.) 
■Watching  unto  prayer : — When  an  archer  shoots  his  arrow  at  a  mark,  he  likes  to 
go  and  see  whether  he  has  hit  it,  or  how  near  he  has  come  to  it.  When  you  have 
written  and  sent  off  a  letter  to  a  friend,  you  expect  some  day  that  the  postman  will 
be  knocking  at  the  door  with  an  answer.  When  a  child  asks  his  father  for  some- 
thing, he  looks  in  his  face,  even  before  he  speaks,  to  see  if  he  is  pleased,  and  reads 
acceptance  in  his  eyes.  But  it  is  to  be  greatly  feared  that  many  people  feel,  when 
their  prayers  are  over,  as  if  they  had  quite  done  with  them  ;  their  only  concern  was 
to  get  them  said.  An  old  heathen  poet  speaks  of  Jupiter  throwing  certain  prayers 
to  the  winds — dispersing  them  in  empty  air.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  we  so  often  do 
that  for  ourselves.  What  would  you  think  of  a  man  who  had  written  and  folded 
and  sealed  and  addressed  a  letter  flinging  it  out  into  the  street,  and  thinking  no 
more  about  itt  Sailors  in  foundering  ships  sometimes  commit  notes  in  sealed 
bottles  to  the  waves,  for  the  chance  of  their  being  some  day  washed  on  sonie  shore. 
Sir  John  Franklin's  companions  among  the  snows,  and  Captain  Allen  Gardiner 
dying  of  hunger  in  his  cave,  wrote  words  they  could  not  be  sure  any  one  wonld 
ever  read.  But  we  do  not  need  to  think  of  our  prayers  as  random  messages.  We 
should  therefore  look  for  reply  to  them,  and  watch  to  get  it.  (Dr.  Edmond.) 
B.3W  to  treat  temptation: — A  sentinel  posted  on  the  walls,  when  he  discerns  a 
liostile  party  advancing,  does  not  attempt  to  make  head  against  them  himself,  but 
informs  his  commanding  officer  of  the  enemy's  approach,  and  leaves  him  to  take 
the  proper  measure  against  the  foe.  So  the  Christian  does  not  attempt  to  fight 
temptation  in  his  own  strength.  His  watchfulness  lies  in  observing  its  approach, 
•nd  in  telling  God  of  it  by  prayer.  (W.  Mason.)  Watch  and  pray — danger 
lurking  in  trifles : — Not  only  (says  Mauton)  do  great  sins  ruin  the  soul,  but  lesser 
faults  will  do  the  same.  Dallying  with  temptation  leads  to  sad  consequences. 
Caesar  was  killed  with  bodkins.  A  dagger  aimed  at  the  heart  will  give  as  deadly  a 
wound  as  a  huge  two-handed  sword,  and  a  little  sin  nnrepented  of  will  be  as  fatal 
as  a  gross  transgression.  Brutus  and  Cassius  and  the  rest  of  the  conspirators 
•ould  not  have  more  surely  ended  Caesar's  life  with  spears  than  they  did  with 
daggers.  Death  can  hide  in  a  drop,  and  ride  in  a  breath  of  air.  Our  greatest 
dangers  lie  hidden  in  little  things.  Milton  represents  thousands  of  evil  spirits  aa 
crowded  into  one  hall ;  and  truly  the  least  sin  may  be  a  very  pandemonium,  in 
which  a  hocr^  of  evils  may  be  concealed — a  populous  hive  of  mischiefs,  each  one 


634  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn, 

Btoring  death.  Believer,  though  thou  be  a  little  Caesar  in  thine  own  sphere, 
beware  of  the  bodkius  of  thine  enemies.  Watch  and  pray,  lest  thou  fall  by  little 
and  little.  Lord,  save  me  from  sins  which  call  tliemselves  little.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
All  tins  dangerous : — All  consciences,  like  all  stomachs,  are  not  alike.  How  many 
do  we  see  digest  those  sins  with  ease,  which  others  cannot  get  down  with  struggUng. 
One  strains  at  a  gnat,  while  another  swallows  a  camel.  He  that  will  keep  clear  of 
great  sina  must  make  conscience  of  all.  I  will  think  no  sin  little,  because  the  least 
endangers  my  soul ;  and  it  is  all  one  whether  I  sell  my  Saviour  for  thirty  pence 
with  Judas,  or  for  half  I  am  worth  with  Ananias;  whether  I  go  to  hell  for  one  sin, 
or  for  many.  {Bishop  Ucnshaw.)  Conflict  of  Jlesh  and  spirit: — Anselm,  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury,  as  he  was  passing  on  the  way,  espied  a  boy  with  a  bird  tied 
in  a  Btriug  to  a  stone ;  the  bird  was  still  taking  wing  to  fly  away,  but  the  stone 
kept  her  down.  The  holy  man  made  good  use  of  this  sight,  and,  bursting  into 
tears,  said,  "  Even  so  it  is  betwixt  the  flesh  and  the  spirit ;  the  spirit  is  willing  to 
meant  upwards  in  heavenly  thoughts  and  contemplation,  but  the  flesh  keeps  it 
down,  and,  if  possible,  would  not  admit  of  the  least  thought  of  heaven.  (Spencer.) 
Conflict  of  the  spirit  with  the  flesh: — Man  is  a  trinity  consisting  of  body,  soul,  and 
spirit.  The  word  soul,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  is  not  used  in  its  modem 
significance.  It  stands  for  that  part  of  our  nature  which  we  have  in  common  with 
the  brutes  that  perish.  The  spirit  likewise  in  the  language  of  both  Old  and  New 
Testaments  stands  for  that  intelligent  nature  in  man  which  the  brutes  have  not. 
The  spirit  is  the  seat  of  the  will,  for  it  is  written,  ♦'  the  spirit  is  willing."  The 
spirit  is  the  perceptive  and  reflective  faculty  in  man,  for  "  no  man  knoweth  th« 
things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man  that  is  in  him."  The  text  suggests  to  ai» 
that  though  the  spirit  of  man  be  illumined  by  the  Spirit  of  Ood,  the  weakness  of 
the  flesh  may  bear  him  down.  The  word  "flesh,"  in  scriptural  language,  meana 
something  quite  different  from  "  body."  It  points  to  the  nature  of  man  as 
endowed  with  all  its  wondrous  adaptations  to  the  world  in  which  he  lives,  which 
adaptations  indeed  supply  his  strongest  temptation  to  forget  God.  Satan  goeth 
about  with  muffled  feet,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  As  in  the  natural  world 
there  are  subtle  influences  at  work,  in  the  power  of  electricity  for  example,  which 
we  can  measure  but  cannot  see,  so  there  are  angels  bad  as  well  as  good,  the  one 
ministering  to  that  minding  of  the  flesh  which  is  death,  the  others  to  that  minding 
of  the  spirit  which  is  life  and  peace.  Heavenly  influences  begin  with  the  spirit, 
affect  the  lower  or  soulish  nature,  and  through  it  regulate  the  actions  of  the  body. 
(J.  0.  Pilkington.)  Sleep  on  now,  <&e.: — Luther  reads  the  words  indicatively, 
and  by  way  of  question,  thus:  Ah  1  do  ye  now  sleep  and  take  your  rest?  Will  ye, 
irith  Solomon's  drunkard,  sleep  upon  a  mast-pole  7  take  a  nap  upon  a  weather- 
eock  ?  Thus  this  heavenly  Eagle,  though  loving  His  young  ones  dearly,  yet  pricka 
and  beats  them  out  of  the  nest.  The  best  (as  bees)  are  killed  with  the  honey  of 
flattery,  but  quickened  with  the  vinegar  of  reproof.  {John  Trapp.)  The  willing 
spirit  and  the  weak  flesh : — I.  A  charactkbistic  of  the  Christun — a  willing  spirit. 
1.  This  is  true  of  every  one  of  Christ's  real  disciples  on  earth.  2.  We  must  set  no 
bounds  to  the  degree  of  the  Christian's  willingness.  3.  Christ  constantly  tested  it» 
"  Sell  all  that  thou  hast."  II.  The  Christian's  infirmity.  "  The  flesh  is  weak.'* 
1,  True  in  prayer.  2.  True  in  Bible  reading.  3.  True  in  Christian  effort.  4. 
True  in  our  losses  and  afflictions.  5.  We  must  expect  to  experience  more  and 
more  of  this  weakness  of  our  mortal  nature  as  life  progresses.  III.  The  compab- 
BioN  OF  OOR  Lord  fob  the  Christian  under  his  infirmity.  Kebuke  is  soon 
followed  by  compassion.  He  was  now  overwhelmed  with  misery ;  but  suffering  did 
not  make  Him  selfish.  IV.  The  conduct  we  abb  to  pursue  under  oub  infirmities. 
Are  we  to  4llow  the  weak  flesh  to  do  as  it  will  7  We  are  to  watch  and  pray.  {C. 
Bradley.)  The  sentinel  and  the  arsenal: — I.  The  Christian  is  a  sentinel  ;  his 
Captain  is  Chbist;  and  the  word  of  command  is  "watch."  1.  To  be  watchful 
implies  wakefulness.  2.  Watchfulness  implies  discrimination.  A  sentinel  must 
distinguish  between  an  enemy  and  a  friend.  3.  A  sentinel  will  scrutinize  and  test 
the  character.  II.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  enoaob  a  sentinel  to  watch  against 
TUB  INVASION  OF  THE  FOE  :  HOT  is  it  euough  that  he  be  faithful,  and  give  the  signal 
of  alarm  when  needed.  The  arsenal  is  necessary ;  without  this  the  sentinel  would 
be  weak  and  useless.  "  But  in  Me  is  thy  help  found."  III.  The  insepabablb 
RELATION  OF  WATCHFULNESS  AND  PRAYER.  Thus  are  WO  savcd  from  entering  into 
temptation,  since  where  a  man  is  fully  in  it,  there  is  an  end  of  watching,  and  an 
indisposition  to  pray.  (G.  H.  Jackson.)  Watching  with  Christ: — I  shall  not 
follow  this  history  farther,  except  (o  develop  this  single  fact — the  need  which  oai 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  625 

God  has  of  our  affection,  and  our  sympathy,  and  onr  presence  with  Him.     I  know 
not  how  it  is  with  you.-but  it  is  just  this  that  makes  me  love  God.     It  is  jnst  this 
need  of  being  loved  in  God,  and  just  this  sense  of  loneliness  without  it,  that  calls 
forth  my  affection  for  Him.    Power  may  be  venerable,  and  wisdom  may  be  admir- 
able ;  but  only  affection  is  lovable.     It  is  a  marvel,  if  it  be  true — and  blessed  be 
God,  it  is  true — that  while  we  can  do  nothing  to  the  Divine  stature,  and  while  we 
can  do  nothing  to  the  Divine  wisdom,  it  is  in  the  power  of  a  heart  that  knows  how 
to  love,  to  do  much  for  the  Divine  happiness.    For  we  are  not  to  say  that  God  is 
perfect  in  the  sense  that  He  can  never  feel  any  more.     That  is  carrjing  philosophy 
to  insanity.    Every  heart  that  loves  God  makes  Him  experience  a  Divine  gladness. 
Every  soul  that  lifts  itself  up  into  the  presence  of  God  with  adoration  of  love  makes 
Him  hai^pier.     And  now,  further,  is  there  not  a  relationship  of  this  scene  to  our 
relations  in  this  life,  and  to  our  experiences  ?    la  Chiist  still  upon  earth  in  any 
such  sense  that  it  may  be  said  that  we  are  watching  with  Him  here  ?    I  remark, 
that  Christ's  life  is  going  on  in  this  world  ;  that  it  is  developing  here,  I  had  almost 
said  in  some  respects  more  wonderfully  than  in  heaven  itself.     In  other  words,  the 
next  representation  is,  that  Christ  has  mingled  His  spirit  with  the  hearts  of  the 
race ;  that  by  His  life  and  example  He  is  teaching  men.     And,  above  all,  by  His 
spiritual  influences,  Christ  is  germinating  in  the  race  His  own  nature,  and  ia 
bound  to  carry  the  race  above  its  animal  conditions,  and  into  the  transcendent 
sphere  where  He  Himself  is.    Wherever,  then,  in  all  the  earth,  there  are  those  who 
need  guidance ;  wherever  there  are  those  who  need  instruction ;  wherever  there  are 
those  who  are  seeking  the  upward  way,  and  looking  about  for  some  one  to  guide 
them — there  the  Saviour  is  with  them.     He,  then,  is  watching  with  Christ,  if  these 
be  truths,  who  watches  with  the  Saviour  in  his  earthly  ministrations.     Those  who 
are  in  the  midst  of  the  glare  and  growth  of  material  things  in  this  life,  and 
identify  themselves,  notwithstanding,  with  the  interior,  with  the  spiritual,  with  the 
religious  affairs  of   men,   may  fitly  be  said  to  be  watching  with  Christ.      Still 
further,  those  especially  who  are  watching  as  Christ  taught  that  we  should  watch, 
are  those  who  watch  for  the  souls  of  men,  and  not  for  Christ  alone.    A  man  can 
watch  with  Christ  in  his  own  experiences,  as  well  as  in  the  experiences  of  others. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)        Watchfulness  and  prayer: — As   all  war  is  to  be  carried  on 
partly  by  our  own  strength  and  partly  by  that  of  allies  and  auxiliaries  called  in  to 
our  aid  and  assistance,  so  in  this  Christian  warfare  the  things  which  properly 
answer  those  two  are  watchfulness  and  prayer :  forasmuch  as  by  watchfulness  we 
exert  and  employ  our  own  strength,  and  by  prayer  we  engage  God's;  and  if  ever 
victory  and  success  attend  us  in  these  encounters,  these  two  must  join  forces, 
heaven  and  earth  must  be  confederate,  and  where  they  are  so,  the  devil  himself, 
as  strong  as  be  is,  and  as  invincible  a  monarch  as  he  would  be  thought  to  be,  may 
yet  be  forced  to  go  off  with  a  pluribus  impar,  and  to  quit  the  field  with  a  frustration 
and  a  baffle.     (R.  South,  D.D.)         Watching: — I.  Imports  a  strong,  lively,  abiding 
sense  and  persuasion  of  the  exceeding  greatness  of  the  evil,  which  we  watch  and 
contend  against.      11.  imports  a  diligent  consideration  and  survey  of  our  own 
strengths  and  weaknesses  compared  with  those  of  our  enemy.    III.  Watchfulness 
implies  a  close  and  thorough  consideration  of  the  several  ways  by  which  temptation 
has  at  any  time  actually  prevailed  either  upon  ourselves  or  others.     1.  For  himself. 
Every  man  should  know  the  plagues  of  his  own  heart,  and  what  false  steps  he  has 
made  in  the  several  turns  and  periods  of  his  Christian  course,  by  what  means 
he  fell,  and  upon  what  rocks  he  split.     2.  Let  the  watchful  Christian  carry  his 
eye  from  himself  to  others,  and  observe  with  what  trick  and  artifice  the  tempter 
has  practised  upon  them.      IV.  Watchfulness  implies  a  continual,  actual  inten- 
tion of  mind  upon  the  high  concern  and  danger  which  is  before  us,  in  opposition 
tc  sloth,  idleness,  and  remissness.     V.  Watching  implies  a  constant  and  severe 
temperance  in  opposition  to  all  the  jollities  of  revelling  and  intemperance.     {Ibid.) 
Prayer  in  time  of  temptation  : — It  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  secure  or  defend 
himself  against  temptation,  something  above  him  must  do  it  for  him,  as  well  as 
very  often  by  him ;  and  prayer  is  that  blessed  messenger  between  heaven  and  earth, 
holding  a  correspondence  with  both  worlds,   and  by  a  happy   intercourse  and 
Bure  conveyance  carrying  up  the  necessities  of  the  one,  and  bringing  down  the 
boimties  of  the  other.     To  render  prayer  prevalent  and  effectual,  there  are  required 
to  it  these  two  qualifications  :  1.  Fervency  or  importunity.     2.  Constancy  or  perse- 
verance.    Men  too  often  divide  between  watc  ing  and  prayer,  and  so  use  and  rely 
npon  these  duties   separately,  which  can  do  nothing  but  in  conjunction.     For 
watchfulness  without  prayer  is  presumption,  and  prayer  without  watchfulness  is  & 

40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

iiiockery.  By  the  first  a  man  invades  God's  part  in  this  great  work,  and  by  th« 
liitter  he  neglects  his  own.  Prayer  not  assisted  by  practice  is  laziness,  and  contra- 
dicted by  practice  is  hypocrisy ;  it  is  indeed  of  mighty  force  and  use  within  its 
proper  compass,  but  it  was  never  designed  to  supply  the  room  of  watchfulness,  or 
to  make  wish  stand  in  the  stead  of  endeavour.  {Ibid.)  Preparing  for 
timptation: — Wise  oombatants  will  measure  swords  before  they  engage.  And  a 
discreet  person  will  learn  his  own  weaknesses  rather  by  self-reflection  than  by 
experience.  For  to  know  one's  self  weak  only  by  being  conquered,  is  doubtless  the 
worst  sort  of  conviction.  (Ibid.)  Danger  of  sleep  m  times  of  temptation: — 
Another  instance  I  have  met  with  in  story  of  a  certain  general,  who  going  about 
his  camp  in  the  night,  and  finding  the  watch  fast  asleep  upon  the  ground,  nails  him 
down  to  the  place  where  he  lay  with  his  own  sword,  using  this  expression  withal, 
"  I  found  him  dead,  and  I  left  him  so."  {Ibid.)  Lip-devotion: — Lip-devotion 
will  not  serve  the  turn.  It  undervalues  the  very  things  it  prays  for.  It  is  indeed 
the  begging  of  a  denial,  and  shall  certainly  be  answered  in  what  it  begs.  {Ibid.) 
Spirit  willing,  flesh  weak: — I.  Give  an  explication  of  the  words.  II.  Show  that 
our  present  state  is  imperfect,  and  there  will  always  be  defects — defects  in  our 
spiritual  frame,  defects  in  our  obedience,  defects  in  our  approaches  to  God  in  our 
religious  duties.  III.  If  the  spirit  be  willing,  and  our  infirmities  are  truly  lamented, 
and  we  watch  and  pray  against  them,  God  will  graciously  accept  us,  approve  of  our 
sincere  desires  and  endeavours,  and  pardon  our  failings.  IV.  That  this  grace  of 
God  and  the  Redeemer  is  matter  of  great  comfort  to  the  sincere  Christian,  a  support 
to  him  under  a  sense  of  his  weakness  and  unworthiness,  and  an  encouragement  to 
engage  in  solemn  duties,  particularly  in  the  celebration  of  the  ordinance  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  with  readiness  and  cheerfulness,  and  without  amazing,  distracting 
dread  and  terror.  {John  Whitty.)  Prayer: — I.  Explain  the  nature  of  prayer, 
and  set  it  in  its  true  light,  by  stripping  it  of  all  foreign  and  superfluous  circum- 
stances. In  order  to  understand  the  nature  of  prayer,  let  us  take  notice  that  the 
inward  acts  of  mind  and  heart  exerted  in  it,  from  which  the  outward  expressions 
should  flow,  and  by  which  they  should  be  animated,  are  principally  these  three 
following  :  1.  A  lively  and  intimate  persuasion  that  we  are  utterly  insuflicient  for 
our  own  happiness,  and  that  we  depend  upon  our  Maker  for  all  we  possess  here  or 
hope  to  enjoy  hereafter.  2.  The  second  act  of  the  soul  exerted  in  prayer,  is  the 
lifting  it  up  with  the  utmost  ardour  to  that  greatest  and  best  of  beings  who 
brought  us  into  life,  and  assigned  us  our  station  in  it.  3.  The  third  act  of  mind  is 
a  firm  belief  and  assured  trust  in  that  God  to  whom  we  pray,  and  on  whom  we 
depend.  II.  Vindicate  prayer  from  the  objections  commonly  urged  against  it.  1. 
That  an  omniscient  God  already  knows  what  we  want  before  we  ask  it.  Answer : 
The  real  design  of  prayer  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  express,  under  a  lively  impression 
of  the  presence  of  God,  the  sense  we  have  of  our  dependence  upon  Him  :  and,  in 
the  second  place,  to  express  our  earnest  desires  of  having  all  those  sentiments  and 
pious  dispositions  which  it  is  proper  for  ua  to  entertain  and  cultivate.  2.  That 
since  God  is  infinite  in  goodness,  He  is  always  disposed  to  bestow  on  His  creatures 
whatever  is  proper  for  them,  and,  since  He  is  infinite  in  wisdom,  He  will  always 
choose  the  fittest  times  and  best  manner  of  bestowing.  Answer :  Prayer  is  not 
designed  to  move  the  affections  of  God,  it  works  its  effect  on  us,  as  it  contributes  to 
change  the  temper  of  our  minds.  3.  Prayer  can  be  of  no  importance,  for  all  things 
are  already  fixed  by  an  unalterable  decree  of  God.  Answer:  None  ever  maintained 
that  God  hath  determined  events  to  happen  without  any  means,  and  prayers  are 
the  proper  means  of  obtaining  spiritual  blessings.  III.  The  advantages  which  arise 
from  the  sincere  and  steadfast  performance  of  this  duty.  1.  As  a  break  in  oiu 
worldly  life.  2.  As  inspiring  us  with  the  love,  and  animating  us  to  the  practice,  ol 
every  virtue.  3.  Putting  us  into  the  best  frame  and  situation  of  mind  for  receiving 
the  influences  of  heavenly  light  and  grace.  4.  Raising  the  human  soul  to  an  un- 
common pitch  of  grandeur  and  elevation.  5.  Giving  a  wonderful  strength  and 
firmness  to  the  soul  which  is  under  the  full  power  and  influence  of  it.  Since,  then, 
prayer  is  a  reasonable  thing  in  itself,  it  must  be  both  our  duty  and  our  interest  to 
continue  instant  in  it.  {W.  Leechman.)  Entering  into  temptation  : — To  tempt  is 
in  general  no  more  than  to  try,  and  a  state  of  temptation  is  a  state  of  trial ;  to 
pray  therefore  that  we  may  not  be  put  into  a  state  of  temptation,  is  to  pray  our« 
selves  out  of  this  world,  which  was  designed  by  God  for  a  state  of  trial  in  order  to 
another  world.  Therefore,  when  we  pray  not  to  be  led  into  temptation,  the 
meaning  is,  that  God  by  His  wise  providence  would  keep  us  from  such  trials  as, 
according  to  the  ordinary  measnres  of  grace,  we  should  hardly  be  able  to  withstand. 


OHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  687 

For,  although  it  be  possible  for  those  to  whom  God  gives  extraordinary  assistance, 
not  only  to  resist  the  temptation,  but  to  triumph  over  it,  and  to  shake  off  tempta- 
tions as  St.  Paul  did  the  viper  from  his  hand,  yet,  considering  the  frailty  of  human 
nature,  and  that  God  is  not  obliged  to  give  assistance  in  difficult  cases,  it  is  a  wise 
and  becoming  petition  for  ua  to  our  heavenly  Father,  that  He  would  not  lead  us  in 
this  manner  into  temptation.     (E.  Stillingjleet.)       Tlu  attractions  of  two  worlds : — 
It  is  the  love  of  this  world,  that  is,  of  the  riches  and  honours  of  it,  which  make  the 
sins  of  ambition  and  covetousness  so  plausible  and  prevailing  among  those  who 
profess  to  believe  another  world.     Their  souls  are  like  a  piece  of  iron  between  two 
loadstones  of  an  unequal  magnitude  and  distance;  the  one  is  far  greater,  and  hath 
more  force  in  itself  to  attract,  but  it  is  placed  at  a  far  greater  distance  ;  the  other  is 
much  less,  but  very  near,  and  therefore  may  more  powerfully  draw,  than  that  which 
is  more  forcible  but  farther  off.     (Ibid.)        Importance  of  resolution: — One  of  the 
best  means  in  the  world  to  withstand  temptations  to  sin,  because— 1.  It  keeps  the 
mind  steady  and  fixed,  and  therefore  ready  to  resist  the  temptation  when  it  comes. 
2.  Because  it  takes  off  the  false  colours  and  appearances  of  things  ;  for  everything 
may  be  represented  plausibly  to  an  irresolute  mind.     (Ibid.)        Sins  of  will  and  sins 
of  infirmity  : — By  what  certain  rules  may  we  proceed  to  judge  what  sins  are  wilful 
and  presumptuous,  and  what  are  sins  of  infirmity,  or  such  as  come  from  the  weak- 
ness of  the  flesh.     We  have  two  ways  to  judge  by.    1.  From  the  nature  of  moral 
actions.     2.  From  the  Scriptures,  declaring  what  sins  are  inconsistent  with  the 
Btate  of  salvation.    For  there  are  two  sorts  of  infirmities :   1.  Such  as  belong  to 
particular  actions.     2.  Such  as  belong  to  our  state  and  condition.     There  are  three 
things  which  do  very  much  alter  and  discriminate  the  nature  of  moral  actions.     1. 
The  choice  and  consent  of  the  will.     2.  The  time  and  deliberation  about  it.     8. 
The  manner  of  committing  it.     (Ibid.)         What  is  watchfulness  ? — It  is  a  constant 
eare  of  ourselves  and  actions.     We  walk  as  it  were  upon  precipices,  and  therefore 
had  need  to  look  to  our  standing,  when  we  see  persons  falling  on  every  side. 
(Ibid.)        The  defence  of  prayer : — Prayer,  when  duly  performed,  not  only  diverts, 
and  raises,  and  composes  the  mind,  and  so  breaks  the  force  of  a  present  temptation, 
but  when  a  close  siege  is  laid,  it   keeps   the   passage   open   for    supplies  from 
heaven,  and  brings  down  those  supports  which  may  enable  us  to  endure.     (Ibid.) 
Sins  of  infirmity : — I.  What  is  the  Scrip  tube  sense  of  infirmitt?    1.  The  state  of 
human  nature  is  such  as  to  be  liable  to  many  pains,  diseases,  and  at  last  to  death. 
In  this  sense  Christ  is  said  to  bear  our  infirmities,  being  by  the  law  of  His  nature 
subject  to  the  like  weakness — hunger,  thirst,  sleep,  dread  of  pain.     2.  Men  are  not 
more  weak  in  their  bodies  than  in  their  minds,  nor  more  exposed  to  bodily  pains 
than  to  the  impressions  of  sin,  which  is  our  spiritual  disease.     3.  Next  to  this 
general  sense  of  infirmity  comes  the  particular  infirmities  included  in  it.     It  is 
nrged  in  defence  that  these  passions  are  natural ;   also  that  they  are  inherent. 
That  a  natural  passion  has  the  same  author  with  nature,  and  belongs  to  us  as  we 
are  men,  therefore  not  to  be  avoided.     None  of  these  h&ve  infirmity  enough  to  be 
an  excuse  for  sin.     II.  What  sobt  of  bins  they  are  which  will  admit  of  an  excuse 
BECAUSE  of  the  infirmitt  FROM  WHICH  THEY  PROCEED.     There  is  an  imperfection  in 
the  obedience  of  the  best  of  men — coldness  in  devotion,  wandering  thoughts,  which 
is  a  weakness  to  be  forgiven.     The  one  way  to  entitle  us  to  the  plea  is  by  endea- 
vouring sincerely  and  universally  to  obey  the  will  of  God.     (T.   Sherlock,  D.D.) 
The  disciples  in  Gethsemane  : — I.  The  need  of  rebuke.     II.  The  method  of  Christ ; 
rebuke  is  tempered  and  limited.     The  flesh  is  to  be  rebuked  for  its  weakness,  the 
spirit  commended  and  strengthened  for  its  willingnees.    Had  Christ  been  of  the 
spirit  of  some  He  would  have  allowed  no  such  palliation  of  their  weakness.     How 
Christ  put  His  knowledge  of  man  into  the  other  side  of  the  balance — "  He  knew 
what  was  in  man."     Imagine  the  disappointment  with  which  the  disciples  awoke 
to  find  that  their  firm  resolves  had  vanished.     These  words  of  Christ  show  rather 
His  intense  appreciativeness  of  all  the  concealed  willingness  of  men  than  any  desire 
to  set  their  failure  in  aggravated  form.     He  used  His  knowledge  for  their  help,  not 
hurt.    He  sees  the  redeeming  brightness.    Foster  willingness  of  spirit.    III.  Lastly, 
what  a  strengthened  and  rightly  directed  will  can  do ;  how  it  can  rise  above  the 
flesh.     We  see  it  in  worldly  pursuits.     How  eagerly  a  man  will  pursue  an  idea 
"when  it  masters  his  will.    The  ideal  religious  hfe  is  just  a  new  ambition  with 
Divine  help  to  reach  it.      (C.  J,  Proctor.)        Temptation: — I.  The  bources  o! 
temptation.     1.  Temperament  and  disposition.    2.  The  circumstances  with  which 
a  man  is  sarroonded  and  the  training  under  which  he  has  been  brought  np.     U. 
Passing  from  the  Boarcee  of  temptation,  let  me  speak  of  the  nkcebsity  of  watchins 


C23  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvi 

AOAIN3T  IT.  1.  One  reason  ia  onr  ignorance  of  self.  2.  Watchfulness  is  needed 
because  the  trial  of  man's  character  is  life-long.  8.  Watchfulness  of  spirit  will 
effect  much,  but  it  will  be  greatly  helped  if  combined  with  a  spirit  of  devotion.  It 
gives  him  strength  which  in  one  sense  is  his  own,  but  in  a  truer  and  higher  sense 
is  not  his  own.  A  sense  of  religious  responsibility  to  God  strengthens  the  sense 
of  right  against  wrong.  When  he  is  resisting  temptation  he  is  not  fighting  single- 
handed,  but  has  the  eternal  law  and  will  of  God  on  his  side.  In  every  eucouuter 
it  helps  a  man  mightily  to  know  that  he  is  not  single.  {A,  Watson,  D.D.)  Watch 
our  ttrength  : — Men  may  be  on  their  guard  against  their  infirmities,  but  unwary 
where  they  deem  themselves  strong.  And  just  as  every  reader  of  history  is  familiar 
with  stories  which  tell  how  fortresses  and  castles  were  taken  by  the  enemy,  not  on 
their  weak  and  well-guarded  side,  but  on  the  side  where  they  were  deemed  impreg- 
nable, and  where  watching  was  thought  useless,  so  has  it  been  a  thousand  times  in 
the  history  of  the  human  mind  and  life.  The  faithful  Abraham  fell  into  distrust ; 
the  meek  Moses  was  ruffled  in  spirit ;  the  wise  Solomon  was  overreached  by  acts 
which  he  might  have  withstood ;  the  courageous  Peter,  even  when  warned  by 
Christ,  was  drawn  into  an  act  of  cowardice.  So  we  often  see  it  in  common  life. 
We  see  the  man  of  strong  understanding  thrown  off  his  guard,  and  doing  foolish 
things ;  the  man  of  integrity,  by  some  impulse,  turned  aside  from  the  straight 
path.  (Ihid.)  Christian  vigilance: — I.  To  show  the  importancb  of  and  neces- 
BiTT  of  Christian  vigilance.  From — 1.  The  commands  and  exhortations  of  Scrip, 
ture.  2.  The  deceitfulness  and  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  The  illusions  it 
practices  on  itself.  Like  an  ingenious  advocate  whose  object  is  to  colour  and 
*?commend  a  bad  cause,  it  employs  the  most  deceitful  sophistry ;  and  sin  is  artfully 
pleaded  for  on  the  various  grounds  of  constitution,  custom,  expediency,  and  neces- 
sity. 3.  The  temptations  to  which  we  are  exposed.  (1)  The  temptations  of  the 
world.  (2)  Satan.  4.  The  sins  into  which  many  of  the  people  of  God  have  fallen 
through  its  neglect.  Noah,  David,  Hezekiah,  and  Peter.  No  dependence  can  hk 
placed  in  elevated  station,  piety,  or  experience.  Adam  fell  when  all  was  beautiful. 
5.  Review  your  own  experience  and  see  the  need  for  vigilance.  II.  The  nature  o« 
THE  DOTY  enjoined.  1.  A  deep  and  abiding  conviction  of  danger.  2.  A  diligent 
use  of  appointed  means.  Avoid  all  occasions  of  sin  ;  watch  the  beginnings  of  sin; 
watch  your  besetting  sin  ;  watch  your  thoughts;  watch  your  company  ;  watch  your 
pursuits ;  watch  in  dependence  upon  God.  III.  The  persons  on  whom  this  P"tt 
OUGHT  ESPECiAiiiiY  TO  BE  ENFORCED.  1.  To  ministers  and  all  who  occupy  official 
stations  in  the  Church  of  God.  2.  It  applies  to  the  aged.  They  are  not  beyond 
the  reach  of  temptation.  3.  It  applies  to  the  young.  4.  It  applies  to  heads  of 
families.  IV.  To  enforce  the  observance  of  this  duty.  1.  Think  of  the  salva- 
tion of  the  soul.  2,  Think  of  the  consequences  resulting  from  the  neglect  of  thia 
duty.  3.  Think  of  the  glory  of  God.  (T.  H.  B'alker.)  Watch  the  occasions  of 
sin : — Avoid  all  occasions  of  sin.  Boston  justly  remarks,  that,  "  as  one  who  carriea 
gunpowder  would  not  wish  to  be  where  sparks  are  flying,  lest  he  should  ba 
destroyed ;  so  should  we  carefully  avoid  such  places  and  company  as  may  lead  into 
sin."  (Ibid.)  Watch  the  beginnings  of  sin: — All  sin  proceeds  by  rapid  and 
beguiling  steps  ;  and  when  its  influence  is  once  yielded  to,  who  can  determine  all 
the  possible  declinations  from  rectitude  which  may  afterwards  follow  J  In  its  first 
approach  it  may  seem  altogether  harmless ;  it  may  be  nothing  more  than  thought 
The  spark  may  seem  to  be  harmless;  but  it  shall  enkindle  a  conflagration  that 
ahall  resist,  by  its  violence,  the  united  wisdom  and  power  of  man.  The  shell  may 
seem  to  be  insignificant,  but  it  contains  a  substance  which,  when  matured,  shall  ba 
*•  a  serpent  in  the  path,  or  adder  by  the  way,  that  biteth  the  horse's  heel,  so  that 
the  rider  thereof  falloth  backward."  The  riJl  that  steals  eDently  over  the  sod  may 
appear  trivial ;  but  it  shall  multiply  its  waters,  until  it  mocks  the  man  who  shall 
Bay,  "  Here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed."  (Ibid.)  Christ's  comideration  for 
the  weakness  of  His  followers : — Applying  the  subject  to  ourselves.  L  Is  the  spirit 
WILLING  ?  Are  we  willing,  in  the  sense  of  being  resolved,  and  bent  upon  doing 
God's  will,  following  after  holiness,  and  showing  sympathy  with  Christ  by  bearing 
the  cross  for  His  sake  ?  Yet — IL  The  flesh  mat  be  weak.  1.  In  religious  exer- 
cises. 2.  In  the  tasks  and  duties  of  our  Christian  life.  3.  Most  of  all  in  suffering 
and  trial.  III.  The  comport  and  use  of  Christ's  gracious  saying  to  vb  in  such 
TIMES  AS  THESE,  1.  It  is  a  word  of  kind  apology.  2.  There  is  a  tone  of  warning 
in  it.  8.  Our  duty  therefore  is  to  do  our  utmost  to  keep  awake  and  to  maintain 
eommunion  with  our  Lord.  "  Watch  and  pray."  IV.  Look  forward  to  a  bettei 
lite.     (r.  O.  Horton.) 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  62S 

Vers.  47-52.  And  JeauB  said  onto  Mm,  Friend,  wherefore  art  Ulou  come  7 — Tk4 
kut  pleading  of  love: — I.  The  patience  of  Christ's  love.  The  betrayer  in  the  very 
instant  of  his  treason  has  that  changeless  tenderness  lingering  around  him,  anl 
that  merciful  hand  beckoning  to  him  stil).  Sin  is  mighty,  but  it  cannot  make  God 
cease  to  love  us.  II.  The  pleading  of  Christ's  patient  love.  There  is  an  appeal  to 
the  traitor's  heart,  and  an  appeal  to  his  conscience.  Christ  would  have  him  think 
of  the  relations  that  have  so  long  subsisted  between  them,  and  of  the  real  nature  of 
the  deed  he  was  doing.  The  sharp  question  is  meant  to  wake  up  his  conscience. 
All  our  evils  are  betrayals  of  Christ,  and  all  our  betrayals  of  Christ  are  sins  against 
a  perfect  friendship  and  an  unvaried  goodness.  We  too  have  sat  at  His  table,  heard 
His  wisdom,  had  a  place  in  His  heart.  It  is  the  constant  effort  of  the  love  of  Christ 
to  get  us  to  say  to  ourselves  the  real  name  of  what  we  are  about.  "  Wherefore  art 
thou  come  ?  "  Almost  all  actions  have  a  better  and  a  worse  side,  prudence  is  called 
selfishness ;  we  are  clever  men  of  business,  he  a  rogue.  It  is,  therefore,  the  office 
of  love  to  force  us  to  look  at  the  thing  as  it  is.  He  must  begin  with  rebukes  that 
He  may  advance  to  blessing.  III'.  The  possible  eejection  of  the  pleading  of 
Christ's  patient  love.  We  can  resist  His  pleadings.  It  is  easily  done.  Judas 
merely  held  his  peace — no  more.  Silence  is  sufficient.  Non-submission  is  rebel- 
lion. The  appeal  of  Christ's  love  hardens  where  it  does  not  soften.  The  sun  either 
scatters  the  summer  morning  mists,  or  it  rolls  them  into  heavier  folds,  from  whose 
livid  depths  the  lightning  is  flashing  by  mid-day.  That  silence  was  probably  the 
silence  of  a  man  whose  conscience  was  convicted  while  his  will  was  unchanged. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  God's  love  embraces  the  worst  man : — As  the  sunshine  pours 
down  as  willingly  and  abundantly  on  filt&  and  dunghills,  as  on  gold  that  glitters  in 
its  beam,  and  jewels  that  flash  back  its  lustre,  so  the  light  and  warmth  of  that  un- 
setting  and  unexhausted  source  of  life  pours  down  on  "  the  unthankful  and  on  the 
good."  The  great  ocean  clasps  some  black  and  barren  crag  that  frowns  against  it, 
as  closely  as  with  its  waves  it  kisses  some  fair  strand  enamelled  with  flowers  and 
fragrant  with  perfumes.  So  that  sea  of  love  in  which  we  live,  and  move,  and  have 
our  being,  encircles  the  worst  with  abundant  flow.  He  Himself  sets  us  the  pattern, 
which  to  imitate  is  to  be  the  children  of  "  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven,"  in  that 
He  loves  His  enemies,  blessing  them  that  curse,  and  doing  good  to  them  that  hate. 
(Ibid.)  Man  may  reject  the  Divine  love: — We  cannot  cease  to  be  the  objects  of 
His  love,  but  we  can  refuse  to  be  the  recipients  of  its  most  precious  gifts.  We  can 
bar  our  hearts  against  it.  Then,  of  what  avail  is  it  to  us?  To  go  back  to  an 
earlier  illustration,  the  sunshine  pours  down  and  floods  a  world,  what  does  that 
matter  to  us  if  we  have  fastened  up  shutters  on  all  our  windows,  and  barred  every 
crevice  through  which  the  streaming  gladness  can  find  its  way  ?  We  shall  grope  at 
noontide  as  in  the  dark,  within  our  gloomy  houses,  while  our  neighbours  have  light 
in  theirs.  What  matters  it  though  we  float  in  the  great  ocean  of  the  Divine  love, 
if  with  pitch  and  canvas  we  have  carefully  closed  every  apeiture  at  which  the  flood 
can  enter?  A  hermetically  closed  jar,  plunged  in  the  Atlantic,  will  be  as  dry  inside 
as  if  it  were  lying  on  the  sand  of  the  desert.  It  is  possible  to  perish  of  thirst  within 
sight  of  the  fountain.  It  is  possible  to  separate  ourselves  from  the  love  of  God, 
not  to  separate  the  love  of  God  from  ourselves.  (Ibid.)  Judas,  why  made  a 
disciple : — But  why  did  Christ  choose  Judas  as  a  disciple,  knowing  him  a  wicked 
man?  1.  To  teach  us  that  He  will  tolerate  in  the  Church  militant  evil  men,  and 
no  society  among  men  so  small,  so  holy,  but  some  will  creep  in.  2.  To  show  His 
humility  and  patience  in  admitting  to  His  board  and  bread  so  vile  a  person,  yea,  to 
dip  his  hand  in  the  same  dish.  3.  To  accomplish  the  ancient  prophecy,  that  his 
familiar  friend,  and  he  that  eats  bread  with  Him,  that  went  up  to  the  house  of  God 
with  Him  as  a  friend,  he  should  lift  up  his  hand  against  Him  (Psa.  Iv.  13,  14.) 
{Thomas  Taijlor.)  Perishing  by  the  sword  if  we  use  the  sword: — Human  ven- 
geance will  produce  its  own  punishment.  Eesist,  and  you  will  be  resisted.  Treat 
men  unkiodly  and  they  will  treat  you  unkindly.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  be  gentle 
and  you  will  rule.  Be  wilUng  to  bear  injuries  and  you  will  triumph.  Believe  in 
martyrdom.  Let  martyrdom  be  possible.  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  Christ  is  the  great  fulfilment  of  that  beatitude;  and  His  ex- 
ample  is  here  before  as,  consistent  to  the  end.     (Dean  Uowson.) 

Ter.  53.  Tblnkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray  to  Uy  Father  7 — War  opposed  to 
the  precepts  and  spirit  of  Christianity  : — Show  that  war  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of 
Christianity.  I.  Offeb  such  reasons  as  pbove  this.  1.  The  toleration  of  wat 
under  the  New  Testament  dispensation  is  contrary  to  what  Christianity  was  ex* 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxyi,. 

peoted  to  he  by  the  prophet  who  foretold  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  by  th« 
Church  of  the  Jews,  to  whom  they  were  Bent  (Isa.  ii.  ;  ix.  6 ;  Zech.  ix.  9,  10).  9. 
The  advent  of  the  Saviour  was  attended  with  revelations  which  indicated  peace. 
The  angels  sang  of  peace  on  earth.  3.  The  doctrine  which  Christ  tavight  condemna 
war  (Matt.  v.  3-9,  <fec.)  4.  The  example  of  Christ  teaches  the  same  truth.  His  life 
was  unresisting.  5.  War  originates  in  a  passion  which  Christianity  condemns.  6. 
It  can  only  be  carried  on  by  the  use  of  those  means  which  Christianity  must  con- 
demn. II.  Answers  objections.  1.  It  is  said  that  war  was  allowable  under  the 
Old  Testament  dispensation,  that  therefore  it  cannot  be  wrong  in  the  abstract. 

2.  It  is  said  that  tlie  predictions  of  the  New  Testament  foretell  wars  in  the  course 
of  Christianity  through  the  world.  3.  It  is  said  that  the  civil  magistrate  shall  not 
bear  the  sword  in  vain.  4.  It  is  said  that  to  argue  in  favour  of  these  principles  is 
a  proof  of  cowardice  and  imbecility.  6.  What  will  be  the  consequences  if  men  act 
in  this  way?  III.  Make  a  few  reflections.  1.  It  calls  for  a  close  examination  of 
the  subject.     2.  It  is  the  duty  of  parents  to  be  careful  in  training  up  their  children. 

3.  I  would  urge  that  no  professor  of  Christianity  should  think  of  bearing  arms. 
{N.  M.Harry.)  The  villing  surrender : — "Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  waa 
al?o  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  glory  of  Christ  is  in  His  willing  surrender  of  that  which 
be  oiiged  to  Him,  and  whith  He  might  have  always  had  and  enjoyed.  The  multi- 
tude whom  the  chief  priests  had  sent  was  arresting  Jesus.  Then  one  of  Hia 
disci]iles  drew  the  sword.  Jesus  bade  him  put  his  sword  into  its  place  again.  He 
tells  His  eager  followers  that  if  He  wants  He  can  protect  Himself.  *'  Thinkeat 
thou,"  &c.  The  helpless  prisoner  looked  up  and  saw  the  air  thick  with  angela 
huirying  to  His  rdief.  A  word  from  Him  and  they  would  have  been  His  warriors. 
He  had  the  power,  but  would  not  use  it.  The  nobleness  of  this  surrender  of  Jesus; 
no  man  becomrs  really  noble  who  has  not  its  repetition  in  himself.  To  give  up 
some  precious  thing  which  is  legitimately  yours ;  to  shut  your  eyes  upon  visions  of 
glory,  or  safety,  or  luxury,  which  you  might  make  your  own  without  blame,  that  is 
one  of  the  marks  of  nobleness.  The  man  who  is  taking  all  that  he  has  a  right  to 
take  in  life  is  always  touched  with  a  shade  of  baseness.  Let  us  study  the  noblenesa 
of  voluntary  surrender.  I.  We  want  to  feel  how  definite  and  distinct  it  is. 
There  are  base  imitations  of  it.  There  are  two  kinds  of  renunciation  of  things 
which  have  this  origin  in  unworthy  motives.  1.  The  first  is  the  renunciation  which 
comes  from  idleness  or  lack  of  spirit.  There  will  always  be  people  who  might  be 
rich,  learned,  famous,  who  despise  these  things  simply  because  of  the  trouble  they 
involve.  The  surrender  they  make  is  a  loss  not  a  gain ;  it  has  nothing  in  common 
with  the  Divine  relinquishment  of  Jesus.  2.  The  second  of  the  two  base  forms  of 
voluntary  surrender  is  what  we  may  call  the  ascetic  foim.  It  includes  the  renuncia- 
tion of  legitimate  enjoyments,  that  we  may  be  chastened  by  disappointment.  Now 
turn  back  to  Jesus.  When  He  said,  "  I  will  not  call  the  angels,"  it  was  no  pusil- 
lanimous submitting  to  His  fate ;  nor  was  it  any  unnatural  submitting  of  Himself 
to  suffering  that  He  might  be  cultivated  and  purified,  or  that  the  release  from  suf- 
fering when  it  came  might  be  more  sweet.  It  was  the  quiet  suiTcnder  of  what  was 
His,  because  He  could  not  have  it  and  yet  do  His  work  and  save  the  world.  No 
man  in  this  world  has  a  right  to  all  his  rights.  Here  is  really  the  key  to  the  ques- 
tion of  voluntary  abstinence  from  certain  innocent  indulgences  for  the  sake  of 
others.  Voluntariness  lies  at  the  root  of  it  all.  We  talk  of  the  glory  of  resignation 
to  the  inevitable ;  but  the  true  glory  is  in  resignation  to  the  inevitable.  To  stand 
nnchained,  with  perfect  power  to  go  away,  and  so  standing  to  let  the  fire  creep  up 
to  the  heart — that  is  the  truer  heroism.  Christ  knew  what  it  was  to  gain  the  life 
He  lost,  to  have  the  thing  that  He  surrendered.  When  He  refused  to  call  the 
angels  to  His  help,  the  strength  which  was  the  meaning  of  the  angels  was  surely 
entering  into  Him,  and  making  Him  ready  for  the  battle  which  He  was  just  about 
to  fight.  (P.  Brooks,  D.D.)  Self-surrender  under  the  influence  of  a  higher  pur- 
pose : — When  a  man  who  might  be  rich  deliberately  gives  up  the  chance  of  wealtli 
that  ho  may  be  a  scholar,  men  whose  object  in  life  is  wealth,  and  who  know  that 
he  has  the  same  power  to  get  wealth  which  they  have  if  he  should  give  himself  to 
its  pursuit,  must  honour  him  and  feel  the  infiuence  of  his  renunciation.  It  ia  not 
laziness,  for  he  goes  to  work  harder  than  any  of  them.  It  is  not  asceticism,  for  he 
has  no  foolish  sweeping  abuse  of  wealth  with  which  to  insult  his  fellow-men's  intel- 
ligence. It  is  not  incapacity,  for  he  is  as  bright  as  the  brightest.  It  is  simply  the 
power  of  a  higher  purpose.  It  is  the  calm,  manly,  uncomplaining  choice  to  do  thia 
greater  thing,  and  to  surrender  whatever  would  hinder  the  doing  of  it  most  faith* 
fully  and  well.   The  man  goes  oif  into  his  study,  and  thinks  that  nobody  sees  him—' 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  631 

indeed,  does  not  think  for  a  moment  whether  anybody  is  seeing  him  or  not ;  but  hia 
life  and  such  lives  as  bis  are  the  salt  of  the  society  in  which  they  live.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  56.  Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  Him  and  fled. — The  causet,  tigm,  evils, 
and  cure  of  backsliding: — I.  Its  causes.  1.  Opposition  and  fear  of  injury  from 
those  who  are  the  enemies  of  religion.  2.  A  too  frequent  and  uniform  conformity 
and  intercourse  with  the  world.  3.  Self-confidence  in  spiritual  gifts  and  attain- 
ments. 4.  A  neglect  of  the  private  duties  of  religion.  II.  Its  signs.  1.  It  ig 
testified  by  signs  which  do  not  amount  to  that  flagrant  and  public  departure  from 
the  gospel  which  frequently  is  displayed.  (1)  A  relinquishment  of  public  labour  in 
the  church  ;  (2)  an  irregular  attendance  upon  public  ordinances ;  (3)  a  spirit  of 
inattention  and  carelessness  under  these  ordinances ;  (4)  an  indulgence  in  social 
life  of  useless  conversation.  2.  Signs  which  do  amount  to  a  positive  and  public 
departure  from  the  religion  of  the  cross.  III.  Its  evils.  1.  As  they  affect  the 
individuals  themselves.  2.  As  t-hey  affect  the  Church.  (1)  They  discourage  others 
just  setting  forth  in  the  way  of  religion ;  (2)  they  lead  others  tc  sin  ;  (3)  they 
cause  mockery  of  religion.  IV.  The  cube.  1.  Call  to  mind  the  times  of  former 
devotedness.  2.  Contemplate  the  intense  guilt  of  the  act.  3.  Resolve  to  forsake 
the  transgression  by  which  it  has  been  brought  about.  4.  Connect  all  our  convic- 
tions and  emotions  with  prayer  for  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (J.  Parsons.) 
Apostasy  : — Here  we  see  four  things.  I.  Base  ingratitude.  1.  They  had  received 
special  favours  from  Him.  2.  They  were  under  the  greater  obligation.  3.  Ten- 
dency of  gratitude  to  bind  to  benefactor.  II.  Eash  impulsiveness,  probably  roused 
by  (1)  disappointment ;  (2)  alarm.  HL  Involuntary  influence.  One  fled,  then  all 
fled.  This  should  (1)  act  as  incentive  to  become  thoroughly  sound  in  character ; 
(2)  make  as  cautious  as  to  associations  we  form.  IV.  False  policy.  Doing  wrong 
to  sav^  the  body  (1)  injures  the  soul ;  (2)  endangers  it.  Learn — (a)  importance  of 
chenshing  a  practical  impression  oif  our  obligations  to  Christ ;  (b)  of  cultivating 
the  habit  of  acting  from  inteUigent  conviction  ;  (c)  of  habitually  realizing  the  prin- 
ciple, that  the  path  of  duty  is  the  path  of  safety.  (Homilist.)  Fickle  friends : — 
The  bees  were  haunting  the  flowering  trees  in  crowds,  humming  among  the 
branches,  and  gathering  honey  in  the  flowers.  Said  Gotthold,  •'  Here  is  an  image 
of  temporal  prosperity.  So  long  as  there  is  blossom  on  the  trees,  and  honey  in  the 
blossom,  the  bees  will  frequent  them  in  crowds,  and  fill  the  place  with  their  music  ; 
but  when  the  blossom  is  over,  and  the  honey  gone,  they  too  will  disappear.  The 
same  happens  in  the  world,  among  men.  In  the  abodes  of  fortune  and  pleasure, 
friends  will  be  found  in  plenty,  but  when  fortune  flys  away,  they  depart  along  with 
it.  Temporal  gain  is  the  world's  honey,  and  the  allurement  with  which  you  may 
entice  it  whithersoever  you  will ;  but  where  the  gain  terminates,  there  likewise 
do  the  lore  and  friendship  of  the  world  stop.  For  this  reason  let  all  good  men  be 
advised  to  fly  to  Christ  crucified,  who  never  forsakes  in  their  distress  those  who 
truly  seek  Him."  Tlie  sin  of  apostasy  : — Disheartened  by  the  extraordiuaiy 
dangers  and  diflSculties  of  their  enterprize,  a  Eoman  army  lost  courage,  and 
resolved  on  a  retreat.  The  general  reasoned  vnth  his  soldiers.  Expostulating 
with  them,  he  appealed  to  their  love  of  country,  to  their  honour,  and  to  their  oaths. 
By  all  that  could  revive  a  fainting  heart  he  sought  to  animate  their  courage  and 
shake  their  disgraceful  resolution.  Much  they  trusted,  admired,  loved  him ;  but 
his  appeals  were  all  in  vain.  They  were  not  to  be  moved ;  and,  carried  away  as  by  a 
panic,  they  faced  round  to  retreat.  At  this  juncture  they  were  forcing  a  mountain- 
pass,  and  had  just  cleared  a  gorge  where  the  road,  between  two  stupendous  rooks 
on  one  side  and  the  foaming  river  on  the  other,  was  but  a  footpath  broad  enough 
for  the  step  of  a  single  man.  As  a  last  resort  he  laid  himself  down  there,  saying, 
*•  If  you  will  retreat,  it  is  over  this  body  you  go,  tramphng  me  to  death  beneath 
your  feet."  No  foot  advanced.  The  flight  was  arrested.  His  soldiers  could  face 
the  foe,  but  they  could  not  mangle  beneath  their  feet  one  who  loved  them,  and  who 
had  often  leu  their  ranks  to  victory,  sharing  like  a  common  soldier  all  the  hardships 
of  the  campaign,  and  ever  foremost  in  the  fight.  The  eight  was  one  to  inspire 
them  with  decision.  Hesitating  no  longer  to  advance,  they  wheeled  round  to 
resume  their  march ;  deeming  it  better  to  meet  sufferings,  and  endure  even  death 
itself,  than  to  trample  under  foot  their  devoted  and  patriotic  leader.  Their  hcarci 
recoiled  from  such  an  outrage.  But  for  such  as  have  named  the  name  of  Christ 
Dot  to  depart  from  iniquity,  for  such  as  have  enlisted  under  His  baniifr  to  go  back 
to  the  world,  for  such  as  have  renounced  sin  to  return  to  its  pleasures,  involves  a 
greater  crime.     A  more  touching  spectacle  bars  our  return.    Jesus,  as  it  were,  layt 


632  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

Himself  down  on  our  path ;  nor  can  any  become  backelidera,  and  return  to  the 
practice  and  pleasure  of  siu,  without  trampling  Kim  under  their  feet.  (T. 
Guthrie,  (D.D.) 

Ver»  fi7,  68.  But  Peter  followed  Him  afair  oS.— Danger  of  following  Jenu  afar 
off: — I.  What  induced  the  apostle  to  follow  Jesus  afab  op.  It  was  fear  of  men, 
of  the  evil  which  might  fall  upon  him.  He  miglit  persuade  himself  that  he  could 
render  no  help  to  his  Master.  Compare  the  attachment  of  Buth  to  Naomi.  The 
apostle  had  some  affection  for  Christ,  or  he  would  not  have  followed  at  all.  The 
only  safety  is  in  following  fully.  Thus  Peter's  self-confidence  was  rebuked. 
n.  Who  were  the  companions  with  whom  the  apostle  sat  down  ?  and  what  was 
HIS  DANGER  IN  DOING  80?  He  was  in  company  hostile  to  Jesus,  but  did  not  resent 
their  hostility.  He  did  not  side  with  his  Lord.  "  Evil  communications  corrupt 
good  manners."  There  was  a  gradual  descent  in  the  fall  of  the  apostle.  He  was 
first  alarmed,  and  consulted  his  safety  by  flight ;  then  he  followed  Jesus,  but  afar 
off  ;  then  he  entered  into  the  palace  ;  then  he  sat  down  among  the  servants  ;  then 
he  listened  without  rebuke  to  their  scoffs  against  Jesus ;  then  he  denied  that  he 
was  a  disciple ;  then  he  denied  with  oaths  and  curses.  One  step  led  to  another. 
in.  What  was  the  apostle's  state  of  mind  when  he  went  into  the  high  priest's 

PALACE  T  AND  HOW  DID  THIS  EXPOSE  HIM  TO  THE  DANGER  OF  FALLING  UNDER  TEMPTA- 
TION? He  went  in  to  see  the  end.  Peter  was  not  resolved  how  he  would  act.  He 
might  think  that  Christ  would  avow  Himself ;  put  forth  His  omnipotent  power  ; 
or  that  he  would  acknowledge  Jesus.  He  was  in  a  state  of  mind  easily  to  be  over- 
come by  temptation.  Ho  wanted  to  make  his  attachment  for  Christ  such  as  to 
secure    his  own  safety.       {T.   Stark.)  Following    Christ    afar    off: — I.  Thb 

SYMPTOMS  OF  FOLLOWING  Christ  AFAB  OFF.  1.  A  gradual  departure  from  Him.  The 
first  step  was  self-confidence  ;  the  second  step  was  an  ignorant  zeal  for  Christ  and 
the  use  of  carnal  weapons  in  His  cause.  The  next  step  was  an  abandonment  of  the 
cause  he  had  espoused — **  Then  all  the  disciples  forsook  Him."  2,  A  disinclination 
to  commune  with  Him.  3.  Indifference  to  meet  Him  at  public  ordinances.  4.  An 
attempt  to  stretch  Christian  liberty  to  the  utmost.  II.  "The  bad  consequences  o» 
FOLLOWING  Christ  afab  off.  1.  Such  a  course  grows  worse  and  worse.  2.  Such  a 
state  brings  its  own  punishment.  3.  Such  a  course  is  ucspeakably  offensive  to 
Jesus  Christ.  III.  Some  of  the  remedies  for  this  state  of  mind.  Consider — 1. 
Whom  you  follow.  2.  The  obligations  you  are  under  to  follow  the  Lord  closely. 
3.  What  advantages  you  derive  from  following  Him  closely.  4.  Who  has  promised 
to  help  you  to  follow  Him.  5.  If  the  consequences  of  following  Christ  afar  off  be 
so  dreadful,  what  must  be  the  consequence  of  not  following  Him  at  all.  (/. 
Sherman.) 

Ver.  63.  But  Jesus  held  His  peace, — Silence  the  he»t  reply  to  slander ; — It  is 
reported  of  Titus  Vespasian,  that  when  any  one  spake  ill  of  him  he  was  wont  to 
say  that  he  was  above  false  reports ;  and  if  they  were  true,  be  had  more  reason 
to  be  angry  with  himself  than  the  relator.  And  the  good  Emperor  Theodosius 
commanded  that  no  man  should  be  punished  who  spoke  against  him :  for,  what  was 
spoken  slightly,  said  he,  was  to  be  laughed  at ;  what  spitefully,  to  be  pardoned  ; 
what  angrily,  to  be  pitied ;  and  what  truly,  he  would  thank  him  for.  Oh,  that 
there  were  but  such  a  frame  of  spirit  in  this  carping  age  of  ours,  wherein  men,  like 
tinder,  are  ready  to  take  fire  upon  the  least  spark  that  falls,  to  quarrel  sometimes 
on  the  most  inoffensive  word  that  can  be  spoken ;  whereas  the  best  way  is  to  be 
fsilent.  Silnce  sometimes  the  wisest  policy: — A  courtier  in  the  retinue  of 
Alexander  the  Great  paid  a  visit  to  the  studio  of  Apelles,  the  celebrated  painter, 
and  was  received  with  the  consideration  due  to  his  rank.  This  excited  his  vanity 
and  talkativeness,  which,  unhappily,  sallied  forth  upon  the  fine  art  in  questions 
exposing  his  own  ignorance.  Apelles  interrupted  him  at  length  in  an  undertone : 
"  Do  you  see  those  boys  that  are  grinding  my  colours?  While  you  were  silent  they 
admired  vou,  aazzled  with  the  splendour  of  the  purple  and  gold  with  which  your 
habit  glitters ;  but  ever  since  you  began  to  talk  about  what  you  do  not  understand, 
they  have  done  nothing  but  laugh  at  you."  The  silence  of  Jesus  .-—We  learn 
that  there  may  often  be  prudence,  wisdom,  dignity,  and  power.  I.  It  will  appear 
evident  that  the  silence  of  our  Saviour  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies  was  the  most 
effectual  AMD  SUITABLE  REPLY  which  He  could  have  made  to  their  accusations. 
These  accusations  wtre  false  and  frivolous.  His  life  and  doctrine  had  been  « 
Bufficient  reply.     No  verbal  defence  could  have  been  so  powerful.     U.  No  verbai- 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  M3 

DEFENCE  WOULD  HAYB  ATAiiiED  HiM  ANYTHING  with  those  who  Were  determined  to 
procure  His  condemnation.  It  was  not  for  Him  to  join  in  a  war  of  words  ;  His  last 
hours  should  be  tranquil.  How  solemnly  His  silence  rebukes  the  vociferation  of 
the  priests  and  populace.  III.  There  are  seasons  and  occasions  when  silkncb 
roB,  0DBSELVE8  MAY  BE  BETTEB  THAN  SPEECH,  sharper  than  argument,  more 
effectual  than  verbal  reply.  1.  When  our  characters  are  attacked.  If  we  are 
so  happy  as  to  own  a  life  which  can  defend  us,  let  us  be  silent  that  the  life  may 
speak.  2.  Silence  is  often  the  best  reproof  of  profane  conversation.  3.  It  is  often 
the  only  reproof  of  mere  locquacity.  4.  We  are  apt  to  talk  too  much,  and  lay 
too  much  stress  on  talking.  (P.  IF.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  The  silence  of  Jesus : — 
L    Pbejudice,  whatever    be  its    source,   gets    nothing  out  of    the    Scriptures. 

II.  Habitual  indulgence  in  sin  will  also  prevent  ns  from  getting  any  answer  to 
our  inquiries  from  Scripture.    The  Herods  of  to-day  get  no  answer  from  Christ. 

III.  The  influence  of  scepticism  makes  the  Scriptures  silent.  PiUte  did  not 
believe  there  was  any  truth,  and  if  there  was  it  could  not  be  known.  (W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  The  silence  of  Christ : — I.  On  one  occasion  Christ  was  silent  in 
THE  pbesence  o»  AN  OVERWHELMING  SORROW.  The  Canaauitish  woman,  "He 
answered  her  not  a  word."  This  was  a  touching  case.  This  was  the  silence  of 
love.  Sometimes  Christ  is  silent  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  life ;  sometimes  at 
its  close.  XL  On  anotheb  occasion  Christ  was  silent  in  the  presence  o» 
captious  INQUIRERS.  The  woman  taken  in  adultery.  This  was  a  critical  moment. 
This  was  the  silence  of  reserve.  There  are  many  occasions  in  Ufe  when  silence  is 
golden.  Some  men  are  naturally  of  a  quiet  disposition.  III.  On  anotheb 
OCCASION  Christ  was  silent  in  the  presence  of  personal  suffering.  ^Tien  arrested. 
This  was  a  remarkable  scene.  1.  The  time.  2.  Place.  3.  Persons.  This  was 
the  silence  of  submission.  (/.  T.  Woodhouse.)  The  silence  of  Christ: — I.  It  was 
WONDERFUL.  He  could,  by  a  word,  have  made  the  world  tremble;  judge  and 
witnesses  fall  dead  before  Him.  Why  was  He  silent  ?  He  came  not  to  be  His  own 
advocate,  but  ours.  II.  His  silence  was  full  of  suffering,  suffering  that  was 
vicarious  and  expiatory.  All  who  are  great  sufferers  endure  most  at  times  when 
one  hears  no  sound  from  their  lips.  It  is  a  reUef  to  pain  to  cry  out.  lU.  It  was 
OMINOUS.  It  foreshadowed  ills.  His  silence  said,  "  What  more  can  I  do  unto  My 
vineyard  t "  It  is  an  appalling  sign  when  Christ  ceases  to  plead  with  us.  IV.  Christ 
was  INSPIRED,  and  thus  full  of  instruction.  1.  Take  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's 
Deity.  This  is  established  by  a  mass  of  evidence,  but  there  is  no  stronger  proof 
of  it  than  the  silence  of  Christ.  2.  Apply  it  to  the  authenticity  of  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures,  that  against  which  the  destructive  criticism  of  our  day  is  making  such 
fierce  attacks,  and  what  an  argument  we  find.  3.  Apply  His  silence  to  the 
perpetuity  of  the  Sabbath  law,  and  with  what  force  it  speaks.  V.  Christ's  silence 
was  beautiful.  Difficult  to  restrain  malice  before  enemies.  VI.  It  is  exemplary. 
Belf-imposed  silence  often  a  duty.  1.  Because  of  the  perils  of  speech.  2.  Because 
of  the  blessings  of  the  discipline  of  silence.     (cT".  T.  Blackburn.) 

Vers.  69-75.  Now  Peter  sat  without  In  the  palace.— TA* /aM  of  Peter: — 
One  of  the  most  melancholy  instances  of  depravity  ever  committed.  But  a  little 
while  before  so  confident,  seated  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  &o.  Draw  from  it 
important  practical  uses.  I.  The  danger  of  self-confidence — '*  Let  him  that 
thinketh,"  &o.  Kely  on  God  for  strength.  II.  The  highest  favours,  the  most 
exalted  privileges,  do  not  secure  us  from  the  danger  of  falling  into  sin.  III.  When 
a  man  begins  to  sin  his  fall  from  one  act  to  another  is  easy,  perhaps  almost 
certain.  The  downward  road  of  crime  is  easy.  IV.  True  repentance  is  deep, 
thorough,  bitter.  V.  A  look  from  Jesus — a  look  of  mingled  affection,  pity,  and 
reproof — produces  bitter  sorrow  for  sin.  Him  we  injure  by  our  crimes,  4c. 
VL  When  we  fall  into  temptation,  let  us  seek  the  place  of  solitude,  and  pour  out 
our  sorrows  before  God.  VII.  Keal  Christians  may  be  suffered  to  go  far  astray. 
To  show  them  their  weakness,  &c.  VIH.  Yet  though  a  Christian  may  be  suffered 
to  go  astray,  yet  he  who  should,  from  this  example  of  Peter,  think  he  might  law- 
fully do  it,  or  who  should  resolve  to  do  it,  thinking  that  he  might,  hke  Peter,  weep 
and  repent,  would  give  evidence  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  grace  of  God. 
(A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Peter's  recovery : — Let  us  lay  to  heart  some  of  the  most 
important  lessons  of  this  subject.  I.  Let  no  Christian  rely  on  his  disposition 
or  feeling  for  safety  from  falling.  II.  Let  no  Christian  rely  upon  hia 
past  conduct  as  .a  safeguard.  UI.  Let  no  Christian  presume  to  trust  in 
conscience  to  keep  him   right    in    the   hour  of  danger.    IV.  Learn  to  realise 


6H  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sxf\ 

the  bitter  memory  of  good  words  which  came  too  late.  (F.  Sherry.)  Peter* $ 
repentence: — I.  Some  of  the  beasons  of  bt.  peteb's  denial,  1.  Fear, 
2.  Self-confidence.  II.  The  repentance  of  St.  Peteb.  The  compassionatism 
of  tlie  Man  of  Sorrows.  He  looked  upon  Peter.  Memory  acts  in  cases  of  repentance. 
{ FF.  D.  Herwood.)  Peter  and  Judas  : — I.  Peter's  sorrow  arose  from  a  sense  of  the 
guilt  of  his  conduct,  but  Judas'  from  a  perception  of  the  consequences  of  his 
conduct.  II  Peter's  sorrow  was  fuU  of  hope,  but  Judas'  was  full  of  despair. 
III.  Peter's  sorrow  drove  him  nearer  to  God,  but  Judas'  drove  him  further  from 
God.  IV.  Peter's  sorrow  developed  his  Christian  manhood,  but  Judas'  became 
an  element  of  sharp  retribution.  Repent  or  perish.  {J.  )F.  Mays,  M.A.)  The 
denying  disciple : — I.  Who?  Peter,  the  confessor  of  the  Christ  of  God,  &c. 
II.  Whom?  III.  What?  IV.  When?  V.  Where?  VI.  How?  Three  times, 
after  being  warned,  throup;h  fear  of  a  woman,  &o.  (Dr.  Bonar.)  Skill 
required  to  keep  up  a  lie  : — A  Spanish  proverb  declares  that  *'  for  an  honest  man 
half  his  wits  is  enough,  while  the  whole  are  too  little  for  a  knave  ;  "  the  ways,  that 
is,  as  Archbishop  Trench  expounds  the  adage,  of  truth  and  uprightness,  are  so 
simple  and  plain,  that  a  little  wit  is  abundantly  sufficient  for  those  who  walk  in 
them ;  whereas  the  ways  of  falsehood  and  fraud  are  so  perplexed  and  tangled, 
that  sooner  or  later  all  the  wit  of  the  cleverest  rogue  will  not  preserve  him  from 
being  entangled  therein — a  truth  often  wonderfully  confirmed  in  the  lives  of  evil 
men.  (F.  Jacox.)  Telling  a  lie  a  big  task: — He  who  tells  a  lie  is  not  sensible  how 
great  a  task  he  undertakes ;  for  he  must  be  forced  to  invent  twenty  more  to 
maintain  that  one.  (Dean  Swift.)  Occasional  relapse  compatible  with  spiritual 
advance : — As  an  illustration  of  this  law  in  the  kiugdom  of  grace,  consider  the 
movement  of  the  tide,  when  it  is  coming  in.  It  is  movement  upon  the  whole. 
The  water  is  sure  to  cover  that  dry  beach  in  two  or  three  hours'  time,  and  to  float 
that  stranded  sea-weed  ;  but  it  is  not  a  movement  without  relapses.  Each  wave, 
I  suppose,  gains  a  little  ground,  but  each  wave  falls  back  as  soon  as  it  has  plashed 
upon  the  shore.  Even  so  in  the  Christian  life,  there  may  be  a  forward  movement 
on  the  whole,  consistently  with  many  relapses,  though  this  assertion  requires  to  De 
guarded  by  the  observation  that  the  relapses  must  be  such  as  proceed  from  in- 
firmity,  and  not  from  malice  prepense.  Deliberate,  habitual  sin  cannot  possibly 
consist  with  spiritual  growth ;  but  the  shaking  of  a  man's  steadfastness  by  a 
sudden  tornado  of  temptation  (which  was  St.  Peter's  case)  may  do  so.  The  great 
question  is  whether,  after  each  such  fall,  the  will  recovers  its  spring  and  elasticity, 
and  makes  a  fresh  start  with  new  and  more  fervent  prayers  and  resolve.  Indeed 
the  making  many  fresh  starts  after  relapses  of  infirmity  is  a  hopeful  sign  of 
growth.  In  order  to  any  great  attainment  in  spiritual  life,  there  must  be  an  indom- 
itable resolve  to  try  and  try  again,  and  still  to  begin  anew  amidst  much  failure 
and  discouragement.  On  warm,  dewy  mornings  in  the  spring,  vegetation  makes 
a  shoot ;  and  when  we  rise  and  throw  open  the  window,  we  mark  that  the  may  is 
blossoming  in  the  hedgerows.  And  those  periods  when  a  man  can  say,  •'  I  lost 
myself  sadly  yesterday  in  temper  or  in  talk,  but  I  know  that  my  crucified  Lord 
took  upon  Him  those  sins  and  answered  for  them,  and  to-day  I  will  earnestly  strive 
against  them  in  the  strength  of  His  Spirit  invoked  into  my  soul  by  earnest 
prayer ;"  these  are  warm,  dewy  mornings  of  the  soul,  when  the  spiritual  life  within 
UB  sprouts  and  blossoms  apace.  (Dean  Goulbum.)  The  old  nature  reasserting 
its'.lf : — The  old  fisherman  of  Galilee,  it  would  seem,  in  days  gone  by,  had  been 
a  man  who  used  strong  language.  Since  He  had  been  a  disciple  of  Christ  he  had 
learned  to  control  his  language.  Three  years'  intercourse  with  Christ  had  dona 
much  for  him,  but  it  had  not  done  all.  The  "  old  man "  was  still  alive  and 
strong."  The  "new  man  "  was  very  weak  in  Peter  just  at  this  time.  The  "  old 
man  "  had  risen  up  against  the  "  new  man."  The  old  nature  in  Peter  was  fighting 
against  the  Christ  that  was  within  him;  and  if  the  Lord  had  not  just  at  that  worst 
moment  turned  and  looked  upon  Peter,  the  issue  might  have  been  more  disastrom 
than  it  was.  Then  Peter  saw  what  he  had  done — he  had  been  stabbing  hit 
Master  to  the  very  heart — driving  a  nail  into  Bis  cross,  and  piercing  Him  witl 
another  spear  1    (H,  Bonar^  D,D^ 


CHAP.  XEVii.]  ST.  MATTHEW. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Tebs.  1-10.  Then  Judas,  wblch  liad  betrayed  Him,  when  he  saw  that  Hewas  con« 
demned. — Judas  and  the  priests — end  of  evil  association  : — Men  join  hand  in  band 
for  a  wicked  object,  out  of  wbicb  tbey  bope  for  common  profit.  For  a  wbile  tbe 
alliance  lasts,  and  evil  seems  to  have  power  of  coherence  as  well  as  good.  But 
conflicting  interests  arise,  and  then  the  nature  of  the  union  is  apparent.  Sin 
began  by  severing  the  bond  between  man  and  his  Maker,  and  what  other  bond  can 
henceforth  have  any  permanence?  If  left  to  do  its  will,  it  would  disintegrate 
God's  universe  into  atoms  of  selfishness.  Observe  here — I.  Jddas,  and  thk  stats 
OF  MIND  TO  WHICH  HE  IS  BROUGHT.  He  begins  in  the  guilt  of  selfishness,  and  ends 
in  its  utter  solitude.  1.  Separation  from  human  companionship,  (a)  From  Christ 
and  the  apostles.  After  his  act  of  treachery  was  committed,  he  felt  as  if  a  I  ridge 
were  broken  behind  him.  He  had  no  more  part  nor  lot  in  the  circle  of  which  he  had 
been  a  member,  (b)  From  his  employers  and  accomplices.  Here  again,  he  is  alone. 
He  has  served  their  purpose,  and  is  thrown  away  like  a  broken  tool.  2.  Self-deser- 
tion.  He  can  no  loager  keep  company  with  his  own  thoughts.  Backward,  forward, 
upward,  his  sin  meets  him  wherever  he  turns,  and  his  feeUng  is  that  which  the  poet 
has  given  to  the  apostate  angel,  "  Me  miserable,  which  way  shall  I  fly  I "  3.  De- 
serted by  the  tempter  and  the  bribe.  He  has  no  pleasure  in  the  thing  he  coveted. 
The  silver,  which  was  so  dear,  eats  his  flesh  as  it  were  fire,  and  he  casts  it  from 
him  like  a  viper  that  has  stung  the  hand.  So  does  the  devil  ever  cheat  the  sinner 
of  the  substance  for  a  shadow,  and  then  robs  him  of  that,  or  changes  it  into  a  frightful 
spectre  from  which  he  would  escape  if  he  could.  4.  Separation  between  the  soul 
and  God.  That  which  is  reviving  light  to  others  is  to  him  consuming  fire,  and  he 
seeks  flight  from  God  as  a  relief  and  escape.  Remorse  only  hardens.  The  heart  of 
stone  may  be  crushed  and  remain  stone  in  its  every  fragment ;  it  can  only  be 
melted  when  the  love  of  God  is  suffered  to  shine  on  it.  But  when  it  refuses  to 
admit  that  love,  what  can  be  done  ?  For  a  time  this  awful  isolation  may  not  seem 
60  terrible  as  it  is.  Other  things  may  be  put  in  the  place  of  God — friendships, 
occupations,  and  pleasure.  But  when  these  pass,  as  pass  they  must,  and  perish 
like  flowers  on  the  edge  of  a  gulf,  the  awful  depth  of  the  chasm  will  be  seen.  When 
fold  after  fold  which  now  closes  the  eye  of  the  soul  is  torn  off,  and  it  is  compelled 
to  look  on  eternal  realities,  how  will  it  stand  the  gaze  ?  II.  The  chief  priests  and 
THEIR  CONDUCT.  1.  Their  disregard  for  their  instrument  when  their  purpose  is 
gained.  How  differently  would  Judas  have  been  treated,  had  he  gone  to  Christ  1  If 
any  friendship  is  to  be  formed  that  will  stand  us  in  stead  in  the  hour  of  trial,  it 
need  not  be  sought  among  bad  men  consorting  for  unprincipled  ends.  The  first 
stress  will  lay  bare  the  hollow  of  such  friendships,  and  show  what  bitter  enemies 
confront  one  another  when  wicked  men  are  separated  by  selfish  purposes.  2.  Their 
attempt  to  shake  off  the  responsibility  of  the  common  act.  One  of  the  punish- 
ments in  concerted  sin  is  mutual  recrimination,  and  the  weakest  are  denied  not 
only  pity  but  ordinary  justice.  3.  Their  taunt.  A  sneer  at  his  being  too  late  in 
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ's  innocence.  This  view  of  the  matter  should 
have  suggested  itself  earlier.  Infinitely  better  to  meet  the  ridicule  of  sinners  for 
not  joining  them,  and  to  keep  a  good  conscience,  than  to  end  by  being  subjected  to 
their  taunts  with  the  bitter  knowledge  that  they  are  deserved  I  (J.  Ker,  D.D.) 
Judas,  which  had  betrayed  Him :  treachery  against  a  Friend : — I  am  going  to  put 
before  you  the  behaviour  of  Judas  in  a  purely  human  point  of  view ;  no  narrow 
view  of  tbe  question,  but  that  which  most  concerns  us.  I  would  have  you  look  to 
his  dishonourable  betrayal  of  his  Friend.  Put  out  of  sight,  then,  the*  crucifixion 
of  the  Son  of  God ;  for  this  does  not  strictly  belong  to  Judas :  this  triith  Judas 
never  learnt.  Put  out  of  sight,  also,  the  whole  transcendent  scheme  of  redemp- 
tion :  Judas  knew  nothing  of  this.  But  Jesus  was  his  Friend.  Day  by  day  he  had 
lived  with  Jesus.  Day  by  day  he  had  heard  Him  speak,  "  Who  spake  as  never  man 
spake."  Day  by  day  he  had  seen  the  ineffable  grace  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Truth  had 
dwelt  with  him,  and  had  not  won  his  allegiance.  Love  had  dwelt  with  him,  and  had 
failed  to  touch  his  heart.  Purity  and  holiness  had  gradually  unveiled  their  glories 
in  his  presence,  and  he  had  looked  aside,  and  been  proof  to  their  loveliness.  Jesua 
had  been  his  Friend.  The  Incarnate  Son  of  God  had  dwelt  upon  earth,  not  merely 
to  promise  heaven,  but  to  be  that  heaven  which  He  promised ;  not  merely  to  judge 
and  reward  hereafter,  but  to  be  in  each  believer — ^Life.  This  was  what  was  pre- 
sented to  the  eyes  and  heart  of  Judas — the  glories  of  a  present  immortality  ol 


0-i6  -    THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxvn. 


purity  and  love ;  glories  veiled  indeed,  but  not  unseen  by  watchful  loving  eyes. 
Jesus  was  his  Frien<l.  And  we  must  observe  that  Judas  was  thoroughly  aware  of 
what  was  true  and  good,  and  perfectly  conscious,  as  far  as  a  broad,  general  choice 
went,  of  the  surpassing  excellence  of  Him  with  whom  he  lived.  {E.  Thring,  M.A.) 
Dissatisfaction  of  Jutlas  : — Might  not  Judas  have  sung  care  away,  now  that  he  had 
both  the  bag  and  the  price  of  blood,  but  he  must  come  and  betray  himself.  Whiles 
Le  played  alone,  he  won  all ;  but  soon  after,  his  own  wickedness  corrected  him,  and 
his  backslidings  reproved  him  (Jer.  ii.  19).  Sin  will  surely  prove  evil  and  bitter, 
when  the  bottom  of  the  bag  is  once  turned  upward.  A  man  may  have  the  stone 
who  feels  no  fit  of  it.  The  devil  deals  with  men  as  the  panther  does  with  the 
beasts  :  he  hides  his  deformed  head,  till  his  sweet  scent  have  drawn  them  into  his 
danger.  Till  we  have  sinned,  Satan  is  a  parasite ;  when  we  have  sinned,  he  is  a 
tyrant.  But  it  is  good  to  consider  that  of  Bernard  :  "  At  the  Day  of  Judgment  a 
pure  conscience  shall  better  bestead  one  than  a  full  purse.  (John  Trapp.)  Revul- 
aion  of  feeling  after  sin  is  committed: — What  an  awful  difference  there  is  in  the 
look  of  a  sin  before  you  do  it  and  afterwards  !  Before  I  do  it,  the  thing  to  be  gained 
seems  so  attractive,  and  the  transgression  that  gains  it  seems  so  comparatively 
insignificant.  Yes  1  and  when  I  have  done,  the  two  alter  places ;  the  thing  that 
I  win  by  it  seems  so  contemptible !  Thirty  pieces  of  silver  1  pitch  them  over  the 
Temple  enclosure  and  get  rid  of  them  I  The  thing  that  I  win  by  it  seems  so  insig- 
nificant; and  the  thing  that  I  did  to  win  them  dilates  into  such  awful  magnitude! 
For  instance,  suppose  you  or  I  do  anything  that  we  know  to  be  wrong,  tempted  to 
it  by  a  momentary  indulgence  of  some  mere  animal  impulse.  By  the  very  nature 
o£  the  case  that  dies  in  its  satisfaction,  and  the  desire,  dies  along  with  it.  We  de 
not  want  it  any  more,  when  once  we  have  got  it.  It  lasts  but  a  moment  and  is 
past ;  then  we  are  left  alone  with  the  thought  of  the  thing  that  we  have  done. 
When  we  get  the  prize  of  our  wrong-doing  we  find  out  that  it  is  not  as  all-satisfying 
as  we  expected  it  would  be.  Most  of  our  earthly  aims  are  like  that.  The  chase  is 
a  great  deal  more  than  the  hare.  Or,  as  George  Herbert  has  it,  "  Nothing  between 
two  difhes."  A  splendid  service  of  silver  plate,  and  when  you  take  the  cover  off 
there  is  nothing  in  it.  It  is  that  old  story  over  again,  of  the  veiled  prophet  who 
wooed  and  won  the  hearts  of  foolish  maidens,  and  when  he  had  them  in  his  power 
in  the  inner  chamber  removed  the  silver  veil  that  they  had  looked  upon  with  lovf , 
and  showed  hideous  features  that  struck  de.-pair  into  their  hearts.  Every  wrong 
th;3g  that  you  do,  big  or  little,  will  be  hke  some  of  those  hollow  images  of  the 
gods  that  one  hears  of  in  barbarous  temples  :  looked  at  in  front,  fair ;  but  when  you 
get  behind  them  you  find  a  hollow,  full  of  dust  and  spiders'  webs  and  unclean 
things.      {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Gradual  downfall  of  Judas  : — It  is  clear  that 

h3  had  no  intention  whatever  of  committing  so  terrible  a  crime  as  the  consequences 
showed  it  to  be.  Alas  I  what  a  fearful,  gradual  downfall  there  must  have  been 
since  the  moment  when  the  sweetness  of  the  Word  of  Life  first  made  him  give  up 
all  to  follow  Christ  I  How  day  by  day  Uttle  dishonourable  choices  must  have  been 
made,  with  an  uneasy  conscience,  before  he  arrived  at  the  deep  dishonour  of  the 
betrayal  I  How,  whilst  his  companions  were  gradually  putting  away  their  delu- 
sions, and  seeing  more  clearly,  and  chngmg  more  strongly,  he  was  gradually 
separating  from  them  too  ;  acting  the  part  of  the  tempter  sometimes — as  when  we 
find  him  taking  the  lead  in  complaining  of  the  waste  of  ointment — but  neverthe- 
less having  less  in  common  with  them  every  day,  as  tbey  became  nearer  to  Jesus 
and  he  became  more  distant.  (E.  Thring,  M.A.)  Iscariot's  confession  : — The 
man  who  has  wronged  another  proverbially  finds  it  harder  to  forgive  than  he  who 
suffered  the  wrong  ;  and  the  heavier  the  wrong  the  more  reluctant  is  he  to  admit 
that  it  had  no  justification.  He  seeks  to  justify  himself  by  depreciating  the  cba- 
racter  of  the  neighbour  te  whom  the  wrong  has  been  done  ;  he  sets  himself  to  think 
of  him  as  badly  as  he  can,  to  speak  even  worse  of  him  than  ho  thinks,  that  he  may 
thus  in  some  degree  shift  the  burden  of  guilt  on  to  other  shoulders  than  his  own. 
Judas,  therefore,  had  every  motive  to  think  and  speak  of  Jesus  the  worst  he  could. 
He  was  in  the  habit,  too,  of  glossing  over  his  sins,  of  inventing  better  motives  for 
them  than  they  would  be^tr.  If  he  could  have  found  any  fault  in  the  Man  Christ 
JeeuB,  and,  much  more,  if  he  had  seen  in  Him  anything  worthy  of  death,  would  he 
not  have  clutched  at  it  now,  and  proclaimed  it,  that  he  might  thus  justify  himself 
to  the  world  7  Nay,  if  he  could  have  fixed  on  a  single  point  in  the  character  and 
life  of  Jesus  on  which  to  hang  so  much  as  a  suspicion,  would  he  not  have  dwelt  on 
it,  and  exaggerated  it,  and  woven  from  it  at  least  some  thin  disguise  for  bis  own 
perfidy  and  shame  7     We  may  be  very  sure  that  the  Son  of  Man  was  verily  innooeni 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  63T 

vvhen  it  is  Judas  who  pronounces  Him  innocent.  And  •we  may  also  be  snre  that 
there  was  much  that  was  genuine  in  the  repentance  of  the  man  who.  by  acknow- 
ledging  the  innocence  of  hia  Victim,  brought  the  whole  weight  of  b'ls  deed  upon 
himself.  "  The  instruments  of  darkness,"  who,  "to  win  us  to  our  harm,"  often 
throw  a  false  colour  of  virtue  round  the  sins  to  which  they  tempt  us,  must  indeed 
have  lost  their  power  with  Judas  when,  seeing  what  he  had  done,  he  publicly  con- 
fessed that  it  was  innocent  blood  be  had  betrayed,  and  so  left  himself  without 
palliation  or  excuse.  (5.  Cox,  D.D.)  "  See  thou  to  that : " — The  tools  of  more 
respectable  sinners  are  flung  away  as  soon  as  they  are  done  with.  These  three,  Judas, 
the  priests,  and  Pilate,  suggest  to  us  a  threefold  way  in  which  conscience  is 
perverted.  I.  Judas  —  the  agony  of  conscience.  I  see  nothing  in  Scripture 
to  bear  out  the  hypothesis  that  his  motives  were  mistaken  zeal ;  he  was  a  man 
of  a  low,  earthly  nature,  who  became  a  follower  of  Christ,  thinking  that  He 
was  to  prove  a  Messiah  of  the  vulgar  type.  The  sudden  revulsion  of  feeling 
which  followed  upon  the  accomplished  act ;  not  like  the  words  of  a  man  who  had 
acted  on  mistaken  love.  What  an  awful  difference  there  is  between  the  look 
of  sin  before  you  do  it  and  afterwards ;  before,  attractive  and  insignificant ; 
after,  contemptible.  Here  is  hell,  a  conscience  without  hope  of  pardon.  You 
cannot  think  too  blackly  of  your  sins,  but  you  may  think  too  exclusively  of 
them.  II.  Pilate — the  shufflings  of  a  half-awakened  conscience.  Here,  then, 
we  get  once  more  a  vi\'id  picture  that  may  remind  us  of  what,  alas  !  we  all  know  io 
our  own  experience,  how  a  man's  conscience  may  be  clear-sighted  enough  to  discern, 
and  vocal  enough  to  declare,  that  a  certain  thing  is  wrong,  but  not  strong  enough  tc 
restrain  from  doing  it.  Conscience  has  a  voice  and  an  eye  ;  alas  !  it  has  no  hands. 
It  shares  the  weakness  of  all  law,  it  cannot  get  itself  executed.  Men  will  climb  over 
a  fence,  although  the  board  that  says  "  Trespassers  will  be  prosecuted,"  is  staring 
them  in  the  face  in  capital  letters  at  the  very  place  where  they  jump.  Your  con- 
science is  a  king  without  an  army,  a  judge  without  officers.  "  If  it  had  authoritj, 
as  it  has  the  power,  it  would  govern  the  world,"  but  as  things  are,  it  is  reduced  to 
issuing  vain  edicts  and  to  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  not  1  "  and  if  you  turn  roimd  and 
say  "  I  will,  though,"  then  conscience  has  no  more  that  it  can  do.  And  then,  here, 
too,  is  an  illustration  of  one  of  the  commonest  of  the  ways  by  which  we  try  to  slip 
our  necks  out  of  the  collar,  and  to  get  rid  of  the  responsibilities  that  really  belong 
to  us.  "  See  ye  to  it  "  does  not  avail  to  put  Pilate's  crime  on  the  priests'  shoulders 
Men  take  part  in  evil,  and  each  thinks  himself  innocent,  because  he  has  companions. 
Half  a  dozen  men  carry  a  burden  together ;  none  of  them  fancies  that  he  is  carrj- 
ing  it.  It  is  like  the  case  of  turning  out  a  platoon  of  soldiers  to  shoot  a  mutineer-^ 
nobody  knows  whose  bullet  killed  him,  and  nobody  feels  himself  guilty  ;  but  there 
the  man  lies  dead,  and  it  was  somebody  that  did  it.  So  corporations,  churches, 
societies,  and  nations  do  things  that  individuals  would  not  do,  and  each  man  of 
them  wipes  his  mouth,  and  says,  "  I  have  done  no  harm."  And  even  when  we  sin 
alone  we  are  clever  at  finding  scapegoats.  III.  And  so,  lastly,  we  have  here  another 
group  still — the  priests  and  people.  They  represent  for  us  the  torpor  and  misdirec- 
tion of  conscience.  "Then  answered  all  the  people  and  said,  His  blood  be  on  ua 
and  on  our  children."  They  were  perfectly  ready  to  take  the  burden  upon  them- 
eelves.  They  thought  that  they  were  "  doing  God  service  "  when  they  slew  Qod'a 
Messenger.  They  had  no  perception  of  the  beauty  and  gentleness  of  Christ's  cha- 
racter. They  believed  Him  to  be  a  blasphemer,  and  they  believed  it  to  be  a  solemn 
religious  duty  to  slay  Him  then  and  there.  Were  they  to  blame  because  they  slew 
a  blasphemer?  According  to  Jewish  law — nol  They  were  to  blame  because  they 
hud  brought  themselves  into  such  a  moral  condition  that  that  was  all  they  thought 
of  and  saw  in  Jesus  Christ.  With  their  awful  words  they  stand  before  ns,  as  per- 
haps the  crowning  instances  in  Scripture  history  of  the  possible  torpor  which  may 
paralyze  consciences.  The  habit  of  sinning  will  lull  a  conscience  far  more  than  any- 
thing else.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Conscience  nueds  revelation: — And  it  is  quite 
possible  that  a  man  may  have  no  prick  of  conscience  and  yet  have  done  a  very  wrong 
thing.  So  we  want,  as  it  seems  to  me,  something  outside  of  ourselves  that  shall  not  be 
affected  by  our  variations.  Conscience  is  like  the  light  on  the  binnacle  of  a  ship. 
It  tosses  up  and  down  along  with  the  Tessel.  We  want  a  steady  light  yonder  on 
that  headland,  on  the  fixed  soUd  earth,  which  shall  not  heave  with  the  heaving 
wave,  nor  vary  at  all.  Conscience  speaks  lowest  wljen  it  ought  to  speak  loudest. 
The  worst  man  is  least  troubled  by  his  conscience.  It  is  like  a  lamp  that  goes  oat 
in  the  thickest  darkness.  Therefore  we  need,  as  I  believe,  a  revelation  of  truth  and 
goodness  and  beauty  outside  of  ourselves  to  which  we  may  bring  our  consciences,  that 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

they  may  be  enlightened  and  set  right.  We  want  a  standard  like  the  standard 
weights  and  measures  that  are  kept  in  the  Tower  of  London,  to  which  all  the  people 
in  the  little  country  villages  may  send  up  their  yard  measures,  and  their  pound 
weights,  and  find  out  if  they  are  just  and  true.  We  want  a  Bible,  and  we  want  a 
Christ  to  tell  us  what  is  duty,  as  well  as  to  make  it  possible  for  us  to  do  it.  (Ibid.) 
The  remorse  of  Judas  on  tlie  condemnation  of  Christ : — Tou  will  observe  the  testi- 
mony which  Judas  bears  to  Christ  and  His  religion.  Had  Christ  been  a  de- 
ceiver Judas  would  have  been  aware  of  it ;  how  valuable  his  testimony  would  hava 
been  against  our  Lord.  Yet  it  is  evident  Judas  had  nothing  to  communicate.  It  is 
evident  from  the  narrative  of  the  evangelists  that  the  devil  had  much  to  do  with 
the  treachery  of  Judas.  In  no  case  has  Satan  power  over  the  individual  except  as 
that  individual  shall  famish  him  with  advantages.  It  was  the  unrestrained  covet- 
ousness  of  Judas  which  opened  an  access  to  the  tempter.  We  must  not  excuse  our- 
selves by  accusing  the  devil ;  but  it  is  distinctly  said  that  he  "  put  into  the  heart  of 
Jadas  Iscariot,"  &c.    How  Satan  succeeded  in  working  up  Judas  to  this  treachery  ? 

I.  We  may  give  it  as  in  a  high  degree  probable  that  the  devil  suggested  to  Judaa 
that  by  placing  Christ  in  the  hands  of  His  enemies  he  should  only  afford  Him  an 

OPPORTUNITY  OF    SHOWING    HiS    POWER    BY    DEFEATING   THEIB   MALICE.       HoW    eaSy    fot 

the  traitor  to  argue  ' '  No  harm  but  good  will  arise  from  the  betrayal ;  he  would 
actually  be  doing  Christ  a  service  I  "  In  this  way  professing  Christians  comply  with 
the  customs  of  the  world,  fancying  that  they  will  disarm  prejudice  and  recommend 
piety.     Satan  dealt  with  Judas  as  a  man  with  a  conscience  that  had  to  be  pacified, 

II.  We  may  also  suppose  that,  in  place  of  suggesting  to  Judas  the  probability  that 
Jesus  would  escape,  Satan  plied  him  with  the  certainty  that  Jesos  was  to  die. 
The  prophecies  attested  this.  Your  treachery  is  needful,  and  so  cannot  be  criminal. 
Men  imagine  that  if  their  sins  contribute  to  God's  fixed  purpose  tbey  cannot  bo 
guilty.  The  purpose  would  have  been  accomplished  without  the  sin.  III.  There  is 
Bometbing  very  affecting  in  the  fact  that  Jud  a  gave  himself  cp  to  despair  oh 
seeing  that  Jesds  was  given  over  to  death.  The  moment  a  sinner  is  brought 
to  see  his  own  work  in  Christ's  death,  then  is  the  moment  for  showing  him  his  life 
in  Christ's  work.  Only  feel  that  we  crucify  Christ,  and  we  are  ready  for  being  told 
that  Christ  was  crucified  for  us.  (H".  Melvill,  B.D.)  Refusing  a  legacy : — I.  Am 
illustration  of  the  lack  of  conscience  on  the  part  of  the  professedly  bk- 
ligious  is  seen  in  the  treatment  of  a  guilty  soul.  They  consulted  about  the 
money,  but  not  the  man.  They  ought  to  have  rejoiced  in  the  confession  of  Judas, 
and  that  he  had  time  to  save  Jesus  and  himself.  They  discard  their  tool.  We  have 
irtquently  seen  men  of  good  position  and  of  high  moral  principles  associate  on  equal 
teims  with  those  below  them  for  civil  or  political  purposes.  The  priests  could  not 
make  him  shoulder  all  the  guilt.  II.  The  schemes  op  the  consciencelesb  to  get 
rid  of  an  unwelcome  legacy.  Says  one,  "  Pity  to  waste  the  money  ;  "  says  an- 
other, "Never  mind  the  past,  it  will  serve  a  good  end  now."  "  Cast  it  into  the 
Kedron."  •' Melt  it  over  again,  and  thus  get  out  the  stain."  "  Buy  the  potter's 
parcel  of  ground."  "  Good  suggestion,"  was  the  murmur.  This  will  secure  con- 
fcicience  and  personal  advantage  at  the  same  time.  How  conscientious  were  these 
unprincipled  men.  III.  How  direct  bin  and  conscienceless  scheming  are  oveb- 
ruled  by  Christ.  His  betrayal  causes  a  cemetery  to  be  provided  for  the  stranger 
and  outcast ;  thus  it  is  turned  to  good  effect.  {F.  Hastings.)  The  repentance  of 
Judas : — I.  Wherein  it  resembled  true  repentance.  1.  It  was  similar  to  true 
1  epentanco  in  that  conviction  of  sin  from  which  it  sprung.  2.  In  the  open  ac- 
knowledgment of  guilt  to  which  his  convictions  led  him.  3.  In  the  deep  sorrow 
with  which  his  repentance  was  accompanied.  4.  In  the  self-condemnation  with 
which  the  repentance  of  Judas  was  attended.  5.  His  extreme  anxiety  to  counteract 
the  evil  consequences  of  his  crime,  and  his  entire  renunciation  of  its  fruits.  II. 
Wherein  it  differed  from  it.  1.  It  differed  from  it  in  its  origin.  It  had  its 
origin  in  the  natural  conscience,  not  in  the  grace  of  God.  2.  In  the  object  of  hi« 
sorrow.  Judas  repented  not  of  his  crime,  but  of  its  consequences.  3.  In  its  extent. 
It  was  of  a  partial  nature.  4.  In  its  results.  This  shows — 1.  That  we  may  bear 
very  close  resemblance  to  the  disciples  of  Christ,  and  yet  remain  still  in  the  number 
of  Hia  enemies,  and  share  their  condemnation.  2.  That  a  profession  of  attach- 
ment to  Christ  aggravates  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  renders  an  indulgence  in  it  peculiarly 
dangerous.  3.  No  man  can  be  a  gainer  by  sin.  (C.  Bradley.)  The  unconverted 
warned  by  the  remorse  of  the  lost : — I.  The  binneb  in  the  next  wobld  will  know  thm 
chabacteb  of  bin  ab  Judas  knew  it.  Now  men  do  not  judge  of  sin  aright,  their 
imagination  is  dazzled  by  its  charms.     As  soon  as  the  sin  is  committed  its  promts* 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  639 

u  found  to  be  delusive.  II.  This  will  lead  him  to  hate  sin  and  everythinq  con 
KECTED  WITH  IT.  Now  he  loves  it.  He  will  hate  it  because  of  its  consequences. 
He  will  hate  the  gains  and  pleasures  that  once  allured  him.  As  Judas  hated  tha 
priests,  the  sinner  will  hate  his  evil  comrades.  Judas  disliked  the  thought  of  the 
happiness  of  his  fellow  disciples  ;  the  sinner  will  know  that  he  might  have  had  joy. 
With  what  feelings  wiU  he  regard  himself  f  {B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  I.  The  conduct 
AND  CHABACTEU  OF  J0DA8.  His  objCCt  not  malice  but  avarice.  II.  The  conduct  or 
THB  HIGH  PRIESTS  AND  BLDER3.  1.  Judas  could  not  endure  his  own  reflectio'ig. 
Compare  the  unfeeUng  spirit  with  which  these  men  treat  this  coiwcience-stricken 
ginner  with  the  love  of  the  Saviour  for  the  sinner.  2.  The  delusion  which  sometimes 
occupies  the  minds  of  the  ungodly — "  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  them  into  the 
treasury,"  &o.  They  who  care  not  for  inuocent  blood,  who  care  not  for  the  remorse 
of  their  victim,  are  very  careful  about  God's  treasury.  Thus  Satan  deludes  men. 
(1)  See  what  is  in  man.  (2)  See  what  dreadful  havoc  one  lust  can  make  on  a  promising 
character.  3.  Howgooda  work  to  pluck  men  out  of  the  hands  of  Satan.  (G.J.  Noel.) 
The  betrayer : — I.  His  chabacxer.  1.  He  occupied  a  very  high  position.  2.  He 
enjoyed  greet  privileges.  3.  He  committed  a  great  crime.  Trace  this  sin — the  plot, 
&c.  4.  He  deeply  repented.  His  repentance  was  real,  distressing,  &c.  5.  He  made 
restitution.  6.  He  despaired  of  mercy.  II.  Educe  erom  this  subject  some  lessons 
OF  instruction.  We  ieam — 1.  That  we  may  possess  great  privileges,  make  a  blazing 
profession,  and  fill  a  high  office,  and  still  have  no  real  piety.  2.  That  whatever 
amount  of  repentance  a  man  may  possess,  in  the  absence  of  faith  in  Christ  tha 
•oul  will  perish.  3.  That  there  is  tremendous  power  in  a  guilty  conscience  to 
inflict  punishment.  Gain,  David,  Herod,  Judas,  penitents.  4.  The  danger  of 
indulging  in  the  sin  of  oovetousness.  5.  That  the  atonement  alone  presents  the 
only  remedy  that  will  meet  all  the  deep-felt  necessities  of  a  guilty  conscience. 
{A.  Weston.)  The  repentance  and  suicide  of  Judas  : — There  are  many  prin- 
ciples underlying  this  tragedy.  I.  That  the  repentance  of  Judas  was  occasioned 
by  the  new  aspect  which  his  sin  assumed.  IL  That,  the  delusion  dispelled,  two 
faculties  of  the  mind  urged  him  to  confession  and  restitution — memory  and  reason. 
III.  That  alliances  based  on  sin  are  utterly  hollow  and  worthless.  IV.  That  sin 
brings  in  its  train  the  most  maddening  remorse  and  despair.  {E.  T.  Carrier.) 
The  true  confessor  and  the  false  : — I.  Examples  of  false  confession.  Its  falsehood 
consisted  in  this — It  was  constrained,  selfish,  superficial,  impulsive,  temporary. 
Beware  I  IL  Examples  of  true  confession.  In  true  confession  we  take  our  proper 
place  ;  we  come  to  see  sin  somewhat  as  God  sees  it.  (Dr.  Bonar.)  Tlie  repentance 
cf  Judas: — The  history  of  Judas  was  written  for  our  admonition,  and  is  full  of  instruc- 
tion to  all.  1.  How  totally  unprepared  he  seems  to  have  been  for  the  terrible 
results  of  his  treachery.  The  condemnation  of  Jesus  was  an  event  on  which  he  had 
not  calculated.  He  was  horror-struck  and  confounded  with  the  unforeseen  conse- 
quences of  his  villainy.  No  man,  when  consenting  to  temptation,  can  possibly  teil 
how  much  evil  may  be  involved  in  the  sinful  act  which  he  contemplates,  or  deter- 
mine the  results  in  which  it  shall  issue.  2.  To  what  excesses  of  wickedness  a  man 
may  be  hurried,  who  is  yet  far  from  being  hardened  in  iniquity.  It  was  not  any 
malignant  or  revengeful  feeling  which  he  entertained  against  our  Lord,  but  the 
promptings  of  avarice  only,  that  determined  Judas  to  the  perpetration  of  hia 
immoral  crime.  The  ungovernable  grief  and  horror  that  seized  him  manifests  that 
he  was  not  hardened  in  iniquity.  The  sense  of  virtue  and  shame  was  far  from  being 
extinct.  But  there  was  the  wretched  greed  of  lucre  in  his  soul.  Constantly  assailed 
by  this  temptation,  he  gradually  yielded.  Hence  the  danger  of  encouraging  a  dis- 
position to  oovetousness,  and  of  listening  to  temptation  of  wliatever  kind.  3.  The 
tranciency  of  sinful  pleasures.  It  was  night  when  he  received  the  reward  of  iniquity, 
but  when  morning  came  then  came  repentance  too.  How  many  such  extreme  cases 
are  there  1  4.  How  dearly  the  pleasures  of  sin  are  purchased.  6.  The  sort  of 
sympathy  a  man  may  expect  from  his  accomplices  in  iniquity.  6.  How  the  sense 
of  guilt  may  operate.  He  was  brought  to  repentance,  but  it  was  a  very  different  kind 
of  repentance  from  that  which  he  purposed  coming  to.  The  sense  of  guilt  may  take 
either  of  two  very  different  forms — "  godly  sorrow  "  or  the  "  sorrow  of  the  world." 
Look  at  Judas,  and  beware  1  Precisely  the  same  purposes  as  many  are  entertaining 
beguiled  him  onwards,  until  at  length  it  surprised  him  with  the  repentance  of 
despair.  Conclusion :  Make  repentance  a  voluntary  act.  Repent  now  I  (J.  H.  Smith.) 
What  is  that  to  usf — Responsibility  not  to  be  shaken  off: — Though  they  might 
disown  responsibility,  they  could  not  destroy  it.  A  man  may  stop  his  chronometer 
in  the  night,  but  he  cannot  arrest  the  sunrise.    As  long  as  men  are  in  the  porsait 


S40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

of  an  object,  they  may  be  able,  with  the  aid  of  passion,  to  stifle  conscience ;  but 
when  the  object  is  reached,  and  the  vahie  deliberately  counted,  conscience  can 
begin  to  strike  the  balance.  The  heat  and  halo  of  the  chase  are  over,  and  the  net 
result  can  be  reckoned,  at  least  on  one  side;  the  miserable  gain,  if  not  the  infinite 
loss.  So  it  is  with  the  betrayer,  and  so  it  must  be,  by  and  by,  with  those  who  hired 
Idm.  They  may  meanwhile  outbrave  Judas,  but  they  have  to  meet  God.  And,  let 
us  think  of  it — the  poisoned  arrow  a  man  uses  may  wound  himself.  The  sneer  ia 
always  on  the  way  to  the  remorse.  They  have  both  the  same  hard  bitterness  in 
them — the  same  want  of  God's  love.  (J.  Ker,  D.D.)  The  devil  tempts  to 
despair: — The  craft  of  the  devil  is  often  displayed  in  representing  a  sin  to  which 
we  are  tempted  as  trifling,  but  after  we  have  committed  it  as  so  great  that  there  is 
no  help  for  us  in  God.  (Ayguan.)  Manner  of  IscarioVs  death: — Objectors  have 
represtsuted  the  statement  in  this  text  as  inconsistent  with  that  in  Acts  i.  18,  where 
he  is  said  to  have  "  purchased  a  field  with  the  reward  of  iniquity,  and  falling 
headlong,  he  burst  asunder  in  the  midst,  and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out."  But 
these  passages  do  not  necessarily  contradict  each  other.  Matthew  does  not  say 
that  Judas,  after  having  hanged  himself,  did  not  fall  to  the  ground ;  nor,  on  the 
contrary,  does  Luke  say  that  Judas  did  not  hang  himself  before  he  fell  to  the 
ground;  and  nnless  the  writers  affirm  the  reality  of  the  events  which  they 
respectively  mention  in  such  a  way  as  to  assert  or  imply  that  if  the  one  event  be 
true  the  other  must  be  false,  it  is  obvious  that  they  do  not  contradict  each  othei. 
Of  the  precise  relation  of  the  two  events  in  question  to  each  other  we  have  no 
information,  and  can  affirm  nothing  with  certainty.  Some  intermediate  circum- 
stance connected  the  one  with  the  other  as  parts  of  the  same  transaction,  bat  that 
circumstance  has  not  been  recorded.  It  is  conjectured  that  Judas  may  have  hung 
himself  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice  near  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  and  that  the  rope 
breaking  by  which  he  was  suspended,  he  fell  to  the  earth  and  was  dashed  to  pieces. 
As  I  stood  in  this  valley,  and  looked  up  to  the  rocky  heights  which  hang  over  it  on 
the  south  side  of  Jerusalem,  I  felt  that  the  proposed  explanation  was  a  perfectly 
natural  one ;  I  was  more  than  ever  satisfied  with  it.  I  measured  the  precipitoua, 
almost  perpendicular  walls,  in  different  places,  and  found  the  height  to  be  variously 
forty,  thiiliy-six,  thirty-three,  thirty,  and  twenty-five  feet.  At  the  bottom  of  these 
precipices  are  rocky  ledges,  on  which  a  person  would  fail  from  above,  and  in  that 
case  not  only  would  life  be  destroyed,  but  the  body  almost  inevitably  bruised  and 
mangled.  {H.  B.  Hackctt,  D.D.)  IscarioVs  motive  for  suicide : — One  of  the  most 
learned  and  compassionate  fathers  of  the  early  Church,  Origen,  reports  and  argues 
for  what  seems  to  have  been  a  not  uncommon  belief  in  those  early  days,  viz.,  that 
Judas  was  moved  to  hang  himself  by  some  confused  thought  that,  beyond  the  veil, 
in  the  life  to  come,  he  might  meet  his  Master  once  more,  and  cast  himself  at  His 
feet,  confessing  his  guUt,  and  imploring  pardon  for  his  sin.  That,  however,  is 
only  a  tradition,  though  surely  many  of  us  would  be  glad  to  know  that  it  was  some- 
thing more.  But  he  must  be  dull  and  hard  indeed  who  does  not  feel  that  in  that 
loathing  of  himself  and  of  his  guilt,  which  made  life  intolerable  to  him,  there 
is  some  proof  that  Iscariot  was  not  altogether  sold  under  sin.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
The  mixture  of  good  and  bad  in  Judas : — We  are  too  hard  in  our  thoughts  of  Judas 
if  we  hold  him  to  have  been  an  utterly  graceless,  abandoned,  and  irredeemable 
reprobate ;  and  above  all,  we  are  too  hard  and  narrow  in  our  thoughts  of  Christ  if 
we  suppose  even  the  sin  of  Judas  to  have  put  him  for  ever  beyond  the  pale  of  mercy. 
Judas  was  once  a  babe,  such  as  we  all  have  been,  and  had  a  mother  who  loved  him, 
and  built  bright  hopes  upon  him.  Probably,  too,  he  had  a  father  who  led  him  to 
school  and  to  synagogue,  and  trained  him  carefully  in  the  Hebrew  wisdom  and 
piety.  He  shot  up  into  a  steady  and  thrifty  young  man — not  addicting  himself  tc 
vicious  and  spendthrift  courses,  but  rather  displaying  a  mind  unusually  open  to 
religious  impressions.  We  can  trace  in  him  some  touch  of  the  character  of  his 
ancestor,  Jacob ;  the  same  by  no  means  infrequent  combination  of  religious 
susceptibilities  and  aspirations  with  a  determination  to  do  well  in  the  world,  the 
same  preference  of  crafty  and  subtle  expedients  fo  securing  his  ends  over  the  frank 
and  downright  methods  of  which  Esau  is  one  type  and  Peter  another.  Two  souls, 
two  natures,  were  at  strife  in  the  man,  as  they  were  also  in  Jacob  ;  the  one  subtle, 
grasping,  money-loving,  the  other  keen  to  discern  the  value  of  things  unseen  and 
eternal,  and  to  pursue  them.  And  for  a  time,  as  we  all  know,  the  better  nature 
conquered.  When  he  heard  the  call  of  Christ,  all  that  was  noble,  and  unselfish, 
and  aspiring  in  the  man  rose  up  to  welcome  Him  and  to  respond  to  His  call.  Ea 
was  not  ft  thief  and  a  traitor  when  he  became  an  apostle ;  cor  when  he  went  out 


CHAP,  ixvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  Ml 

into  the  cities  and  villages  of  Galilee,  without  staff  or  scrip,  preaching  the  kingdora 
of  heaven ;  nor  when  he  returned  to  his  Master  rejoicing  that  even  devils  were 
Bubject  unto  him.  Goodness,  honour,  d^otion,  self-sacrifice,  were  not  unknown 
to  him  then.  Let  us  remember  what  there  was  of  good  in  him  once,  what  there 
was  of  good  in  him  even  to  the  end :  for  no  man  who  is  capable  of  repentance 
is  wholly  and  irredeemably  bad  ;  and  let  us  not  be  overhard  in  our  thoughts  of  him, 
nor  unjust  even  to  his  tainted  memory.  The  medieval  Church  had  a  legend  which 
Bhows  that  even  in  those  dark  stern  days  men  had  glimpses  of  a  light  which  many 
among  us  have  not  caught  even  yet.  The  legend  was  that,  for  the  sake  of  one  good 
and  kindly  deed  performed  in  the  days  of  his  innocency,  Judas  was  let  out  ot  hell 
once  in  every  thousand  years,  and  allowed  to  cool  and  refresh  himself  amid  the 
eternal  snows  of  some  high  mountain  for  a  whole  day.  But  we  know  that  while  he 
was  still  true  to  Christ  he  must  have  wrought  many  good  and  kindly  deeds ;  and  if 
he  still  suffers  the  punishment  of  the  evil  deeds  he  did,  are  we  to  believe  he  does 
not  also,  in  some  mysterious  way,  receive  the  due  reward  of  his  good  deeds. 
Ibid.)  Passion  is  stronger  than  the  fear  oj  death: — The  dread  of  death  is 
universal  and  instinctive ;  and  yet  how  many  rush  into  its  arms  1  Suicide  is 
a  most  impressive  fact  in  this  connection.  The  disappointed  lover,  the  dis- 
couraged adventurer,  the  suspected  clerk,  the  child  wounded  in  its  self-love  or 
fearful  of  punishment,  faces  the  great  enemy  and  invites  his  blow.  Every  now  and 
then  the  community  is  shocked  by  suicides  so  unprovoked  and  so  frequent  as  almost 
to  persuade  us  that  the  natural  fear  of  death  is  passing  away.  The  inconsistency 
is  easily  explained.  Bacon  says  there  is  no  passion  that  will  not  overmaster  the 
terror  of  death.  For  passion  is  thoughtless ;  occupied  wholly  with  an  immediate 
suffering  it  makes  no  estimate  of  any  other  kind  of  pain  ;  absorbed  in  an  instan- 
taneous sorrow  it  takes  no  other  sorrow  into  account.  The  mind  entertains  but 
one  passion  at  a  time,  whether  it  be  joy  or  fear.  But  men  are  not  always  or  generally 
under  the  influence  of  passion.  Ordinary  life  is  calm,  calculating,  considerate,  and 
it  is  to  ordinary  life  that  death  is  terrible.  It  is  the  thought  of  death  that  is 
terrible,  not  death.  Death  is  gentle',  peaceful,  painless ;  instead  of  bringing 
Buffering  it  brings  an  end  of  suffering.  It  is  misery's  cure.  Where  death  is,  agony 
is  not.  The  processes  of  death  are  all  friendly.  The  near  aspect  of  death  is 
gracious.  There  is  a  picture  somewhere  of  a  frightful  face,  livid  and  ghastly,  which 
the  beholder  gazes  on  with  horror,  and  would  turn  away  from,  but  for  a  hideous 
fascination  that  not  only  rivets  his  attention,  but  draws  him  closer  to  it.  On 
approaching  the  picture  the  hideousness  disappears,  and  the  face  is  that  of  an 
angel.  It  is  a  picture  of  death,  and  the  artist's  object  was  to  impress  the  idea  that 
the  terror  of  death  is  an  apprehension.  Death  is  an  ordinance  of  nature,  directed 
by  beneficent  laws  to  beneficent  ends.  (0.  B.  Frothinglmm.)  The  field  of  blood, 
— Site  of  Aceldama  : — The  "field  of  blood  "  is  now  shown  on  the  steep  south  face 
of  the  valley  or  ravine  of  Hinnom,  near  its  east  end,  on  a  narrow  plateau,  more 
than  half  way  up  the  hill  side.  Its  modem  name  is  Hak-ed-damne.  It  is  separated 
by  no  inclosure ;  a  few  venerable  olive-trees  occupy  part  of  it,  and  the  rest  is  covered 
by  a  ruined  square  edifice — half  built,  half  excavated — which,  perhaps  originally  a 
church,  was  in  Maundrell's  time  in  use  as  a  charnel-house.  It  was  believed  in  the 
middle  ages  that  the  soil  of  this  place  had  the  power  of  very  rapidly  consuming 
bodies  buried  in  it,  and  in  consequence  either  of  this  or  of  the  sanctity  of  the  spot, 
great  quantities  of  the  earth  were  taken  away;  amongst  others  by  the  Pisan 
Crusaders,  in  1218,  for  their  Campo  Santo  at  Pisa,  and  by  the  Empress  Helena,  for 
that  at  Rome.  Besides  the  charnel-house,  there  are  several  large  hollows  in  the 
ground,  which  may  have  been  caused  by  such  excavations.  The  formation  of  the 
hill  is  cretaceous,  and  it  is  well  known  that  chalk  is  always  favourable  to  the  rapid 
decay  of  animal  matter.      (Br.  Smith.)  Origin  of  name : — The    article    rov 

expresses  a  particular  field  known  by  that  name  ;  so  called  from  having  been  used 
by  a  potter,  no  doubt  to  dig  clay  for  his  wares.  Thus  several  villages  in  England 
have  the  prefix  Potter,  probably  from  part  of  the  ground  having  been  formerly 
occupied  for  potteries — e.g.,  Pottersbury,  Northamptoushire.  So  the  field  at  Athens, 
appropriated  as  a  cemetery  for  those  who  fell  in  the  service  of  their  country,  was 
called  CeramicuB,  from  having  been  formerly  used  for  brickmaking.  This,  of 
course,  would  make  a  field  unfit  for  tillage,  though  good  enough  for  a  burying- 
ground,  hence  the  smaUness  of  the  price.  (Bloomfield.)  The  repentance  of  Judas : 
— If  you  ask  how  he  repented,  I  think  he  repented  as  most  usurers  repent,  upon  their 
death-beds.  There  is  a  shame  of  sin,  and  guilt  of  conscience,  and  fear  of  judgment, 
even  in  the  reprobate,  which  is  a  foretaste  of  hell,  which  the  wicked  feel ;  even  aa 

n 


643  "  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xrvu, 

the  peace  of  conscience  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  foretaste  of  heaven,  whieb 
the  godly  feel  before  they  come  thither.  So  Jndas  was  displeased  with  the  uglinesa 
of  his  treachery,  and  had  a  misshapen  sorrow,  like  a  bear's  whelp,  but  without  any 
conversion  to  God,  or  hope  of  mercy,  or  prayer  for  pardon,  or  purpose  to  amend. 
Only  he  felt  a  gnilt,  a  shame  and  anguish  in  his  heart,  which  was  rather  a  punish- 
ment of  sin  than  a  repentance  for  his  sin,  and  a  preparative  for  hell  which  he  was 
going  anto.  For  hardness  of  heart  and  despairing  of  mercy  are  sins,  and  punish- 
ment for  sins  too  ;  but  true  repentance  is  such  a  sorrow  for  one  sin  as  breedeth  a 
dislike  of  all  sins,  and  moveth  to  pray,  and  resolveth  to  amend ;  which  falletb 
upon  none  but  the  elect.  (Henry  Smith.)  A  gnawing  conscience: — There  is  a 
warning  conscience  and  a  gnawing  conscience.  The  warning  conscience  cometh 
before  sin;  the  gnawing  conscience  followeth  after  sin.  The  warning  conscience  is 
often  hilled  asleep ;  but  the  gnawing  conscience  wakeneth  her  again.  If  there  be 
any  hell  in  this  world,  they  which  feel  the  worm  of  conscience  gnawing  upon  their 
hearts  may  truly  say  that  they  have  felt  the  torments  of  hell.  Who  can  express 
that  man's  horror  but  himself  ?  Nay,  what  horrors  are  there  which  he  cannot 
express  himself  ?  Sorrows  are  met  in  his  soul  at  a  feast ;  and  fear,  thought,  and 
anguish  divide  his  soul  between  them.  All  the  furies  of  hell  leap  upon  his  heart 
like  a  stage.  Thought  calleth  to  fear,  fear  whistleth  to  horror,  horror  beckoneth  to 
despair  and  eaith,  "  Come,  help  me  to  torment  this  sinner."    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  11-14.  And  JesuB  Btood  before  the  governor. —Ponttws  Pilate:— Th» 
trial  of  Christ  is  a  part  of  His  humiliation ;  He  who  shall  judge  the  nations  stands 
to  be  judged  of  another.  He  who  is  "life"  expects  the  sentence  of  death.  The 
Eternal  Word  keeps  silence.  I.  In  speaking  of  the  chabacteb  and  conduct  of 
PriiATE,  we  desire  to  bring  him  before  you,  as  far  as  possible,  as  a  man.  He  has  won 
a  terrible  pre-eminence  among  the  sons  of  Adam.  Every  child  is  taught  to  say  that 
its  Lord  was  crucified  "  under  Pontius  Pilate."  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
these  instruments  of  our  Lord's  sufferings  were  men  of  astounding  depravity. 
Pilate  was  not  of  this  class.  He  was  a  reluctant  agent  in  these  events.  He  was 
induced  simply  by  expediency.  Indifference  to  religion  can  issue  in  deeds  as  un. 
pardonable  as  utter  violation  of  its  spirit.  Again  and  again,  on  a  narrower  stage, 
has  been  acted  over  that  scene  of  criminal  irresolution,  resisted  impulses,  and  weak 
concession  to  the  fear  of  man.  I.  Consider  thb  pkovidencb  op  God  towards 
Pilate.  We  are  sometimes  tempted  to  think  that  they  were  in  very  hard  case,  who, 
like  Pilate,  were  involved  in  events  so  peculiar  as  were  all  things  connected  with 
Christ's  life  on  earth,  that  it  must  have  been  a  great  trial  of  faith  to  recognize  a  present 
God  in  Jesus  as  He  stood  before  Pilate.  The  answer  is  twofold :  First,  PDate's 
guilt  did  not  lie  in  this,  that  he  condemned  the  Son  of  God,  but  that  without 
evidence,  against  his  own  convictions,  he  condemned  an  innocent  man, — that  to 
gratify  the  mob,  he  prostituted  his  high  office.  The  fact  that  the  prisoner  wai 
God  in  the  flesh,  only  enters  into  the  question  of  his  guilt,  so  far  as  he  might,  if  he 
would,  have  known  Him.  But,  secondly,  it  is  evident  that  Pilate  was  in  a  remark- 
able degree  held  back  from  his  sin.  It  has  been  observed,  that  the  Saviour  appears 
to  have  exercised  the  most  marked  grace  towards  all  who  were  concerned  in  His 
final  agony.  In  Pilate's  instance,  every  possible  way  consistent  with  his  free-will 
seems  to  have  been  tried,  in  order  to  save  him  from  consummating  his  guilt.  Such 
was  the  long  silence  of  Chiist  at  the  beginning.  It  is  clear  from  the  Gospels,  that 
there  was  in  the  whole  of  our  Lord's  demeanour  an  almost  supernatural  dignity. 
No  words  dropped  from  His  lips ;  He  declined,  i.e.,  to  plead  before  an  authority 
inferior  to  His  own,  insomuch,  it  is  said,  that  "Pilate  marvelled."  And  when, 
after  Pilate  had  uttered  the  fatal  words,  '•  Take  ye  Him  and  crucify  Him,"  yet 
another  appeal  was  made  to  his  conscience.  The  Jews  triumphantly  responded, 
"  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  He  ought  to  die,  because  He  made  Himself  the 
Son  of  God."  This  open  and  undisguised  claim  to  superhuman  rank,  did  for  a 
moment  startle  the  wavering  judge:  "  When  Pilate  therefore  heard  that  saying,  he 
was  the  more  afraid."  Again,  it  may  be,  there  recurred  to  his  mind  the  feelings  of 
involuntary  awe  inspired  from  the  beginning  by  his  mysterious  prisoner ;  thoughts 
glanced  across  him,  that  there  might  be  more  than  he  surmised  in  the  events  in 
which  he  bore  a  part;  "that  Just  Man,"  against  whom  no  charge  could  be  sub- 
Btantiated,  and  of  whose  miraculous  power  tidings  so  strange  had  reached  his  ears, 
might  be  (as  old  records  told  there  had  been  in  former  times),  at  least  a  messenger 
of  Deity.  Hence  his  earnest  question  to  our  Lord,  "Whence  art  Thou?"  Through- 
oat  that  diead  scene  of  judgment  there  seems  not  to  have  been  a  moment  when 


CHAP.  xivn.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  6 it 

Pilate  might  not  have  been  saved  for  ever.  Again  and  again  he  was  all  but 
delivered  from  blood-guiltiness.  {J.  R.  Woodford,  M.A.)  Tlie  sufferings  of  Christ 
under  Pontius  Pilate: — I.  The  civn.  magistrate  under  whose  administration  Hb 
BUITEBED.  Pilate's  name  intimately  interwoven  with  the  history  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings; mentioned  more  than  twenty  times.  The  elements  which  composed  hia 
character  were  contradictory.  He  had  good  qualities,  but  associated  with  bad 
principles.  1.  He  was  influenced  by  the  fear  of  man.  2.  He  had  a  sordid  regard 
to  place  and  power.  3.  He  discovers  a  servile  love  of  human  applause.  4.  The 
sequel  of  his  history  is  affecting  and  instructive;  the  thing  he  dreaded  came,  he  lost 
the  favour  of  the  emperor.  II.  The  peculiar  nature  and  character  of  those 
BOTTERiNOS  which  HE  ENDURED.  Look  at  the  Sufferings  of  Christ.  1.  In  their 
visible  form.  2.  Their  moral  design.  III.  The  lessons  they  teach.  1.  The 
infinite  evil  of  sin.  2.  The  unbounded  love  of  Jesus.  3.  The  full  compatibility 
between  the  irreversible  decrees  of  God  and  the  freedom  of  man's  agency,  and  the 
culpability  of  man's  transgression.  4.  The  true  ground  of  hope  for  the  self-accusing 
sinner.  5.  What  a  provision  of  comfort  for  the  suffering  Christian.  6.  The  fear 
of  man  bringeth  a  snare.  (Gf.  Clayton.)  The  silence  of  Jesus : — He  had  never 
been  slow  of  speech  when  He  could  bless  the  sons  of  men,  but  He  would  not  say  a 
single  word  for  Himself.  "  Never  man  spake  hke  this  Man,"  and  never  man  was 
eilent  like  Him.  1.  Was  this  singular  silence  the  index  of  His  perfect  self-sacrifice? 
Did  it  show  that  He  would  not  utter  a  word  to  stay  the  slaughter  of  His  sacred 
person,  which  He  had  dedicated  as  an  offering  for  us  ?  2.  Was  this  silence  a  type 
of  the  defencelessness  of  sin  J  Nothing  can  be  said  in  palliation  or  excuse  of  human 
guilt ;  and  therefore  He  who  bore  its  whole  weight  stood  speechless  before  His  judge. 
3.  Is  not  patient  silence  the  best  reply  to  a  gainsaying  world  t  Calm  endurance 
answers  some  questions  infinitely  more  conclusively  than  the  loftiest  eloquence. 
The  best  apologists  for  Christianity  in  the  early  days  were  its  martyrs.  The  anvil 
breaks  a  host  of  hammers  by  quietly  bearing  the  blows.  4.  Did  not  the  silent 
Lamb  of  God  furnish  us  with  a  grand  example  of  wisdom?  Where  every  word  was 
occasion  for  new  blasphemy,  it  was  the  line  of  duty  to  afford  no  fuel  for  the  fame 
of  sin.  The  ambiguous  and  the  false,  the  unworthy  and  mean,  will,  ere  long,  over- 
throw and  confute  themselves,  and  therefore  the  true  can  afford  to  be  quiet,  and 
finds  silence  to  be  its  wisdom.  6.  Our  Lord,  by  His  silence,  furnished  a  remark- 
Bble  fulfilment  of  prophecy  (Isa.  liii.  7).  By  His  quiet  He  conclusively  proved  Him- 
self to  be  the  true  Lamb  of  God.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  15-18.  Barabbas,  or  Jesus  which  Is  called  Christ. — The  release  ofBarahhas : — 
J.  It  illustrates  the  evasion  of  personal  responsibilitt.  We  always  admire 
courage  in  the  abstract.  Look  at  the  position  of  Pilate  I  "  I  must  sentence, 
gentlemen,  you  choose  the  culprit."  We  may  be  doing  this  same  thing.  How  often 
we  allow  others  to  determine  our  duty.  "  If  my  wife  would  be  religious  I  would." 
"  Will  you  go  if  I  will  ?  "  Alone  you  must  die  and  give  an  account  to  God.  II. 
The  controlling  power  of  prejudice  over  moral  approbation.  They  were  to 
forget  all  the  munificence  of  Jesus  because  He  outraged  their  prejudices.  III.  The 
choice  of  Barabbas  in  the  end  exalts  the  eternal  principles  which  underlie 
THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  GoD.  The  etcmal  plan  of  God  is  carried  out  in  the  death  of 
ifesus.  IV.  The  attitude  of  Barabbas.  Suppose  he  had  refused  release  on  the 
ground  that  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  live  by  the  death  of  another.  Some 
reject  the  substitution  of  Christ  for  themselves.  (R.  Jeffery,  D.D.)  Releasing 
prisoners : — No  trace  of  this  custom  is  found  in  the  Talmud.  But  the  release  of 
prisoners  was  usual  at  certain  festivals  at  Eome,  and  at  Athens  during  the  Pana- 
thenaic  festival  prisoners  enjoyed  temporary  liberty.  It  is  not,  therefore,  improbable 
that  Herod  the  Great,  who  certainly  familiarized  the  Jews  with  other  usages  of 
Greece  and  Bome,  introduced  this  custom,  and  that  the  Roman  governor,  finding 
the  custom  established  and  gratifying  to  the  Jews,  in  accordance  with  Boman 
practice,  retained  the  observance  of  it.    {A.  Carr,  M.A.) 

Ver.  19.  His  wife  sent  nnto  him  saying,  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  tbat  Jost 
man. — Pilate's  wife: — I.  The  testimony  of  women  to  Christ.  II.  The  testimony 
of  dreams  to  Christ.  III.  The  testimony  of  suffering  to  Christ — "Have  thoa 
nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man :  for  I  have  suffered  many  things,"  Ac.  The  wife 
failed ;  but  it  was  well  to  have  tried.  {G.  T.  Coster.)  The  dream  of  Pilate's 
wife: — I.  Let  us  observe  her  dream  as  a  sign  that  various  obstacles  are  placed 
in  the  way  of  completing  sin.    II.  Let  us  observe  the  dream  as  a  sign  that  continu- 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Lchap.  xxvq. 

ance  in  sin  depends  upon  injustice  done  to  Jesus  Christ.  (D.  O.  Watt,  M.A.)  It 
is  easier  to  do  right  than  wrong  : — Is  there  one  of  you  who  would  seriously  maintain 
that  it  is  easier  to  drive  a  horse  and  cart  over  a  steep  embankment  than  it  is  to 
drive  along  the  road  on  the  top  of  the  embankment  7  Oh  yes,  you  say,  the  former 
is  easier  1  It  is  but  a  plunge,  and  you  have  done  it.  But  then,  you  must  consider 
how  many  obstacles  you  have  to  overcome  before  you  can  take  the  plunge,  and 
these  obstacles  make  it  a  harder  thing  to  go  over  than  to  go  along  the  road.  The 
beaten  road  says:  "I  am  the  way;  you  must  not  leave  me."  You  will  have  to 
overcome  the  obstacle  which  tltat  clear  statement  raises.  "  There  is  certain 
danger  to  limb  and  life" — you  will  have  to  overcome  the  obstacle  which  respect  for 
your  own  safet}'  raises.  "  The  horse,  if  it  has  been  properly  driven,  will  back  ofl 
from  sharp  descent."  You  will  have  to  overcome  the  obstacle  which  the  animal 
raises.  Putting  together  the  forces  which  are  exerted  by  such  matters,  you  will 
acknowledge  that  it  is  not  fair  to  say  that  it  is  easier  to  drive  over  a  precipice  than 
it  is  to  drive  along  the  road  which  skirts  its  summit.  Just  so  is  it  with  us  in  life. 
Eight  and  wrong  solicit  us.  It  may  appear  more  easy  to  submit  to  the  representa- 
tions of  evil  impulses  than  to  those  of  good  ;  but,  however  it  may  appear,  remember 
that  before  you  can  yield  to  the  former  you  must  have  cast  off  the  restraint  of  a  law 
of  God ;  you  must  have  stifled  your  desires  to  be  truly  happy ;  you  must  have 
broken  away  from  the  influences  which  proceed  from  those  of  your  friends  who 
stand  in  awe  of  the  Christ  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  warning  word  to  be  welcomed : — 
Put  not  this  word  from  you.  If — to  use  one  of  Dr.  Payson's  illustrations — yoo 
should  see  at  this  moment  a  very  fine,  an  almost  invisible,  thread  coming  dov,Ti  from 
heaven  and  attaching  itself  to  you,  and  knew  it  came  from  God,  what  would  yoa 
do  ?  Would  you  dare  to  thrust  it  away  f  Now,  this  word  of  appeal  is  like  such  a 
thread.  It  is  weak  and  frail,  and  you  can  easily  brush  it  away.  But  will  you  J 
No  I  Welcome  it,  and  it  wiD  enlarge  and  strengthen  itself  until  it  becomes  a 
golden  thread  to  bind  you  to  that  just  Man — the  Saviour — and  to  bind  you  for  ever. 
(G.  T.  Coster.)  Pilate's  wife : — The  wickedness  of  Pilate  forced  him  to  assume 
all  the  appearance  of  weakness.  How  striking  the  testimony  given  by  enemies  to 
our  Lord ;  He  is  to  die  as  a  malefactor  with  the  judge's  verdict  in  His  favour.  I. 
The  great  principle  of  conscience  was  not  dormant  in  Pilate,  but  on  thb 
CONTRARY  ACTED  WITH  FAITHFULNESS  AND  VIGOUR.  Whatever  the  scnsuality  and 
tyranny  of  this  Koman  he  had  not  succeeded  in  silencing  conscience.  The  enormity 
of  his  sin  is  also  enhanced  by  the  warning  he  received  through  his  wife.  II.  We  con- 
sider God  AS  ACTING  upon  Pilate  to  deter  him  from  committing  a  great  crime, 

AND    THEREFORE     TO    LEAVE     HIM   WITHOUT    EXCUSE     IN    THE    COMMISSION.      God    ha« 

nothing  to  do  with  causing  the  wicked  actions  he  overrules.  No  man  can  take 
refuge  in  God's  foreknowledge  of  his  sins,  as  having  made  them  unavoidable.  It 
left  Pilate  as  free  as  if  there  had  been  no  foreknowledge.  III.  How  the  method 
used  by  God  was  eminently  fitted  to  prevail  with  Pilate,  and  how  it  cut  off  all 
excuse  when  he  gave  up  Jesus  to  the  multitude.  It  may  seem  singular  that  the 
vision  was  to  Pilate's  wife,  and  not  to  Pilate  himself.  Would  not  the  admonition 
have  been  more  likely  to  prevail  if  directly  conveyed  to  him?  But  to  please  hia 
vrife  may  have  been  a  motive  in  addition  to  obedience  to  the  vision.  God  took  this 
course  because  the  Roman  governor  was  probably  most  accessible  through  hia 
affections.  It  is  far  from  an  unfrequent  thing  that  God  causes  His  warnings  to  be 
conveyed  through  the  channel  of  the  affections.  One  member  of  the  family  ia 
saved  in  order  to  impress  another.  If  this  does  not  succeed,  there  remains  no 
more  likely  method.  Let  not  men  think  it  would  be  better  if  they  were  acted  upon 
directly  by  the  gospel.     IV.  How  greatly  it  increased  the  criminahty  of  Pilate  that 

THE   message   of   HIS   WIFE   REACHED   HIM   AT  THE   VERY   MOMENT    OF   HIS    TAKING    HIS 

PLACE  ON  THE  JUDGMENT  SEAT.  It  was  precisely  when  his  convictions  were  urging 
him  to  release  Christ,  that  there  came  to  him  a  testimony  to  His  innocence.  When 
men  are  tempted  God  sends  seasonable  aids  and  disposes  events  for  their  strength 
and  victory.  The  whole  judicature  of  conscience  is  constructed  on  the  principle 
of  counsel  being  given  at  the  precise  moment  when  temptation  is  urgent.  It 
remonstrates  at  the  moment  the  bait  allures.  What  a  scene  will  it  be  when  this 
Roman  stands  forth  to  answer  for  himself  at  the  tribunal  of  Christ.  How  changed 
their  condition.    Christ  will  then  be  in  glory  and  power.    {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  20.  And  deatroy  Jeana. — The  cruel  purpose : — Moral  beauty  generally  admired, 
&a.  None  more  lovely  than  "  Jesus,"  and  yet  He  was  envied,  hated,  persecuted,  and 
erucified.    I.  The  efforts  to  debtroy  Jesus  (Matt.  ii.  1-17  ;  Luke  iv.  28).    lo  th« 


CHAP,  xxvn.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  64f 

final  conspiracy  hired  Judas,  Ac.  (ch.  xxviii).  Though  put  to  death,  He  rose,  &o. 
Since  then,  Jews,  <&o.,  have  laboured  to  destroy  Him.  II.  Why  have  thet  sought 
TO  DESTKOY  Jesub  ?  1.  Not  on  account  of  the  viciousness  of  His  life.  2.  Nor  Hia 
opposition  to  law  and  order.  8.  Nor  the  evil  tendency  of  His  doctiines.  4.  Nor  the 
injury  He  did  by  His  influence  (Matt,  xxvii.  i ;  Luke  xxiii.  14 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  19). 
It  was — 1.  Enmity  to  the  truth.  2.  Envy  of  His  goodness.  3.  Hatred  of  His  person. 
4.  Love  of  wickedness.  III.  How  they  have  failed  to  destroy  Jestts.  Herod, 
Jews,  Pilate,  though  they  killed  Him.  He  rose,  &g.  He  lived  on  in  His  body,  the 
Church.  Trace  the  history  of  those  destructive  attempts  down  to  Strauss  and 
Benan,  &c.  Jesus  is  Divine,  and  cannot  be  destroyed.  *•  He  shall  live,"  itc. 
(Ps3.  Ixxii.  15-18).  His  titles.  The  enemies  of  Jesus  shall  be  destroyed.  The 
nations  that  vrill  not  serve  Him  shall  perish.  So  individuals.  Learn : — 1.  The 
baseness  of  the  human  heart  to  try  to  destroy  Jesus.  2.  Our  obvious  duty  and 
interest  to  accept  and  honour  Christ.  3.  He  should  have  our  hearts  and  lives.  (J. 
Burns,  D.D.)  Satanic  policy  defeated  : — L  The  destboctible  Jesus.  To  what 
extent  could  the  purpose  of  the  foes  of  Jesus  succeed  ?  They  might  succeed  in  dis- 
paraging His  character  and  station  before  men.  Maliciously  assaulting  the  person 
of  Jesus — to  this  Jesus  had  long  been  subjected.  Restraining  His  personal  freedom. 
Silencing  His  tongue.  The  torture  they  applied  to  His  feelings.  His  crucifixion. 
Suggestions :  In  that  it  was  possible  for  Jesus  to  die,  lies  the  very  basis  of  our 
redemption.  In  the  death  of  Jesus,  promises  of  the  deepest  import  to  our  race  were 
accomplished.  In  the  death  of  Jesus  lay  His  most  sublime  victory  for  men.  II. 
The  indestructible  Jesus.  The  purpose  of  Jesus's  assailants  was  an  entire  and 
^jregious  failure.  The  very  body  of  Jesus  recovers  its  vitality.  The  Deity  that 
wfts  within  the  destructible  temple  they  could  not  touch.  They  could  not  frustrate 
oi'  retard  His  designs.  The  violent  death  of  Jesus  did  not  secure  the  permanence 
of  the  old  Jewish  establishment.  Nor  did  it  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  New 
Kingdom,  or  to  the  dethronement  of  Jesus.  Conclusion  :  Show  who  are  in  sympathy 
with  this  unholy  purpose,  and  who  are  in  living  sympathy  with  the  Indestructible 
Jesus.     (Anon.) 

Vers.  21-23.  They  said,  Barabbaa.— Tfee  choice — Barabbas  or  Jesus: — The  same 
choice  continues  still.  AU,  throughout  the  whole  world,  is  one  choice  between  God 
and  Satan,  Christ  and  Barabbas.  We  know  not,  indeed,  what  we  do ;  and  so,  again 
and  again,  our  blessed  Lord  intercedes  for  those  who  deliver  Him  to  His  foes.  But 
whenever  a  choice  is  given,  if  we  have  but  any  fear  that  we  are  choosing  amiss,  if 
we  do  what  we  suspect  to  be  wrong  or  worse,  if  we  say  wilfully  what  we  think  better 
unsaid,  what  do  we,  in  fact,  but  choose  Barabbas?  .  .  .  We  must  in  all  things  make 
this  choice.  There  is,  in  everything,  a  better  and  a  worse,  a  good  and  an  evil  to  us. 
if  we  choose  good,  we  choose  God,  Who  alone  is  good,  and  is  in  all  things  good ;  if 
we  choose  evil,  we  do,  in  fact,  choose  the  evil  one.  There  are  degrees  of  choice ;  as 
there  were  degrees  and  steps  in  the  rejection  of  our  Lord.  Yet  each  led  on  to  the 
next.  Each  hardens  for  the  next.  "  No  one  ever  became  at  once  wholly  vile,"  ia 
even  a  heathen  proverb.  But  there  is  no  safety  against  making  the  very  worst 
choice,  except  in  the  fixed,  conscious  purpose,  in  all  things  to  make  the  best.  The 
last  acts  are  mostly  not  in  a  person's  own  power.  They  who  compass  themselves 
about  with  sparks,  cannot  themselves  quench  the  burning.  They  who  make  the 
first  bad  choice  are  often  hurried  on,  whether  they  will  or  no.  The  one  choice  is 
manifoldly  repeated.  The  roads  part  asunder  slightly ;  yet,  unmarked,  the  distance 
between  them  is  ever  widening,  until  they  end  in  heaven  or  in  hell.  Each  act  of 
ohoice  is  a  step  toward  either.  Either  we  are  striking  more  into  the  narrow  way,  or 
we  are  parting  from  it ;  we  are,  by  God's  grace,  unbinding  the  cords  by  which  we 
are  held,  or  we  are  binding  them  tighter.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Christ  before 
Pilate — Munkassy's  picture: — The  scene  is  in  the  pavement  or  open  court  before  the 
governor's  palace,  which  was  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Gabbatha,  and  in  which, 
after  all  his  efforts  to  wriggle  out  of  the  responsibility  of  dealing  with  the  case, 
Pilate  ultimately  gave  up  Jesus  to  be  crucified.  At  one  end  of  the  court,  on  a  raised 
bench,  and  dressed  in  a  white  toga,  Pilate  sits.  On  either  side  of  him  are  Jews, 
each  of  whom  has  a  marked  and  special  individuality.  The  two  on  his  left  are  gazing 
with  intense  eagerness  at  Christ.  They  are  evidently  puzzled,  and  know  not  what 
to  make  of  the  mysterious  prisoner.  On  his  right,  standing  on  one  of  the  seats,  and 
with  hia  back  against  the  wall,  is  a  Scribe,  whose  countenance  is  expressive  of  utter- 
most contempt ;  and  just  in  front  of  this  haughty  fellow  are  some  Pharisees,  one  of 
whom  is  on  his  feet,  and  passionately  urging  that  Jesna  should  be  put  to  death, 


646  •  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 


presumably  on  the  ground  that,  if  Pilate  should  let  Him  go,  he  would  make  it 
eddent  that  he  was  not  Caesar's  frieud.  Before  them  again  ia  a  usurer,  fat  and 
Belf-satiafied,  clearly  taking  great  comfort  to  himself  in  the  assurance  that,  however 
the  matter  may  he  settled,  his  well-filled  money-bags  will  be  undisturbed.  Beyond 
him  stands  the  Christ,  in  a  robe  of  seamless  white,  and  with  His  wrists  firmly 
bound ;  while  behind,  kept  in  place  by  a  Boman  soldier,  standing  with  his  back  to 
tbe  spectator,  and  making  a  barricade  with  his  spear,  which  he  holds  horizontally, 
is  a  motley  group  of  on-lookers,  not  unlike  that  which  we  may  see  any  day  in  one  of 
our  criminal  courts.  Of  these,  one  more  furious  than  the  rest  is  wildly  gesticulating, 
and  crying,  as  we  may  judge  from  his  whole  attitude,  •'  Crucify  Him!  crucify  Him! " 
and  another,  a  little  to  the  Saviour's  left,  but  in  the  second  row  behind  Him,  is 
leaning  forward  with  mockery  in  his  leering  look,  and  malung  almost  as  if  he  would 
epit  upon  the  Saintly  One.  There  is  but  one  really  compassionate  face  in  the 
crowd,  and  that  is  the  face  of  a  woman  who,  with  an  infant  in  her  arms,  most  fitly 
represents  those  gentle  daughters  of  Jerusalem  who  followed  Jesus  to  Calvary  with 
tears.  Then,  over  the  heads  of  the  on-lookers,  and  out  of  the  upper  part  of  the 
doorway  into  the  court,  we  get  a  ghmpse  of  the  quiet  light  of  the  morning  as  it 
Bleeps  upon  the  walls  and  turrets  of  the  adjacent  buildings.  All  these  figures  are 
BO  distinctly  seen  that  you  feel  you  could  recognize  them  again  if  you  met  them 
anywhere ;  and  a  strange  sense  of  reality  comes  upon  you  as  you  look  at  them,  so 
that  you  forget  that  they  are  only  painted,  and  imagine  that  you  are  gazing  on  living 
and  breathing  men.  But,  as  you  sit  awhile  and  look  on,  you  gradually  lose  all  con- 
•ciousness  of  the  presence  of  the  mere  on-lookers,  and  find  your  interest  concentrated 
on  these  two  white-robed  ones,  as  if  they  were  the  only  figui'es  before  you.  The  pose 
of  the  Christ  is  admirable.  It  is  repose  blended  with  dignity  ;  self-possession  rising 
into  majesty.  There  ia  no  agitation  or  confusion  ;  no  fear  or  misgiving ;  but, 
instead,  the  calm  nobleness  of  Him  Who  has  just  been  saying,  "  Thou  couldst  have 
no  power  at  all  against  Me,  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above."  The  face  alone 
disappoints.  The  eyes,  which  look  so  steadily  at  Pilate  as  if  they  were  looking  him 
through,  seem  to  me  to  be  cold,  keen,  and  condemnatory,  rather  than  compassionate 
and  sad.  They  have  not  in  them  that  deep  well  of  tenderness  out  of  which  came 
the  tears  which  He  shed  over  Jerusalem,  and  which  we  expect  to  see  in  them  when 
He  is  looking  at  the  hopeless  struggle  of  a  soul  which  will  not  accept  His  aid.  .  .  . 
The  Pilate  is  well-nigh  faultless.  Here  is  a  great,  strong  man,  the  representative 
of  the  mightiest  empire  the  world  has  ever  seen,  with  a  head  indicating  intellectual 
force,  and  a  face,  especially  in  ita  lower  part,  suggestive  of  sensual  indulgence. 
There  is  ordinarily  no  want  of  firmness  in  him,  as  we  may  see  from  the  general  set 
of  his  features ;  but  now  there  ia  in  his  countenance  a  marvelloua  mixture  of 
humiliation  and  irresolution.  He  cannot  lift  his  eyes  to  meet  the  gaze  of  Christ ; 
and  while  one  of  his  hands  is  nervously  clutching  at  his  robe,  he  is  looking  sadly 
into  the  other,  whose  fingers,  even  as  we  look  at  them,  almost  seem  to  twitch  with 
perplexed  irresolution.  He  is  clearly  pondering  for  himself  the  question  which,  a 
few  moments  before,  he  had  addressed  to  the  multitude,  "  What  shall  I  do  with 
Jesus  which  ia  called  Christ  ?  "  He  is  annoyed  that  the  case  has  been  brought  to 
him  at  all,  and  as  he  feels  himself  drifting  on,  against  his  own  better  judgment, 
toward  yielding  to  the  clamour  of  the  multitude,  he  falls  mightily  in  his  own  conceit, 
and  begins  to  despise  himself.  He  would  at  that  moment  give,  oh,  how  much  1  to 
be  rid  of  the  responsibility  of  dealing  with  the  Christ,  but  he  cannot  evade  it ;  and 
BC  he  sits  there,  drifting  on  to  what  he  knows  is  a  wrong  decision,  the  very  incarna- 
tion of  the  feeling  which  his  own  national  poet  described  when  he  said,  "  I  see  and 
approve  the  better  course ;  I  follow  the  worse."  Thus,  as  we  look  at  these  two,  we 
begin  to  discover  that  it  was  not  so  much  Christ  that  was  before  Pilate  as  Pilate 
that  was  before  Christ.  His  was  the  testing  experience.  Hia  was  tbe  trial ;  his, 
too,  alas  1  was  the  degradation  ;  and  at  that  coming  day,  when  the  placea  shall  be 
reversed,  when  Christ  shall  be  on  the  judgment  seat,  and  Pilate  at  the  bar,  there 
will  still  be  that  deep  aelf-condemnation  which  the  painter  here  has  fixed  upon  his 
countenance.     (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jestia? — The  qvestion  that  must  be 
amwered:  —  Perhaps  we  all  feel  more  or  less  a  certain  satisfaction  that 
we  have  not,  as  Pilate  had,  to  make  that  terrible  decision  which,  with  the 
limited  knowledge  of  that  day,  we  might  have  made  as  he  did.  Nevertbelesa, 
this  question  which  Pilate  asked,  and  which  he  answered  so  fatally,  is  a  question 
which  we  have,  every  one  of  us,  still  to  answer.     It  is  far  more  awful  for  as. 


•HAP.  XXVII.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  617 

than  it  was  for  Pilate.  We  have  to  answer  it  with  a  full  knowledge  of  what  Jesua 
was  and  is.  We  have  to  answer  it,  aided  by  the  light  of  centuries  streaming 
upon  that  Divine  face.  So  long  as  Christ  is  popular,  so  long  as  being  with 
Him  means  going  on  safely  with  a  rejoicing,  happy  multitude,  there  is  nc 
doubt  or  difficulty  as  to  what  we  will  do  with  Christ.  We  will  gladly  follow  Him. 
But  oh  1  brothers,  there  come  awful  moments  in  every  experience — the  Passion 
Week  of  each  life — when  the  Christ  stands  pleading  before  your  soul.  A  wild, 
frenzied  mob  of  passions,  prejudices,  indulgences,  sins,  raise  their  murderous  clamour, 
and  demand  that  we  shall  give  Him  up ;  that  we  shall  take  into  our  favour  some  other 
popular  idol,  and  each  of  us  has  then  to  answer  the  question,  "  Wliat  shall  I  do 
then  with  Jesus  ? "  {T.  T.  Shore,  M. A.)  Our  treatment  of  Jesxis : — This  is  no 
dried  or  withered  question,  but  one  that  throbs  with  warm  and  quick  pulses  in  the 
heart  of  each  one.  We  must  do  something  with  Jesus.  He  is  here.  What  shall 
it  bo  ?  I.  You  can  let  Him  stand  without  a  word  of  recognition.  But  surely 
your  sense  of  common  courtesy  will  not  allow  that.  II.  You  can  thrust  Him  back 
from  your  heart,  and  tell  Him  to  stand  aside.  But  surely  you  will  not.  Even 
Pilate  treated  Him  better  than  that.  III.  You  can  look  on  Him  merely  as  an 
optician  to  help  blind  eyes,  or  an  aurist  to  retune  deaf  ears,  a  friend,  a  good  friend, 
a  helpful  companion,  a  cheerful  passenger  on  shipboard.  Yet  what  good  will  all 
that  do  you  ?  Surely  He  is  something  more.  IV.  You  can  take  Him  into  your 
heart.  That  is  the  best  thing  you  can  do  with  Him,  and  the  only  safe  thing. 
Trust  Him.  Love  Him.  What  more  could  He  do,  than  He  has  done,  for  you  ? 
{T.  de  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Tlie  changed  question : — Tlie  question  will,  after  a 
while,  change,  and  it  will  not  be  any  longer,  "  What  shall  we  do  with  Jesus  ?  " 
but  "  What  will  Jesus  do  with  us  ?  "  Eing  all  the  bells  of  eternity  at  the  burning 
of  a  world  1  On  that  day,  what  do  you  think  Christ  will  do  with  us  ?  Why,  He 
will  say,  *•  There  is  that  man  whom  I  called,  that  woman  whose  soul  I  importuned  ; 
but  they  would  not  any  of  My  ways.  I  gave  them  innumerable  opportunities  of 
salvation.  They  rejected  them  all.  Depart.  I  never  knew  you  !  "  Blessed  be  God,  that 
day  has  not  come.  Halt,  ye  destinies  of  eternity,  and  give  one  more  chance ! 
(Ibid.)  What  shall  we  do  with  Jesus  t  I.  Some  kind  of  answeb  must  be  given 
TO  THIS  QUESTION.  1.  It  cannot  be  evaded.  You  must  answer  it.  2.  Jesus  Christ 
is  offered  to  you  as  a  means  of  salvation,  &c.,  and  you  are  free  to  accept  or  reject ; 
out  one  of  these  two  things  you  must  do.  3.  We  know  how  Pilate  answered  this 
question.  4.  This  is  the  great  question  of  the  age.  5.  It  is  a  personal  question. 
II.  CoNsiDEB  SOME  OF  THE  ANSWERS  THAT  have  been  given  to  this  question. 
1.  Some  answer  it  by  placing  themselves  in  direct  opposition  to  Christ,  they  give 
it  a  bold  negative,  they  deny  His  Divinity,  His  gospel,  and  His  claims.  2.  Others 
give  an  answer  that  seems  more  respectful :  they  say,  "  Probably  His  claims  are 
well  founded ;  but  association  with  Him  would  involve  separation  from  friends  and 
pursuits  we  love — we  will  do  without  Him,"  &c.  3.  Others  give  a  somewhat  im- 
posing reply,  but  think  they  need  not  be  too  intimate  with  Him,  <fec.  4.  Others 
admit  His  claims  but  delay  their  decision.  5.  Others  accept  Him  as  their  Guide 
and  Saviour,  &c.  III.  The  answer  God  expects  08  to  give.  Welcome  Him  to 
our  hearts.  Love  Him  supremely.  Obey  Him  fully.  Serve  Him  faithfully  and 
constantly.  {S.  Smith.)  What  will  yon  do  with  Jesus  J — I  remember  a  young 
man  in  New  York  city,  whose  father  I  knew.  He  was  a  great  prodigal,  and  had 
broken  his  mother's  heart,  and  brought  her  down  to  the  grave  in  sorrow.  Every 
night  he  was  out  carousing  with  boon  companions.  The  father's  heart  was  just 
broken  too,  and  one  night  a  few  weeks  after  the  mother's  death  the  young  man 
was  just  starting  out ;  the  old  man  said,  "  My  son,  I  want  one  favour  of  you.  I 
would  likp  you  to  stay  at  home  and  spend  one  night  with  me."  The  young  man 
Baid  he  did  not  want  to  stay,  it  was  so  gloomy.  "  But,"  said  the  father,  "  will  you  not 
stay  and  gratify  your  aged  father  ?  You  know  your  conduct  killed  your  poor  mother. 
My  boy,  won't  yon  say  ?"  The  old  man  pleaded  with  him,  and  just  begged  him  to 
stay,  but  the  boy  said,  "No,  I  am  not  going  to  stay  at  home."  The  old  father 
put  forth  one  more  effort  to  save  his  prodigal  boy,  and  he  threw  himself  down 
before  him  in  the  hall.  What  did  that  boy  do  ?  He  just  leaped  over  the  body,  and 
went  out  to  join  his  comrades.  There  is  not  one  of  you  but  would  say,  "  That  was 
an  ungrateful  wretch,  not  fit  to  live."  Ah,  sinner,  what  would  you  do  with  Christ 
in  such  a  case?  Why,  many  of  you,  I  believe,  if  He  were  to  throw  Himself 
down  before  you  and  plead  with  you,  you  would  step  right  over  Him.  And  now, 
■inner,  what  will  you  do  with  Christ?  Will  you  send  back  the  insulting 
message  that  you  do  not  want  Christ  to  rule  over  you.     Oh,  may  God  forbid 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvit 

it,  and  this  very  night  may  there  be  hundreds  who  shall  receive  Him.        (D.  L. 
Mtody). 

Ver.  24.  When  Pilate  saw  that  he  coiQd  pervall  nothing. — Pilate  a  type  of  self- 
justifying  rejectors  of  the  gospel : — Observe  the  resemblance  in  his  evasive  pleas.  1. 
Assuming  that  the  matter  presented  had  no  claims  on  him — "  Take  ye  Him."  2. 
Substituting  a  favourable  opinion  of  Christ  for  a  decision — "  I  find  in  Him  no  fault 
at  8,11."  "I  have  the  highest  regard  for  the  Christian  religion,"  say  some.  3. 
Assuming  that  it  was  out  of  his  power  to  decide — "  And  as  soon  as  he  knew  that 
He  belonged  to  Herod's  jurisdiction  he  sent  Him  to  Herod"  (Luke  xxiii.  7).  A  law  is 
in  the  way,  perhaps  the  Divine  decree  :  the  law  of  inherited  corruption.  4.  Pro- 
posing a  compromise — "  I  will  therefore  chastise  Him  and  release  Him."  With 
Christ  in  some  things  quiets  conscience.  6.  Surrendering  the  rights  of  judgment — 
"  What  shall  I  do  with  Jesus?  "  I  submit  the  case  to  your  decision.  6.  Turning 
censor — "Why,  what  evil  hath  He  done?"  (S.  V.  McCorkle.)  Pilate  and  his 
modem  imitators  : — I.  Whoever  does  wickedness  through  others  is  rot  less  wicked 
than  they,  but  more.  Pilate  was  no  less  guilty  because  the  Jews  hated  and  con- 
demned Christ  first.  As  soon  as  he  said  to  them,  '♦  Take  Him ;  see  ye  to  it,"  he 
did  all  that  was  necessary  to  make  him  a  partaker  in  their  villainy.  II.  Evil  which 
many  men  commit  is  not  distributively  borne.  If  a  thousand  men  commit  a  mur- 
der,  each  man  is  not  guilty  of  one  thousandth  part  of  that  murder;  but  of  the 
whole.  III.  Evil  actions  are  not  less  guilty  because  they  are  done  for  reasons  of 
state.  Pilate  sacrificed  Christ  from  political  considerations.  IV.  Wickedness  which 
a  man  can  prevent,  and  which  he  does  not  prevent,  inculpates  him.  (H.  W. 
Beechcr.)  Better  to  be  a  Puritan  than  a  Pilate  : — There  is  another  point.  This 
makes  me  a  Puritan.  I  had  rather  be  a  Puritan  than  a  Pilate.  What  is  a  Pilate? 
A  Pilate  is  one  of  those  courtly  gentlemen,  polislied,  tasteful  expert,  who  is  not  dis- 
turbed nor  warped  by  convictions  in  over-measure ;  who  looks  upon  all  moral 
qualities  as  a  gambler  looks  upon  cards,  which  he  shnfiQes,  and  plays  according  to 
the  exigency  of  his  game — and  one  just  as  easy  as  another.  A  Pilate  is  a  man  who 
believes  in  letting  things  have  their  own  way.  "  Do  not  sacrifice  yourself.  Do  not 
get  in  the  way  of  a  movement.  Do  the  best  thing.  Live  in  peace  with  your  time. 
Be  not  like  the  fool,  who  stands  in  his  own  light.  Maintain  good  appearances — 
that  is  profitable.  See  to  it  that  you  do  not  go  too  far,  one  way  or  another.  Study 
the  interest  of  Number  One  all  through.  And,  whatever  comes,  see  that  you  come 
nut  uppermost.  Do  not  be  gross,  brutal,  fanatical — that  is  not  profitable.  Preserve 
your  balance.  See  that  you  keep  your  eye  on  the  chances.  If  they  go  this  way, 
you  go  with  them  far  enough  to  reap  them.  If  they  go  the  other  way,  go  with  them, 
bo  not  be  too  scrupulous.  Be  just  enough  so  to  gain  your  ends.  Use  men,  use 
events,  use  everything  that  is  profitable.  Do  not  use  your  conscience  too  much  !  " 
This  is  the  language  of  the  Pilates  of  our  day.  Those  men  who  ride  astride  of  the 
times,  and  of  administrations,  and  of  policies  ;  those  men  who  are  polished,  cold, 
calculating,  speculating — these  are  the  Pirates — the  Pilates,  I  mean !  It  was  a 
blunder  of  the  lip,  but,  after  all,  it  hit  right  1  (Ibid.)  Lessons  from  the  incidents: — 
I.  Men  have  not  always  that  strict  regard  to  justice  and  honour,  that  might  be 
reasonably  expected  from  their  stations  and  characters.  II.  Truth  and  innocence 
are  frequently  overpowered  by  numbers,  and  oppressed  by  noise  and  tumult.  III.  A 
party  spirit  does  oftentimes  hurry  men  to  the  most  fatal  extremities.  (William  West.) 

Ver.  25.  His  blood  be  on  us. — God  talcing  selfcursers  at  their  word: — God  said 
Amen  to  this  woeful  curse,  which  cleaves  close  to  them  and  their  posterity,  as  a 
girdle  to  their  loins,  soaking  as  oil  into  their  bones  to  this  very  day.  Thirty-fight 
years  after  this  fearful  imprecation,  in  the  same  place,  and  close  by  the  same  tribu- 
nal where  they  thus  cried  out,  "His  blood  be  ou  us  and  on  our  children,"  historians 
tell  us  that  Herod,  wanting  money,  demanded  of  the  Jews  so  much  out  of  their 
treasury  as  would  pay  for  the  making  of  a  water-course.  But  the  Jews,  supposing 
it  a  needless  work,  not  only  denied  him,  but  gave  him  outrageous  and  spiteful 
speeches,  tumultuously  flocked  about  him,  and  with  great  clamours  pressed  upon 
him,  even  as  he  was  in  his  seat.  Whereupon,  to  prevent  mischief,  he  sent  to  his 
soldiers  to  apparel  themselves  like  citizens,  and  under  their  gowns  to  bring  with 
them  a  dagger  or  poniard,  and  mi  gle  themselves  amongst  the  multitude ;  which 
they  did,  observing  who  they  we  e  that  made  the  greatest  uproar.  And  when 
Herod  gave  the  sign,  they  fell  upon  them,  and  slew  a  great  multitude.  Many  also, 
lor  fear  of  loss  or  danger,  killed   themselves;    besides  others,  which  seeing  thif 


CHAP,  ixyn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  64f 

massacre,  suspecting  treason  among  themselves,  fell  one  upon  another.  What  a 
dispersed  and  despised  people  they  are  ever  since  1  exiled,  as  it  were,  out  of  the 
•world,  by  the  common  consent  of  all  nations,  for  their  inexpiable  guilt.  And  beware 
by  their  example,  of  wishing  evil  to  ourselves  or  others,  as  our  desperate  God- 
damn-me's  do  at  every  third  word  almost,  and  God  will  undoubtedly  take  them  at 
their  words,  as  He  did  those  wretches  that  wished  they  might  die  in  the  wildernesa 
(Numb.  xiv.  28).  As  He  did  John  Peters,  the  cruel  keeper  of  Newgate  in  Queen 
Mary's  days  ;  who  commonly,  when  he  would  affirm  anything,  were  it  true  or  false, 
used  to  say,  "  If  it  be  not  true,  I  pray  God,  I  rot  ere  I  die ;  "  and  he  had  his  desire. 
So  had  Sir  Gervase  Ellowais,  lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  hanged  in  our  remembrance 
on  Tower-hill,  for  being  accessory  to  the  poisoning  of  Sir  Thomas  Overbury :  who 
being  upon  the  gallows,  confessed  it  was  just  upon  him,  for  that  he  had  oft  in  his 
playing  of  cards  and  dice  wished  that  he  might  be  hanged  if  it  were  not  so-and-so. 
In  the  year  1551,  the  devil  in  a  visible  shape  lifted  up  a  cursing  woman  into  the 
air  in  Germany ;  and  therehence  threw  her  down  in  the  view  of  many  people,  and 
brake  her  neck.  Another  brought  her  daughter  to  Luther,  entreating  his  prayers 
for  her,  for  that  she  was  possessed  by  the  devil,  upon  her  cursing  of  her.'  For  when 
she  had  said  in  a  rage  against  her  daughter,  "  The  devil  take  thee,"  be  took 
possession  of  her  accordingly.  The  same  author  relates  a  like  sad  story  of  a  stub- 
bom  son,  cursed  by  his  father,  who  vrished  he  might  never  stir  alive  from  the  place 
lie  stood  in,  and  he  stirred  not  for  three  years.  Cursing  men  are  cursed  men.  Sees* 
fion  another  suffer  shipwreck,  look  to  thy  tackling.  (J.  Trapp.)  His  blood  be 
6t  us  and  on  our  children  : — I.  Consider  the  daring  impiety  and  wickedness  of  thus 
<v-lling  down  on  themselves  the  blood  of  Christ.  II.  Consider  the  heavy  wrath  of 
G  od  which  fell  on  them.  In  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  1.  We  gather  an  awfal 
warning  from  this  history.  The  fulfilment  in  the  Jew  of  God's  righteous  anger. 
2.  It  establishes  the  perfect  innocence  of  the  condemned  Saviour.  The  destruction 
of  the  Jewish  nation  was  God's  seal  to  the  perfect  rigliteousaess  of  Him  whom  they 
put  to  death.  3.  This  fearful  vengeance  upon  the  Jewish  nation  stands  also  as  an 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  4.  We  have  also  a  moral  evidence  of  the  truth 
of  the  scriptures  in  the  whole  Jewish  nation.  God  hath  kept  them  separate  from 
the  nations.  5.  Learn  to  pity  and  pray  for  all  who  do  not  know  the  Lord  Jesus. 
(J.  Pratt.)  The  reaponsibility  of  blood : — Can  we  bring  this  blood  upon  our- 
selves ?  The  murderers  of  Christ  may  be  amongst  ourselves.  The  means  of  blessing 
perverted  into  a  curse.  The  means  of  blessing  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  prefigured 
by  sacrifice.  Blood  provided  must  be  blood  imputed.  His  blood  be  on  us — this  ia 
our  salvation.  Blood  provided,  imputed,  accepted.  It  was  sin  that  compassed  His 
death.  You  then  who  knowingly  continue  in  sin  have  identified  yourselves  with  the 
enemies  who  killed  our  Lord.  His  blood  is  on  you.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.).  The 
horrid  imprecation  of  the  Jeivs  : — I.  The  aggravating  circumstances  with  which  the 
imprecation  was  attended,  and  the  solemnity,  unanimity,  and  warmth  with  which 
it  was  expressed.  II.  The  wonderful  manner  with  which  it  was  accomplished,  in 
the  destruction  of  the  city  and  nation  of  the  Jews.  III.  The  justice  of  God  vindi- 
cated, in  respect  to  these  sufferers.  His  wisdom,  by  making  them,  in  their  destruc- 
tion, an  irrefragable  proof  of  onr  Saviour's  Divine  mission ;  and  in  their  dispersion, 
a  means  of  propagating  those  Divine  oracles  that  foretold  and  described  him.  IV. 
Inferences  to  be  deduced — 1.  To  abstain  from  all  rash  and  horrii  imprecations,  and 
to  aim  at  simplicity  of  speech,  as  well  as  sincerity  of  heart,  and  integrity  of  manners. 
2.  To  admire  the  inscrutable  methods  of  God's  providence,  in  bringing  about  the 
salvation  of  sinners ;  and  making  the  scandal  of  the  cross  turn  to  its  greatest 
advantage.  3.  To  attribute  the  infidelity  of  those  men  to  a  judicial  blindness,  who 
live  where  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  professed,  and  yet  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light 
of  it.  4.  To  be  fearful  of  despising  the  mercies  of  God,  and  falling  into  that  sin,  by 
•which  God's  peculiar  people  forfeited  His  protection  and  favour.    (F.  Atterbury.) 

"Vers.  29-31.  And  •when  they  bad  platted  a  crown  of  thorns. — Mocked  of  tht 
soldiers: — The  shameful  spectacle!  What  element  of  scorn  is  lacking?  Roman 
Boldiers  mocking  a  supposed  rival  of  Casar  are  sure  to  go  to  the  utmost  lengths  in 
theii  derision.  The  spectacle  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  derisive.  Thorns  and  rough  blows 
accentuate  mockeries  and  scoffs.  Roman  legionaries  were  the  brutalized  instm. 
ments  of  a  race  noted  for  its  ignorance  of  all  tenderness;  they  wrought  cruelties 
with  a  singular  zest,  being  most  at  home  in  amusements  of  the  most  cruel  kind. 
I.  H«RB  LEARN  A  LESSON  FOB  YouB  HEART.  1.  See  what  siu  dcservcd.  All  laid  on 
Bim.    (a)  Ridicule  for  its  folly,     (b)  Scorn  for  its  pretensions,     (c)  Shame  for  its 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xxtxj. 

audacity.  2.  See  how  low  yonr  Saviour  stooped  for  your  sake,  (a)  Made  the  sub- 
Btitute  for  fooUsh,  sinful  man  ;  and  treated  as  such,  (6)  Scoffed  at  by  soldiers  of 
meanest  grade,  (c)  Made  a  puppet  for  men  who  play  the  fool.  3.  See  how  your 
Redeemer  loved  you.  He  bears  immeasurable  contempt,  in  silence,  to  the  bitter 
end.  4.  See  the  grand  facts  behind  the  scorn,  (a)  He  is  a  King  in  very  surety. 
(6)  Glorified  by  conquering  earth's  sorrow,  (c)  Rules  by  weakness,  (d)  Makes 
men  bow  the  knee,  (e)  True  Monarch  of  the  Jews.  5.  See  that  you  honour  and 
love  Him  in  proportion  to  this  shame  and  mockery.  The  more  vile  He  has  made 
Himself  for  us,  the  more  dear  He  ought  to  be  to  us.  H.  A  lesson  fob  the  con- 
science. 1.  Jesus  may  still  be  mocked,  (a)  By  deriding  His  people,  {b)  By 
despising  His  doctrine,  (c)  By  resolves  never  fulfilled,  {d)  By  beliefs  never 
obejed.  (e)  By  professions  never  justified.  (C.  II  Spurgcon.)  The  crown  of 
thorns: — According  to  the  Eabbis  and  the  botanists,  there  would  seem  to  have  been 
from  twenty  to  twenty-five  different  species  of  thorny  plants  growing  in  Palestine  ; 
and  different  writers  have,  according  to  their  own  judgment  or  fancies,  selected  one 
and  another  of  these  plants  as  the  peculiar  thorns  which  were  used  upon  this  occa- 
sion.  But  why  select  one  thorn  out  of  many  ?  He  bore  not  one  grief,  but  all ;  any 
and  every  thorn  will  suifice  ;  the  very  dubiousness  as  to  the  peculiar  species  yields 
us  instruction.  It  may  well  be  that  more  than  one  kind  of  thorn  was  platted  in 
that  crown :  at  any  rate  sin  has  so  thickly  strewn  the  earth  with  thorns  and  thistles 
that  there  was  no  dilliculty  in  finding  the  materials,  even  as  there  was  no  scarcity 
of  griefs  wherewith  to  chasten  Him  every  morning  and  make  Him  a  mourner  all 
His  days.  The  soldiers  may  have  used  pliant  boughs  of  the  acacia  or  shittim  tree, 
that  unrotting  wood  of  which  many  of  the  sacred  tables  and  vessels  of  the  sanc- 
tuary were  made ;  and,  therefore,  significantly  used  if  such  was  the  case.  It  may 
have  been  true,  as  the  old  writers  generally  consider,  that  the  plant  was  the  spina 
Christi,  for  it  has  many  small  and  sharp  spines,  and  its  green  leaves  would  have 
made  a  wreath  such  as  those  with  which  generals  and  emperors  were  crowned  after 
a  battle.  But  we  M'ill  leave  the  matter ;  it  was  a  crown  of  thorns  which  pierced 
His  head,  and  caused  Him  suffering  as  well  as  shame,  and  that  suffices  us.  {Ibid.) 
The  Christian's  crown,  not  gold  but  thorns: — That  thorn  crown  cures  us  of  desire 
for  the  vain  glories  of  the  world,  it  dims  all  human  pomp  and  glory  till  it  turns  to 
smoke.  It  takes  the  glitter  from  your  gold,  and  the  lustre  from  your  gems,  and  the 
beauty  from  all  your  dainty  gewgaws,  to  see  that  no  imperial  purple  can  equal  the 
glory  of  His  blood,  no  gems  can  rival  His  thorns.  Show  and  parade  cease  to 
attract  the  soul,  when  once  the  superlative  excellencies  of  the  dying  Saviour  have 
been  discerned  by  the  enlightened  eye.  Who  seeks  for  ease  when  he  has  seen  the 
Lord  Christ  ?  If  Christ  wears  a  crown  of  thorns,  shall  we  covet  a  crown  of  laurel  t 
Even  the  fierce  Crusader,  when  he  entered  into  Jerusalem  and  was  elected  king, 
had  sense  enough  to  say,  "  I  will  not  wear  a  crown  of  gold  in  the  same  city  where 
my  Saviour  wore  a  crown  of  thorns."  Why  should  we  desire,  like  feather-bed 
soldiers,  to  have  everything  arranged  for  our  ease  awd  pleasure?  Why  this  re- 
clining upon  couches,  when  Jesus  hangs  on  a  cross  ?  Why  this  soft  raiment,  when 
He  is  naked  ?  Why  these  luxuries,  when  He  is  barbarously  entreated  J  Thus  the 
thorn  crown  cures  us  at  once  of  the  vain  glory  of  the  world,  and  of  our  own  selfish 
love  of  ease.  The  world's  minstrel  may  cry,  "  Ho,  boy,  come  hither,  and  crown  ma 
with  rosebuds!"  but  the  voluptuary's  request  is  not  for  us.  For  us  neither  delights 
of  the  flesh  nor  the  pride  of  life  can  have  charms  while  the  Man  of  Sorrows  is  in 
view.  For  ua  it  remains  to  suffer  and  to  labour,  till  the  King  shall  bid  us  share  His 
rest.  (Ibid.)  Crowned  with  thorns : — I.  The  crown  of  thorns  was  placed  upon 
the  brow  of  our  Divine  Redeemer  in  derision  of  His  true  kiugly  dignity.  It  suggests 
the  world's  general  treatment  of  His  claims.  Herod's  question — "  Art  Thoo  • 
King  ?  "  Christ  claims  this  supremacy  on  the  ground  of  His  Divine  fulness  and 
BufiQciency  as  our  Redeeming  God.  II.  The  crown  of  thorns  reminds  us  of  kingship 
over  suffering,  or  the  passive  perfection  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  III.  Of  the  disappoint- 
ments which  are  inseparable  from  the  earthly  and  the  seen.  (C.  II.  Davison.) 
The  crown  of  thorns: — 1.  A  striking  exhiljition  of  the  intense  love  of  Christ  to  guilty 
man.  2.  The  profound  depth  of  His  abasement.  3.  The  development  of  the  nature 
of  that  kingdom  which  Christ  came  into  tliis  world  to  establish.  4.  There  is  a 
description  of  the  character,  tendency,  and  issue  of  the  affliction  of  the  righteoas. 
Afflictions  prick  and  tear,  but  suffering  is  a  crown.  5.  An  affecting  image  of  the 
reahty,  extent,  and  the  permanence  of  the  dominion  of  Christ.  (J.  Clayton.) 
The  thoTu  crown : — I.  See  what  that  age  must  have  shnk  to.  We  test  forces  ia 
depravity  by  their  resistance  of  good.    Rome  decadent  t    Do  you  know  its  wealth. 


OHAP.  ixvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  651 

armies,  &e.  It  was  withal  corrupt,  dying.  II.  See  what  a  limited  power  Christ's 
ENEMIES  HAVE.  They  can  put  thorns  on  His  bead,  but  none  on  His  heart.  How 
calm  in  all  His  sorrow.  The  keenest  physical  agony  is  little  felt  in  the  joyoui 
sense  of  triumphant  love  for  others.  III.  See  what  suffebino  love  can  do. 
IV.  See  what  is  the  bin  of  the  world  to-day.  Our  rebellion  is  a  crown  of  thoma 
on  his  heart.  V.  See  the  altered  verdict  of  the  ages.  The  crown  was  then  a 
mockery,  now  a  royal  symbol.  Learn  (1)  never  to  be  carried  away  by  a  mere 
temporary  judgment;  (2)  what  a  contrast  we  have  in  the  glorious  vision  of  tha 
Apocalypse,  "  On  His  head  were  many  crowns."  (IF.  M.  Statham.)  The  crown 
of  thorns  : — The  crown  of  thorns  symbolized — I.  That  Christ  was  about  to  bear 
the  CURSE  for  sinful  man.  Thorns  were  part  of  the  original  curse  upon  the  soil. 
II.  That  Christ  was  about  to  endure  pain  for  sinful  man.  The  piercing  thorns  were 
harbingers  of  the  cruel  spear  and  nails.  III.  That  Christ  was  about  to  conquer 
death  for  dying  man.  Christ  was  crowned  before  He  came  to  the  cross ;  nnde- 
Blgnedly  indicating  His  victory.     {F.  W.  Brown.) 

Vera.  32.  Hita  they  compelled  to  bear  His  cross. — Simon  bearing  the  cross : — ■ 

1.  We  may  derive  from  this  narrative  a  confirmation  of  our  faith.  It  was  in 
accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  country ;  the  correspondence  is  minute.  Not 
compassion  towards  Christ  that  His  cross  was  carried.  II.  An  affecting  illustration 
oi"  OUB  Saviour's  love.     1.  The  preliminary  sufferings  were  marked  by  severity. 

2.  The  preliminary  sufferings  were  marked  by  ignominy.  III.  We  may  see  ak 
incitement  to  Christian  obedience.  1.  To  self-denial.  2.  To  observance  of  the 
pablic  ordinances  of  religion.  (R.  Brodie,  M.A.)  Simon  the  Cyrenian: — I.  It 
is  interesting  to  remark  that  the  accomplishment  of  ancient  prophecy  seems 
OFTEN  TO  HAVE  HUNQ  UPON  A  THREAD,  BO  that  the  least  thing,  a  thought,  a  word, 
might  have  sufficed  to  prevent  its  occurrence.  The  marvel  is  that  the  enemies  of 
Christ  were  not  more  on  the  alert  than  to  allow  things  to  be  done  which  they  could 
see  were  evidences  of  His  Messiahship.  How  easy  for  them  to  have  taken  care 
that  vinegar  and  gall  should  not  be  given  Him  on  the  cross.  It  is  a  striking  proof 
of  the  certainty  with  which  God  can  reckon  on  every  working  of  the  human  mind. 
Isaac  was  a  type  of  Christ ;  he  carried  the  wood  on  which  he  was  to  be  sacrificed. 
This  type  was  fulfilled  when  our  Lord  was  led  forth  carrying  His  cross.  This  waa 
the  better  Isaac,  bearing  the  wood  for  the  burnt-offering.  Yet  how  near  was  the 
prophecy  to  being  defeated  1  It  was  only  for  a  part  of  the  way  that  Christ  carried 
the  cross.  II.  What  induced  the  fierce  and  brutal  soldiers  to  grant  the 
Bedeemeb  this  little  indulgence,  and  relieve  Him  for  a  time  of  the  burden  of 
the  cross.  They  probably  feared,  from  the  exhausted  condition  of  our  Lord,  that 
death  would  ensue  before  He  reached  Calvary.  This  an  incidental  notice  which 
shows  us  how  great  were  the  endurances  of  the  Mediator.  This  incident  shows  ua 
that  Christ  was  as  sensitive  to  bodily  pain  as  we  are.  III.  The  incident  symbolical. 
"  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  and 
follow  Me. "  He  teaches  His  disciples  that  they  must  bear  the  same  cross  as  Himself. 
St.  Paul  says: — "I  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my 
flesh,"  &o.  There  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  represent  it  as  an  easy  thing  to 
attain  eternal  life  ;  the  bearing  the  cross  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  wearing 
the  crown.  Many  a  cross  is  of  our  own  manufacture,  the  consequence  of  our  sin  ; 
these  are  not  the  cross  which  was  laid  upon  Simon,  and  which  had  first  been  on 
Christ.  "  They  are  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  His  name  " — so  we  read  of 
the  apostles.  The  offence  of  the  cross  has  not  ceased.  The  followers  of  Christ 
gain  nothing  by  those  compromises  which  may  be  made  in  hopes  of  conciliating 
the  world.  You  will  make  it  all  the  heavier  by  avoiding  it  when  it  lies  in  the  clear 
path  of  duty.  But  take  comfort :  the  cross  was  carried  by  Christ  before  it  was 
eartied  by  Simon.  And  is  this  all  that  was  typically  represented  by  the  laying  of 
the  cross  on  Simon  the  Cyrenian  ?  Indeed  we  ought  never  to  press  a  type  too  far : 
it  is  easy,  by  indulging  the  imagination,  to  injure  or  bring  into  discredit  the  whole  of 
the  figurative  lesson.  Yet  there  is  one  thing  more  which  we  would  venture  to  advance, 
though  we  may  not  speak  with  the  same  confidence  as  when  asserting  that  Christ 
taught  by  action,  as  He  had  before  taught  by  word,  that  His  disciples  must  suffer 
with  Him,  if  they  ever  hope  to  reign.  We  have  already  mentioned  our  inability 
to  ascertain  any  particulars  respecting  Simon,  or  even  to  determine  whether  he 
were  a  Jeir  or  a  Pagan.  Many  of  the  ancient  fathers  suppose  him  to  have  been  a 
Pagan,  and  consider  that,  in  being  made  to  bear  the  cross  after  Christ,  He  typified 
the  conversion  of  idolatrous  nations  which  either  have  been  or  will  be  broaght  to 


65&  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrru  . 

a  profession  of  faith  in  onr  Lord.  And  there  are  no  such  reasons  against  thii 
opinion  as  can  require  its  rejection,  nor  such  even  as  can  show  that  the  weight  of 
probability  is  on  the  opposite  side.  We  must  be  therefore  at  hberty  to  entertain 
the  opinion,  and,  at  least,  to  point  out  the  inferences  which  would  follow  on  suppo- 
sition of  its  truth.  But  once  let  it  be  considered  that  Simon  was  a  Pagan,  and  our 
text  becomes  one  of  those  bright,  prophetic  lines  which  shoot  through  centuries  of 
gloom,  giving  promise  of  a  morning,  if  they  cannot  scatter  night.  {H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  The  cross  to  be  borne  gladly: — Mr.  Simeon,  of  Cambridge,  conversing 
with  Mr.  Gumey,  made  the  following  remarks : — "  Should  you  see  a  poor  maniao 
knocking  his  head  against  a  wall,  and  beating  out  his  brains,  you  would  not  be 
angry  with  him,  however  he  might  taunt  you.  You  would  pity  him  from  your  very 
soul ;  you  would  direct  all  your  energies  to  save  him  from  destruction.  So  it  will 
be  with  you :  the  world  will  mock  and  trample  on  you :  a  man  thall  come,  and,  as 
it  were,  slap  you  on  the  face.  You  rub  your  face  and  say,  •  This  is  strange  work  ;  I 
like  it  not,  sir.'  Never  mind,  I  say,  this  is  your  evidence;  it  turns  to  you  for  a 
testimony.  If  you  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  its  own,  but  now  yon 
are  not  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you.  Many  years  ago,  when  I  was 
an  object  of  much  contempt  and  derision  in  this  university,  I  strolled  forth  one 
day,  buffeted  and  afflicted,  with  my  little  Testament  in  my  han-d.  I  prayed  earnestly 
to  my  God,  that  He  would  comfort  me  with  some  cordial  from  His  word,  and  that, 
on  opening  the  Book  I  might  find  some  text  which  should  sustain  me.  The  first  text 
which  caught  my  eye  was  this :  '  They  found  a  man  of  Gyrene,  Simon  by  name  ; 
him  they  compelled  to  bear  His  cross.'  You  know  Simon  is  the  same  name  as 
Simeon.  What  a  world  of  instruction  was  here — what  a  blessed  hint  for  my 
encouragement  1  To  have  the  cross  laid  upon  me,  that  I  might  bear  it  after  Jesus 
— what  a  privilege  I  It  was  enough.  Now  I  could  leap  and  sing  for  joy  as  one 
whom  Jesus  was  honouring  with  a  participation  in  His  sufferings.  My  dear  brother, 
we  must  not  mind  a  little  suffering.  When  I  am  getting  through  a  hedge,  if  my 
bead  and  shoulders  are  safely  through,  I  can  bear  the  pricking  of  my  legs." 

Ver.  33-37.  And  they  crucified  Htm,  and  parted  His  garments,  casting  lots.— 
The  watch  by  the  cross : — The  thought  of  those  who  with  tender  heart  watch  by  the 
cross  of  Jesus.  I.  The  first  thought  concerns  the  visible  tragic  elements  of  the 
Bcene.  II.  The  contemplation  of  the  sufferer,  His  character,  and  His  works.  HI. 
The  Divine  permission  of  these  atrocities.  IV.  What  a  plenitude  of  grace  there  is 
In  this  Divine  provision.  (J.  II.  Davison.)  I.  The  spectacle.  1.  There  was 
Vhat  which  all  might  see.  2.  There  was  that  which  only  enUghtened  and  quickened 
>tiinds  can  see.  II.  The  spectators  and  their  various  emoti-ons.  Of  the  spectators 
i«ome  were — 1.  Bad.  2.  Hopeful.  3.  Good.  (Anon.)  Christ  crucified : — I.  The 
VBocEss  of  the  crucifixion.  1.  The  preliminary  by  which  it  was  preceded.  2.  The 
act  itself.  3.  The  explanation  by  which  the  act  was  accompanied.  II.  The  designs 
of  the  crucifixion.  1.  It  was  the  accomplishment  of  a  Divine  purpose.  2.  In 
order  to  offer  an  all-sufficient  atonement  for  human  sin.  3.  In  order  that  it  might 
found  for  our  Lord  an  exalted  mediatorial  empire.  III.  The  concldsions  which  the 
crucifixion  should  leave  on  the  hearts  of  those  who  contemplate  it.  1.  To  esteem 
supremely  the  love  from  which  it  emanated.  2.  To  repent  humbly  of  the  trans- 
gressions it  was  necessary  to  pardon.  3.  To  repose  implicitly  upon  the  merit  by 
which  it  is  signalized.  4.  To  avow  zealously  the  cause  with  which  it  is  identified. 
(J.  Parsom.)  Crucifixion: — I.  What  they  did  to  Him.  "They  crucified  Him." 
II.  How  He  conducted  Himself  under  it.  III.  The  results  of  all  this.  1.  A  great 
consternation  did  befall  the  universe  at  this  crucifixion.  2.  It  gave  to  the  church 
its  subUmest  and  most  central  theme.  3.  It  established  a  city  of  refuge  for  guilty 
men.  4.  It  was  the  opening  of  a  fountain  for  the  washing  away  of  sin.  6.  It  was 
the  stretching  forth  of  a  mighty  hand  to  help,  comfort,  and  deliver  in  every  time 
of  need.  6.  It  gave  to  the  believing  soul  a  pillow  on  which  to  he  down  and  die  in 
peace.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Gambling : — That  is  the  Bible's  picture  of  gamblers. 
What  is  gambling  ?  It  is  neither  begging  nor  stealing,  but  it  resembles  both  in 
that  it  consists  in  gettiug  money  from  another  for  which  you  have  rendered  no 
honest  equivalent.  Tlie  winner  of  a  bet  has  rendered  no  service  at  all  to  the 
country  or  to  the  individual ;  and  ought  to  feel  a  sense  of  theft.  Do  you  ask  wheru 
is  God's  commandment  against  it  ?  "  In  its  results  scored  deeply  on  the  character  of 
gamblers."  The  love  of  gaming  springs  from  the  love  of  excitement  that  is  in  our 
nature.  It  unfits  a  man  for  life's  duties.  It  is  strange  how  uniformly  no  good 
comes  of  it.  It  has  been  disallowed  by  all  ethical  and  religious  teachers.    (B.  J.  Stuli, 


ITHAF.  xxvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  65S 

M.A.)  Gambling  unproductive  of  wealth : — In  honest  business  yoa  give  an  equi- 
valent for  80  mu'jh  received.  It  may  be  a  service,  or  it  may  be  the  result  of  service. 
The  farmer  gives  his  farm  produce,  the  result  of  his  toil ;  the  mechanic  renders  hia 
Bkill ;  the  pilot  his  knowledge  of  the  channel ;  the  lawyer  his  acute  knowledge 
required  to  navigate  channels  more  intricate.  In  any  one  of  these  cases  money  ie 
earned  by  the  performance  of  actual  service,  and  in  every  case  the  body  politic  is 
the  richer  for  the  service.  But  gambling  is  unproductive,  the  wealth  of  the  whole 
body  is  not  increased.  The  only  result  is  the  ciiculaiion  of  moneys,  and  even  that 
is  a  questionable  benefit  seeing  that  the  cash  is  but  transferred  from  the  pocket  of 
the  fools  to  the  pocket  of  the  knaves,  always  with  a  contingent  reversion  to  the 
pubHcan.  The  community  is  no  more  enriched  by  the  mere  circulation  of  gold 
than  the  level  of  a  pool  is  raised  by  a  tempest  blowing  upon  it ;  gain  in  one  direc- 
tion is  balanced  by  loss  in  another.  (Ibid.)  The  excitement  of  gambling: — The 
love  of  gaming  springs  from  the  love  of  excitement  that  is  in  our  nature.  This  has 
existed  always  and  everywhere.  Tacitus  says  that  the  ancient  Germans  would  stake 
their  property  and  even  their  life  on  the  throw  of  the  dice-box.  The  typical  Asiatic 
wiU  risk  child  or  wife  on  the  turn  of  a  die  or  the  fighting  of  a  game-cock.  Civiliza- 
tion does  not  seem  to  diminish  the  fascination  of  gambling.  And  excitement,  so 
long  as  it  is  within  bounds,  is  healthful,  bracing,  and  necessary;  beyond  these 
bounds  (which  no  man  can  well  define  for  another),  it  is  exhausting  and  destructive. 
At  first  a  man  bets  to  gain  a  new  sensation,  a  certain  thrill  of  the  nerves ;  to  repeat 
the  pleasant  thrill  an  increased  dose  is  necessary.  The  sensation  itself  palls ;  it 
must  be  intensified.  The  process  itself  is  luring,  and  at  last  it  heats  every  part  of 
the  mind  like  an  oven.  It  is  notorious  that  the  passion  grows ;  no  more  experi- 
ments need  to  be  tried  in  that  direction,  vivisection  could  not  demonstrate  it  more 
amply.  The  winnings  that  come  so  easily  are  hot  so  much  the  gifts  of  fortune  as 
they  are  the  baits  of  misfortune  that  lead  on  to  beggary.  Nice  distinctions  are 
drawn  between  "playing"  and  gambling.  Play  is  harmless  so  long  as  it  is  play; 
but  "playing"  is  a  seed  that  comes  up  "gambling."  It  is  a  dangerous  seed  to 
play  with.  Not  drunkenness  itself  is  as  hard  to  cure  as  is  the  gambling  mania 
when  it  has  once  enthralled  a  man ;  he  cares  only  for  it — every  passion  is  absorbed 
into  that  one  intense  consuming  lust.  The  day  lags  heavy  on  his  hands  without 
it,  all  other  pursuits  are  tasteless ;  he  is  only  aUve  when  he  is  gaming,  and  then 
the  very  dregs  of  his  soul  are  stirred  into  fearful  activity.  (Ibid.)  The  watchers 
round  the  cross: — Note  the  varied  types  of  watchers  around  the  cross.  1.  The  care- 
less watch  of  the  soldiers.  2.  The  jealous  watch  of  the  enemies.  3.  The  anxious 
watch  of  the  women.  4.  The  wondering  watch  of  angels  on  high.  (Anon.)  The 
blind  watchers  at  the  cross : — These  rude  soldiers  had  doubtless  joined  with  their 
comrades  in  the  coarse  mockery  which  preceded  the  sad  procession  to  Calvary ;  and 
then  they  had  to  do  the  rough  work  of  the  executioners,  fastening  the  sufferers  to 
the  rude  wooden  crosses,  lifting  these  with  their  burden,  fixing  them  into  the 
ground,  then  parting  the  raiment.  And  when  all  that  is  done  they  sit  stolidly  down 
to  take  their  ease  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  idly  to  wait,  with  eyes  that  look  and 
Bee  nothing,  until  the  sufferers  die.  A  strange  picture  I  I.  How  ionobant  men  abb 
or  THE  REAL  MEANING  AND  OUTCOME  OF  WHAT  THEY  DO.  Think  of  what  a  corporal's 
guard  of  rough  English  soldiers,  out  in  Northern  India,  would  think  if  they  were 
bade  to  hang  a  native  charged  with  rebellion  against  the  British  Government.  So 
much,  and  no  more  did  these  men  know  of  what  they  were  doing.  And  so  with  ua 
all.  No  man  knows  the  real  meaning,  the  possible  issue  and  outcome  of  a  great 
deal  in  our  lives.  If  we  are  wise,  we  will  let  results  alone,  and  just  take  care  that 
our  motive  is  right.  II.  Responsibility  is  limited  by  ksowledge.  These  men 
were  ignorant  of  what  they  were  doing,  and  therefore  guiltless.  God  weighs,  not 
counts,  our  actions.  III.  It  is  possible  to  look  at  Christ  on  the  cross  and  bes 
KOTHiNo.  For  half  a  day  there  these  soldiers  sat,  and  it  was  but  a  dying  Jew  they 
saw — one  of  three.  They  were  the  unmoved  witnesses  of  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  dying  on  the  cross  for  the  whole  world,  and  for  them.  Their  ignorance  made 
them  blind.  Let  us  all  pray  to  have  our  ignorance  and  blindness  removed,  our 
hearts  softened  by  the  sight  of  Christ  crucified  for  as.    (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  38.  Two  thieves  crucifled  with  Him. — Jesus  between  two  robbers : — I.  The 
moral  condition  of  these  men  before  crucifixion — Bobbers.  They  are  also  called 
*•  malefactors."  At  the  earlier  stage  of  the  proceedings  these  two  men  were  equall^^ 
depraved.  II.  The  moral  condition  of  these  men  after  they  were  affixed  to  thu 
CBOSB.    In  the  case  of  one — 1.  There  was  a  beholding  of  the  crucified  Jesus.    2.  Ther« 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxva, 

■was  a  perception  of  his  own  sinfulness  and  of  the  purity  of  Christ.  3.  There  is  • 
prajer  for  a  participation  in  all  that  Christ  has  to  offer.  4.  His  acceptance  promised 
by  Jesus.  The  other  sinner  mocks  our  Lord.  The  men  the  same  at  first,  but  now  how 
changed  the  condition  of  one.  III.  The  position  these  two  robbers  occupied  m 
BESPECT  TO  Christ.  1.  Christ  is  placed  on  the  central  cross.  He  was  first  suspended 
on  the  cross  by  the  cruel  malignity  of  men.  2.  That  Christ's  sufferings  were  for 
all  men.  He  was  crucified  between  two,  not  on  one  side.  3.  These  robbers  were 
the  representative  men  of  the  world.  4.  You  may  perish  with  Christ  close  beside 
you.  (O.  Vejiables.)  The  three  crosses : — I.  There  may  be  the  same  outward  cir- 
cumstances where  there  is  the  greatest  inward  diversity.  II.  We  have  no  choice  as 
to  the  fact  of  suffering  :  our  choice  refers  only  to  its  nature.  Each  has  his  own 
cross  :  Christ  was  not  without  one.  The  wicked  have  their  woes.  1.  The  sufferings 
of  the  good  are  consoled.  2.  The  sufferings  of  the  good  are  limited — "For  a  season." 
III.  The  means  used  for  Christ's  disgrace  promote  His  glory.  Satan  was  wounded 
by  his  own  weapon :  and  the  robber  designed  to  insult  our  Lord  was  saved.  Thus 
temptation  is  turned  to  good  ends.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  Christ  dying  amid 
thieves : — There  then  are  the  two  stories  (of  the  thieves  and  of  Jesus),  See  how  far 
apart  they  begin.  One  in  the  innocence  of  perfect  holiness ;  the  other  in  the 
blackest  wickedness.  And  then  see  how  they  meet  at  last.  As  when  a  black  and 
turbid  stream  goes  hurrying  towards  a  cavern's  gloom,  into  which  it  is  destined  to 
plunge  itself  out  of  sight,  and  just  before  it  reaches  its  dark  doom,  a  pure  fresh 
river  that  was  born  among  the  snows  in  the  sunlight  on  the  mountain's  top,  and 
has  sung  its  way  down  through  flowers,  drops  its  quiet,  transparent  waters  down 
into  the  tumultuous  current,  and  shares  its  plunge,  so  tlae  pure  holiness  of  Christ 
fell  into  the  stream  of  human  wickedness,  and  shared  its  fate.  (Phillips  Brooks.) 
The  penitent  thief: — The  different  effects  the  judgments  of  God  have  upon  the 
minds  of  men.  The  wisdom  of  God  in  setting  the  examples  of  His  justice  and 
mercy  so  near  together,  and  has  taught  us  to  fear  without  despair,  and  to  hope 
without  presumption.  What  would  the  dying  sinner  give  to  have  his  Saviour  so 
near  him  in  his  last  moments.  I.  Let  us  see  the  circumstances  which  distinguish 
IT  FROM  THAT  OF  THE  DYiNs  CHRISTIAN.  1.  In  all  this  there  may  be  nothing  re- 
sembling a  death-bed  repentance.  The  dying  thief  seems  to  have  heard  and  known 
much  about  the  character  of  Christ :  he  had  elsewhere  learnt  His  dignity  and  was 
persuaded  of  the  truth  of  His  mission.  And  what  is  this  to  them  who  have  no 
desire  to  lie  down  Christians  upon  their  death-beds,  though  they  would  willingly  go 
off  penitents.  2.  Suppose  this  great  work  were  begun  and  finished  on  the  cross, 
yet  it  cannot  be  drawn  into  example  by  Christian  sinners ;  because  the  conversion 
of  a  Jew  or  a  heathen  is  one  thing,  and  the  repentance  of  a  Christian  another. 
8.  The  profligate  life  of  this  unconverted  sinner  was  not  attended  with  such  aggra- 
vated circumstances  as  the  sins  of  Christians  are.  He  sinned  against  the  light  of 
nature  and  reason  only.  The  greater  his  weakness  was,  the  fitter  object  for  mercy 
was  he.    Not  the  same  excuses  for  Christians.     II.  But  there  are  other  circum- 

BTANCES   FIT  TO   BE   OBSERVED    WHICH   BENDER   A   DEATH-BED    REPENTANCE   VERY   INSK- 

CDRE  AFD  DANGEROUS,  though  wc  should  allow  it  all  the  hopes  which  have  been 
raised  from  the  case  before  us.  1.  He  that  sins  in  hopes  of  repentance  at  last  3.iy 
sin  so  far  as  to  grow  hardened  and  obdurate,  and  incapable  of  repentance  whta  the 
time  comes.  Nor  is  it  in  your  own  power  to  sin  to  what  degree  you  please ;  habits 
grow  insensibly.  There  is  more  reason  to  fear  that  sin  indulged  will  get  the  better 
of  you,  than  you  of  it.  2.  Could  you  preserve  your  resolutions  of  repentance,  yet 
still  it  is  not  in  your  own  power  to  secure  an  oppoiiunity  to  execute  them.  The 
thief  on  the  cross  died  by  the  hand  of  justice,  knew  how  long  he  had  to  live;  he 
had  no  pretence  to  defer  his  repentance.  3.  His  death  not  being  the  effect  of  disease, 
but  of  the  judge's  sentence,  he  brought  with  him  to  the  cross,  which  you  may  call 
his  death-bed,  a  sound  body  and  mind.  He  had  his  senses  perfectly,  his  reason 
fresh,  and  was  capable  of  faith  and  acts  of  devotion.  How  different  is  the  case  of 
the  languishing  sinner.  How  can  one  know  His  Saviour  who  cannot  know  even  his 
own  brother  at  such  a  time.    (T.  Sherlock,  D.D.) 

Vers.  89,  40.  Ha  laved  others ;  Himself  He  cannot  .save. — He  iaved  other$,  Him- 
$elf  He  cannot  save : — I.  The  incontestible  fact — "  He  saved  others."  Let  us  bring 
forth  witnesses :  Angels,  healed  men  and  women.  II.  Himself  He  cannot  save* 
He  is  Divine.  The  world  was  made  by  Him ;  yet  Himself  He  cannot  save.  The 
«ct8  of  onlimited  providence  are  ascribed  to  Him — *'  He  Bustaineth  all  things  by  tht 
<Krord  of  Hia  power."     "  Himself  He  cannot  save."    The  resorrection  of  the  dead. 


BiiAP.  XXVI I.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  656 

Bdministration  of  judgment  are  ascribed  to  Him.  "Himself  He  cannot  save."  The 
power  to  save  Himself  is  demonstrated  in  those  very  acts  by  which  He  "  saved 
others."  The  devils  were  subject  to  Him,  "  No  man  taketh  my  life  from  Me,  I  lay  it 
down  of  Myself."  III.  However  paradoxical  all  this  may  seem,  I  must  proceed  to 
ESTABLISH  THE  MOMENTOUS  TRUTH  iguorantly  sxpressed  in  those  words.  In  its 
literal  sense  it  was  false  ;  Jesus  was  not  destitute  of  physical  power  to  save  Himself; 
in  its  theological  sense  it  was  true.  There  was  no  original  necessity  that  the  Son  of 
God  must  die  ;  He  might  have  left  the  race  to  perish.  The  necessity  of  the  death 
of  Jesus  was  founded — 1.  In  the  purpose  and  foreordination  of  God.  2.  On  the  ful- 
filment which  that  event  gives  to  the  predictions  of  sacred  Scripture.  3.  To  fulfil  the 
typical  representations  by  which,  under  the  Mosaic  law,  it  had  been  prefigured.  4,  In 
order  to  verify  His  own  declarations.  6.  As  a  sacrificial  atonement  for  the  sins  of 
the  world.  6.  In  order  to  the  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  7.  Eveu  in  order  to  the 
perfection  of  His  example.  Learn :  1.  The  affecting  display  which  our  subject  pre- 
sents of  the  love  of  Christ.  2.  The  glorious  and  certain  effects  of  the  Eedeemer's 
Bufferings.  3.  I  conjure  you  to  seek  a  personal  interest  in  the  important  benefits 
of  the  Saviour's  death.  4.  Let  it  be  the  theme  of  your  meditation  and  the  confirma- 
tion of  your  faith.  (J.  Bowers.)  Success  in  apparent  failure: — Christ  seems  a 
failure.  Thus  His  enemies  asserted  and  His  friends  seemed  to  admit  it.  Where 
they  right  ?  I.  What  is  success  ?  1.  Certainly  not  that  which  is  merely  in  appear- 
ance strong,  beautiful,  or  prosperous,  for  inwardly  it  may  be  quite  different.  The 
ship  on  the  waters  may  be  beautiful  to  look  at,  but  if  made  of  inferior  material  is 
not  a  success.  2.  Not  that  which  is  good  merely  for  the  time  being.  The  finest 
house  built  on  a  sand-hill  has  its  ruin  beneath  it.  3.  Nor  is  it  a  necessary  element 
of  success,  that  it  should  confer  aught  of  benefit  or  reward  upon  him  who  has 
brought  it  about.  The  highest  favour  often  comes  after  death.  4.  Nor  is  any 
result,  however  magnificent,  obtained  on  doubtful  principles  worthy  of  this  royal 
title.  God  and  Hia  laws  are  against  it.  Success  is  that  good  purpose  which  hath 
been  conducted  upon  right  principles  to  a  prosperous  and  durable  completion. 
IL  Christ  we  ciaim  was  and  is  a  success.  1.  His  purpose  was  good — to  "  save 
His  people  from  their  sins."  2.  His  purpose  was  conducted  upon  pure  and  holy 
principles.  3.  Though  small  in  its  beginnings  His  purpose  is  evidently  intended  to 
prosper.  His  influence  has  been  steadily  increasing.  4.  His  success  is  alwaya 
durable.  III.  Hence  the  Pharisees  erred.  They  mistook  the  dawn  of  success 
for  <he  clouds  of  a  coming  failure.  The  causes  that  led  them  to  the  error.  1.  The 
bad  habit  of  looking  only  at  the  outside  of  thicgs.  They  were  quick  to  see  a  colour 
or  a  cloth,  but  not  a  principle.  2.  Because  they  judged  results  by  what  they  wanted 
instead  of  by  what  He  wanted.     They  wanted  a  temporal  Messiah,  He  a  spiritual. 

3.  Because  they  deemed  success  a  matter  of  thirty  or  forty  years  instead  of  all  time. 

4.  They  could  not  understand  His  leaving  self  out  of  view.  The  omnipotence  ol 
love  exceeds  mere  physical  almightiness.  (W.  W.  Walker!)  The  Saviour  of  all 
but  Himself : — I.  What  they  deemed  He  could  do.  *'  Himself  He  cannot  save." 
1.  He  could.  It  was  not  in  the  power  of  man.  2.  He  could  not.  He  would  fulfil 
the  Scripture.  II.  What  they  allowed  He  could  do.  (S.  H.  Simi)son.)  When 
originally  spoken.  I.  Implied  a  critical  position.  II.  Expressed  a  mistaken  view 
■»f  rehgion.  The  men  who  saw  the  Saviour  dying  thought  exclusively  of  the 
present ;  were  more  concerned  for  pain  and  physical  deprivation  than  for  sin ; 
argued  from  self-love  to  the  salvation  of  others.  III.  Witnessed  unconsciously  to 
the  principle  of  atonement.  A  moral  necessity  compelled  Him  to  die  :  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  had  to  be  vindicated  ;  He  could  only  save  others  (in  the  deeper  sense 
of  the  word)  by  self-sacrifice.  The  great  question  with  us  all  now  should  be,  not 
'*  Conld  He  save  Himself  ?  "  or  '•  Could  He  save  others  ?  "  but,  "  Has  He  saved  us — 
has  He  enfranchised  us  from  self?"  (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.)  Self-sacrifice : — Many 
voices  from  Calvary  ;  all  significant.  I.  A  great  truth.  Truer  word  never  uttered. 
Who  meant  by  "  others  "  ?  Whoever  refeired  to,  the  words  true.  This  His  work 
day  by  day.  All  ages  shall  declare  that  this  testimony  of  enemies  was  true.  H.  A 
falsehood.  He  could  save  Himself.  Did  the  speakers  know  their  woids  were 
false  ?  III.  A  latent  truth.  Concealed  from  the  men  who  proclaimed  it.  A  power 
at  work  within  Christ  which  made  it  impossible  for  Him  to  save  Himself.  Impos- 
sibility seen  in  whatever  way  we  regard  His  death.  As  a  martyr,  example,  victim 
of  sin,  substitute  for  sin,  He  could  not  save  Himself.  Conclusion  :  The  death  ol 
Christ  a  lesson  of  self-sacrifice.  The  highest  rule  in  the  world — that  of  Christ. 
His  Spirit's  rule  who  could  not  save  Himself.  Is  the  cross  of  Chiist  such  a  powez 
ia  onr  lives  as  to  lead  us  in  daily  life  to  feel  and  to  show  that  though  we  can,  yet  w« 


656  IBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 


cannot  ?  Appesl  to  men  to  yield  themselves  to  Him  who  gave  Himself  for  them. 
(J.  M.  Blackie,  LL.B.)  He  saved  others.  Himself  He  cannot  save. — Necessity  of 
the  cross  : — These  men  only  needed  to  alter  one  letter  to  be  grandly  and  gloriously 
right.  li,  instead  of  "  cannot,"  they  had  said  "  wiU  not,"  tliey  woiJd  have  grasped 
the  very  heart  of  the  power,  and  the  very  central  brightness  of  the  glory  of  Chris- 
tianity. "  He  saved  others ;  "  and  just  because  He  saves  others,  Himself  He  will 
not,  and,  in  a  real  sense,  "  He  cannot,  save."  ...  It  was  His  own  will,  and  no  out- 
ward necessity,  that  fastened  Him  to  the  cross;  and  that  will  was  kept  steadfast  and 
immoveable  by  nothing  else  but  His  love :  He  Himself  fixed  the  iron  chain  which 
bound  Him.  He  Himself  made  the  "  cannot."  It  was  His  love  that  made  it  im- 
possible He  should  relinquish  the  task ;  therefore  His  steely  will,  like  a  strong 
spriug  constantly  working,  kept  Him  close  up  against  the  sharp  edge  of  the  knife 
that  cut  into  His  very  heart's  life.  Though  there  were  outward  powers  that  seemed 
to  knit  Him  there,  and  though  to  the  eye  of  sense  the  taunt  of  the  priests  might  be 
true,  "Himself  He  cannot  save," — the  inmost  verity  of  that  cross  is,  "No  man 
taketh  My  hfe  from  Me,  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself,  because  I  love  and  will  save  the 
world."  .  .  .  Yet  a  Divine  necessity  for  the  cross  there  was.  No  saving  of  men 
from  any  evil  can  be  effective  but  at  the  cost  of  self -sacrifice.  The  lamp  burns  oat 
in  the  very  act  of  giving  light.  So  that,  while  on  the  one  side  there  is  necessity,  on 
the  other  "there  is  free,  willing  snbmiasion.  It  was  not  high  priests,  Pilato,  soldiers, 
nails,  that  fastened  Jesus  to  the  cross.  He  was  bound  there  by  the  cords  of  love, 
and  by  the  bands  of  his  own  infinitely  merciful  purpose.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
He  saved  others.  Himself  He  cannot  save  : — I.  The  confession  made  by  the  bitterest 
enemies  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  They  had  long  tried  falsehood,  now  they  admit  tha 
truth — "  He  saved  others."  But  we  may  go  back  to  the  earlier  eras  in  proof  of 
this  assertion.  It  was  He  that  saved  Lot ;  the  Egyptians  from  bondage ;  the  peopl* 
out  of  Babylon.  He  is  able  to  save  others  to  the  uttermost  of  human  guilt,  to  the 
uttermost  of  human  life,  to  the  uttermost  of  human  time.  How  it  comes  to  pass 
that  He  who  saved  others,  could  not  save  Himself  ?  It  was  not  for  want  of  power, 
for  He  had  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth.  It  was  not  through  any  deadness  to  a 
feeling  of  pain  ;  for  his  sensibilities  were  keen.  It  was  not  from  any  ignorance  of 
the  issue.  The  answer  is,  "He  came  to  seek  and  to  save,  &e."  The  inability  to 
Bave  Himself  was  not  physical.  I.  It  arose  from  the  nature  of  the  work  he  had 
undertaken.  Without  shedding  of  blood  was  no  remission.  If  others  were  to  be 
saved  Christ  must  die.  II.  The  everlasting  purpose  of  the  Father  was  another  rea- 
son why  He  could  not  save  Himself.  III.  The  Saviour's  free  undertaking  of  the 
oflSce  of  a  Priest  and  Victim  and  Redeemer  brought  Him  into  the  condition  that 
while  He  saved  others  Himself  He  could  not  save.  He  pledged  Himself  to  go 
through  with  the  amazing  work  of  redemption,  even  though  hell  oppose.  IV.  Vhe 
glory  and  honour  of  God  made  it  the  only  alternative  that  while  He  saved  others, 
Himself  He  could  not  save.  V.  The  love  that  He  bore  to  us  is  another  reason  of 
the  truth  of  the  text.  Learn:  1.  The  inseparable  connection  that  subsists  between 
the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  and  the  salvation  of  His  people.  2.  Deduce  the  length,  height, 
depth  of  the  love  of  Jesus.  3.  What  a  fearful  and  obnoxious  thing  is  sin.  4. 
What  mast  be  the  great  theme  of  the  gospel  ministry.    (J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 

Ver.  45.  There  waa  darknesa  over  all  the  land.  —  Oood  Friday  and  its 
lessons: — A  dark  shadow  belongs  to  the  best  of  things.  I.  The  first  lesson  is 
patience  and  perseverance.  We  must  be  patient  with  others  if  they  stumble  in  the 
darkness,  if  they  do  not  at  once  find  their  way  towards  the  truth.  II.  The  dark 
nesB  of  Good  Friday  is  a  likeness  of  the  opposition  which  each  one  of  us  ought  to 
be,  and  will  be,  called  upon  to  face,  in  doing  his  duty.  III.  The  darkness  of  the 
dismal  tragedy  of  the  crucifixion  reminds  us  of  the  consoling  truth  that  failures 
are  not  perpetual  failures.  Good  Friday  was  outwardly  a  failure;  the  Easter 
mom  was  its  complete  success.      (Dean  Stanley.)  A   sermon  suggested   by 

an  eclipse  of  the  sun: — The  infidel  has  attempted  to  impngn  its  credibility.  He  has 
urged:  "WTiy  we  do  not  read  of  it  in  profane  history?  "  1.  That,  according  to  the 
evangelical  history,  the  darkness  may  not  have  extended  beyond  the  limits  of  Judea. 
If  this  be  true  it  would  not  be  observed  in  Greece,  Italy,  or  any  other  country 
beyond  Judea.  2.  The  historical  accounts  of  that  period,  especially  of  matters 
then  occurring  in  Judea,  are,  if  we  except  those  of  the  New  Testament,  very  scanty 
indeed.  8.  The  policy  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  who  were  opposed  to  Christianity, 
was  t-r  suppress  facts  that  miglit  tend  to  record  it.  4.  It  is  assuming  what  cannot 
be  proved  when  it  is  said  that  this  event  is  not  named  by  other  than  Christiaa 


CHAP.  xxvii.J  8T.  MATTHEW.  657 

writers.  Most  of  the  works  of  that  time  have  perished ;  and  Tertullian,  in  his 
•pology  for  the  Christian  religion,  addressed  to  the  magistates  of  the  empire  and  to 
the  Senate  of  Rome,  appeals  as  having  this  miraculous  darkness  preserved  in  their 
•rchives.  I.  Tins  darkness  as  indioatinq  thb  agency  which  then  predominated. 
Sin  was  then  prevailing  over  holmess.  II.  This  darkness  as  indicating  thb 
CRiMK  WHICH   WAS  THEN    PERPETRATED.      III.    This  darkness  as  indicating  thb 

BUFFERINGS   WHICH    WERE    THEN    ENDDBED.        IV.     This    daiknCSS    aS    indicating    THB 

EviiiS  WHICH  WERE  THEN  REMOVED.     V.  This  darluiess  as  indicating  the  judomentp 

tBAT  WEBB   THEM   INOUBREO.      (W.  Uncick,  D.D.) 

Ver.  46.  My  Ood,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  VLet—TJie  formh'n 
Christ: — The  desebtion  itself  is  plain.  "Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?" 
Then  He  felt  Himself  to  be  forsaken  ?  The  Divine  nature  could  not  be 
separated  from  the  human ;  He  was  eternally  God.  Nor  could  the  Father 
be  separated  from  the  Son  in  the  Divine  Godhead,  since  that  in  affection 
and  will  He  was  insolubly  one.  Nor  could  the  Father  forsake  the  Son  in  any 
sense  that  He  ceased  to  love  and  uphold  Him ;  for  at  that  moment  Christ  was 
accomplishing  that  act  of  holy  obedience  worthiest  of  the  admiration  of  Deity. 
L  There  remain  thbee  senses  in  which  it  might  be  said  that  He  was 
deserted  of  His  Father.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  might  be  said  that  He  bore  at 
that  moment  the  wrath  of  God  on  account  of  onr  sins.  How  could  the  Almighty, 
as  He  loved  His  Son,  convey  to  the  mind  of  Christ  a  sense  of  that  wrath  which  was 
not  real?  2.  In  the  sense  that  God  forbore  to  interfere  on  Christ's  behalf  to 
terminate  those  sufferings,  and  rescue  Him  from  the  hands  of  His  enemies.  But 
many  saints  have  endured  as  great  physical  sufferings  without  complaint.  3.  That 
onr  Lord  was  suffered  in  this  hour  of  anguish  to  be  left  destitute  of  the  sense  of 
His  Father's  love,  and  care,  and  protection.  There  is  a  close  connection  between 
mind  and  body ;  so  that  when  the  body  is  languishing  in  pain,  the  mind  contracts 
a  sensibility  as  keen,  and  shudders  at  the  approach  of  the  least  suffering,  which  in 
a  state  of  health  it  would  meet  unmoved.  But  there  was  far  more  than  this  in 
Christ.  The  comunications  which  God  makes  to  the  minds  of  His  people  are 
directly  from  Himself ;  this  he  is  free  to  give  or  withdraw.  I  suppose  that  on  this 
occasion  our  Saviour  had  it  withdrawn.  It  is  clear  that  however  pious,  however 
convinced  of  acceptance  with  God,  there  can  be  a  state  of  mind  in  which  a  Christian 
may  be  deprived  of  the  present  sense  of  the  Being  of  God ;  and  that  this  will  inflict 
great  miseiy.  II.  Odb  Savioob's  complaint  under  the  desertion.  Our  Lord 
made  no  complaint  of  the  nails  and  spear,  but  is  now  urged  to  lament.  1.  Consider 
the  nature  of  that  sorrow  which  our  Lord  at  this  time  experienced.  Love  is  a  great 
source  of  misery  or  happiness  ;  the  former  if  withdrawn.  If  so  in  human  objects, 
how  much  more  as  regards  Divine.  2.  The  complaint  of  these  words — "  Why  hast 
Thou  f  "  He  was  forsaken  by  His  disciples,  but  now  forsaken  by  His  best  Friend, 
and  at  a  moment  when  He  most  needs  consolation  and  help.  The  Almighty  thus 
marks  His  view  of  sin.  Christ  hung  upon  the  cross  that  we  might  never  be  for- 
saken by  God.  Every  ungodly  person  is  advancing  to  that  sentence,  "  Depart  from 
Me,"  A'C.  3.  That  God  may  desert  for  a  moment  in  the  same  sense,  and  in  that  sense 
alone,  those  whom  He  still  loves  and  npholds.  There  is  nothing  in  the  relationship 
of  a  child  of  God  to  prevent  that  experience,  and  it  may  be  a  requisite  discipline,  b" 
which  sin  is  embittered.  {B.  Noel,  M.A.)  The  Redeemer's  desertion: — L  Thb 
IMPORT  OF  the  Redeemer's  language.  1.  It  does  not  mean  that  the  Godhead  of 
Christ  was  separated  from  His  manhood,  so  that  His  humanity  alone  was  present 
on  the  cross.  2.  The  language  is  not  that  of  murmuring.  3.  It  is  not  indicative 
of  distrust.      4.   It  is  not  that  of  despair.     All  sensible  comfort  is  eclipsed.    II. 

SoatE    OF    THE    great    DESIGNS    TO    BE    EFFECTED    THEOUOH   THIS  DESERTION.      1.    The 

ptmishment  due  to  the  sins  of  the  people  was  herein  endured.  2.  The  manifestation 
of  God'a  regard  for  the  honour  of  His  law.  3.  That  He  might  be  like  unto  His 
people  in  all  things.  4.  The  brightest  pattern  of  confidence  in  God.  6.  To  enable 
Him  to  enter  upon  His  mediatorial  glory.  (J  R.  Mackenzie.)  The  despairing 
cry  of  Jesus  on  the  cross: — I.  The  surroundings  of  the  sufferer  uttering  this  wail  of 
distress.  II.  What  is  the  import  of  this  lame  tation  of  Jesus.  1.  It  is  not  the 
result  of  any  corporeal  pain  being  endured.  There  are  two  primary  causes  for  this 
cry.  (1)  In  a  manner  beyond  finite  compre  ension  God  then  withheld  from 
EUs  dying  Son,  as  the  latest  and  most  appalling  ingredient  of  His  atoning  suffer- 
ings, a  cloudless  consciousness  of  His  supporting  presence,  (2)  Track  His  public 
minlBtiy  and  He  is  never  found  murmiriug  as  to  His  Fath:r'B  absence.     la 

42 


&5«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Mm. 

lemcnstration  of  his  moral  fidelity  Daniel  went  down  into  the  den  of  lions ;  but 
God  was  with  him.  Jesus  Christ,  the  purest  character,  was  the  only  one  dying  for 
the  Father's  glory,  who  could  not  by  possibility  secure  a  consciousness  of  the 
Divine  presence  and  favour  amidst  His  pains.  2.  This  seeming  abandonment  of 
His  suffering  Son  was  the  crowning  manifestation  of  God's  wrath  against  sin. 
Christ  was  man's  representative  at  Calvary.  The  cross  at  the  ninth  hour  of  gloom 
is  the  loftiest  observatory  from  which  men  look  at  sin.  3.  The  value  at  which  God 
rates  a  human  soul  is  seen  in  this  cry,  and  the  responsibility  of  the  unsaved. 
{S.  V.  Leech,  D.D.)  Victory  in  desertion: — Thus  the  will  of  Jesus,  in  the  very 
moment  when  His  faith  seems  about  to  yield,  is  finally  triumphant.  It  has  no 
feeling  now  to  support  it,  no  beatific  vision  to  absorb  it.  It  stands  naked  in  His  soul 
and  tortured,  as  He  stood  naked  and  scourged  before  Pilate.  Pure  and  simple  and 
surrounded  by  fire,  it  declares  for  God.  The  sacrifice  ascends  in  the  cry,  "  My  God." 
The  cry  comes  not  out  of  happiness,  out  of  peace,  out  of  hope.  Not  even  out  of 
suffering  comes  that  cry.  It  was  a  cry  in  desolation,  but  it  came  out  of  faith.  It 
is  the  last  voice  of  truth,  speaking  when  it  can  but  cry.  The  divine  horror  of  that 
moment  is  unfathomable  by  human  soul.  It  was  blackness  of  darkness.  And  yet 
He  would  believe.  Yet  He  would  hold  fast.  God  was  His  God  yet.  "  My  God  " — and 
in  the  cry  came  forth  the  victory,  and  all  was  over  soon.  Of  the  peace  that 
followed  that  cry,  the  peace  of  a  perfect  soul,  large  as  the  universe,  pure  as  light, 
ardent  as  life,  victorious  for  God  and  His  brethren.  He  Himself  alone  can  ever 
know  the  breadth  and  length,  and  depth  and  height.  (G.  Macdonald,  LL.B.) 
Reasons  for  ChrisVs  desertion : — He  does  not  even  say ,"  My  Father,"  the  term 
of  endearment,  but  employs  the  sterner  word,  as  though  more  fully  to  express  the 
-lesolation  which  He  feels.  We  may  not,  however,  understand  these  words  aa 
though  they  signified  that  the  union  of  the  Godhead  and  the  Manhood  was  at  this 
time  dissolved  ;  that  could  never  be.  The  union  between  the  Father  and  the  Son 
could  never  he  severed,  though  for  a  while  the  vision  of  the  eternal  Presence  of 
God  was  removed  from  our  Lord's  human  nature.  Let  ns  try  to  discover  why  it 
was  ordaiped  that  this  terrible  desertion  should  take  place.  1.  It  was  no  doubt 
designed  in  order  to  prevent  our  supposing  that  the  indissoluble  union  of  the  God- 
head with  the  Manhood  in  our  Lord's  Person  would  interfere  with  His  suffering,  to 
the  full,  the  agony  of  death  as  Man.  It  was  for  our  sakes,  that  we  might  be 
established  in  the  true  faith  concerning  Himself.  2.  Hence  we  gather  from  it  that 
it  was  not  only  possible  for  Him  to  suffer,  but  that  He  really  did  suffer  as  none 
ever  did  before  or  since.  His  martyrs  in  their  hour  of  trial  were  strengthened  and 
refreshed  by  spiritual  consolations,  but  He  would  die  the  very  bitterest  death, 
bereft  of  all.  3.  From  our  Lord's  privation  of  all  sensible  comfort  we  may  learn 
somewhat  concerning  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  One  drop,  indeed,  of  that  precious 
Wood  would  have  been  enough  to  save  the  world  from  the  punishment  of  sin,  and 
from  its  power,  but  He  would  pay  the  full  price,  and  drink  the  cup  of  sonow  to  the 
very  dregs.  4.  In  the  abandonment  of  Christ  we  may  learn,  if  we  will,  what  out 
deserts  would  be  if  we  were  dealt  with  only  in  rigid  justice.  Ho  was  forsaken  that 
we  might  never  be  forsaken.  He  was  left  to  suffer  the  loss  of  all  consolation  in 
order  the  more  fully  to  convince  us  of  the  greatness  of  His  love.  5.  How  very 
terrible  it  must  be  to  be  deprived  for  ever  (as  the  finally  reprobate  will  be)  of  the 
presence  of  God.  {J.  E.  Vaux,  M.A  )  Comfort  not  the  measure  of  grace : — 
Take  heed  thou  thinkest  not  grace  decays  because  thy  comfort  withdraws.  .  .  . 
Did  ever  faith  triumph  more  than  in  our  Saviour  crying  thus  !  Here  faith  was  at  its 
meridian  when  it  was  midnight  in  respect  of  joy.  Possibly  thou  comest  from  an 
ordinance,  and  bringest  not  home  with  thee  those  sheaves  of  comfort  thou  used  to  do, 
and  therefore  concluded,  grace  acted  not  in  thee  as  formerly.  Truly,  if  thou  hast 
nothing  else  to  go  by,  thou  mayest  wrong  the  grace  of  God  in  thee  exceedingly  ; 
because  tliy  comfort  is  extrinsical  to  thy  duty,  a  boon  which  God  may  give  or  not, 
yea,  doth  give  to  the  weak,  and  deny  to  the  strong.  The  traveller  may  go  aa  fast, 
and  ride  as  much  ground,  when  the  sun  doth  not  shine  as  when  it  doth,  though 
indeed  he  goes  not  so  merrily  on  his  journey  ;  nay,  sometimes  he  makes  the  more 
haste  ;  the  warm  sun  makes  him  sometimes  to  lie  down  and  loiter,  but  when  dark 
and  cold  he  puts  on  with  more  speed.  Some  graces  thrive  best  (like  some  flowers) 
-in  the  shade,  such  as  humility  and  dependence  on  God.  (W.  Gumall.)  God't 
\^  comfort  may  he  withdrawn,  but  not  His  presence  : — Sometimes  God  takes  away  fronj 
a  Chriatian  His  comfort,  but  He  never  takes  away  His  sustaining  presence.  Yoo 
know  the  difference  between  sunshine  and  daylight.  A  Christian  has  God's  day- 
light in  his  Boul  when  he  may  not  have  sunlight ;  that  is,  he  has  enough  to  light 


OHAP.  xxvn.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  tfit 

him,  but  not  enough   to  cheer  and  comfort  him.     (J,   Cumming,  D.D.)        The 
true  $ense  of  this  cry  : — Two  reasons  why  Christ  chose  to  express  Himself  on  this 
occasion  in  the  language  of  David.    1.  That  the  Jews  might  call  to  mind  the  greai 
resemblance  between   His  case  and  that  of  this  illustrious  king   and   prophet. 
2.  This  psalm  was  allowed  to  belong  to  the  Messiah,  and  to    have  its  ultimate 
completion  in  Him.    I.  Consider  the  style  Christ  makes  use  of  in  addressing  Him- 
self to  God — "My  God,  My  God."     This  seems  to  denote  His  innocence,  His  choice 
of  God  for  His  God,  and  His  filial  trust  and  confidence  in  Him.     II.  In  what  sense 
was  Christ  forsaken  by  God  in  His  passion  ?     1.  Are  we  to  believe  that  God  was 
Bngry  with  His  well-beloved  Son  ?    2.  If  God  was  not  angry,  might  not  the  Son 
apprehend  that  He  was,  or  at  least  doubt  of  the  continuance  of  His  Father's  love 
to  Him  ?    III.  The  reasons  of  God's  thus  forsaking  His  beloved  Son.     1.  To  add 
the  greater  perfection  to  His  example.     2.  To  increase  the  perfection  of  His  atone- 
ment.    3.  To  contribute  to  the  perfection  of  His  priesthood.    4.  To  render  His 
triumph  the  more  glorious.     Two  reflections :    1.  How   should  this  endear  the 
Kedeemer  of  the  world  to  us,  who  was  willing  to  suffer  such  things  for  our  sakes. 
2.  This  part  of  the  history  of  our  Saviour's  passion  carries  in  it  a  great   deal  of 
instruction  and  consolation  to  His  faithful  disciples  when  they  are  in  like  circum- 
Btancea  with   Him.     {Henry  Grove.)        The  Hebrew  term,  ^* Forsaken"  : — In  the 
Hebrew  way  of  speaking,  God  is  said  to  leave  or  forsake  any  person  when  He  suffers 
him  to  fall  into  great  calamities,  and  to  lie  under  great  miseries,  and  does  not  help 
him  out  of  them ;  and  therefore  Zion,  being  long  afflicted,  is  brought  in  by  the  Prophet 
Isaiah  (ch.  Ixix.  14)  thus  complaining :  "  The  Lord  has  forsaken  me,  the  Lord  has  for- 
gotten me. "    And  the  psalmist,  as  he  is  frequent  in  this  complaint,  so  does  he  mani- 
festly explain  himself  in  the  words  following  the  complaint  of  his  being  forsaken : 
*'  Why  art  Thou  far  from  helping  me,  and  from  the  words  of  my  roaring?  "  {Whitby.) 
Christ  forsaken  : — I.  That  Christ,  being  in  extremity,  was  forsaken.     II.  Being 
forsaken.  He  was  very  sensible  of  it,  and  from  sensibleness  complains,  pouring  out 
His  soul  into  the  bosom  of  the  Father.     III.  He  not  only  complains,  but  believes 
certainly  that  His  Father  will  help  Him.     IV.  And  to  strengthen  His  faith  the 
more,  He  puts  it  forth  in  prayer,  the  fire  of  faith  in  His  heart  kindled  into  a  flame 
of    prayer.     (R.  Sibbs.)         The  forsaking  itself: — I.  In  what  sense  was  Christ 
forsaken  1    II.  In  what  parts  He  was  forsaken.     III.  Upon  what  ground  He  was 
forsaken.     And  IV.  To  what  end  all  this  forsaking  of  Christ  was.     Christ  was 
forsaken  in  regard  of  His  present  comfort  and  joy,  and  He  positively  felt  the 
wrath  and  fury  of  the  Almighty,  whose  just  displeasure  seized  upon  His  soul  for 
sin,   at  our  surety.      {Ibid.)         A    true  human  experience: — Without   this  last 
trial  of  all,  the  temptations  of  our  Master  had  not  been  so  full  as  the  human  cup 
could  hold ;  there  would  have  been  one  region  through  which  we  had  to  pass 
wherein  we  might  call  aloud  upon  our  Captain-Brother,  and  there  would  be  no 
voice  or  hearing  :  He  had  avoided  the  fatal  spot.     {George  Macdonald.)        God 
withdrawn  : — This  is  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God.     God  withdrew,  as  it  were,  that 
the  perfect  will  of  the  Son  might  arise  and  go  forth  to  find  the  will  of  the  Father. 
{Ibid.)         The  cry    a    model    cry : — Troubled  soul,   will   thou  His  will.      Say 
tc  Him,  "  My  God,  I  am  very  dull,  and  low,  and  hard ;    but  Thou   art   wise. 
and  high,  and  tender,  and  Thou  art  my  God.     I  am  Thy  child,  forsake  me  not." 
Then  fold  the  arms  of  thy  faith,   and  wait  in  quietness  until  light  goes  up  in  thy 
darknsss.     Fold  the  arms  of  thy  faith,  I  say,  but  not  of  thy  action.    Bethink  thee 
of  something  that  thou  oughtest  to  do,  and  go  and  do  it,  if  it  be  but  the  sweeping 
of  a  room,  or  the  preparing  of  a  meal,  or  a  visit  to  a  friend.    Heed  not  Thy 
feelings.    Do  thy  work.     {Ibid.)        Significance  of  small  cries: — The  pennant 
at  the  mast-head  is  a   small  thing,  yet  it   shows  plainly  which  way  the  wind 
blows.     A  cloud  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand  is  a  small  thiiag,  yet  it  may  show  the 
approach  of  a  mighty  storm.     The  swallow  is  a  little  bird,  and  yet  it  shows  that 
summer  is  come.     So  is  it  with  man.     A  look,  a  sigh,  a  half-uttered  word,  a  broken 
sentence,  may  show  more  of  what  is  passing  within  than  a  long  speech.     So  it 
was  with  the  dying  Saviour.     These  few  troubled  words  tell  more  than  volumes  of 
divinity.     {R.  HI.   McCheyne.)        The  Eloi : — I.  The  completeness    of    Christ'i 
obedience.      1.  Words  of    obedience.      2.  Words   of    faith.      3.  Words  of    love. 
II.  The  infinity  of  Christ's  sufferings.     1.  He  suffered  much  from  His  enemies. 
(a)  He  suffered  in  all  parts  of  His  body  ;  {b)  He  suffered  in  all  His  offices  ;  (c)  He 
Buffered  from  all  sorts  of  men;  {d)  He  suffered  much  from  the  devil.    2.  He 
saffered  much  from  those  be  afterwards  saved.     3.  From  His  own  disdples. 
4.  From  His  Father.    Three  things  show  the  infinity  of  His  sufferings.    1.  Who 


060  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxm. 


It  was  that  forsook  Him.  2.  Who  it  was  that  was  forsaken.  3.  What  God  did  to 
Him— forsook  Him.  III.  Answer  the  Saviour's  "  Why ?  "  Because  He  wftp  the  surety 
of  sinners,  and  stood  in  their  room.  1.  He  had  agreed  with  His  Father,  before  all 
worlds,  to  stand  and  suffer  in  the  place  of  siunera.  2.  He  set  His  face  to  it. 
3.  He  knew  that  either  He  or  the  whole  world  must  suffer.  (Ibid.)  The 
desertion : — I.  These  words  do  not  imply,  on  the  part  of  the  Father,  an  entire 
and  perpetual  abandonment  of  His  Son.  H.  These  words  do  not  imply,  on 
the  part  of  the  Son,  any  discontent  or  rebellion  against  His  Father.  (A. 
L.  R.  Foote.)  God  forsakes  only  for  sin : — I  venture  to  lay  down  this  as  a 
fundamental  principle — an  axiom,  it  may  almost  be  called — that  God  never 
forsakes  any  one  but  for  one  cause,  and  that  cause,  sin.  He  must  have  seen 
sin  in  Christ,  or  on  Him.  He  must  have  seen  real  or  imputed  sin  to  warrant 
His  acting  towards  Him  as  He  did.  There  is  no  way  of  accounting  for  the 
sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God — from  His  incarnation  to  Hia  death,  from  the 
manger  to  the  grave,  from  His  cradle  to  His  cross — but  on  the  supposition  of  His 
being,  in  the  eye  of  justice  and  the  law,  a  sinuer,  the  sin-bearer,  the  sinner's 
substitute.  Except  on  the  grand  principle  of  an  atonement,  all  this  is  unaccount- 
able. (Ihid.)  Chi-ist  our  surety  : — Christ  took  not  the  desert  of  punishment 
upon  Him  (from  any  fault  in  Himself),  He  took  whatsoever  was  penal  upon 
Him,  but  not  culpable.  As  He  was  our  surety,  so  He  everyway  discharged  oar 
debt,  being  bound  over  to  all  judgments  and  punishments  for  us.  {R.  Sibbs.\ 
I.  What  was  Chbist's  desertion?  I  shall  for  more  distinctness,  handle  it 
negatively  and  affirmatively.  First — Negatively.  1.  It  was  not  a  desertion  in 
appearance  and  conceit  only,  but  real.  We  often  mistake  God's  dispensations,  God 
may  be  out  of  sight  and  yet  we  not  out  of  mind.  When  the  dam  ifl  abroad  foi 
meat  the  young  brood  in  the  nest  is  not  forsaken.  The  children  cry  as  if  the  mothei 
were  totally  gone  when  she  is  employed  about  necessary  business  for  their  welfare 
(Isa.  xlix.  14,  15).  So  we  think  that  we  are  cut  off  when  God  is  about  to  help  and 
deliver  us  (Psa.  xxxi.  22).  Surely  when  our  affections  towards  God  are  seen  by 
mourning  for  His  absence,  He  is  not  wholly  gone  ;  His  room  is  kept  warm  for  Him 
tUl  He  come  again.  We  mistake  God's  dispensations  when  we  judge  that  a  for. 
Baking  which  is  but  an  emptying  us  of  all  carnal  dependence  (Psa.  xciv.  18,  19) 
He  is  near  many  times  when  we  think  Him  afar  off ;  as  Christ  was  to  His  disciples 
when  their  eyes  were  withheld  that  they  knew  Him  not,  but  thought  Him  yet  lying 
in  the  grave  (St.  Luke  xxiv.  16).  But  this  cannot  be  imagined  of  Christ,  who 
pould  not  be  mistaken.  If  He  complained  of  desertion,  surely  He  felt  it.  U. 
Though  it  were  real,  the  desertion  must  bb  understood  so  as  may  btanu 
WITH  the  dignitv  OF  Hi8  PERSON  AND  OFFICE.  Therefore — (1)  There  was  no 
separation  of  the  Father  from  the  Son ;  this  would  make  a  change  in  the  unity  of 
the  Divine  essence  (St.  John  x.  30).  This  eternal  union  of  the  Father  and  Son 
always  remained.  (2)  There  was  no  dissolution  of  the  union  of  the  two  naturec  in 
the  person  of  Christ,  for  the  human  nature  which  was  once  assumed  was  never  after 
dismissed  or  laid  aside.  III.  The  love  of  God  to  Him  ceased  not.  We  read  (St. 
John  iii.  85).  IV.  His  personal  holiness  was  not  abated  or  lessened.  The  Lord 
Jesus  was  "full  of  grace  and  truth  "  (St.  John  i.  4).  Neither  His  nature  nor  His 
office  could  permit  an  abatement  of  holiness  (Heb.  vii.  26).  The  Son  of  God  might 
fall  into  misery,  which  is  a  natural  evil,  and  so  become  the  object  of  pity,  not  of 
blame ;  but  not  into  sin,  which  is  a  moral  evil,  a  blot  and  a  blemish.  V.  God's 
assistance  and  sustaining  grace  was  not  wnolly  withdrawn,  for  the  Lord  eaithof 
Him  (Isa.  xlii.  1).  The  power,  presence,  and  providence  of  God  was  ever  with 
Him,  to  sustain  Him  in  His  difficult  enterprise.     Secondly — Positively.     1.  God's 

desertion  of  us  or  ant  CREATURE  MAY  BE  UNDERSTOOD  WITH  A  RESPECT  TO  Hl8 

COMMUNICATING  HiMSELF  TO  US.  We  have  a  twofold  apprehension  of  God — as  a 
holy  and  happy  being :  and  when  He  doth  communicate  Himself  to  any  reasonable 
creature  it  is  either  in  a  way  of  holiness  or  in  a  way  of  happiness.  These  two  have 
such  a  respect  to  one  another,  that  He  never  gives  felicity  and  glory  without 
holiness  (Heb.  xii.  14).  And  a  holy  creature  can  never  be  utterly  and  finally 
miserable.  He  may  sometimes  give  holiness  without  happiness,  as  when  for  a  while 
He  leaveth  the  sanctified  whom  He  will  try  and  exercise  under  the  cross — or  in  a 
state  of  sorrow  and  affliction.  Now  apply  this  to  Christ.  It  is  blasphemy  to  say 
that  Christ  lost  any  degree  of  His  holiness,  for  He  was  always  pure  and  holy,  and 
that  most  perfectly  and  exactly.  Therefore  He  was  deserted  only  as  to  His  felicity, 
and  that  fcct  for  a  short  time.    2.  The  felicity  of  Christ  may  bb  coKSiDEiueD 

BITBEB  AS  TO   HiS   OUTWASD   AND   BODILY   ESTATE;,    OB   ELBB   TO    HiS   INWABD    MaN   01 


CHAP,  xxvu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  6€1 

THE  ESTATE  OF  His  souii.  (1)  Some  Bay  His  desertion  was  nothing  else  but  Hia 
being  left  to  the  will  and  power  of  His  enemies  to  crucify  Him,  and  that  He  was 
then  deserted  when  His  Divine  nature  suspended  the  exercise  of  His  omnipotency 
80  far  as  to  deliver  up  His  body  to  a  reproachful  death,  (a)  Why  should  Christ 
complain  of  that  so  bitterly,  which  He  did  so  readily  and  willingly  undergo,  and 
might  so  easily  have  prevented,  (b)  If  we  look  merely  to  bodily  pains  and  sufferings 
certainly  others  have  endured  as  much  if  not  more  ;  as  the  thieves  that  were  crucified 
with  Him  lived  longer  in  their  torments,  and  the  good  thief  did  not  complain  that 
he  was  forsaken  of  God.  (c)  It  would  follow  that  every  holy  man  that  is  persecuted 
and  left  to  the  will  of  his  enemies,  might  be  said  to  be  forsaken  of  God,  which  ia 
contrary  to  Paul's  holy  boasting  (2  Cor.  iv.  9).  (d)  This  desertion  was  a  punish- 
ment  one  part  or  degree  of  the  abasement  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  so  belongeth  to 
the  whole  nature  that  was  to  be  abased,  not  only  to  His  body,  but  His  soul  (Isa.  liii. 
10).  (2)  As  to  the  felicity  of  His  inward  estate,  the  state  of  His  soul.  Christ  carried 
about  His  heaven  with  Him,  and  never  wanted  sensible  consolation,  spiritual 
suavity,  the  comfortable  effects  of  the  Divine  presence,  till  now  they  were  withdrawn 
that  He  might  be  capable  of  suffering  the  whole  punishments  of  sins.  1.  I  will  show 
how  this  sort  of  desertion  is — Possible.  The  union  of  the  two  natures  remaining ; 
for  us  the  Divine  nature  gave  up  the  body  to  death,  so  tbe  soul  to  desertion.  Christ, 
as  God,  is  the  fountain  of  life  (Psa.  xxxvi.  9).  And  yet  Christ  could  die.  Tha 
Divinity  remained  united  to  the  flesh,  and  yet  the  flesh  might  die ;  so  it  remained 
united  to  the  soul,  and  yet  the  soul  might  want  comfort.  There  is  a  partial,  tem- 
poral desertion,  when  God  for  a  moment  hideth  His  face  from  His  people  (Isa.  liv. 
7).  This  is  so  far  from  being  contrary  to  the  dignity  of  Christ's  nature  that  it  ia 
necessary  to  His  oflice  for  many  reasons.  2.  That  it  is  grievous.  This  was  an 
incomparable  loss  to  Christ.  (1)  Partly  because  it  was  more  natural  to  Him  to  enjoy 
that  comfort  and  solace  than  it  can  be  to  any  creature.  To  put  out  a  candle  is  no 
great  matter,  but  to  have  the  sun  eclipsed,  which  is  the  fountain  of  light,  that  seta 
the  world  a  wondering.  (2)  Partly  because  He  had  more  to  lose  than  we  have.  The 
greater  the  enjoyment,  the  greater  the  loss  or  waufc.  We  lose  drops.  He  an  ocean. 
(3)  Partly  because  he  knew  how  to  value  the  comfort  of  the  union,  having  a  pure 
understanding  and  heavenly  affections.  God's  children  count  one  day  in  His 
presence  better  than  a  thousand  (Psa,  Ixxxiv.  10).  One  glimpse  of  His  love  more 
than  all  the  world  (Psa.  iv.  7).  (4)  Partly  because  He  had  so  near  an  interest  and 
relation  to  God  (Prov.  viii.  30).  (5]  Partly  from  the  nature  of  Christ's  desertion. 
It  was  penal.  There  was  nothing  m  Christ's  person  to  occasion  a  desertion,  but 
much  in  His  office ;  so  He  was  to  give  body  for  body  and  soul  for  soul.  And 
this  was  a  part  of  the  satisfaction.  He  was  beloved  as  a  son,  forsaken  as  our 
Mediator  and  Surety.  Why  was  Christ  forsaken  ?  Answer.  With  respect  to  the 
office  which  He  had  taken  upon  Himself.  This  desertion  of  Christ  carrieth  a 
suitableness  and  respect  to  our  sin,  our  punishment,  and  our  blessedness.  1.  Our 
sin.  Christ  is  forsaken  to  satisfy  and  make  amends  for  our  wilful  desertion  of  God 
(Jer.  ii.  13) .  No w  we  that  forsook  God  deserved  to  be  forsaken  by  God,  therefore  what 
we  had  merited  by  our  sins,  Christ  endured  as  our  Mediator.  It  is  strange  to  consider 
what  small  things  draw  us  off  from  God.  This  is  the  first  degeneracy  and  disease  of 
mankind  that  a  trifle  will  prompt  us  to  forsake  God,  as  a  little  thing  will  make  a 
stone  run  down  hill ;  it  is  its  natural  motion.  2.  It  canies  a  full  respect  to  the 
punishment  appointed  for  sin  (Gal.  iii.  13).  It  is  true  the  accidentals  of  punish- 
ment Christ  suffered  not.  As — (1)  To  the  place.  He  was  not  in  hell.  It  was  not 
necessary  that  Christ  should  descend  to  the  hell  of  the  damned.  One  that  is  bound 
as  a  surety  for  another,  needs  not  go  into  prison  provided  that  he  pay  the  debts. 
(2)  For  the  time  of  continuance.  The  damned  must  bear  the  wrath  of  God  to  all 
eternity,  because  they  can  never  satisfy  the  justice  of  God.  Therefore  they  must  lie 
by  it  world  without  end.  Christ  hath  made  an  infinite  satisfaction  in  a  finite  time. 
He  bote  the  wrath  of  God  in  a  few  hours,  which  would  overwhelm  the  creature. 
Christ  did  not  bear  the  eternity  of  wrath,  but  only  the  extremity  of  it ;  intensive, 
not  extensive.  The  eternity  of  the  punishment  ariseth  from  the  weakness  of 
the  creature,  who  cannot  overcome  this  evil  and  get  out  of  it.  (3)  There  ii 
another  thing  unavoidably  attending  the  pains  of  the  second  death  in  reprobates, 
and  that  is  desperation,  an  utter  hopelessness  of  any  good  (Heb.  x.  27).  3.  With 
respect  to  our  blessedness,  which  is  to  Uve  with  God  for  ever  in  heaven.  Christ  wag 
forsaken  that  there  might  be  no  longer  any  separation  between  us  and  God.  Appli- 
cation :  1.  How  different  are  they  from  the  Spirit  of  Christ  that  can  brook  God's 
abienoe  without  any  remorse  or  complaint  ?    2.  It  informeth  us  of  the  gnevousnesa 


%n  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxnt 

if  sin.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  reconcile  Binners  to  God,  it  cost  Christ  a  life  of 
borrows,  and  afterwards  a  painful  and  accursed  death,  and  in  that  death,  loss  (A 
actual  comfort,  and  an  amazing  sense  of  the  wrath  of  God.  3.  The  greatness  of 
our  obligation  to  Christ,  who  omitted  no  kind  of  sufferings  which  might  conduce  to 
the  expiation  of  sin,  4.  The  infiniteness  of  God's  mercy,  who  appointed  such  a 
degree  of  Christ's  sufferings — as  in  it  He  gives  us  the  greatest  ground  of  hope  to 
invite  us  the  more  to  submit  to  His  terms.     {T.  Mantoii.) 

Ver.  48-49.  And  gave  Him  to  drink. — The  relenting  erucifier : — No  ill  motive 
could  have  prompted  this  relief  of  thirst.  I.  The  relenting  crucifier  may  have  wished 
TO  CONCEAL  HIS  INTEREST  IN  CnRiST.  It  is  uot  uucommon  for  those  who  are  really 
convinced  upon  the  subject  of  religion  to  use  arts  to  conceal  their  feelings.  Or  the 
man  may  only  have  acted  a  prudent  part :  He  concealed  his  interest  for  safety, 
while  he  gave  Him  a  proof  of  his  compassion.  II.  The  relenting  crucifier  may 
have  been  a  sincere  inquirer.  Learn:  1.  Christ  on  the  cross  for  our  sins  is  re- 
duced  to  such  extremity  that  the  most  common  act  of  humanity  is  grateful  to 
Him.  3.  Christ  will  one  day  behold  each  of  us  in  the  same  need  of  compassion 
and  help  in  which  we  have  now  contemplated  Him.  (iV.  Adams,  D.D.)  Mistaken 
teachers : — The  cavelling  Jewish  teachers  aptly  illustrate  the  attitude  of  many 
modern  critics  of  Christ  and  Christianity.  1.  They  are  alike  mistaken  in  the 
nature  and  meaning  of  the  supernatural  in  connection  with  revelation,  as,  in  their 
views  of  prophecy,  miracles  and  providence.  2.  They  are  alike  mistaken  as  to  the 
methods  of  securing  truth.  "  Let  be,  let  us  see,"  &c.  3.  They  are  alike  mistaken 
in  waiting  for  other  signs,  when  the  most  stupendous  sign  of  the  centuries  ia 
hanging  before  them.  4.  "They  alike  make  their  greatest  mistake  in  substituting 
eye  for  heart,  experiment  for  faith,  the  intellectual  for  the  spiritual.  Lessons : 
These  mistakes,  in  all  ages,  lead  to  the  same  results,  viz. :  1.  To  increased  blind- 
ness of  spiritual  vision.  2.  To  an  increased  opposition  to  Christ  in  feeling  and 
desire.  3.  To  an  increased  diCQculty  in  coming  to  the  truth  as  revealed  in  the 
gospel.  4.  To  an  increased  guilt.  Inference  :  If  men  would  avoid  these  unhappy 
outcomes,  they  must  avoid  the  mistakes  leading  thereto.     {J,  M.  Allis.) 

Vers.  50-53.  Jesus,  when  He  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the 
Ghost. — Seven  wonders : — There  were  seven  wonders  which  made  the  death  of 
Christ  exceedingly  remarkable.  L  Over  His  head  was  written  an  inscription  in 
Hebrew,  and  Greek,  and  Latin,  "Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  That 
there  should  be  a^distinct  recognition  of  His  kingfihip  over  the  Jewish  people  has 
ever  been  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable  splendours  of  the  Saviour's 
death.  Typical  of  His  sovereignty  over  the  entire  Church,  which  is  but  the  pre- 
lude to  His  sovereignty  over  all  worlds.  Is  He  King  in  your  heart?  II.  The 
conversion  of  the  thief  (Luke  xxiii.).  See  here  the  majesty  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour, 
even  in  His  misery  as  an  atonement.  What  the  thief  saw  about  Christ  let  us  all 
endeavour  to  see — His  almighty  power  to  save.  God  hath  laid  help  upon  One  that 
is  mighty.  Trust  Him  only  and  fully.  III.  The  total  darkness  at  noon-day 
made  a  fitting  cavern  into  which  Christ  might  retire.  A  picture  of  Christ's 
tremendous  power.  Tour  darkness  is  never  so  black  as  His.  IV.  The  rending  of 
the  veil.  An  eminent  type  of  the  departure  of  God  from  the  symbolical  dispensa- 
tion. It  was  all  over  now.  Now  there  was  no  veil  between  man  and  God.  The 
dying  Saviour  rends  away  for  ever  every  impediment  which  shuts  us  out  from 
the  Most  High.  V.  The  earthquake.  Here  we  see  Christ's  lordship  over  the 
world.  The  Lord  of  Providence.  VI.  The  resurrection  of  certain  of  the  saints. 
How  I  should  like  to  know  something  about  them  I  They  were  representative 
men;  they  arose  as  specimens  of  the  way  in  which  all  the  saints  shall  in  their  due 
time  arise.  VII.  The  confession  of  the  centurion.  A  picture  of  Christ's  con- 
vincing power.  I  hope  we  have  felt  this  convincing  power — it  lies  in  the  doc- 
trine of  the  cross.  The  unrecorded  wonder  connected  with  the  cross  of  Christ 
ia  that  when  we  hear  of  it  our  hearts  do  not  break,  and  that  our  dead  soula 
do  not  rise.  (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  Prodigies  attending  the  Crucifixion  : — ^I. 
Thb  great  event  of  the  Saviour's  death.  1.  That  this  great  event  did 
take  place  we  have  abundant  testimony — (1)  Profane  testimony.  (2)  The  testi- 
mony of  the  early  Christians.  (3)  The  testimony  of  the  inspired  writers.  2. 
The  design  of  His  death.  (1)  To  atone  for  the  world  (2  Cor.  v.  18,  19  ;  Heb.  x. 
12 ;  John  i.  29-36 ;  Heb.  vii,  27).  (2)  To  procure  for  the  guilty,  pardon  of  ain 
(Heb.  ii.  22 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  28 ;  Rom.  iii.  25).     Withheld  from  the  unforgiving,  th« 


CHAP,  xxvii.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  668 

nnbelieving,  the  impenitent  (Matt.  xi.  26  ;  John  vii.  21,  2i  ;  Luke  xiii.  2-5).  (3) 
To  procure  the  Holy  Ghost  to  quicken  dead  sinners,  (fee.  (4)  To  exhibit  to  the 
world  the  amazing  love  of  God.  II.  The  kmblematical  and  awfdl  prodigies 
THAT  ATTENDED  THAT  EVENT.  Christ  had  been  charged  as  an  imposter;  how 
important  that  this  testimony  should  be  borne  just  at  this  time  1  1.  The 
darkness.  Dionysius,  a  heathen,  who  observed  the  darkness,  declared  that  it 
portended  something  extraordinary,  and  exclaimed,  "  Either  nature  is  deploring, 
or  the  God  of  nature  suffers."  2.  "The  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent."  Signifies: 
The  abolition  of  the  Jewish  economy ;  that  the  mysteries  of  that  dispensation 
were  now  explained ;  that  the  way  of  access  to  God  was  open  to  all  believers.  3. 
•'The  earth  did  quake."  The  shaking  of  the  moral  world  then,  since,  now,  &c. 
4.  "  The  rocks  rent."  Emblems  of  the  hard  hearts  that  should  be  broken  by  Christ's 
death.  5.  "  Graves  were  opened,"  Ac.  Signifying  that  the  dead  in  sin  should  be 
raised  to  a  life  of  righteousness ;  that  Christ  had  won  a  victory  over  death  ;  that 
the  saints  of  the  early  ages  had  an  interest  in  the  work  of  Christ ;  that  there  shall 
be  a  general  resurrection  of  the  dead.  III.  The  claims  it  has  upon  os.  1.  It 
claims  our  attention.  2.  Our  faith.  3.  Our  affections.  4.  Our  zeal.  {A.Weston.) 
E^ectt  of  the  death  of  Christ : — I.  The  ciboumstances  attendant  on  the  Saviour's 
death  claim  our  attention  and  they  attest  His  Divine  character.  "  The  earth  did 
quake."  The  death  of  Christ  shook  the  moral  world  and  shakes  it  stiU.  "  The  rocks 
rent."  Emblems  of  the  hard  flinty  hearts  that  should  be  subdued  by  the  power  of 
Christ's  death.  *'  Graves  were  opened,"  as  if  to  denote  that  the  hidden  things  of 
darkness  should  be  revealed.  II.  The  manneb  in  which  these  stbikinq  events 
BHODLD  influence  D8.  1.  They  should  confirm  us  n  the  dignity  of  His  character. 
We  should  reflect  upon  the  power  of  His  death.  3.  We  should  search  for  these 
effects  upon  ourselves.  (Dr.  Cope.)  I.  The  fact  of  the  Saviour's  death.  1. 
Christ  died  according  to  the  appointment  of  the  Divine  coimsels.  2.  This  design 
of  God  was  announced  in  prophecy.  3.  The  particular  manner  of  our  Lord's 
death.  II.  The  signification  of  those  awful  pbodiqies  by  which  His  death  was 
ATTENDED.  1.  Of  the  whole  of  them.  So  many  testimonies  to  the  Messiahship  of 
Jesus,  and  approbations  of  His  work.  1.  "The  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent" — (1) 
That  the  ceremonial  arrangements  of  the  Jewish  economy  were  about  to  be 
abolished  ;  (2)  That  the  way  of  access  is  opened  to  all  behevers  in  God ;  (3)  That 
the  mysteries  peculiar  to  the  Mosaic  economy  were  now  displayed  and  explained. 
2.  •'  The  earth  did  quake."  (1)  Another  emblem  of  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish 
system.  (2)  How  God  expressed  His  wrath  at  the  scenes  now  transacting.  3. 
"  The  graves  were  opened."  (1)  It  showed  that  Christ  achieved  a  victory  over 
death.  (2)  That  the  saints  of  the  early  ages  had  an  interest  in  the  work  of  the 
Redeemer.     (3)   That  there  should  be  a  general  resurrection  of  the  dead.     HI. 

The   INFLUENCE   WHICH   THE  DEATH   OF    ChBIST  AND  ITS   PBODIOIES  OUGHT  TO  POSSESS 

OVEB  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  1.  Frequent  contemplation  on  His  death.  2,  Pungent 
sorrow  for  the  cause  which  produced  His  death.  3.  Cordial  faith  in  His  merits. 
4.  Grateful  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the  scenes  which  have  been  unfolded.  (J. 
Parsons.)  Miracles  of  Calvary  : — I.  Miracle  evinced  itself  in  the  great  victim  of 
Calvary.  In  the  voluntary  surrender  of  His  Ufe.  Christ  had  power  over  His  own 
life ;  and,  not  depending  on  the  operation  of  nature's  laws.  He  could  dismias  the 
spirit,  or  retain  it  at  His  pleasure.  II.  Miracle  as  it  evinced  itself  in  the  circum- 
stances attending  the  crucifixion.  (1)  The  miraculous  facts,  darkness,  earthquake, 
rent  veil,  graves  burst  open.  (2)  The  design  of  this  miraculous  interposition,  (a) 
These  miracles  constituted  a  Divine  attestation  to  the  Messiah,  even  in  the  hour  of 
forsaking  and  death.  (5)  The  prodigies  of  Calvary  served  to  betoken  the  more 
dread  conflict  and  terrifying  darkness  of  the  Saviour's  soul  in  the  hour  of  atone- 
ment, (c)  In  the  rending  of  the  veil  we  are  taught  that  the  Mosaic  institutions 
were  henceforth  to  be  superseded,  the  objects  which  they  symbolized  being  now 
accomplished,  (d)  We  see  in  these  miracles  the  trophies  and  the  earnest  of  the 
Redeemer's  triumphs.  (John  Ely.)  Yielding  up  the  Ghost : — It  does  not  appear 
that  the  special  agonies  which  the  Saviour's  mental  sufferings  created  produced 
death  prematurely ;  for  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  paroxysm  producing 
convulsion,  nor  does  death  appear  to  have  been  the  effect  of  mere  exhaustion :  the 
oalna  which  succeeded  the  sufferer's  exclamation  under  Divine  forsakings  forbids  the 
former  conclusion;  the  vigour  of  His  dying  shout  forbids  the  latter.  (Ibid.) 
Seasons  for  these  miracles: — In  respect  of — 1,  The  Sufferer  dying.  2.  The  creatures 
obeying.  3.  The  Jews  persecuting.  4.  The  women  beholing.  5.  The  disciples 
forsaking.     (Thos.  Adams.)        Divirie  testimonial  to  Jesus: — I.    The  dream  of 


664  IRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrm. 

Pilate's  wife.  II.  The  darlmess  of  the  slvy.  III.  The  rending  of  the  veil  cf  th« 
temple.  IV.  The  earthquake  at  Calvary.  V.  The  rising  of  the  dead.  {N. 
Lardner.)  The  mysterious  resurrections  : — I.  The  place  where  this  resurrection 
happened.  II.  Who  were  rnised.  III.  The  time  when  they  were  raised.  IV.  To 
whom  they  appeared.  V.  Whether  they  soon  after  ascended  up  to  heaven,  or  died 
again.  VL  The  truth  of  this  history.  VII.  The  use  of  this  extraordinary  event. 
Beflections :  1.  We  may  perceive  a  great  agreement  between  the  life  and  the  death 
of  JesuB.  2.  It  cannot  but  be  pleasing  to  observe  the  mildness  of  all  the  wonderful 
works  performed  by  Christ  and  done  in  His  favour.  (3)  The  testimonials  given  to 
Jesus  should  induce  us  to  show  Him  all  honour  and  reverence.  4.  Let  these  medi 
tations  inspire  us  with  courage  and  resolution  in  the  profession  of  His  name.  (Ibid.) 

Ver.  51.  And,  behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain. — The  rent  veil: — 

1.  The  event  as  literally  recorded.  II.  The  event  in  its  spiritual  significancy. 
What  did  the  veil  represent?  The  human  nature  of  Christ,  which  was  now 
Buffering  for  sin.  The  veil  of  sin  which  separated  between  God  and  us.  The 
abolition  of  Jewish  ordinances.  The  removal  of  all  distinctions  between  the 
Jewish  and  Gentile  nations.  III.  The  effects  it  should  produce  upon  us.  Revereace 
for  the  person  and  work  of  Christ.  Confidence  in  His  offering.  How  to  present 
all  our  services  to  God.  The  necessity  of  the  veil  of  sin  being  removed  from  our 
hearts.  That  the  veil  of  our  mortal  flesh  must  be  rent  before  we  can  enter  tts 
hoUest  of  all.  {J.  Burru,  D.D.)  The  rent  veil: — I.  The  intimations  conveyed 
thereby.  1.  That  the  ceremonial  dispensation  was  now  abolished.  Into  the  holy 
place  none  were  permitted  to  enter  but  the  high  priest  alone,  and  he  but  once  a 
year,  and  only  then  with  the  blood  of  the  annual  atonement.  But  now  it  is  exposed 
to  public  view.  The  design  of  its  institution  having  been  accomplished,  God  Him- 
BeM  has  thrown  it  open,  thereby  intimating  that  it  is  of  no  further  use,  but  that 
another  way  of  propitiating  Him  is  established.  2.  That  the  barrier  between  Jew 
and  Gentile  is  thrown  down.  The  offerings  presented  in  the  holy  place  were  for  the 
Jewish  people  only.  But  now  an  atonement  has  been  made  for  the  whole  world. 
3.  That  the  way  to  the  holiest  of  all  is  opened.  The  way  into  the  holy  place  was 
with  the  blood  and  incense;  the  way  to  heaven  is  through  the  blood  and  inter- 
cession  of  Christ,  who  has  not  only  abolished  separation,  but  brought  life  and, 
immortality  to  light.  The  mists  which  hung  over  the  future  have  been  dissipated 
by  the  rising  of  the  sun  of  righteousness,  who  has  shed  life,  fertility,  and  beauty  over 
the  entire  prospect.  II.  The  encouragement  afforded  thereby.  In  the  rending  of  the 
veil  we  have  exhibited — 1.  The  gracious  designs  of  God  concerning  us.  He  would  have 
US  no  longer  to  be  on  the  outside  of  the  temple,  "  far  off  "  from  Him.  He  would 
have  U8  freed  from  all  the  evils  of  separation ;  He  would  have  us  enjoy  all  the 
pleasures  that  are  at  His  right  hand  for  evermore.     This  event  ought  to  teach  us — 

2.  Frequently  to  approach  within  the  veil.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  our 
approach  ;  we  are  not  confined  to  stated  periods ;  the  more  frequently  we  come  the 
more  welcome  we  shall  be.  3.  Let  us  place  all  our  confidence  within  the  veil.  Let 
us  have  the  anchor  of  our  hope  there,  sure  and  steadfast ;  thither  the  Forerunner 
has  entered.      [Pulpit  Outlines.)         The  rending  of  the  veil : — I.  As  a  miraclb 

ATTESTING   THE   DiVINITY   OF     THE   LoRD    JeSUS    ChBIST.        II.   As  A    SYMBOL   OF   THE 

POTTING  AWAY  OF  THE  Levitical  DISPENSATION.  1.  There  Were  many  things  about 
this  veil  which  made  it  a  very  exquisite  and  beautiful  type  of  the  religion  then 
existing.  It  was  beautiful  for  appearance.  Was  there  ever  a  system  of  worship 
that  was  more  beautiful,  more  awe-inspiring,  or  more  touching  ?  On  the  outside  of 
the  veil  there  were  pictured  the  things  which  really  existed  inside.  2.  While  the  veil 
was  very  suggestive  it  was  yet  very  obscure — it  was  one  through  which  the  glory 
f  trcaraed,  and  which,  by  and  by,  was  to  be  broken  down.  This  rending  of  the  veil 
was,  on  the  part  of  God,  the  glorious  "  Amen  "  which  the  Father  gave  to  the  lite  of 
Christ.  III.  As  setting  forth  some  of  the  great  objects  and  results  of  thh 
ATONEMENT.  1.  It  Set  forth  the  body  of  Christ,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  tells  us.  2.  It 
gave  men  the  truth  about  the  old  Levitical  dispensation.  It  finished  it,  but  did  not 
abrogate  it.  3.  It  is  through  the  rent  veil  that  a  way  was  opened  into  the  holy  of 
holies.  You  can  only  get  to  the  mercy-seat  through  the  rent  veil.  It  is  through 
the  rent  veil  that  the  Holy  Spirit  descends.  The  way  is  open  to  everybody.  In  the 
old  dispensation  only  the  high  priest  could  go  into  the  holiest  once  a  year,  and  in  a 
particular  manner.  Blessed  be  Go  i,  it  is  not  so  now  I  There  is  no  veil  now — 
nothing  to  keep  you  away.  If  there  is  a  veil,  you  weave  it  with  your  own  handi ; 
h  ia  iu  your  own  hearts.     (S.  Coley.)        Christ  the  only  way  to  the  Father:— 


CHAP,  xxvu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  Q6$ 

Theodore  Parker,  in  one  of  hia  books,  so  flashingly  bright  with  genius,  but  bo 
awfully  dark  with  infidelity,  daringly  asks  why  we  cannot  go  ourselves  before  the 
All-Father,  and  speak  to  Him  for  ourselves,  without  talking  by  attorney,  and 
whining  about  our  Brother's  name  !  Ah,  he  has  made  a  great  mistake.  No,  no  ; 
you  can  never  get  into  that  holiest  place  but  through  the  rent  veil,  and  you  wiU  be 
shut  out  for  ever  if  you  try  to  go  in  any  other  way.  It  is  through  Christ,  and 
through  Christ  alone,  that  we  can  get  access  to  the  Father.  I  am  glad  to  leave  my 
case  with  Jesus.  I  am  glad  to  go  to  the  Father  through  my  Saviour,  and  to  use 
His  name,  which  is  ever  fragrant  with  merit ;  but  if  any  man  shall  go  without  that 
name,  and  should  choose  to  stand  on  the  ground  of  bare  justice,  he  will  get  justier, 
and  he  will  not  get  any  mercy.  (Ibid.)  The  Divinity  of  Judaum : — I  should 
like  you  to  notice  that  the  very  way  in  which  God  put  away  Hebraism,  at  the  same 
time  marked  its  Divinity.  Supposing  an  Act  of  Parliament  were  passed  in  this 
year  of  the  reign  of  Queen  Victoria  to  repeal  a  law  that  was  made  in  the  time  of 
Charles  I.— do  you  not  see  that  the  very  Act  which  would  repeal  the  law  would 
acknowledge  that  it  was  a  law  ?  for  Parliament  never  repeals  that  which  is  not  law, 
but  the  very  form  of  repeal  is  itself  an  endorsement.  So  when  God  by  a  miracle 
repealed  Hebraism,  it  was  as  if  He  had  said  that  up  to  that  moment  it  had  been 
Divine.  Thus,  you  see,  in  this  way  Christianity  links  on  with  Judaism,  and  you 
are  not  to  think  that  the  New  Testament  throws  any  slur  or  slight  upon  the  old 
dispensation.  In  fact,  I  should  think  that  the  Jews  would  have  been  quite  right 
in  keeping  on  their  services  if  it  had  not  been  that  God,  by  miracles,  had  put  them 
away ;  for  it  was  by  miracle  that  He  had  instituted  them,  and  it  wanted  the  eame 
authority  to  repeal  as  it  did  to  enact.  (Ibid.)  The  veil  rent  in  twain: — I.  Thb 
EVENT  BBCOBDED.  It  meant  broadly  the  end  of  the  age  of  shadows ;  the  end  of  the 
childhood's  stage  in  man's  education.  II.  The  specul  belation  of  the  bendino 
OF  THE  VEIL  TO  THB  EVENT  wnicH  IT  iLLDBTEATED.  The  deep  meaning  is  that  it 
was  rent  at  the  crucifixion :  it  fixes  our  thoughts  upon  that  death  as  the  end  of  the 
incarnate  life.  III.  The  light  which  this  sign  fobecasts  on  the  expebience, 
TEE  histoby,  and  THE  DESTiNX  OF  MANKIND.  1.  It  proclaims  that  man  as  man  has 
access  to  the  heavenly  temple.  2.  That  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  have 
entered  into  and  possessed  man  and  his  world.  The  human  is  not  an  outer 
dependency  but  an  inner  province  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  3.  The  final  overthrow 
and  abolition  of  death.  The  angel  of  death  advances  through  the  veil  to  meet  us, 
to  repay  our  tears  with  glories.     (J,  B.  Brown,  B.A.) 

Yet.  54.  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God. — Homage  of  reason  and  eonseienee  to  the 
facts  of  the  Christian  religion: — Men's  hearts  often  harden  in  proportion  to  the 
privileges  they  enjoy.  Hence  heathens  look  on  the  affecting  scene  in  a  different 
state  of  mind  than  the  Jews.  They  were  nearer  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  I.  Wa 
have  in  this  declaration  a  testimony  to  the  impbessive  chabacteb  of  those  obeaI 

HISTOBICAL   facts   WHICH   WEBB   CONNECTED   WITH    THE    FOnNDATION   OF   ChBISTIANITT; 

These  facts  are  the  basis  of  Christianity.  Familiarity  with  them  may  tend  to  ro(b 
them  of  their  greatness.  It  is  so  with  the  wonders  of  nature ;  the  sun  ceases  to 
Astonish  us.  It  is  with  the  first  impression  produced  by  these  events  that  we  have 
to  do.  The  centurion  and  his  band  were  not  predisposed  to  attach  any  peculiar 
sanctity  to  these  events.  They  had  no  previous  knowledge  as  to  the  meaning  of 
them.  They  bad  been  educated  in  the  paganism  of  the  Bomans  ;  they  worshipped 
maiiy  gods.  They  may  have  seen  that  the  Jews  adored  no  images,  that  they  paid 
respect  to  the  Temple  as  the  house  of  their  one  God.  This  knowledge  of  Judaism 
may  have  prepared  this  centurion  to  use  language  different  from  that  of  the  pagan 
idolatry.  This  Boman  officer  would  appear  to  have  had  every  opportunity  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  the  things  which  happened  at  this  time  at  Jerusalem. 
Natural  and  civil  history  are  full  of  remarkable  events.  They  are  to  be  viewed  in 
general  relation  to  the  sinfulness  of  man  ;  they  may  at  the  same  time  be  traced  to 
natural  causes.  But  the  events  which  attracted  the  attention  of  the  centurion  were 
of  a  different  order.  It  was  a  solitary  occurrence  in  the  history  of  the  world.  The 
like  had  never  happened  before.  There  was  a  remarkable  response  and  sympathy 
between  the  natural  and  moral  world  of  human  life.  The  course  of  nature  is 
generally  indifferent  to  the  facts  of  human  life ;  the  moon  shines  on  the  wreck. 
But  here  nature  seems  roused  from  her  general  apathy  to  human  affairs.  Well 
might  such  extraordinary  events  convince  men  that  more  was  going  on  than  met 
the  eye — that  the  sufferer  was  no  ordinary  Person.  The  prelude  of  events  to  the 
sroM  might  deepen  the  impression.     II.  Pbactical  impbovbment  fbom  thsu 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrm. 

TKSTiMONT.  I  regard  their  testimony  as  the  homage  of  reason  and  conBcienca 
to  the  general  truth  of  the  Christian  religion.  All  they  had  seen  manifested  that 
Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God.  What  a  depth  of  meaning  in  these  words  to  us.  1. 
The  glory  of  the  Son  of  God  was  more  illustrious  by  the  very  humiliation  which 
attended  His  course.  2.  In  what  light  does  "  this  was  the  Son  of  God  "  exhibit 
man's  moral  view  and  the  evil  of  sin.  3.  If  the  Son  of  God  must  thus  become  a 
pubUo  spectacle  of  suffering  and  death,  in  order  to  exhibit  the  method  by  which  it 
seems  good  to  the  Sovereign  Will  of  God  that  sinners  should  approach  Him ;  let 
us  rejoice  in  the  Father's  love,  and  in  the  Saviour's  love,  Who  became  obedient 
unto  the  death  of  the  cross.  4.  How  soUd  is  the  ground  on  which  the  guilty  may 
apply  for  pardon.  5.  The  Saviour  justly  claims  the  hearts  and  obedience  of  all. 
(J.  Hoppus,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  57-60.  There  came  a  rich  man  of  Arlmathsea. — Joseph  of  Arimathaa  :— 

I.  The  burial  of  Jesus  by  Joseph  and  his  friend  is  an  interesting  illustration  of 
faith.  He  accepted  the  evidence  that  Jesus  was  Christ.  The  popular  fury  had  not 
affected  his  faith.  Calm  and  dignified  in  his  faith,  he  respectfully  makes  his 
request  to  Pilato.  When  we  believe  with  all  the  heart  we  shall  not  be  hindered  by 
great  difficulties  from  professing  Christ.  II.  In  the  conduct  of  Joseph  we  have  an 
illustration  of  moral  coubaqb  and  decision  of  Christian  character.  It  exposed 
any  man  to  loss  of  reputation  to  favour  one  who  was  subject  to  crucifixion.  III. 
The  conduct  of  Joseph  is  an  illustration  of  thk  power  which  ardent  lovk  fob 
Chbibt  has  on  the  life  and  conduct.  Here  was  the  secret  of  his  courage,  the 
liiding  of  its  power.    He  loved  Christ.    IV.  The  grace  of  God  can  prevaii,  oveb 

HINDRANCES   TO    FAITH    AND    CHRISTIAN    ZEAL   IN    THE    CHARACTERS   AND    CIRCOMSTANCBS 

OF  MEN.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  two  men  who  performed  this  courageous  act  were 
men  once  timid  and  cautious.  God  can  place  us  in  circumstances  where  our  faith 
can  suddenly  acquire  the  force  of  years.  We  naturally  like  men  at  once  to  declare 
for  Christ,  like  the  morning  star  which  glows  in  the  sun-rising.  Some  are  like  St. 
John,  constant  from  first  to  last.  V.  The  reward  which  Joseph  had  for  his  con- 
duet.  There  in  his  tomb  life  and  immortality  were  brought  to  light.  The  builder 
of  the  Pyramids  is  not  to  be  compared  for  fame  to  the  owner  of  that  tomb.  Every 
one  of  us  has  his  own  peculiar  opportunity  of  showing  his  attachment  to  Christ. 
(N.  Adavis,  D.D.)  The  burial  of  Jesus  .-—There  has  been  no  time  to  get  a  bier, 
or  it  is  felt  that  the  distance  is  bo  short  that  it  is  not  needed.  That  body,  however, 
has  the  best  bier  of  all — the  hands  of  true  affection  to  Uft  it  and  carry  it  across  to 
the  new  tomb  which  waits  to  receive  it.  The  feet  let  ua  assign  to  Joseph,  the  body 
to  Nicodemus,  and  that  regal  head  with  those  closed  eyes,  over  whom  the  shadows 
of  the  resurrection  are  already  flitting,  let  us  lay  it  on  the  breast  of  the  beloved 
disciple  John,  who,  possibly,  was  present  standing  with  the  Galilean  women.  The 
last  service  which  Jesus  ever  needed  at  the  hands  of  men  it  has  been  their  privilege 
to  render.  For  this  service  shall  we  not  honour  them,  and  forget  that  they  were 
once  secret  disciples?  Yea,  verily  ;  what  they  thus  did  for  the  Lord's  burial  shall 
be  told  for  a  memorial  of  them,  wherever  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom  is  preached. 
{Dr  Hanna.)        A  remarkable  funeral : — I,  The  corpse— It  is  "  the  body  of  Jesus." 

II.  The  undertaker — "  A  rich  man  of  Arimathaa,  named  Joseph."  III.  The 
preparations  he  made  for  the  burial — He  first  "  begged  "  the  body,  Ac.  IV.  The 
time  of  the  funeral — Evening.  V.  The  mourners — No  hired  ones.  (American 
Horn.  Review.)  The  burial  of  Jesus : — I,  The  sepulchre,  1,  Its  situation — in 
a  garden.  Preaching  of  a  new  life  arising  from  decay  and  death.  In  all  human 
gardens  of  domestic  and  social  joy,  there  is  death.  2.  It  was  a  new  tomb.  The 
true  consecration  of  the  great  world — sepulchre,  3.  It  was  a  rich  man's  tomb. 
Jesns  has  been  in  many  rich  men's  homes  and  hearts  since.  Yet  the  aim  of  "  many 
rich  "  seems  to  be,  to  bury  Jesus — fashion,  form,  &o.  4.  Hewn  out  of  a  rock. 
The  strength  of  the  tomb  collateral  proof  of  genuineness  of  resurrection.  II.  Thk 
MoUBNEES.  1.  Their  characters  suggestive.  2.  Their  number  very  email — a  mere 
handful.  More  rejoicers  than  mourners.  Very  few  of  the  disciples,  but  He  ia 
present  at  the  death  of  every  disciple.  3.  Their  grief  intense.  The  Magdalene  had 
lost  her  Saviour;  the  Virgin  her  Son;  the  rest  a  dear  Friend.  lU.  The  interment. 
1.  Hurried.  2,  Costly.  More  was  spent  upon  Jesus  at  His  burial  than  at  any 
time  before,  3,  Vigilance  of  His  enemies ;  they  cannot  leave  even  His  sepulchre 
alone.  The  seal  and  the  guard.  Their  unintended  testimony  to  the  reality  of  the 
resurrection.  Learn :  1.  Christ  entered  the  grave  to  rob  it  of  its  gloom.  8.  B*> 
joioe  in  a  living  Saviour — ^not  hide  Him  out  of  sight.    {J.  C.  Oray.) 


«HAP.  rxTiu.]  8T.  MATTHEW.  667 

Vers.  62-66.  Command  therefore  that  the  sepulchre  he  made  secure. — The  Jew 
and  the  Roman  watching  the  sepulchre : — I.  This  passage  of  sacred  history  illus- 
trates the  truth  that  God  has  "made  all  things  for  Himself,  yea,  even  the  wicked 
for  the  day  of  evil."  "There  is  no  counsel,  nor  wisdom,  nor  understanding 
against  the  Lord."  II.  Some  Christians  are  chosen  of  God  to  display  by  their  great 
trials  His  power  and  wisdom,  as  Christ  was  by  His  death  and  burial  and  resurrec- 
tion. III.  Bad  men  should  be  objects  of  pity  rather  than  of  fear  or  anger.  IV. 
Everything  relating  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  unspeakably  interesting  for  this 
reason,  "  He  was  raised  again  for  our  justification."  {N,  Adams,  D.D.)  Sabbath- 
breaking : — It  is  a  poetical  justice  that  they  who  have  so  often  accused  the  Saviour 
of  Sabbath-breakmg,  now  themselves  finally  desecrate  this  day.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.) 
Anxiety  on  account  of  Christ,  even  when  dead: — It  is  a  common  proverb,  "Dead 
men  bite  not."  But  here  Christ,  though  dead  and  buried,  bites  and  beats  hard  upon 
these  evil  men's  consciences.  They  could  not  rest  the  whole  night  before,  for  fear 
He  should  get  out  of  the  grave  some  way,  and  so  create  them  further  trouble. 
Scipio  appointed  his  sepulchre  to  be  so  placed,  as  his  image  standing  upon  it  mighi 
look  directly  towards  Africa,  that  being  dead,  he  might  still  be  a  terror  to  the 
Carthaginians.  And  Cadwallo,  an  ancient  king  of  this  island,  commanded  hia 
dead  body  to  be  embalmed  and  put  into  a  brazen  image,  and  so  set  upon  a  brazen 
horse  over  Ludgate  for  a  terror  to  the  Saxons.  It  is  well-known  that  Zisca,  that 
brave  Bohemian,  charged  his  Taborites  to  flay  his  corpse,  and  head  a  drum  with 
his  skin  ;  the  sound  whereof,  as  oft  as  the  enemies  heard,  they  should  be  appalled 
and  put  to  flight.  And  our  Edward  I.  adjured  his  eon  and  nobles  that  if  he  died 
in  his  journey  into  Scotland,  they  should  carry  his  corpse  about  with  them,  and  not 
suffer  it  to  be  interred  till  they  had  vanquished  the  usurper  and  subdued  the 
country.  Something  like  to  this  the  prophet  Isaiah  foretelleth  of  our  Saviour  (and 
we  see  it  here  accomplished),  when  he  saith,  '*  In  that  day  the  root  of  Jesse  shall 
Btand  up  for  an  ensign  to  the  people,  and  even  his  rest  (or,  as  some  read  it,  his 
sepulchre)  shall  be  glorious  (Isa.  xi.  10).  There  are  that  think  that  these  words, 
"  The  day  that  followed  the  day  of  the  preparation,"  are  put  ironically,  or  by  way  of 
a  jest  against  the  hypocritical  sabbatism  of  the  high  priests,  who  would  so  workday- 
like, beg  the  body,  seal  the  sepulchre,  and  set  the  watch  on  that  Sabbath,  for  the 
which  they  seemed  to  prepare  so  devoutly  before  it  came.  (John  Trapp.)  Un- 
availing precautions : — Now  they  seemed  to  dance  upon  Christ's  grave,  as  thinking 
themselves  cook-sure  of  Him.  So  did  those  bloody  tyrants  of  the  primitive  times 
make  no  other  reckoning,  but  to  raze  out  the  name  of  Christ  from  under  heaven. 
Therefore,  also,  they  did  not  only  constitute  laws  and  proclamations  against 
Christians,  but  did  engrave  the  same  laws  in  tables  of  brass,  meaning  to  make  all 
things  firm  for  ever  and  a  day.  But  He  that  sat  in  heaven,  and  said,  "  Yet  have  I 
Bet  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  laughed  at  them ;  Jehovah  had  them  in 
derision.  Look  how  Daniel  was  innocently  condemned,  cast  into  the  lions'  den, 
had  the  door  sealed  upon  him,  and,  to  see  to,  no  hope  or  means  of  life  was  left 
him ;  and  yet,  by  God's  good  providence,  he  came  forth  untouched,  and  was  made 
a  greater  man  than  before.  So  our  blessed  Saviour  was  innocently  condemned, 
oast  into  the  grave,  sealed  up  among  the  dead,  and  to  common  judgment  left  as  oat 
of  mind ;  yet  early  in  the  morning,  at  the  time  appointed  by  the  power  of  His 
Deity,  He  raised  Himself  from  death,  and  gloriously  triumph&d  over  it  and  helL 
{Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 


Vbb.  1.  In  the  end  of  the  Sabbath. — The  meaning  and  memorlet  of  Sunday : — 
Let  us  consider  some  of  the  religious  principles  which  have  given  and  preserved 
this  holy  day  to  ns.  I.  "  The  first  day  of  the  week  "  is  a  dat  of  miohty  memobies — 
memories  that  we  cannot  let  die.  1.  The  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Day  has  never 
lost  sight  of  that  precious  fact  in  all  revelation  and  religion — the  creation  of  the 
world  and  of  man,  and  consequently  all  the  claim  of  God's  law  upon  our  conscience, 
and  of  God's  goodness  on  our  gratitude.  The  main  idea  of  the  Sabbatic  rest  is  that 
man  should  occasionally  lift  his  eyes  from  the  clouds  of  earth  and  gaze  into  the  face 
of  his  Creator.  2.  "  The  first  day  of  the  week  "  is  full  of  the  memories  of  redemp> 
tion.  8.  "  The  first  day  of  the  week  "  is  the  great  memorial  of  the  giving  of  ihe  Holjr 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxviu. 

Spirit  of  God  to  man.  It  is  the  memorial  of  the  beginning  of  that  great  work  in 
human  nature  by  which  it  becomes  like  Christ,  and  is  made  one  with  God — the  in- 
carnation of  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  "  The  first  day  of  the  week  "  is  a  day  of  happt 
AND  NOBLE  ASSOCIATIONS.  It  is  rich  in  memories  of  the  past  great  acts  of  God,  but  it 
comes  down  burdened  with  all  the  brightest  and  most  beautiful  thoughts  of  earth  ; 
great  revivals  of  human  friendships  ;  great,  stirring  conliicts  with  evil ;  the  great, 

Jirosperous  changes  and  revolutions  of  nations— the  deliverance  of  untold  milliona 
rom  the  slavery  of  sin  and  the  power  of  death ;  have  all  left  their  impress  upon  it. 
III.  It  ia  a  day  of  holt  anticipations.  Memory  is  blessed  ;  but  what  would  meo 
do  without liope.  The  "  first  day  of  the  week  "  predicts  perpetually  the  Sabbath  of 
God's  love — the  end  of  conflict,  the  light  of  heaven.  IV.  It  is  a  day  of  holy  duties. 
It  is  the  first  day  of  the  week,  not  the  last,  the  day  of  activity,  not  of  indolent 
repose.  This  day  will  lend  a  meaning  to  your  other  days.  *'  Hallow  God's 
Sabbaths."  (ff.  R.  Reynolds,  B. A.)  The  day  of  resurrection : — Philip  Henry 
used  to  call  the  Lord's  Day  the  queen  of  dajs,  the  pearl  of  the  week,  and  observed 
it  accordingly.  His  common  salutation  of  his  family  or  friends  on  the  Lord's  Day 
in  the  morning,  was  that  of  the  primitive  Christians — "  The  Lord  is  risen,  He  is 
risen  indeed ;  "  making  it  his  chief  business  on  that  day  to  celebrate  the  memory 
of  Christ's  resurrection ;  and  he  would  say  sometimes, "  Every  Lord's  Day  is  a  true 
Christian's  Easter  Day." 

Vers.  2-4.  And  behold,  there  wai  a  great  earthquake. — The  earthquake 
trumpet : — An  earthquake  was  a  royal  trumpet  to  proclaim  this  victory,  the 
greatest  that  ever  was  obtained  against  an  enemy.  The  deep  murmur  and  hollow 
sound  which  came  from  beneath  the  earth  gave  notice  at  one  blast  to  heaven,  and 
hell,  and  to  all  Judea,  that  the  Son  of  God  about  that  instant  (as  I  do  verily  believe) 
did  break  the  gates  of  brass,  and  smite  the  bars  of  death  in  sunder.  (Bishop 
Hacket.)  Six  reasons  for  the  earthquake : — I.  It  makes  us  conceit  that  there  was 
a  great  strnggling,  and  a  combat  between  Christ  and  death.  II.  It  betokens  what 
noise  and  tumult  there  shall  be  in  all  the  elements  at  the  last  and  great  resurrec- 
tion. III.  It  signifies  that  the  majesty  of  the  Lord  was  upon  the  earth  to  defend 
His  people.  IV.  The  anger  of  the  Lord  did  roar  out  of  the  earth  against 
those  Jews  who  thought  to  prevail  that  death  should  devour  him,  against  Pilate 
that  allowed  his  seal  to  this  conspiracy,  and  against  the  soldiers  that  watched  the 
sepulchre.  V.  Because  the  consciences  of  these  evil  men  were  only  wounded,  and 
no  other  harm  done  by  the  earthquake,  therefore,  some  say,  the  place  round  about  ^ 
did  rather  dance  for  joy  than  quake  for  trembling.  VI.  Is  allegorical,  and  thus  in 
biief ,  that  our  hearts  must  be  shaken  and  inwardly  troubled  with  compunction  and 
repentance  before  we  believe  steadfastly  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  (Ibid.) 
Keepers  like  dead  men  : — The  sentinels  were  not  "  as  dead  men  "  long  ;  and  when 
they  woke,  they  found  the  tomb  empty,  and  the  tenant  gone.  Thoughts  of  the 
spirit-land  and  impressions  of  reverence  were  not  in  their  world  ;  the  shock  they 
had  received  woke  no  thought  or  question,  but  sheer  physical  terror  only.  AJa 
horses  are  frightened  in  the  flashes  of  the  tempest,  and  the  wild  things  of  the 
woods  are  suddenly  tame  in  the  blow  of  any  tremendous  flood  or  fire  ;  so  these  strong 
human  animals  were  cowed  by  the  lightniug  from  an  angel's  face.  They  would 
have  been  dauntless  amidst  the  shock  of  battle  and  the  din  of  arms,  but  they  were 
dumb  before  a  being  who  was  not  of  flesh  and  blood.  White  as  the  dead,  they  at 
once  burst  into  the  presence  of  their  masters  end  told  all.  (Charles  Stanford,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  And  the  angel  answered  and  said  unto  the  vomen. — Fears  dis- 
pelled : — Why  should  not  the  seekers  of  Jesus  fear  f  I.  Because  in  seeking 
Him,  they  have  an  evidence  that  He  has  sought  them,  and  foimd  them, 
and  touched  their  hearts.  II.  They  that  seek  Christ  should  rejoice ;  for  in 
seeking  they  shall  certainly  find.  III.  In  finding  Christ,  they  find  everything 
tjuited  to  banish  their  fears.  Christ  has  magnified  the  law.  Sin  taken  away 
that  troubles  the  conscience  ;  death  disarmed  of  his  sting;  the  grave  of  its  terrors; 
the  dominion  of  Satan  destroyed.  IV.  Nothing  shall  finally  separate  them  who 
have  sought  and  found  Christ  (Rom,  viii.  38,  39).  (H.  Foster.)  An  Easter 
thought  for  those  who  are  seeking  Jesus : — Never  had  women  more  cause  to  fear  than 
these  helpless  creatures,  who  came  forth  with  trembling  steps,  but  loving  hearts, 
to  the  sepulchre  of  the  crucified  Christ.  Most  blessed  then  to  them  must  hav< 
been  the  angel's  words,  '•  Fear  not."  They  speak  to  us  as  much  as  to  the  women 
»t  the  sepulchre,  Ao.    Light  streams  forth  upon  us  in  this  passage  from  three  di*- 


CHAP,  xxviu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  661 

tinct  sources.  I.  From  thk  pxbsons  addressed.  1.  They  were  wotnen,  who  from 
their  sex  were  naturally  timid,  and  had  in  themselves  nothing  to  enable  them  to 
face  a  supernatural  appearance,  or  any  of  the  terrors  of  such  a  scene  as  we  have 
here.  The  doctrine  of  inherent  weakness.  2.  From  the  emphatic  word  "  te,"  the 
most  important  instruction  is  to  be  derived.  "Ye  "  are  Jesus'  friends  ;  no  cause 
for  fear  have  "  ye."  Full  of  teaching  to  those,  who,  weak,  frightened,  sorrowful, 
ere  seeking  Jesus.  Also  to  His  true  disciples,  however  weak,  &c.  They  stand  in 
the  power  of  their  relationship  to  Christ,  and  need  desire  no  more.  II.  From  the 
woBK  IN  WHICH  THEY  WERB  ENGAGED.  There  was — 1.  Loviug  personal  search. 
They  are  blessed  indeed  who  are  thus  seeking  after  Christ ;  like  these  women,  they" 
want  to  get  to  Himself.  2.  Loving  service.  3.  Entire  devotion  to  one  rejected  by 
the  world.  (P.  B.  Poicer,  M.A.)  The  women's  visit  to  the  grave  of  J&gus  : — I. 
The  gloomy  approach.  Characterized  by  visible  grief,  secret  hope,  timid  faith.  II. 
The  wonderful  experience.  The  anticipated  ditMculty  removed.  The  unexpected 
vision.  The  overpowering  fear.  The  consoling  exhortation.  III.  The  joyous 
return.  Mingled  emotions  leading  to  rapid  movement.  The  blessed  meeting  by 
the  wgy.  The  salutation  and  commission.  (E.  W.  Wilson.)  The  women-friends 
of  Jesus : — 1.  Women,  though  weak,  are  capable  of  religious  oflSces.  No  under- 
standing so  weak,  but  it  may  believe ;  no  body  so  weak,  but  it  may  do  something 
in  some  calling.  2.  These  women  were  early  in  their  religious  work,  they  began 
betimes.  8.  As  they  were  early  and  forward,  so  were  tbey  earnest  and  sedulous. 
4.  Upon  what  their  devotion  was  carried;  upon  things  which  could  not  entirely 
be  done ;  yet  God  accepted  their  devotion.  Where  the  root  and  substance  of  the 
work  is  piety,  God  pretermits  many  times  errors  in  circumstance.      {John  Donne.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  He  Ifl  not  here :  for  He  Is  risen,  as  He  said. — The  open  sepulchre  a 
teal  of  redemption : — I.  The  place  which  the  angel  bade  the  women  come  and  see 
was  an  open,  empty  tomb.  Earth  is  the  place  of  tombs.  There  is  no  tomb  in 
heaven ;  no  silent  grave  in  hell.  Every  grave  of  earth  will  yet  be  empty.  II, 
Momentous  truths  were  uttered  from  the  open,  empty  tomb  where  the  Lord  had 
lain.  1.  The  first  voice  proclaims  the  evil  and  the  power  of  sin.  Sin  dug  for 
Death  all  his  graves.  Sin  has  slain  the  Beloved  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  second  voice 
proclaims  redemption  from  sin.  The'open  grave  of  Christ  is  a  three-fold  sign  of 
(1)  acceptance ;  (2)  liberty  ;  and  (3)  life.  IH.  There  are  some  holy  lessons  which 
men  may  learn  as  they  linger  by  the  Redeemer's  open,  empty  tomb.  1,  Come  and 
see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay,  and  learn  a  lesson  of  penitence  for  sin,  2.  CSome 
and  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay,  and  learn  a  lesson  of  love  to  Him.  The  grave 
of  loved  ones  has  a  strange  fascination.  3.  Come  and  see  the  place  where  the  Lord 
lay,  and  realize  your  union  with  Him  and  nearness  to  Him.  4.  Come  and  be  in 
alliance  with  those  who  honour  Christ,  5.  Behold  He  is  alive  for  evermore.  (D. 
Rose,  M.A.)  Easter  viorning : — 1.  Standing  where  the  Lord  lay  I  am  impressed 
with  the  fact  that  mortuary  honours  cannot  atone  for  wrongs  to  the  living.  2. 
That  floral  and  sculptural  ornamentation  are  appropriate  for  the  place  of  the  dead. 
Christ  was  buried  in  a  garden.  3.  I  am  impresssd  with  the  dignity  of  private  and 
unpretending  obsequies.  Funeral  pageantry  is  not  necessary.  4.  I  am  impressed 
with  the  fact  that  you  cannot  keep  the  dead  down.  The  seal  of  the  Sanhedrin, 
soldiers,  cannot  keep  Christ  in  the  crypt.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  The  great  argument  of 
he  resurrection : — 1.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  considered  in  relation  to  Himself 
as  the  promised  Saviour  of  men,  2.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  in  relation  to 
the  comfort  and  service  of  His  immediate  friends  and  disciples.  3.  The  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  from  the  dead  viewed  in  relation  to  the  enemies  of  our  Lord.  4. 
The  resurrection  of  Christ  considered  in  its  relation  to  the  religious  life  and 
experience  of  believers.  6.  The  resurrection  of  our  Lord  considered  in  relation  to 
the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  Christians  when  contemplating  death.  (T.  Lloyd.) 
The  resurrection  of  our  Lord — the  fact  and  its  consequences  : — I.  The  resurrection 
of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  we  afSrm  to  be  a  fact.  1.  Were  the  apostles 
deceived  ?  2.  If  not  deceived,  did  they  wilfully  proclaim  a  falsehood  ?  II.  Note 
some  of  its  consequences.  1.  The  resurrection  furnishes  the  only  positive  proof 
of  our  immortality.  2.  It  also  assures  us  of  our  redemption,  and  this  gives  definite 
hope  for  the  future.  8.  It  assures  us  of  the  redemption  of  the  body.  (//.  Ward.) 
The  risen  Saviour: — I.  This  declaration  proclaims  the  actual  rebdrbectioii  of 
Chbist.  a  fact  established  by  the  cleapest  evidence.  II.  This  language  expresses 
several  funda3(ental  tbuths.  1.  The  humiliation  of  Christ.  2.  The  infinite  love 
of  God.     3.  The  Divine  faithfulness.     4.  The  Divine  sovereignty.     5.  Christ's 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvin 

triumph  over  all  His  enemies  and  onrs.  6.  The  certain  and  glorious  pledge  of  tha 
perfecting  of  saivation.  {Pulpit  Themes.)  Watchiivj  for  the.  resurrection : — Aa 
(he  flowers  wait  for  the  spring,  and  the  yellow  corn  waits  for  the  summer,  and  the 
stars  wait  for  the  morning,  and  as  Lazarus  waited  in  sweet  silence  for  the  voice  of 
Jesus  to  awake  him  out  of  sleep,  so  do  the  blessed  dead  wait  for  the  resurrection. 
(Q.  W.  M'Cree.)  The  proofs  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ: — I.  Pbesumpiivb  cb 
ciacDMSTANTiAii  EVIDENCE.  1.  The  precaution  of  the  Jews.  2.  The  departure  o» 
Jesus  from  the  sepulchre.  8.  The  change  which  took  place  in  the  apostles  after 
this  event.  II.  The  testimony  of  credible  witnesses.  1.  The  sufficiency  of  evi- 
denea  depends  upon  the  number  of  the  witnesses,  their  qualifications,  and  their 
information.  2.  Their  competency  being  established,  now  examine  their  credi- 
bility. Their  testimony  was  honest,  prominent,  explicit,  and  constant.  III.  Divinb 
TESTiMONT.  The  Holy  Spirit  bears  witness  to  Christ's  resurrection.  1.  By  the  predic- 
tions of  the  prophets.  2.  By  the  miracles  of  the  apostles.  3.  By  the  success  of  tha 
gospel.  (2'.  Gibson.  M.A.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ: — I.  Let  ua  look  at  it  as 
A  FACT  ESTABLISHED  BY  BELiABLE  EVIDENCE,  "  He  is  risen."  1.  In  Order  to  a  true 
resurrection  we  must  first  have  it  clearly  established  that  at  the  time  of  His. burial 
He  was  really  dead.  The  soldiers  found  Jesus  already  dead.  He  was  buried  in  a 
new  tomb  ;  hence  no  other  body  could  have  been  substituted  for  that  of  our  Lord. 
Nicodemus,  Joseph  of  Arematheea,  and  the  women  who  assisted  at  His  burial  are 
witnesses  of  His  death.  2.  The  testimony  of  those  who  saw  our  Lord  alive  after 
His  resurrection.  II.  But  passing  from  the  fact  itself,  let  us  consider  its  relation 
to  the  Saviour's  former  utterances,  "  He  is  risen,  as  He  said  "  (John  ii.  18-21 ; 
Matt.  xii.  40  ;  Matt.  xvi.  21 ;  Matt.  xvii.  22).  Christ  perilled  His  whole  Deity  and 
Messiahsbip  on  His  resurrection.  Thtre  is  a  three-fold  attestation  in  this  wondrous 
event.  1.  It  proved  Him  to  be  a  prophet,  a  miracle-worker,  and  it  threw  back  its 
authenticating  light  on  everything  said  and  done  by  Him  during  His  earthly 
ministry.  Thus  we  learn  to  view  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  as  the  foundation 
of  our  faith.  Take  this  chapter  out  of  the  gospel  and  all  others  are  worthless. 
Two  influences — 1.  Hope  through  life — "  God  hath  begotten  us  unto  a  living  hope 
by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  2.  An  influence  of  comfort  in 
bereavement  and  death  coming  from  this  theme.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  A 
living  hope  awakened  iy  the  resurrection  of  Christ : — Mark  the  expression  a 
"  lively  "  or  living  hope.  The  expectation  of  perfected  salvation  which  the  believer 
cherishes  is  not  contented  with  indifference  or  inactivity.  It  is  a  living,  not  a 
dying  or  dead  thing,  and  it  animates  him  to  most  earnest  efforts  after  the  attain- 
ment of  the  object  to  which  it  looks.  A  ship's  crew  have  been  forced  to  leave  a 
sinking  vessel  and  commit  themselves  in  an  open  and  frail  boat  to  the  mercy  of 
the  ocean.  They  do  not  know  that  they  shall  be  picked  up,  but  they  have  an 
intense  desire  to  be  delivered  and  a  vague  hope  that  they  shall  be.  Day  passes 
after  day.  Their  scanty  stock  of  provisions  is  almost  exhausted,  the  water  is 
entirely  spent,  and  hope  in  them  is  all  but  dead,  so  that  every  energy  within  them 
is  paralyzed.  But  Ic  1  far  away  on  the  dim  horizon  a  sail  appears,  and  in  a 
moment  the  hope  that  seemed  ready  to  expire  is  quickened  into  activity.  First 
they  raise  a  faint  but  thankful  cheer ;  then  they  uplift  any  sort  of  a  flag  they  can 
extemporize  as  a  signal  of  distress  ;  then  they  take  to  the  oars  and  suminon  np 
the  remnant  of  their  strength,  if  by  any  means  they  may  near  the  vessel's  course, 
and  attract  the  attention  of  tViose  who  man  her.  What  a  difference  one  short  hour 
has  made  in  those  worn  and  haprgard  men  !  A  little  while  ago  they  were  ready  to 
perish,  but  now  they  are  all  activity,  for  the  sight  of  that  far-off  sail  has  begotten 
them  to  a  "  living  hope."  So  Christ's  resurrection  brings  living  hope  to  the 
sinner's  heart.  (Ibid.)  Come  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay : — I.  And  be 
assured  that  He  is  risen  from  the  dead.  II.  And  behold  the  completion  of  human 
redemption.  III.  And  view  it  with  penitential  grief.  IV.  Ye  who  love  Him, 
learn  to  view  without  fear  your  own  final  resting-place,  and  rejoice  in  the  assurance 
that  His  resurrection  is  the  pledge  and  type  of  your  own.  Adore  Him  for  the  love 
which  led  him  to  sleep  in  the  sepulchre  that  you  might  rise  and  partake  of  His 
glory  for  ever.  (J.  Johnson,  M.A.)  The  empty  sepulchre: — "  Come  and  see  the 
place  where  the  Lord  lay."  1.  It  is  a  garden.  2.  It  is  a  garden  with  a  grave  in 
it.  The  world  has  no  unmingled  cup  of  sweet  to  offer.  Because  that  tomb  is 
empty  and  Christ  is  risen  there  need  be  no  blight  without  a  blessing,  no  sorrow 
without  a  joy,  &c.  3.  It  is  a  new  tomb  where  never  man  was  laid.  4.  Tou  can 
see  by  its  size,  its  position,  its  adornments,  that  it  belongs  to  a  family  possessed  ol 
wealth — it  is  a  grave  of  the  rich.    Fulfilment  of  prophecy — Isa.  liii.  9.    6.  Th« 


UHAP.  xxviir.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  G71 

heavy  atone,  which  brawny  arms  had  rolled  against  its  entrance,  making  it  fast, 
and  setting  a  seal  on  it,  is  rolled  away.  The  finger  of  God  touches  the  mighty 
incubus  and  it  moves.  6.  And  find  the  sepulchre  empty.  Christ  is  risen  t  (1) 
The  seal  of  truth  is  put  upon  all  He  said  and  did.  God  would  have  never  raised 
a  pretender.  (2)  The  offering  of  Jesus  for  the  sins  of  men  is  hereby  accepted. 
(3)  He  has  Divine  life  in  Himself,  and  the  same  Spirit  that  raised  up  Jesus  from 
death  and  the  dark  can  raise  up  dead  souls.  This  is  the  true  power  of  His  resur- 
rection. Are  we  risen  with  Christ?  (4)  A  pledge  of  His  power  and  purpose  to 
raise  again  from  the  dominion  of  the  grave  the  bodies  of  the  race  He  hath  redeemed. 
Comfort  for  the  bereaved.  (5)  Then  He  hath  also  ascended  up  into  glory,  He  hath 
taken  possession  of  His  inheritance,  and  is  the  forerunner  of  the  saints.  "  Opened 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  Think  of  departed  loved  ones  emerged 
from  the  ruins  of  the  tomb,  &a.  (6)  Then  He  lives  to-day  to  be  our  Friend  and 
Guide  and  Helper.  How  much  we  need  Him,  &o.  Christian,  gird  up  your  loins 
afresh  I  Yours  is  a  living  faith  in  a  living  Saviour.  Sinner  !  He  is  risen.  What 
then  ?  Then  He  is  that  man  whom  God  hath  ordained  to  judge  the  world.  {J.  J. 
Wray.)  A  new  tomb  where  never  vian  icas  yet  laid : — Why  7  For  this  reason :  The 
fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  is  at  the  basis  of  Christianity.  Our  whole  religion 
must  stand  or  fall  with  the  coming  to  life  again  of  the  Man  Jesus.  "  If  Christ  be 
not  risen  from  the  dead,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain." 
God  hath  therefore  hedged  it  round  with  special  tokens,  evidences  which  may  well 
bush  the  doubter  and  strike  the  sceptic  dumb.  In  the  Old  Testament  we  read  that 
contact  with  the  sacred  dust  of  the  Prophet  Elisha  did  once  raise  a  man  to  life  j 
and  a  Jewish  superstition  invested  the  bones  of  their  holier  heroes  with  a  similar 
power.  Had  this  been  an  old  and  much-used  grave,  the  enemies  of  Jesus  would 
have  been  quick  to  suggest  that  as  the  cause  of  the  resurrection.  So  Providence 
provides  a  new  tomb,  where  never  man  was  laid.  Again,  old  tombs  and  ancient 
sepulchres  often  had  secret  passages,  subterraueanavenues,  and  connections  with  each 
other  and  the  outer  world.  How  ready  would  the  unbelievers  have  been  to  suggest 
that  by  such  secret  means  the  body  had  been  carried  off  by  His  disciples  and  in- 
terred elsewhere  1  Hence  it  is  a  new  tomb,  out  in  the  face  of  the  solid  rock,  one  only 
means  of  entrance  and  of  exit,  watched  and  tended  by  the  Roman  guard.  (Ibid.) 
The  place  where  the  Lord  lay  is : — I.  A  place  of  instruction.  1.  The  fact  of  His 
resurrection.  2.  What  is  the  significance  of  the  fact  ?  It  means  that  the  atone- 
ment is  complete.  II.  A  place  of  life.  Christ' si  ife  assures  us  of  life  for  the  body 
and  soul  of  man.  III.  A  place  of  comfort — "  Fear  not  ye."  IV.  A  place  of  hope. 
(D.  Merson,  B.D.)  Jesus  has  lighted  up  the  grave : — It  ia  said  that  the  Romans 
had  a  practice  of  lighting  up  their  tombs.  In  Essex  a  tomb  was  once  opened, 
when  a  lamp  was  found  in  the  corner,  and  a  chair  near  it  indicating  the  rank  of  the 
tomb-tenant ;  and  it  is  recorded  that  fifteen  hundred  years  after  the  death  of  Tullia, 
Cicero's  daughter,  her  tomb,  which  was  accidentally  opened,  was  found  illuminated 
with  a  lamp.  It  was  but  a  glimmering  light,  the  rays  of  which  were  confined  to 
the  catacomb  walls.  But  the  light  Christ  sheds  upon  the  grave  falls  upon  the  vista 
of  eternity.  You  can  now  stoop,  look  in,  and  see  immortality  beyond.  (Blacket'$ 
"  Young  Men's  Class.")  Death  and  resurrection  of  Christ: — Lend  me  your 
imaginations  for  a  minute,  while  I  endeavour  to  picture  a  scene.  Christ  had  paid 
the  price — the  full  price :  that  price  was  presented  before  the  Father's  judgment- 
seat.  He  looked  at  it,  and  was  content.  But  as  it  was  a  solemn  matter,  it  was  not 
harried  over.  Three  days  were  taken,  that  the  ransom-price  might  be  counted  out ; 
and  its  value  fully  estimated.  The  angels  looked,  and  admired.  The  "  spirits  ot 
the  just  "  came  and  examined  it,  and  wondered,  and  were  delighted.  The  very  devils 
in  hell  could  only  express  their  satisfaction  by  biting  their  iron  bonds,  and  sullenly 
keeping  silence,  because  they  had  not  a  word  to  speak  against  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
The  three  days  passed  away,  and  the  atonement  was  fully  accepted.  Then  the 
angel  came  from  heaven — swift  as  the  lightning  flash — ^he  descended  from  the  spheres 
of  the  blessed,  into  this  lower  earth,  and  he  came  into  the  prison-house,  in  which 
the  Saviour's  body  slept;  for',  mark,  His  body  had  been  kept  in  the  prison  till  God 
ratified  His  atonement  and  accepted  it — He  was  lying  there  a  hostage  for  Hii 
people.  The  angel  came,  and  spake  to  the  keeper  of  the  prison,  one  called  Orim 
Death,  and  said  to  him,  "Let  that  captive  go  free."  Death  was  sitting  on  his 
throne  of  skulls,  with  a  huge  iron  key  at  his  girdle  of  iron :  and  he  laughed,  and 
said,  "  Aha  I  thousands  and  thousands  of  the  race  of  Adam  have  passed  the  portalg 
of  this  prison-house ;  but  none  of  them  have  ever  been  delivered.  That  key  has 
been  once  turned  in  its  wards  by  iestiny ;  and  no  mortal  power  can  ever  turn  iJ 


6W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvin. 

back  again,  and  draw  the  bolts  from  their  resting-places."  Then  the  angel  showed 
to  him  Heaven's  own  warrant,  and  Death  turned  pale.  The  angel  grasped  the  key 
— unlocked  the  prison  door,  and  stepped  in.  There  slept  the  Royal  Captive — the 
Divine  hostage.  And  the  angel  cried,  "  Aiise,  Thou  Sleeper  I  Put  off  Thy  garments 
of  death.  Shake  Thyself  from  the  dust,  and  put  on  Thy  beautiful  garments."  The 
Master  arose.  He  unwound  the  napkin,  and  laid  it  by  itself.  He  took  off  His 
graveolothes  and  laid  them  by  themselves,  to  show  He  was  in  no  hurry,  that  all 
was  done  legally,  and  therefore  orderly,  fle  did  not  dash  His  prison-walls 
aside  to  come  out ;  but  came  out  by  legal  process,  just  as  He  had  entered  in. 
He  seemed  to  express  Himself  as  Paul  did,  "  No,  verily,  let  them  come  them- 
selves, and  fetch  Me  out."  So  was  the  Master  set  at  liberty — by  heaven's  own 
officer,  who  came  from  heaven  to  give  Him  just  liberty  —  God's  proof  that  He  bad 
done  all  that  was  necessary.  Thou  Lamb  of  God  1  I  see  Thee  rising  from  Thy 
tomb  in  splendour  ineffable,  dazzling  the  eyes  of  the  guards  and  making  them  flee 
away  in  terror.  And  when  I  see  Thee  risen  from  the  dead,  I  see  myself  accepted, 
and  all  Thy  dying  redeemed  people  fully  delivered.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  8.  And  they  departed  quickly  from  the  sepulchre. — Joy  in  the  morning : — 
Just  as  a  man  who  has  travelled  in  the  dark,  looks  back  at  break  of  day  from  soma 
lofty  eminence  on  the  way  that  he  has  gone,  and  admires  the  beauty  and  magnifi- 
cence of  objects  that  he  passed,  aware  only  of  their  existence  and  not  their  claims, 
or  even  deeming  them  objects  of  fear  and  not  of  delight,  so  the  disciples,  when 
enlightened  from  above,  recalled  the  scenes  and  events  of  their  Master's  life,  and 
rejoiced  in  much  which  at  the  time  they  had  not  understood.  Thus  was  it  especi- 
ally with  the  death  and  departure  of  Christ.  They  were  to  His  followers  like  the 
fabled  statue  of  Memnon,  which  sent  forth  sounds,  mournful  in  the  night,  but 
melodious  at  the  rising  of  the  sun  :  when  God's  morning  light  arose,  how  sweet 
the  notes  those  facts,  once  only  sad,  emitted.  {A.  J.  Morris.)  Sorrow  minister- 
ing to  joy : — It  is  said  that  gardeners  sometimes,  when  they  would  bring  a  rose  to 
richer  flowering,  deprive  it  for  e  season  of  light  and  moisture.  Silent  and  dark  it 
stands,  dropping  one  fading  leaf  after  another,  and  seeming  to  go  down  patiently 
to  death.  But  when  every  leaf  is  dropped,  and  the  plant  stands  stripped  to  the 
uttermost,  a  new  life  is  even  then  working  in  the  buds,  from  which  shall  spring  • 
tender  foliage  and  a  brighter  wealth  of  flowers.  So  often,  in  celestial  gardening, 
every  leaf  of  earthly  joy  must  drop,  before  a  new  and  Divine  bloom  visits  the  souL 
{Mrs.  H.  B.  Stowe.)  Joy  the  shadow  of  sorrow: — In  this  world  full  often  OQI 
joys  are  only  the  tender  shadows  which  our  sorrows  cast.    (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  9, 10.  And  as  they  went  to  tell  His  disciples,  behold,  Jesus  met  them, 
■aylng,  All  hall. — How  the  risen  Chri>:t  is  seen : — It  is  not  supposed  that  the 
impartial  Christ,  or  the  Christianity  of  His  gospel,  literally  prefers  one  sex  to  the 
other.  But  He  respects  the  nature  of  each,  and  does  not  abrogate  the  laws  of  that 
nature.  To  that  one,  therefore,  that  has  the  clearer  spiritual  eyesight,  Christ  will  dis- 
close the  first  radiancy  of  His  glory.  In  that  sex  that  loves  most,  and  therefore, 
suffers  most,  and  is  perhaps  capable  of  sinning  most,  He  finds  the  faith-faculty 
most  ready  to  recognize  Him,  and  on  that,  therefore — as  if  in  a  kind  of  compensa- 
tion for  the  first  sin,  and  the  tender  sensitiveness  to  all  injury — He  bestows  the 
blessing  of  the  earUest  benediction  of  His  resurrection  voice.  The  general  dostino- 
tion  thus  drawn  between  the  sexes  reappears,  in  its  measure,  between  individuals 
of  each  of  the  two  ;  and  there  is  thus  a  similar  advance  of  clearness  in  the  other 
succeeding  manifestations.  The  circle  gradually  enlarges  from  ihe  solitary  Mary 
to  a  great  company  of  men  as  they  are  gradually  prepared  to  see  and  believe.  I. 
This  is  the  certification  afforded  by  our  Saviour's  resurrection  to  the  fact  of  Hia 
DrvDjmr.  "They  came  and  held  Him  by  the  feet  and  worshipped  Him."  They 
worshipped,  and  He  did  not  check  it.  Was  He  not  the  one  that  teaches  of  what 
their  worship  is  f  The  resurrection  had  transfigured,  and  as  it  were  had  divinized 
all  his  mortal  signs.  It  had  never  been  heard  before  that  a  man  lifted^  himself,  by 
his  own  will,  out  of  the  grave,  and  asserted  his  superiority  to  all  the  forces  of 
destruction.  Surely  here  must  be  nothing  less  than  the  Creator's  majesty.  In  the 
glorified  form  the  "  Son  of  God  "  stood  revealod  not  less  than  the  "  Son  of  Man." 
They  worshipped  Him.  Place  beside  this  tr  th  another.  These  faithful  believers 
were  not  believers  in  a  one-sided  or  ultra-spir  tnalism — "  They  held  Him  by  the  feet, 
and  worshipped^  Him.''  Here  were  two  signs  of  a  living  faith,  the  touch  and  tha 
bended  knees.  'Both  were  welcome  to  Him     ho  knows  every  secret  spring  of  the 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  673 

Boul's  strength,  and  who  replaces  the  dead  formalism  of  the  Law  with  the  vital 
Jorms  of  a  spiritual  kingdom.  Again,  a  supreme  value  is  set  here,  for  the  Christian 
life,  on  the  Saviour's  personal  presence.  To  the  Church  for  eighteen  hundred 
years  it  has  been  spiritual,  not  corporeal,  yet  literal  and  real.  Men  of  action  and 
thought,  if  you  do  not  feel  anything  real  about  this  I  know  not  how  to  reason  with 
you  about  it.  We  can  only  tell  you  what  we  have  seen  or  felt.  Those  institutions 
and  movements  in  the  world,  however  active  and  religious,  seem  to  have  no  permanent 
life  in  them,  which  are  without  this  living  conscious  connection  with  the  person 
and  presence  of  Christ,  so  as  to  draw  their  constant  supplies  of  power  from  Him. 
They  seem  like  streams,  however  full,  which  run  from  a  cistern  and  not  from  the 
fountain  in  the  hills.  He  does  not  say  to  them  "All  hail."  I  am  sure  that 
Christ  is  with  me  and  has  for  me  all  the  power  and  love  I  need  ;  He  lives  greatly 
in  me  and  for  me.  As  it  was  then,  so  now ;  they  who  are  spiritually  best  prepared 
by  affliction,  earneetness,  sympathy,  with  the  spirit  of  His  life  and  laws,  and  by 
love  for  Him,  have  the  clearest  and  earliest  disclosures  of  His  Deified  presence. 
{Bishop  Huntingdon).  Meeting  with  Jesus : — All  that  concerns  our  Lord  after 
His  resurrection  is  calm  and  happy.  A  French  writer  calls  the  forty  days  on 
earth,  "The  life  of  Jesus  Christ  in  glory";  truly  it  was  glory  as  full  as  earth 
could  then  bear.  His  tomb  was  empty,  and  consequently  the  disciples'  griefs 
would  have  been  over,  had  they  fully  understood  what  that  vacant  grave  meant. 
Then  was  their  choicest  time  for  living  fellowship  with  their  risen  Lord,  and  He 
did  not  fail  to  grant  them  the  privilege  on  many  memorable  occasions.  Since  our 
Lord  is  risen,  we  also  may  have  happy  communion  with  Him.  These  are  days  in 
which  we  may  expect  Him  to  manifest  Himself  to  us  spiritually,  as  He  did  for 
forty  days  to  the  disciples  coporeally.  Let  us  not  be  satisfied  unless  it  is  often 
said  of  us,  •*  Jesus  met  them."  I.  In  the  way  of  skkvice  Jesus  meets  tjs — 
"As  they  went  to  tell,"  &c,  1.  He  may  come  at  other  times,  as  He  did  to  those 
who  visited  the  sepulchre,  to  those  walking  out  to  Emmaus,  to  others  fishing,  and 
to  the  eleven  assembled  for  mutual  consolation.  2.  He  is  likeliest  to  come  when 
we  are  doing  His  work,  since  (a)  we  are  then  most  awake,  and  most  able  to  see 
Him ;  (6)  we  are  then  in  special  need  of  Him ;  (c)  we  are  then  most  in  accord 
with  Him.  3.  But,  come  when  Jesas  may,  it  will  be  a  blessed  visitation,  worthy 
to  be  prefaced  by  a  "Behold!  "  Oh,  that  he  would  come  now  I  H.  When  Jesus 
MEETS  cs  He  has  eveb  a  good  wobo  fob  cs.  The  fittest  motto  for  resurrection 
fellowship  is  "All  hail  1 "  1.  A  word  of  salutation.  2.  A  word  of  benediction. 
3.  A  word  of  gratulation.  4.  A  word  of  pacification.  III.  When  Jesub  meets  vb 
n  BECOMES  us  TO  AROUSE  OURSELVES.  Wo  ought  at  such  times  to  be  like  the 
disciples,  who  were — 1.  All  alive  with  hopeful  energy.  •'  They  came,"  In  eager 
haste  they  drew  near  to  Him.  What  life  it  would  put  into  preachers  and  hearers 
if  the  Lord  Jesus  would  manifestly  appear  unto  them  1  Dulness  flees  when  Jesus 
is  seen.  2.  All  aglow  with  happy  excitement.  They  "held  Him  by  the  feet," 
hardly  knowing  what  they  did,  but  enraptured  with  the  sight  of  Him.  3.  All 
ardent  with  reverent  love.  They  "worshipped  Him."  What  heartiness  they 
threw  into  that  lowly  adoration  J  4.  All  amazed  at  His  glory.  They  were  pros- 
trate, and  began  to  fear.  6.  All  afraid  lest  they  should  lose  their  bUss.  They 
grasped  Him,  and  held  Him  by  the  ftet.  IV.  From  such  a  meeting  we  should  go 
ON  A  FURTHER  ERRAND.  1.  We  must  not  plead  spiritual  absorption  as  an  excuse  for 
inactivity,  but  must  "  go  "  at  our  Lord's  bidding.  2.  We  must  seek  the  good  of 
others,  because  of  their  relation  to  our  Lord.  He  says,  "  Tell  My  brethren." 
8.  We  must  communicate  what  our  Lord  has  imparted — "  Go,  tell."  4.  We 
must  encourage  our  brethren  by  the  assurance  that  joy,  similar  to  oars,  awaits 
them — "There  shall  they  see  Me."  Thus  shall  we  best  realize  and  retain  the 
choice  benefits  of  intercourse  with  the  Lord.  Not  only  for  ourselves,  but  mainly 
for  the  benefit  of  others,  are  we  to  behold  our  Lord.  Then  let  ns  go  to  holy 
work  hoping  to  meet  Jesus  as  we  go.  Let  ns  go  to  more  holy  work  when  we 
have  met  Him.  Let  us  labour  to  abide  in  Him,  looking  for  JEis  promised  ap- 
pearing, and  exhorting  others  to  do  the  same.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  11-15.  Say  70,  His  dladplea  came  by  night,  and  stole  Elm  away. — Th^ 
chief  priests' story  : — L  Let  us  begin  with  an  exact  dndekbtandino  of  the  whole 
■tory  at  once.  II.  Coolly  and  dispassionately  it  becomes  us  to  weigh  the  tale, 
therefore,  on  its  merits.  1.  In  the  very  outset  the  antecedent  improbability  of 
particulars  crashes  it.  How  came  a  trained  watch  all  to  sleep  7  2.  The  immediate 
followers  of  Jesus  had  no  motive  to  steal  the  body  of  their  Lord.     3.  They  had  no 

id 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvnr 

concerted  plan  to  do  any  such  thing.  4.  The  Jews  never  told  this  tale  in  any 
judicial  audience  or  court,  so  that  it  could  be  subject  to  cross-examination.  Stealing 
was  a  capital  crime,  yet  none  of  the  disciples  were  ever  arrested.  5.  There  was 
awful  risk  to  the  soldiers  if  this  story  was  true.  Death  was  the  penalty  of  a  Roman 
eentinel  asleep  at  his  post.  6.  The  inherent  impossibility  of  the  act  itself.  7.  Then 
what  could  have  been  done  with  the  body  after  the  disciples  had  got  it  in  posses- 
eion  ?  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  is  more  than  a  fact ;  it  is  a  doctrine  ;  and  takea 
all  the  other  Christian  doctrines  in  its  train.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  An  arrant 
Jewish  fable : — For  indeed  this  text  is  a  mere  romancy,  as  arrant  a  Jewish  fable  as 
ever  was  told ;  a  conspiracy  so  full  of  rotten  fictions  that  nothing  is  true  in  it  all, 
but  that  it  is  a  conspiracy,  that  it  is  a  fiction.  I.  Then  we  must  bolt  out  the  con- 
iederates.  II.  The  way  of  confederacy  is  by  putting  a  forged  tale  in  the  soldiers* 
mouths.  III.  The  plot  is  collaterally  against  the  disciples  for  being  breakers-np  of 
graves  and  robbers  of  the  dead.  IV.  The  main  intended  contrivance  was  to  dis- 
credit the  true  doctrine  of  our  Saviour's  resurrection.  V.  Handle  the  improbability 
of  all,  of  what  contradictions  the  plot  consists,  never  to  be  pieced  together.  {Bishop 
Racket.)  The  Roman  soldiers  and  the  Jewish  rulers : — Show  the  falsehood  and 
improbability  of  the  report,  *•  His  disciples  came  by  night,  and  stole  Him  away  while 
we  slept."  I.  It  is  very  unlikely  that  a  guard  of  Roman  soldiers  should  sleep  upon 
duty.  II.  The  absurdity  of  this  report  is  manifest  from  itself,  for  men  cannot  say 
what  is  done  when  they  are  asleep.  III.  If  the  guard  of  soldiers  had  fallen  asleep 
as  they  were  watching  at  the  sepulchre,  they  must  have  awaked  if  any  attempt  had 
been  made  to  steal  the  body.  IV.  The  remaining  of  the  burial  clothes  affords  proof 
that  the  body  was  not  removed  by  friends  or  other  men.  Whoever  came  upon  such 
a  design  woidd  have  been  in  a  hurry,  and  would  have  executed  their  design  with  all 
possible  expedition,  whereas  here  are  marks  of  leisure  and  composure.  V.  It  is  not 
conceivable  that  the  stealing  away,  or  the  clandestine  removal,  of  the  body  of  Jesus 
could  answer  any  purpose  whatever  ;  therefore  it  was  not  thought  of  nor  attempted 
by  any.  VI.  There  does  not  appear  anywhere  in  this  history  any  intimation  of  the 
disciples  expecting  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  ;  therefore  they  did  not  contrive  any 
account  of  His  being  risen,  nor  had  they  beforehand  any  thought  of  it  till  they  had 
more  than  sufficient  evidence  of  that  event.  VH.  This  saying  of  the  guard  must 
have  been  false,  forasmuch  as  no  punishment  was  inflicted  on  any  for  taking  away 
the  body.  VIII.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  the  testimony  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus 
concerning  the  resurrection  is  true  and  credible.  (N.  Lardner.)  Human  unscrupu- 
lousness  : — Some  of  the  particulars  of  the  negotiation  between  the  chief  priests  and 
elders  on  the  one  hand,  with  the  guards  on  the  other  hand,  shall  be  the  subject 
of  our  meditation.  I.  Looking  at  the  heads  of  the  Church  and  the  heads  of 
the  people,  it  might  be  concluded  that  from  such  a  source  nothing  could  flow 
that  was  not  consistent  with  religion  and  "  honour."  Wherever  a  lack  of  principle 
and  high-toned  feeling  might  be  found,  it  would  assuredly  not  be  found  in  the 
reverend  fathers  who  were  the  ornaments  of  that  Church  which  dated  back  to  the 
days  of  the  patriarchs  and  prophets.  The  "  elders,"  too.  These  were  the  "  princes" 
of  the  people  and  the  heads  of  family  associations.  Their  rank,  their  education, 
their  hereditary  civil  privileges  and  consequent  authority,  their  judicial  relations  to 
the  people — all  these  circumstances  were  of  a  kind  to  justify  the  expectation  that 
their  words  and  their  deeds  would  be  not  only  wise  and  constitutional,  but  also  free 
from  all  injustice,  narrowness,  meanness,  low  cunning,  corruption,  and  heartlesa- 
ness.  Where  among  the  Jewish  laity  were  pure  principles,  lofty  aims,  commanding 
virtue,  strict  integrity,  general  greatness  of  character  to  be  looked  for  if  not  in  these 
the  aristocracy  of  the  nation  7  II.  These  distinguished  men  took  steps,  which  legally 
were  allowed,  to  gam  one  greatly-desired  object  of  their  lives,  namely,  the  death  of 
Christ.  How  much  nefariousness  was  employed  by  them  in  arranging  and  com- 
pleting  their  murderous  scheme  so  as  to  bring  it  within  constitutional  limits  it  is 
not  our  design  at  present  to  inquire.  All  the  help  that  was  possible  by  law  they 
Becured.  The  governor  by  courtesy  gave  them  permission  to  use  a  guard  of  soldiers 
to  further  their  plans.  The  captive  Lord,  doubly  captive  for  a  time,  rose  from  the 
dead.  The  military  watchers  told  "  the  things  "  which  had  come  to  pass  to  the 
"  sacred"  and  "noble  "  men  under  whose  brief  authority  they  acted.  Supposing 
these  had  doubted  the  truth  of  the  affirmations  made  by  the  soldiers,  what,  in  that 
case,  was  the  course  suggested  by  their  doubts  ?  It  was  clearly  that  of  inquiry — 
patient,  careful,  fair  inquiry.  Try  the  temper  of  the  man.  Ask  him  if  it  be  true, 
as  some  say  it  is,  that  not  many  days  since  he  sat  down  to  meat  with  unwashen 
hands  7    What  an  active  volcano  of  sacerdotal  indignation  1      Did  yon  think  then 


CHAP,  xxvra.]  ST.  MATTHEW,  «7* 

were  beneath  that  dignified  and  quiet  extei'ior  such  force  and  fire  as  this  half- 
implied  imputation  against  his  ceremonial  goodness  has  stirred  into  activity  ?  Is 
it  not  a  mystery  that  this  saintly-mannered  man  should  be  one  of  those  who,  having 
•'  taken  counsel,"  advised  that  '•  large  money  "  should  be  given  to  the  soldiers  to 
declare  deliberately  a  thing  to  be  true  which  both  he  and  they  knew  to  be  entirely 
false  I  Tet  he  did  all  this,  and  did  it  vnthoat  an  apparent  hesitancy  or  even  the 
smallest  sign  of  compunction  or  self-reproach.  "  Say  ye,  His  disciples  camo  by 
night  and  stole  Him  away  while  we  slept."  III.  Then  as  to  the  agents  paid  to 
commit  the  sin.  There  was,  it  must  be  allowed,  a  very  great  conventional  and 
Bccidontal  disparity  between  the  parties.  These  soldiers  were,  most  probably,  of 
the  •'  lowsBt  order."  They  were  uneducated.  The  military  life  had  not  helped  to 
improve  in  them  either  mind,  heart,  or  manners.  Add  to  these  things  the  facts 
that  they  were  nationally  Gentiles  and  religiously  pagan.  Were  they,  however,  on 
these  accounts  to  be  used  as  mere  matter — tools  to  be  handled  without  a  thought 
about  their  consciences  or  their  moral  responsibilities  7  Might  they  be  used  as 
landlords  sometimes  use  tenantry  ?  or  as  manufacturers  use  their  "  hands  ?  "  or  as 
some  among  the  "  upper  classes  "  use  their  dependent  tradespeople  and  menials  ? 
Was  it  right  to  treat  them  as  having  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  interests  of  truth 
and  goodness?  The  Jews  had  been  taught  that  God  was  "  mindful  "  of  '•  man." 
The  high  priests  and  elders  in  Jerusalem  knew  no  man  had  a  right  to  "  sell  "  the 
truth,  whatever  his  condition  in  life,  his  nationality,  or  his  degree  of  knowledge. 
It  is  not  to  be  much  wondered  at  that  the  soldiers  "  took  the  money  and  did  as  they 
were  taught."  Was  not  the  cause  of  condemnation  unspeakably  greater  in  the 
bribers  than  in  the  bribed  ?  We  are  verging  upon  days  which  will  be  trying  days  to 
the  followers  of  Christ.  They  will  be  intensely  exciting  days,  and,  as  such,  likely 
to  throw  mind  and  conscience  off  the  even  balance.  Can  it  by  any  casuistry  be 
ehown  that  to  use  station,  money,  learning,  or  other  power  at  command,  for  the 
purpose  of  inducing  a  man  to  do  or  to  say  what  is  contrary  to  his  belief  is  an  act  of 
"  righteousness,"  and  that  it  will  help  to  exalt  a  nation  ?  Let  us  show  that  we  are 
prepared  to  encourage  political  conviction,  and  even  to  aid  those  around  us  to 
become  fully  persuaded  in  their  own  minds  that  we  honour  men  not  because  they 
think  as  we  think,  but  because  they  fairly  and  at  some  cost  of  time,  effort,  feeling, 
try  to  learn  what  is  true,  and  have  the  disposition  and  the  will  to  do  what  they 
believe  to  be  right.  Such  a  spirit  and  such  a  bearing  on  our  part  will  help  to  make 
the  nation  "  righteous,"  virill  also  aid  in  healthfully  drawing  class  nearer  to  class, 
and  will  greatly  assist  in  counteracting  and  in  hastening  the  expulsion  of  the 
diabolical  spirit,  which  in  every  age,  under  varying  conditions,  has  made  its 
appearance — the  spirit  which  bargains  that  for  so  much  money  there  shall  be  so 
much  lying.     {T.  Lloyd.) 

Vers.  16-20.  Then  the  eleven  dladples  went  away  into  Galilee. — On  the  moun- 
tain : — I.  Is  THE  wobld's  need  any  less  now  than  it  was  then  t  The  needs  ol 
the  human  soul  are  still  unsupplied  by  any  material  satisfactions.  The  conscience 
of  the  world  is  still  troubled  with  the  old  problem,  "  How  shall  man  be  just  with 
God.'  If  the  gospel  be  withheld  from  the  knowledge  of  mankind  the  problem  re- 
mains insoluble.  The  misery  of  man  is  great  upon  him  still.  "  Go  ye  therefore," 
Ac  Tell  man  that  God  loves  them.  Such  is  the  great  commission.  1.  Look  at  its 
tuuversality.  2.  Look  at  its  intellectual  character,  •'  Go  teach  all  nations."  The 
gospel  is  an  appeal  to  human  intelligence.  3.  Consider  its  gentleness.  The  Divine 
condescension  in  act  of  bending  down  to  reach  men,  disciple  them.      II.  Are  the 

ENC0DRA9EMENT8  GIVEN  TO  THOSE  WHO  PUT  THEMSELVES  INSTANTLY  IN  A  WAY  OF 
obedience    to   THIS  LAST   COMMAND  IN  ANY  DEGBEE    LESS    THAN    THEY  WEBE  AT   FIBST  ? 

The  f ollowem  of  Christ  had  heavenly  power  on  their  side  then.  Has  it  waned  ? 
"  Go,"  even  if  you  doubt.  Once  before  our  Lord  had  seen  the  world  and  its .  king- 
doms "  from  a  high  mountain."  The  race  shall  enter  into  the  kingdonjB  of  the 
world.     (A.  Raleigh,  DJ).) 

Ver  17.  But  some  doubted. — Dofubtt : — I.  Philosophic  doubts.    All  men  are  not 

philosophers,  and  cannot  reason  as  Descartes  did  from  self  to  all  outside.  We  must 
accept  some  axioms  without  proof.  II.  Kationalistic  doubts.  The  withholding 
faith  in  spite  of  evidence.  They  mistake  the  use  of  reason  in  matters  of  faith. 
Men  act  upon  three  propositions  in  determining  what  is  right.  1.  That  is  right  which 
we  think  to  be  right.  2.  There  is  no  telling  what  right  is.  3.  That  there  is  a  final 
arbiter.    Th'e  objections  ol  the  rationalists  are  based  on  foregone  conclusions.    1. 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha/.  xxmv. 


It  is  dwlared  a  priori  that  the  Infinite  cannot  be  a  person.  2.  That  nature  ia 
unifonn.  These  are  urged  against  the  Bible.  But  miracles  have  been  wrought. 
Will  a  man  stand  on  the  wharf  as  the  steamboat  is  departing  and  declare  that 
steam  is  an  absurdity  7  III.  Spiritual  doubts.  Such  are  pestered  with  fears  of  a 
different  kind.  1.  They  believe  that  death  is  a  crisis.  2.  That  the  soul  is  guilty. 
Are  we  pardoned?  3.  Some  are  troubled  by  the  doctrine  of  election.  {F.  L. 
Patton,  D.D.)  Religious  doubts : — 1.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  Christianity  ia 
accountable  for  the  doubts  with  which  it  is  often  assailed.  It  fosters  the  spirit  of 
thonghtfulness,  inquiry,  of  mental  activity.  There  are  bodily  states — of  liver  and 
stomach — that  may  contribute  to  affect  us  with  temporary  gloom  of  doubt.  There 
are  states  of  the  social  atmosphere  that  may  contribute  to  affect  us  in  the  same  way ; 
when  the  general  air  is  charged  with  doubt,  we  can  hardly  help  being  affected  by  it. 
Some  doubts  are  the  sign  of  mental  quickening.  But  we  must  be  careful  to  dis- 
tinguish these  from  those  resulting  from  moral  deterioration  and  decline.  What 
used  to  be  a  beautiful  certainty  has  paled  away  in  the  mist,  not,  though,  under 
research,  but  through  too  much  business  care ;  it  has  come  upon  him  like  a  change 
of  weather  in  the  night.  Sometimes,  again,  it  is  a  deeper  understanding,  or  a  more 
vivid  perception  of  one  particular  link,  that  renders  us  doubtful  in  relation  to  other 
things.  We  must  be  careful  in  yielding  too  readily  to  the  apparent  inevitable 
destructiveness  of  a  truth  that  has  burst  upon  us  with  new  and  fascinating  power. 
The  contradiction  may  be  a  temporary  illusion.  Again,  men  often  come  to  doubt 
what  they  have  ceased  to  require  so  urgently  as  they  did;  wanting  it  less,  they 
believe  it  less.  {S.  A.  Tipple.)  Doubts  and  fears : — I.  From  whence  arise  thosh 
DOUBTS  AND  FFABB  BO  DTSTRESsiNQ  TO  MANY?  Many  fruitful  Bourccs  from  whence 
they  spring.  1.  Sin  is  often  the  cause.  Inward  foes,  &g.  2.  Carelessness  will 
often  lead  to  uncertainty  and  doubt.  3.  Disobedience,  neglected  duty,  «feo.  4. 
Worldliness  necessarily  produces  them.  6.  Seasons  of  temptation  are  often  seasons 
of  doubt.  "  Satan  worries  whom  he  cannot  devour  with  a  malicious  joy."  6.  Ig- 
norance is  perhaps  the  most  fruitful  source.  Ignorance  of  what  is  written  was  evi- 
dently the  cause  of  doubt  here.  How  many  appear  not  to  understand  (Psa.  ciii.  12 ; 
Kom.  viii.  1 ;  John  x.  28,  &c.).  Salvation  is  a  present  certain  reality  (Eph.  ii.  8, 
i.  7 ;  Heb.  x.  14).  It  may  be  ignorance  as  to  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Losing 
sight  of  Christ,  many  become  taken  up  with  feelings  and  self.  II.  Theib  BAMEFni> 
INFLUFNCE.  They  by  no  means  prove  a  state  of  high  spirituality.  1.  Doubts  di!> 
honour  God ;  rob  Him  of  the  praise  that  is  due  to  Him.  2.  Mar  our  comfort.  S-. 
Weaken  our  strength  for  service,  conflict,  and  devotion.  4.  They  chill  our  affection. 
6.  They  stunt  our  spiritual  growth.  6.  Unfit  us  to  witness  for  Christ.  7.  Influence 
others  unfavourably.  III.  Their  remedt.  As  faith  is  a  fruit  of  the  ever-l>lessed 
Spirit,  no  assurance  can  be  obtained  but  from  the  same  Divine  source.  1.  Look  and 
get  away  from  self.  2.  Study  the  sacred  word  more.  3.  Live  nearer  the  Lord.  4. 
Seek  to  have  a  more  simple,  child-like  faith — faith  that  takes  God  at  His  word ; 
that  raises  no  cavilling  questions  ;  that  lives  above  circumstances,  appearances,  and 
feelings,  even  upon  "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  (G.  Cobb.)  Scepticism: — I.  Doubting 
IN  matters  of  religion.  Doubt  which  arises  from  ignorance.  Doubts  which  mark 
the  course  of  inquiry.  Doubts  which  indicate  moral  perversity.  Doubts  about  our 
personal  religion.  II.  Tea  practical  influence  of  doubting  in  matters  of 
RELIGION.  It  is  no  apology  for  indifference.  It  ought  to  stimulate  inquiry.  It 
contains  an  element  of  belief — doubt,  not  denial.  It  may  be  an  ultimate  benefit. 
1.  Christianity  is  not  doubtful  because  it  has  been  doubted.  2.  Its  truths  are  so 
great  that  occasional  doubting  is  not  wonderful.  3.  All  classes  of  doubters  should 
not  be  treated  with  indiscriminate  harshness.  ,4.  There  are  broad  marks  of  dis- 
tinction between  the  doubts  of  the  saint  and  of  the  sinner.  (D.  Young,  D.D.) 
Doubt  not  to  abandon  truth : — When  the  ship  shakes,  do  not  throw  yourself  into 
the  sea.  When  storms  of  doubt  assault  spiritual  truths,  do  not  abandon  yourself 
to  the  wil^  evil  of  the  world  that  "  cannot  rest."  The  ship  rolls  in  the  wind,  but 
by  the  wind  advances.  (T.  Lynch.)  We  must  not  let  go  manifest  truths  because 
we  cannot  answer  all  questions  about  them.  {J,  Collier.)  Some  doubted: — 1. 
Yon  hesitate  because  you  are  measuring  by  human  standards  and  taking  your  level 
from  nature.  2.  You  want  more  proof  than  God  is  pleased  to  give.  3.  You  judge 
that  God  should  do  something  extraordinary.  4.  Your  faith  depends  upon  what  ia 
rare  and  accidental.  5.  Perhaps  an  interval  of  carelessness  has  dimmed  the  moral 
eye.  6.  There  was  some  temptation  to  doubt.  7.  To  God  it  is  no  little  thing  to 
be  doubted  by  His  child.  8.  I  feel  sure  that  some  who  have  doubted  are  now  in 
beaven.      {J.   Vaughan,  M.A.)         Good  doubting: — He  does  not  doubt  wiselj 


CHAP.  xxTxn.J  ST.  MATTHEW.  677 

who,  though  stopping  short  of  being  an  accomplished  unbeliever,  allows  doubt  to 
get  ahead  of  belief ;  who  does  not,  in  fact,  make  believing  his  object,  using  the 
power  and  right  of  doubting  only  to  preserve  him  against  premature  and  crude  and 
false  conclusions.  The  truth-lovmg  man  will  read  and  search,  and  think,  and,  let 
me  add,  pray,  with  the  view  to  enlarge,  and  build,  and  beautify  such  a  home  for  his 
soul  as  we  are  reminded  of  by  the  words  of  Solomon.  •*  Every  wise  woman  buildeth 
her  house,  but  the  foolish  plucketh  it  down  with  her  hands ;  "  and  "  wisdom  hath 
builded  her  house,  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  pillars."  I  believe  in  the  palace- 
home  of  wisdom,  with  its  seven  pillars.  But  what  home  for  the  soul  will  the  mere 
habit  of  doubting — and  especially  of  doubting,  for  doubting  sake — ever  build,  and 
what  would  be  the  pillarB  thereof  ?    (H.  H.  Dobney.) 

Yer.  18.  All  power  Is  given  nnto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  eartb. — The  preroga- 
tive of  the  Saviour : — I.  The  prerogative  itself.  1.  Its  nature — "  power."  This 
means  authority  and  ability.     2.  Its  extent — **  all."    3.  Its  acquisition — "  given." 

II.  View  it  in  reference  to  His  personal  charactsb.  When  an  individual  obtains 
elevation  we  are  anxious  to  know  something  of  his  qualities.  We  would  not  wish 
an  ignorant,  unfaithful,  impatient,  unmerciful  man  to  possess  power.  Christ  gave 
Himself  for  us ;  power  in  good  hands.  III.  His  prebooativb  in  reference  to  His 
ENEMIES.  IV.  In  reference  to  the  saints.  (IF.  Jay.)  Christ's  power  benefi- 
cent : — Had  Cornelius  Winter  obtained  an  income  of  ten  thousand  a-year^  he  woiild 
not  have  been  the  better  for  it.  But  many  others  would ;  and  I  know — being  then 
nnder  his  care — that  when  he  had  an  addition  of  two  hundred  a-year  to  his  small 
income,  it  was  no  advantage  to  him ;  he  never  added  one  article  to  his  dress,  or  one 
dish  to  his  table,  or  one  ornament  to  his  dwelling.  If  Howard — the  apostle  of 
compassion — had  obtained  all  the  power  of  the  late  Napoleon,  oh  I  how  many  mil- 
lions would  have  been  blessed  1  How  grievous  it  is  to  see  a  cold-blooded,  selfish 
wretch  rising  up  in  life,  and  prospering  1  for  you  know  that  his  power  will  be  only  a 
capacity  to  insult,  to  strip,  to  oppress,  to  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor.  But  how 
delightful  it  is  to  see  a  man  of  tenderness  and  generosity  rising  I  for  you  know  that 
his  increased  power  will  be  a  capacity  to  teach  the  ignorant,  to  feed  the  hungry,  to 
clothe  the  naked,  to  cause  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy,  and  to  bring  down 
blessings  upon  the  heads  of  those  who  are  ready  to  perish.  But  what  wa,8  a  Winter, 
and  what  was  a  Howard,  to  the  Friend  of  sinners!  Their  hearts  were  no  better 
than  ice  or  iron,  compared  to  His.  Ah !  Christians,  we  here  find  that  power,  abso- 
lute power,  is  placed  just  where  it  should  be  placed — where  it  is  safe,  where  it  is 
beneficent,  where  it  will  be  glorious.  {Ibid.)  The  power  and  authority  of  Christ : — 
I.  An  account  of  the  extent  ol  our  Saviour's  power;  that  He  is  invested  with  all 
power,  both  in  heaven  and  earth.  II.  A  declaration  of  the  original  of  that  unlimited 
power  and  authority.  "All  power,"  saith  He,  "is  given  Me,"  that  is,  from  the 
Father.  III.  The  commission  He  thereupon  grants  His  disciples — "  Go  ye,  there- 
fore, and  teach  all  nations."  IV.  The  doctrine  which  all  nations  were  to  be  taught, 
and  into  which  they  were  to  be  baptized.  V.  The  practice  of  those  who  were  to  be 
baptized  into  this  faith — "  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things,  whatsoever  I  have 
commanded  you."  VI.  The  promise  of  effectual  assistance  to  the  disciples  sent 
forth  upon  this  commission — "  And  lo  1  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of 
the  world."  {S.  Clarke.)  The  undelegated  rule  andperpetua  I  presence  of  Christ  in 
His  Church : — I.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  source  or  all  adthobitt.  II.  The 
DTJTT  OP  THOSE  COMMISSIONED  BY  Christ.    To  tcach,  uot  to  Sacrifice.     To  baptize. 

III.  The  SPECIAL  PROMISE  which  is  to  animate  Christ's  true  disciples.  (R.  Hibbs,  M.A.) 
Spiritual  power  the  great  want  of  the  Church : — Oh  !  how  we  want  "  all  power  "  now. 
We  all  have  our  theories  of  the  condition  of  the  Church  just  now.  I  do  not  know 
what  yours  may  be.  Mine  is  not  very  bright,  but  I  have  this  one  belief  in  my  soul, 
that  what  is  wanted  most  of  all  is  one  great  revival  of  spiritual  life — one  wonderful 
downpour  of  the  grace  of  God  from  heaven  to  flood  aU  the  churches.  It  seems  to 
me  we  get  something  like  the  barges  and  the  vessels  down  yonder  at  London  Bridge 
when  the  tide  is  out.  There  they  lie  in  the  mud.  There  are  gangs  of  men,  but  they 
cannot  get  at  these  vessels  and  barges.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  Now,  will  you  great 
engineers  tell  me  how  much  horse  power,  how  much  steam  power  you  want  ?  There 
is  nothing  wanted  but  the  tide.  When  the  tide  rises  every  barge  begins  to  walk  like 
a  thing  of  life,  and  every  vessel  can  readily  receive  its  cargo  and  go  out  to  sea  in 
due  time.  When  the  heavenly  tides  of  spiritual  blessing  begin  to  come  up  nothing 
can  withsland  them.  What  a  glorious  time  it  was  when  Mr.  Whitefield  and  Mr. 
Wesley  were  going  up  and  down  this  land  like  tvrin  seraphim,  burning  everywhere 


678  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

with  the  Divine  flame,  and  carrying  everywhere  the  Divine  life.  Can  this  be  done 
again  ?  Can  the  masses  of  the  people  be  raised  ?  Can  we  raise  those  that  are  sunk 
in  ignorance  and  degradation  ?  Do  you  think  it  cannot  be  done?  It  must  be  done. 
It  shall  be  done.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  we  expect  it :  •'  All  power  is  given 
unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  eai-th."  He  can  find  another  student  in  Oxford ;  He  can 
find  another  potboy  in  Gloucester;  He  can  find  some  one  somewhere  upon  whom 
He  can  pour  out  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  send  Him  forth  to  preach  with  a  tongue  of 
firo  that  shall  wake  up  the  churches,  and  startle  the  world.  Let  us  cry  to  God  that 
it  may  be  so.  But  we  must  first  deeply  feel  the  necessity  of  it,  and  rejoice  that 
this  necessity  is  met  by  the  text:  "AH  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and 
in  earth."  (Ibid.)  Power  on  earth : — What  do  we  mean  by  "  power  "  on  earth  ? 
The  politician  will  answer  you,  the  statesman,  the  preacher,  the  orator.  It  is  influ- 
ence, the  ability  to  turn  men  to  one's  own  will,  to  check,  curb,  turn,  and  use  them, 
change  their  natures,  and  make  them  subjects  and  servants  in  body,  soul,  and 
spirit.  That  is  power ;  something  very  different  from  the  brute-force  of  a  Samson 
or  a  Cessar,  and  far  higher.  Still,  Caesar,  in  the  organized  government  of  Rome, 
did  possess  very  considerable  power,  to  which  the  world  was  obedient,  whether 
through  love  or  fear.  And  another  such  power  there  was — the  ancient  idol- worship 
of  Eome  and  Greece.  By  these  Satan  held  empire  over  the  world.  Two  powers 
they  were ;  yet  in  our  Lord's  time  so  closely  connected  as  to  be  almost  one  and  the 
Bame.  The  Eoman  Emperor  was  the  universal  ruler.  The  religions  of  Boman, 
Greek,  and  Barbarian  differed  in  little  but  the  names  of  their  false  gods.  The  Jew 
alone,  though  subject  to  the  Eoman,  maintained  his  belief  in  the  One  God,  Creator, 
and  Almighty.  Thus  the  Eoman  empire  and  the  Eoman  heathenism  were  but  as 
one  power  against  all  other  religions.  And  who  was  coming  forward,  thus  claiming  a 
new  power,  to  be  alone  supremo  in  the  world  ?  Who  came  to  overthrow  the  ancient, 
mighty,  all-but-universal  idolatry — the  very  perfection  of  empire  to  the  statesman 
of  that  day,  the  very  perfection  of  religion  to  the  lovers  of  a  gorgeous  ceremonial, 
and  the  indulgers  of  human  pride  and  selfish  passion  ?  Who  came  to  be  King  and 
God  ?  One  whose  public  execution  was  written  in  the  Eoman  records.  One  who 
preached  humility  as  the  only  true  greatness,  who  substituted  penitence  and  self- 
denial  for  the  indulgence  of  flesh  and  spirit.  A  Jew,  too,  of  all  races  the  most 
despised  by  Eoman  and  Barbarian  alike.  .  .  .  The  cause  of  Christ  to  the  shrewdest 
human  calculation  must  have  looked  simply  hopeless ;  His  claim  to  any  power 
whatever  a  silly  boast.  Force  His  followers  could  not,  might  not,  use.  Argument 
they  might ;  and  then  they  came  at  once  face  to  face  with  death.  Yet  the  disciples 
went  forth  preaching  Christ  crucified,  and  risen  again  as  the  life  of  the  world.  It 
was  not  an  attractive  doctrine,  nor  an  easy  morality,  that  they  preached.  There 
was  offered  no  earthly  gain,  or  pleasure,  or  honour.  And  yet  old  Eome  left  her 
idols  to  worship  Jesus ;  her  emperors  became  Christians ;  the  power  of  the  world 
fell ;  the  rehgion  of  the  world  was  changed.  {W.  Michell,  M.A.)  Christ's  univer' 
$al  dominion : — I.  The  grounds  upon  which  Chkist  administers  this  pboviden- 
TiAL  GOVERNMENT.  1.  It  pertains  to  Him  as  the  Eternal  Word,  by  whose  imme- 
diate agency  the  worlds  were  produced.  2.  As  the  second  Adam — both  Son  of  man 
and  Son  of  God.  3.  By  virtue  of  His  Father's  grant.  4.  Acquired  through  suffering 
and  death.  5.  Necessary  to  His  government  of  the  Church.  II.  The  consequences 
WHICH  flow  from  THIS  MOMENTOUS  TRUTH.  1.  It  gives  Unity  to  history.  2.  It 
explains  to  us  the  intermingling  of  mercy  with  providence.  3.  It  gives  wealth  of 
consolation  to  the  Christian.  (B.  M.  Palmer,  D.D.)  The  universal  dominion  oj 
Christ,  the  foundation  of  the  commission  which  His  ministers  receive,  and  His  pro- 
mised presence  their  encouragement  in  fulfilling  it: — I.  The  universal  dominion  of 
Christ  here  asserted — "  All  power,"  &e.  The  word  "  power  "  in  our  language  ia 
ambiguous.  Sometimes  it  signifies  ability  or  capacity,  and  sometimes  rightful 
authority.  In  both  these  senpes  it  is  true  of  Christ ;  He  has  both  the  ability  to  act 
and  the  authority  to  warrant  His  acting.  1.  That  as  a  Divine  Person  the  Saviour 
has  all  power  inherent  in  Himself.  2.  In  virtue  of  office,  the  power  here  spoken  of 
is  delegated  to  Christ — "  All  power  is  given,"  &c.  3.  This  power  and  authority 
extend  to  universal  nature.  4.  This  power  is  deposited  in  Christ  as  the  Head  of 
the  Church,  and  to  be  exercised  for  her  benefit.  5.  This  power  is  to  be  exercised  in 
the  destruction  of  all  who  do  not  submit  to  it.  II.  The  commission  given  by  Christ 
TO  His  ministers  in  virtue  of  that  power  with  which  He  is  invested.  1.  That 
it  is  only  to  those  who  are  called  by  God,  and  qualified  for  His  service,  that  tliia 
eommission  is  given.  2.  This  commission  extends  to  all  natioDS  as  regards  tha 
persona  to  le  benefited  by  it.    3.  It  embraces  all  that  the  Saviour  has  made  known 


CHAP,  xxvm.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  67f 

in  His  word.  III.  To  consideb  the  encoubaoements  afforded  to  the  ambassadobs 
OF  Chbist  in  the  dischaboe  of  theib  ddty.  1.  Christ  is  with  His  Church  and 
people  always ;  not  His  essential  but  gracious  presence.  2.  A  particular  call  to 
notice  this  truth,  "  I  am  with  you  always."  How  highly  is  Jesus  exalted.  {R. 
Mclndoe.) 

Ver.  19.  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations. — A  plea  for  mistions : — There 
are  many  lessons  in  these  words.  1.  A  lesson  as  to  the  result  of  death.  Soma 
thought  that  death  had  taken  all  "power  "  from  Christ.  They  that  follow  Christ 
as  well  as  the  Master  are  not  robbed  by  death ;  but  on  the  other  side  of  it  they 
say,  "  Power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  2.  The  reward  of  labour. 
The  reward  of  toil  is  a  call  to  a  wider  task,  to  conquer  the  world  for  Christ. 
8.  The  cure  of  doubt.  "Bat  some  doubted.  And  Jesus  said,  Go  ye,  and 
preach  the  gospel."  I.  The  labgeness  of  the  Saviooe's  purpose — "  Go  ye,  and 
teach  all  nations."  What  an  amplitude  there  is  in  the  gaze  of  Christ.  What  a 
reach  in  His  merciful  design.  Calvary  has  not  robbed  Him  of  His  love.  With  the 
freshness  of  the  resurrection  power  upon  Him,  He  bids  men  to  look  at  mankind  and 
conquer  the  world  for  Him.  Our  hearts  are  wofully  small,  and  the  little  heart  pro- 
jects its  littleness  into  everything  at  which  it  looks.  From  this  littleness  of  hope 
and  faith  lift  up  yourself  to  the  dream  of  the  Saviour.  His  eye  has  never  rested 
upon  the  man  of  whom  He  despaired.  H.  The  ix)wlt  methods  which  Christ 
ADOPTS — "  Go  ye,  therefore."  The  instrumentality  is  weak  only  in  our  conception 
of  it.  Christ  knows  what  the  gospel  will  eliect.  Christ  is  a  true  force,  and  oan 
touch  the  heart.  He  knows  the  power  of  the  cross  in  its  very  gentleness.  He  chose 
men  to  preach  it.  He  knew  the  weakness  of  the  twelve ;  He  also  knew  the  power 
there  is  in  each  one  of  us ;  He  knew  the  power  of  sympathy  to  enter  the  soul. 
III.  The  encouragements  to  obey  the  Saviour's  call — "All  power  is  given  unto 
Me."  "Lo,  I  am  with  you  always."  Error  says,  "All  power  is  given  unto  me." 
Sin,  death,  say  the  same.  But  truth  says,  "  All  power  is  given  unto  Christ."  All 
things  work  together  on  behalf  of  the  gospel.  IV.  How  this  charge  has  been 
OBEYED.  (R.  Glover.)  Each  church  contributing  to  the  mission-plan  of  God  : — 
It  has  been  a  constant  joy  to  me  that  from  year  to  year  this  church  has  been  one 
of  its  affluents  ;  and  as  the  Amazon  does  not  disdain  any  side-stream  which  rolls 
its  treasure  into  the  bosom  of  that  ocean  river,  so  every  single  church,  every  side- 
stream,  is  not  disdained  that  rolls  its  golden  sands  into  this  great  movement  which 
is  the  river  of  God  that  is  fertilizing  the  whole  globe.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
work  of  the  Church : — I.  The  nature  of  the  work  which  Christ  has  entrusted  to  His 
Church.  1.  Work  of  spiritual  enlightenment.  2.  Work  of  ingathering  into  His 
Church.  Manifold,  yet  one.  Let  us  arouse  ourselves  to  the  duty  of  gathering  all 
suitable  persons  into  its  fellowship.  3.  Work  of  incitement  to  holiness.  As  holiness 
is  characteristic  of  God,  so  it  ought  to  be  of  His  people.  Thus  the  work  is  rapidly 
sketched  by  the  Kedeemer.  II.  The  extent  of  the  work  Christ  has  committed  to 
His  Church.  Christ's  preaching  prepared  the  way  for  the  doctrine  of  universal 
brotherhood.  No  people,  near  or  remote,  are  to  be  neglected.  This  distinguishes 
Christianity  from  all  other  systems  of  religion.  It  is  not  let  them  come  if  they 
will  and  receive  the  gospel,  but  go  forth,  leave  all,  and  proclaim  the  gospel,  &c. 
III.  The  BNC0DRAGEMENT3  to  the  work  which  Christ  has  entrusted  to  His  Church. 
There  are  many  discouragements  in  the  execution  of  this  commission.  "  The 
kings  of  the  earth  have  set  themselves  together,"  &o.  1.  The  power  of  Christ. 
We  have  might  as  well  as  right  on  our  side.  2.  The  presence  of  Christ.  {A.  A. 
Southems.)  I.  A  great  truth  was  revealed — "All  power,"  &c.  II.  A  great  trust 
was  imparted.  1.  They  were  to  make  disciples  of  all  nations.  2.  They  were  to 
administer  the  ordinance  of  Christian  Baptism.  3.  They  were  to  instruct  their 
converts  in  the  mind  and  will  of  the  great  Master  and  Saviour.  "  Who  is  sufficient 
for  these  things  ?  "  III.  A  great  promise.  {J.R.Thompson.)  The  great  commis- 
tion: — I.  Thb  NATURE  OF  THE  COMMAND.  1.  It  givos  authority  for  missionary  Under- 
takings. 2.  Obedience  to  it  is  a  test  of  a  disciple's  love.  3.  Connected  with  the 
Saviour's  promise — "  I  am  with  you."  4.  It  is  binding  until  Jesus  comes  again. 
II.  What  encoubaqement  is  derived  fbom  it  T  I.  Encouragement  as  to  God's 
purposes  concerning  our  fallen  world.  2.  That  human  instrumentality  is  appointed 
for  the  furtherance  of  God's  purposes.  3.  This  explains  the  opposition  we  meet 
with  in  doing  God's  work :  Satan  is  the  god  of  this  world.  4.  We  may  reckon  on 
our  Master's  sympathy.  6.  We  have  a  certain  hope  of  final  success.  {W.  Cadman^ 
MjL,)        Th*  great  committion : — A  church,  even  of  five  hundred,  represented  bj 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxnn 

eleven  unknown  and  inexperienced  workmen,  looked  a  very  poor  engine  with  which 
to  convert  the  world,  but  the  least  thing  became  a  mighty  thing  in  the  service  of  a 
niighty  agent.  I.  The  first  point  to  be  considered  in  this  great  charter  of  mis- 
sionary enterprize  was  that  the  Chdkch's  missionakt  wokk  reposed  upon  Christ's 
iiLEVATiON  TO  BOPREME  COMMAND.  1.  On  the  evo  of  ELis  mortal  shame,  when  Hia 
feelings  seemed  to  lie  at  the  lowest.  He  still  knewthat  the  Father  Lad  given  nil 
things  into  His  hands ;  and  after  the  resurrection,  within  a  few  days  of  His  ascen- 
sion. He  claimed  it  as  a  gift  given  to  His  crowned  mediatorship — all  power  in 
heaven  and  in  earth.  The  sphere  in  which  He  had  been  thus  constituted  rightful 
Master  was  the  whole  universe ;  as  stated  by  the  eloquent  apostle,  it  extended 
"  far  above  all  principalities,  and  powers,"  &c.  It  is  on  this  universal  range  of 
lawful  control  held  now  by  Jesus  in  virtue  of  His  office,  that  the  world-wide 
missionary  activity  of  His  Church  depends.  Christ's  rule  was  the  basis  ai  thssr 
mission.  It  was  only  when  He  was  on  the  point  of  ascending  to  the  throne  above 
the  heavens  that  He  revoked  His  former  restriction,  which  was,  "  Go  not  into  the  way 
of  the  Gentiles,  and  into  any  city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not ;  "  but  now,  in  the 
room  of  that  revoked  restriction.  He  issued  His  commission  to  Hia  ambassadors  in 
the  widest  terms,  "  Go  ye  now  and  convert  all  the  nations."  This  gave  the  legal 
authorization  to  their  missionaryenterprize.justifyingthe  missionary  in  t^^etting  aside 
the  edicts  of  magistrates,  and  braving  their  threats  of  persecution.  2.  What  was  the 
work  to  which  Jesus  committed  His  Church  in  this  authoritative  fashion  ?  The  word 
translated  "  teach  "  in  the  text  would  read  better  "  disciple  " ;  the  apostles  were  to 
be  the  representation  to  other  men  in  other  lands  of  that  same  spiritual  procesa 
which  had  passed  upon  themselves.  The  two  processes  which  made  up  conversion 
were  discriminated  as  baptizing  and  teaching.  Christ  first  brought  His  disciples 
to  that  point  at  which  they  were  willing  to  accept  Him  by  a  public  profession  and 
a  symbolic  sacrament,  and  then  built  up  their  Christian  life  in  knowledge  and 
service.  What  he  had  done  for  them  He  desired  them  to  do  for  others.  To  do  the 
work  of  baptizing  and  teaching  required  a  combination  of  qualities  which  were  very 
rarely  blended  in  a  single  character.  It  was  necessary  to  combine  enthusiasm  with 
patience,  faith  with  labour ;  the  former  for  the  first,  the  latter  for  the  second,  stage  in 
the  Christianizing  process.  In  the  glorious  warfare  in  which  we  are  engaged  there  is 
room  for  every  temperament.  All  are  soldiers.  II.  The  Church's  missionary  success 

DEPENDS  UPON  the  SPIRITUAi  SUPPORT  AND  PRESENCE  OF  THE  LoRD  JeSUS.    1.  The  rCSUltS 

of  mission  labour  ought  to  be  less  discouraging  than  they  sometimes  seem  to  be. 
The  friends  of  missions  are  too  prone  to  credit  the  disparaging  representations 
made  by  their  enemies.  They  speak  of  this  great  entejprize,  more  than  they  need 
do.  in  a  tone  of  apology.  2.  We  are  living  near  the  beginning  of  what  might  be 
called  the  third  great  missionary  era — and  what  might  prove  to  be  the  last  age  of 
Christian  propagandism.  3,  The  conversion  of  the  world  is  the  task  for  which  the 
Church  of  this  country  has  girt  itself.  Much  has  already  been  accomplished,  and  on 
the  ground  of  natural  likelihood  alone  —to  say  nothing  at  all  of  Divine  promises — 
the  conversion  of  the  world  to  Christianity  began  to  appear  to  the  candid  eye  of  an 
onlooker  but  a  mere  question  of  time.  4.  The  promised  presence  of  Christ  has  not 
failed.  6.  Let  us  throw  ourselves  with  new  heart  and  soul  into  this  most  cheering 
and  hopeful  of  all  enterprizes.  (J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  great  comviand : — 
The  command  to  teach  all  nations  implies — 1.  That  Christianity  is  a  universal 
religion ;  not  merely  one  of  the  religions  of  the  world  from  which,  with  others,  we, 
in  this  later  day,  are  to  select  an  eclectic  or  universal  religion.  2.  That  it  ia 
adapted  to  all  nations  and  all  classes  (Rom.  i.  6),  a  claim  which  history  has  abun- 
dantly justified,  but  which  was  urged  by  early  opponents  as  a  conclusive  objection 
to  it.  3.  That  not  a  natural  development,  but  obedience  to  the  principles  incul- 
cated by  Jesus  Christ,  constitutes  the  secret  of  true  civilization  among  all  nations, 
and  thus  that  Christian  missions  are  the  mother  of  civilization.  4.  Tliat  from  all 
nations  the  members  of  Christ's  Church  triumphant  are  to  be  gathered  to  God  by 
obedience  to  this  commission.  (L.  Abbott.)  The  great  commission: — I.  The 
time  of  it,  or  the  occasion  and  circumstances  under  whieli  it  was  given.  II.  The 
obligation  of  it,  or  the  authority  by  which  it  is  enforced.  III.  The  extent  of  it,  or 
the  sphere  of  its  operation.  IV.  The  nature  of  it,  or  the  message  to  be  com- 
municated. {A.  L.  R.  Foote.)  The  false  and  the  true  universalism : — Tiiii 
incident — the  concluding  one  of  Christ's  earthly  sojourn — is  extremely  valuable, 
among  other  reasons,  as  bringing  forward  what  may  be  called  the  universal 
element  in  Christianity.  There  is  a  false  nniversalism,  and  dangerous  as  false, 
and  coaimon,  too,  as  dangerous.     How  to  meet  it?     Not,  surely,  by  running  into 


CBAP.  xxvra.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  t81 

an  opposite  extreme  of  excl'jsiveness,  but  by  exhibiting  the  true  nniversaliBm. 
For  there  is  a  valid  universalism  in  the  gospel,  and  what  is  it  ?  Not  Christ  in 
every  man — which  is  the  latest  form  of  error  in  this  matter— but  Christ  for 
every  man.  Not  Christ  at  the  root  of  human  nature,  in  some  inexplicable 
way,  waiting  only  to  be  developed,  but  Christ  at  the  root  of  the  gospel,  waiting 
only  to  be  received  by  a  simple  faith.  {Ibid.)  Practical  viissionanj  zeal: — 
The  heathen  are  perishing;  they  are  dying  by  millions  without  Christ,  and 
Christ's  last  commandment  to  us  is,  "  Go  ye,  teach  all  nations : "  are  you  obeying 
it?  "I  cannot  go,"  says  one,  "I  have  a  family  and  many  ties  to  bind  me  at 
home,"  My  dear  brother,  then,  I  ask  you.  Are  you  going  as  far  as  you  can  ? 
Do  you  travel  to  the  utmost  length  of  the  providential  tether  which  haa  fastened 
you  where  you  are?  Can  you  say  "Yes"?  Then,  what  are  you  doing  to  help 
others  to  go  ?  As  I  was  thinking  over  this  discourse,  I  reflected  how  very  littk 
■we  were  most  of  us  doing  towards  sending  the  gospel  abroad.  We  are,  as  a  church, 
doing  a  fair  share  for  our  heathen  at  home,  and  I  rejoice  at  the  thought  of  it ; 
but  how  much  a  year  do  you  each  give  to  foreign  missions  ?  I  wish  you 
would  put  down  in  your  pocket-book  how  much  you  give  per  annum  for  missions, 
and  then  calculate  how  much  per  cent,  it  is  of  your  income.  There  let  it  stand — 
"  Item :  Gave  to  the  collection  last  April  .  .  .  Is."  One  shilling  a  yew  towards 
the  salvation  of  the  world  I  Perhaps  it  will  run  thus — "  Item  :  Income,  £5000 ; 
annual  subscription  to  mission,  £1."  How  does  that  look?  I  cannot  read  your 
hearts,  but  I  could  read  your  pocket-books  and  work  a  sum  in  proportion.  I  suggest 
that  you  do  it  yourselves,  while  I  also  take  a  look  at  my  own  expenditure.  Let  us 
all  see  what  more  can  be  done  for  the  spread  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The.  slow  progress  of  Christianity  : — Now  one  of  the  laws  which  God 
has  arranged,  and  which  He  observes  is  this — the  higher  the  form  of  lite,  the 
longer  it  is  in  coming  to  the  fulness  of  its  power,  to  maturity  and  perfection.  For 
instance,  a  child  continues  helpless  longer,  and  takes  far  more  time  and  care  to  rear 
and  train  than  does  the  offspring  of  any  one  of  the  lower  animals.  It  is  even  so 
among  these  lower  animals  themselves,  for  "  the  lion  has  a  longer  infancy  than  the 
sheep,  and  the  sagacious  elephant  than  either."  Take,  again,  a  more  abstract 
illustration.  For  example,  how  rapidly  does  a  man's  physical  life  grow  and  develop 
compared  with  his  mental  or  moral.  So,  too,  with  society :  shops  grow  faster  than 
schools,  and  a  nation,  as  our  own  has  done,  may  progress  in  a  most  marked  manner 
in  the  region  of  politics  or  commerce,  and  yet,  hke  our  own  again,  lag  sadly  behind 
in  the  matter  of  education.  Besides,  how  much  more  is  education  than  the  diffusion 
of  information  or  the  quickening  of  intelligence?  Is  there  not  the  diflicult  task  of 
npbuilding  character,  and,  alas  I  how  marked  often  is  the  discrepancy  between  the 
intellectual  standard  and  the  moral  tone  ?  Thus  the  law  runs  :  the  higher  the  goal 
to  be  gained  or  the  good  to  be  sought,  the  slower  is  the  race  or  the  individual  in 
its  pursuit,  the  longer  in  its  attainment.  In  the  light  of  this  law,  we  at  once  see 
that  it  is  just  what  might  be  expected,  that  Christianity,  as  the  highest  possible 
form  or  principle  of  life,  should  be,  speaking  of  it  as  a  whole,  the  most  gradual  in 
its  progress  and  realization,  and,  further,  that  it  is  according  to  all  nature  and 
analogy  that  Christianity,  as  the  grandest  and  most  delicate  order  of  life,  should 
be  at  once  the  most  sensitive  to  the  unfavourable  touch  of  man,  as  well  as  the 
Boonest  subject  to  the  prejudicial  effects  of  his  mistakes  or  defects.  (J.  T.  Stannard.) 
Baptizing  them. — Christian  baptit^m  : — I.  The  command — to  make  disciples  of  all 
nations.  1.  They  preached  the  gospel.  2.  They  baptized  the  proselytes.  (1)  Prose- 
lytes were  baptized  without  delay — "  that  same  day  "  (Acts  ii.  41 ;  Acts  viii.  26,  40). 
(2)  They  administered  baptism  with  water.  This  was  symbolical  of  the  renewing 
influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  Apostolic  baptism  was  administered  "  in  the  Name 
of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost."  3.  The  apostles  taught  the  baptized 
persons  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  Christ  bad  commanded  them.  II.  The 
ENCOURAOKMENT.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you,"  &0.  1.  This  encouragement  was  intended 
primarily  and  especially  for  the  apostles.  2.  It  was  intended  also  for  all  other 
ministers  and  teachers  in  every  age.  (1)  Ministers  still  need  the  gracious  assurance 
of  their  Lord.  (2)  Baptism  teaches  parents  what  things  they  should  teach  their 
children.  (H.  March.)  Significance  of  the  form  of  baptism  : — I.  This  form  of 
baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  HoJy  Ghost  may  refer  to 
their  authority  as  giving  rise  to  this  institution.  II.  It  may  refer  to  the  whole 
scheme  of  Christian  doctrine,  which  centres  in  the  discoveries  that  are  made  ua 
•onoeming  the  sacred  Three.  III.  It  refers  to  the  distinct  dedication  to  Father, 
Bon,  and  Holy  Ghost,  that  is  required  as  to  all  that  aie  baptized,  which  the  ancients 


681  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xxruK 

reckcned  to  be  signified  by  the  triune  immersion  that  was  commonly  used  among 
them.  (Edicard  Calaviy.)  The  form  of  baptism : — I.  By  being  baptized  in  the 
name  of  God,  can  be  meant  no  less  than  entering  into  covenant  with  a  person,  as 
God ;  professing  faith  in  Him  as  such ;  enlisting  one's  self  into  His  service ;  and 
vowing  all  obedience  and  submission  to  Him.  II.  What  has  Scripture  revealed  at 
large  concerning  the  Divinity  of  the  three  names  into  which  we  are  baptized  ?  1. 
Concerning  the  Divinity  of  the  Father  there  is  no  dispute.  2.  Divine  titles  are 
given  to  the  Son  in  Holy  Scripture.  3.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  described  as  the  im- 
mediate author  and  worker  of  miracles.  Tbe  very  same  things  are  said  in  different 
places  of  Scripture  of  all  the  three  Divine  Persons,  and  tbe  very  same  actions  are 
ascribed  to  them.  HI.  What  interest  have  we  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity?  1. 
Many  regard  this  as  a  speculative  doctrine  only.  2.  Our  religion  is  founded  upon 
it.  For  what  is  Christianity  but  a  manifestation  of  the  three  Divine  persons,  aa 
engaged  in  the  great  work  of  man's  redemption,  begun,  continued,  and  to  be  ended 
by  them,  in  their  several  relations  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  Creator,  Re- 
deemer, and  Sanctifier,  Three  Persons,  One  God  ?  If  there  be  no  Son  of  God,  where 
is  our  Redemption  ?  If  there  be  no  Holy  Spirit,  where  is  our  sanctification  ?  With- 
out both,  where  is  our  salvation?  (Bishop  Home.)  Christian  baptisvi: — Baptism 
is  a  religious  rite,  which  was  generally  practised  before  our  Saviour  instituted  it ;  for 
the  Gentiles,  in  their  solemn  acts  of  devotion,  made  use  of  sprinkling  and  ablutions, 
and  the  Jews  baptized  all  proseljtes  to  their  religion.  To  explain  this  part  of  oar 
religion  we  must  consider — I.  What  that  belief  is  which  qualifies  persons  for  baptism. 
II,  What  is  the  end  and  design  of  baptism.  III.  What  is  meant  by  being  baptized 
in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  IV.  How  baptism  is  to 
be  performed.  {J.  Jortin.)  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ohost. — The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  practically  considered : — I.  Let  me 
remind  you  that  the  scriptural  Trinity  implies  that  God  is  one.  The  trinity  of 
our  faith  means  a  distinction  of  persons  within  one  common  indivisible  Divine 
nature.  It  implies,  therefore,  at  its  base,  that  the  Divine  nature  is  one  and 
indivisible.  For  this  reason  God  revealed  the  essential  oneness  of  His  being  first ; 
and  it  was  only  after  many  centuries  that  Jesus  could  disclose  to  His  disciples 
the  "  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  On  poly- 
theistic soil  no  such  revelation  could  have  been  intelligible  ;  it  was  to  monotheistio 
Israel  that  it  was  made.  The  new  revelation  of  a  Trinity  in  God  left  quite 
unaltered  the  faith  of  the  apostles  that  God  is  one.  What  is  the  chief  spiritual 
benefit  which  we  derive  from  the  knowledge  of  the  unity  of  God?  It  is  the 
only  religious  basis  for  a  moral  law  of  perfect  and  unwavering  righteousness. 
Rival  gods,  who  care  each  for  his  own  separate  interests,  and  for  no  othfjr,  must 
neglect  moral  law  in  pursuit  of  their  partial  ends.  You  have  no  central  power 
raised  above  the  oonteution  of  inconsistent  passions,  whose  only  care  is  to  mak« 
for  righteousness  and  the  common  weal.  Throughout  the  Old  Testament  there 
runs  a  stern  denial  of  all  secondary  divinities,  stern  insistence  upon  one  only  true 
God,  to  whose  single  will  all  the  wide  fields  of  creation  lie  subject,  and  all  the  nations 
of  men.  The  single  will  is  righteous.  It  is  the  sole  source  of  law  ;  religion  becomes 
the  basis  of  virtue.  Thus  the  Christian  doctrine  of  tlie  Trinity  has  preserved  to  us 
in  undiminished  power  all  the  moral  advantages  which  Hebrew  religion  drew  from 
its  revelation  of  the  one  God.    II.  What  relioious  adtantaoe  do  ws  beaf  fbom 

THE  FEESH  CHRISTIAN   DISCOVERY  0!"  A   TRINITY   WITHIN   THIS    UNITT   OF    THE    DlYIMI 

NATURE  ?  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  has  heightened  and  enriched  our  concep- 
tion of  the  nature  of  God.  Such  a  Trinity  as  this  leaves  room  in  the  Divine  nature 
for  the  play  of  such  moral  atTections  as  would  be  quite  impossible  to  a  mere  single 
or  solitary  divinity.  The  lonely  Deity  whom  human  intellect,  untaught  by  revela- 
tion, is  able  to  fabricate  for  itself,  is  one  utterly  without  passion  or  love  till  He  baa 
externalized  Himself  m  a  created  world.  The  outcome  of  this  is  pantheism.  2. 
It  afifords  a  basis  for  those  gracious  relations  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  sustain 
towards  us  in  the  economy  of  our  salvation.  These  are  facts  of  experience.  {J.  0. 
Dykes,  D.D.)  The  mystery  of  the  most  blessed  Trinity  : — I.  la  the  greatest 
HOMAGE  or  rAiTH.  1.  By  believing  in  this  mystery  we  believe  in  the  most  incom- 
prehensible of  all  mysteries,  and  consequently,  we  pay  God  the  greatest  homage. 
For  I  can  have  no  sublimer  conception  of  God  than  by  professing  Him  absolutely 
incomprehensible.  What  else  do  we  know  respecting  this  adorable  mystery  but  that 
we  know  nothing  ?  2.  We  sacrifice  to  God  the  noblest  faculty  of  our  nature,  ooi 
intellect,  by  believing  a  mystery,  of  which  we  could  not  have  the  least  idea,  before 
God  revealed  it  to  as.    II.  Is  the  most  solid  ground  or  oub  hope.    Without  faith. 


OHA».  xxvni.]  8T   MATTHEW.  683 

no  salvation.  The  most  necessary  article  of  faith  is  the  belief  in  the  most  blessed 
Trinity.  No  one  can  be  saved,  except  he  knows  and  believes  (1)  that  there  are  three 
Persons  in  one  God ;  and  (2)  that  the  second  Divine  Person  became  man  for  us.  III. 
Is  THE  MOST  URGENT  MOTIVE  OF  cHABiTT.  1.  It  is  the  bond  of  brotherly  love — 
"keeping  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,"  &o.  (Eph.  iv.  1).  2.  It  is  the  model  of 
brotherly  love  (John  xvii.  11 ;  Psa.  cxxxii.  1).  Peroration  :  Oh,  most  adorable 
Trinity,  unite  us  in  this  world,  that  we  may  be  united  in  heaven,"  &o.  (Bourd- 
alone.)  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  considered  in  relation  to  practical  religion : — 
Let  ua  Bee  what  simple  facts  are  apparent  in  this  revelation  of  God,  and  what 
service  they  may  render  to  us  in  real  life.  I.  The  Father.  1.  He  is  the  Creator 
of  all  things.  As  such  He  reveals  His  wisdom,  &c.  2.  He  is  the  preserver  of  all 
things.  3.  He  is  King  of  aU,  bending  all  to  His  will,  and  overruling  all  by  His 
providence.  4.  He  is  in  a  peculiar  sense  the  Parent  of  His  spiritual  family.  H. 
The  Son.  God  with  us.  This  is  a  revelation  of  the  humanity  of  God,  and  serves 
great  purposes.  It  helps  us  to  know  and  love  God,  and  makes  the  redemption  of 
man  possible.  III.  The  Holy  Ghost.  God  within  us.  His  presence  is  proved  by 
its  fioits  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  {W,  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The  distinctions  in  the  God- 
head : — Divine  revelation  makes  known  to  us  one  living  and  true  God,  and  prohibits 
bU  worship  being  paid  to  any  being  except  Jehovah.  But  the  phraseology  employed 
obviously  presents  the  one  Jehovah  under  certain  distinctions,  involving  the  idea  of 
8  plurality  in  the  Godhead.  This  distinction  has  been  generally  denominated  the 
Trinity — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  The  doctrine  has  been  controverted  in  all 
ages,  and  numerous  are  the  theories  which  men  have  endeavoured  to  maintain  on 
this  deeply  profound,  and  confessedly  difficult  subject.  I.  It  is  obvious  that  a  three- 
fold distinction  in  Deity  is  not  impossible.  We  have  many  symbols  of  this  in 
nature :  the  sun — the  light  and  heat  thereof ;  man — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  II.  The 
Old  Testament  writings  lead  us  to  this  conclusion  (Gen.  ii.  22,  ii.  7  ;  Numb.  vi.  24 ; 
Psa.  xiv.  6,  7,  ex.  1,  cxxxvi.  1-3 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  3 ;  Isa.  vi.  8,  xlii.  1,  xlviii.  16,  lix. 
19,  20).  ni.  The  writings  of  the  New  Testament  exhibit  this  triune  distinction 
(chap.  iii.  16,  17 ;  John  xiv.  16,  xv.  26 ;  Acts  i.  4,  5,  v.  30-35,  x.  38,  xx.  27,  28 ; 
Eom.  V.  6,  6).  IV.  The  Divine  works  are  ascribed  to  each  of  the  triune  persons.  1, 
Creation.  2.  Inspiration.  3.  Holiness.  4.  Eaising  the  dead.  V.  That  the  essen- 
tial titles  and  attributes  are  given  to  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit.  1.  Eternity. 
2.  Omnipresence.  3.  Omniscience.  4.  Power.  5.  Wisdom.  Observations : 
1.  With  what  reverence  and  profound  veneration  we  should  study  the  nature  and 
character  of  God.  How  awfully  sublime  is  the  theme — how  utterly  incompetent  we 
must  be  to  find  it  out  to  perfection  —  how  essentially  requisite  holy  fear  and 
humility  of  mind  in  its  investigation.  2.  We  should  labour  to  ascertain  the  con- 
nection between  the  Divine  Persons  in  the  Godhead  in  the  exercise  of  devotion 
and  worship.  We  are  to  come  to  God  through  the  Son  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
We  are  thus,  also,  to  praise  God,  and  to  pray  to  Him.  The  Father  is  chiefly 
the  object  of  worship,  Christ  is  the  way,  and  by  the  Spirit  we  worship  Him  in 
spirit  and  in  truth.  God  our  Father — God  our  Eedeemer — God  our  Comiorter  and 
Guide.  3.  Divine  honours  are  to  be  equally  given  to  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  Let 
ns  labour  to  attain  and  enjoy  love  of  the  Father,  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  fellowship  and  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (J.  Burns,  LL.D.) 
Threefold  manifestation  of  Deity : —  Although  we  shall  never  again  paint  the 
Almighty  as  Giotto  painted  Him,  as  an  old  man  with  white  hair  in  the  clouds,  with 
a  young  man  at  His  side,  and  a  dove  flying  from  beneath  His  feet ;  and  whilst  we 
shall  never  again  describe  God  as  Athanasius  described  Him,  yet  the  doctrine  of  a 
Trinity  in  Unity  is  fundamental,  and  rests  on  an  impregnable  basis.  The  Unity, 
the  Humanity,  and  the  Affinity  or  Immanent  Deity,  these  are  the  root  conceptions 
of  all  true  theology,  and  these  remain.  The  conception  of  variety  in  unity,  the 
many  and  the  one,  pervades  all  life  and  nature,  and  is  presented  to  us  in  man  in  a 
trinity  of  body,  mind,  and  spirit.  So  Trinity  in  Unity  is  in  God  a  diversity  of 
manifestation  or  function,  combined  with  a  unity  of  life  and  purpose.  We  can 
hardly  think  of  the  Almighty  in  any  other  way.  It  is  the  normal  order  of  thought 
metaphysically.  Let  us  see.  First,  our  conception  of  God  is  vague  and  indefinite : 
Creative  Force  pervading,  correlating,  co-ordinating  all  things  everywhere.  It  is 
the  All-Father,  the  First  Person.  But  the  instant  we  think  more  closely,  our  only 
definite  conception  proves  insensibly  anthropomorphic.  All  power,  wisdom,  intelli- 
gence, love,  is,  in  some  sort,  human,  manifested  and  transferred  to  God,  but  still 
human  in  nature  and  thought;  and  thus,  the  Ideal  Man,  the  God  under  the 
limitations  of  humanity,  steps  forth.    This  would  be  so  in  the  order  of  thought 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvitt 

were  there  no  figure  of  Jesus  in  history.     We  cannot  but — we  always  have  mad« 
God  in  our  own  image,  God  the  Son,  or  the  Second  Person.    But  in  prayer  and 
worship  He  is  apprehended  as  a  Spirit  only,  in  communion,  in  sympathy  with 
ours ;  then  He  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the  Third  Person.     God  the  Vague,  God 
the  Definite,  God  the  Immanent,  that  is  the  inexorable  order  of  thought,  and  that 
is  the  eternal  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  in  Unity.    This  would  be  tnie  whether  xve 
call  ourselves  Christians  or  not.     But  if  you  ara  a  Christian,  you  believe  in  addi- 
tion that  the  Ideal  Humanity  of  God  has  once  in  all  time  been  realized,  and  realized 
in  Jesus.     You  believe    that    the    eternally  human    side   of    God — which    was 
before  the  Life  Divine  in  Galilee,  and  will  be  for  ever  after  it,  the  life-giving  and 
the  love-giving  One — that  all  of  Him  which  could  become  incarnate  did  become 
incarnate — came  forth  and  dwelt  amongst  us  as  it  has  never  before  or  since  ;  that 
then  and  there,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  amongst  the  chosen  people  and  in  the  holy 
land  1,900  years  ago,  a  special  use  of  human  nature  was  made  for  a  special  purpose, 
and  that  we  "  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father, 
full  of  grace  and  truth.     {H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)        The  mystery  of  the  Trinity  : — 
The  Father,  Son,  and  Holy   Ghost — three   distinct  Persons :  in  the  Name,  not 
names — one  essence.     The  Holy  Ghost  is  called  the  finger  of  God,  Christ  the  hand 
of  the  Father.   Now,  as  the  finger  is  in  the  hand,  and  the  hand  on  the  body,  ao  of 
one  and  the  same  most  pure  and  simple  essence  is  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit. 
But,  as  it  was  reported  of  Alanus,  when  he  promised  his  auditory  to  discourse  the 
next  Sunday  more  clearly  of  the  Trinity,  and  to  make  plain  that  mystery  ;  while  he 
was  studying  the  point  by  the  seaside,  he  spied  a  boy  very  busy  with  a  little  spoon, 
trudging  often  between  the  sea  and  a  small  hole  he  had  digged  in  the  ground. 
Alanus  asked  him  what  he  meant  to  do.     The  boy  answered,  "  I  intend  to  bring  all 
the  sea  into  this  pit."     Alanus  replies,  "  Why  dost  thou  attempt  such  impossibili- 
ties, and  mis-spend  thy  time  ?  "     The  boy  answered,  "  So  dost  thou,  Alanus  :  I  shall 
as  soon  bring  aU  the  sea  into  this  hole,  as  thou  bring  aU  the  knowledge  of  the 
Trinity  into  thy  head.     All  is  equally  possible :  we  have  begun  together,  we  shall 
finish  together  ;  save  that  of  the  two  my  labour  hath  more  hope  and  possibility  of 
taking  effect."     I  conclude  with.  It  is  rashness  to  search,  godliness  to  believe,  safe- 
ness  to  preach,  and  eternal  blessedness  to  know  the  Trinity ;  yet  let  us  know  to 
praise  the  Trinity  in  the  words  of  the  Church :  "  Glory  be  to  the  Father,"  &c.   And 
let  all  answer,  "  As  it  was  .  .  .  Amen."     {T.  Adams.)        Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  : 
God  a  mystery  to  man  : — You  have  seen  a  steam  threshing-machine  at  work.     Yoa 
know  perhaps  how  the  steam  acts  upon  the  machinery,  and  sets  the  wheels  in 
motion  ;  but  does  the  little  insect  that  settles  on  the  engine  know  what  you  know  ? 
Could  it  be  taught?    Well,  when  we  try  to  understand  the  great  God,  we  are 
like  the  fly  trying  to  understand  the  engine.    The  being  of  God  is  a  mystery  to 
us;  that  is,  it  is  something  which  we  cannot  understand.     Man  is  a  mystery  to  a 
dog  or  a  horse.    We  can  no  more  hope  to  understand  how  God  is  what  He  is  than 
a  dog  or  a  horse  can  understand  what  man  is,  or  what  speech  and  thought  and 
memory  are.     {J.  E.  Vernon,  M.A.)        Belief  in  the  Trinity  not  against  reason 
though  beyond  it : — Though  I  cannot  explain  this  mystery  to  you,  I  think  I  can 
show  you  in  nature  certain  figures  whereby  we  may  get  some  idea  of  how  true  the 
mystery  is,  though  it  is  beyond  our  understanding.    If  I  were  to  shut  the  window  of 
a  room,  and  cut  a  slit  in  the  shutter,  and  put  into  the  slit  a  piece  of  glass  called  a 
prism,  you  would  see  on  the  wall  on  the  other  side  of  the  room  a  streak  of  red, 
yellow,  and  blue  light.    If  I  take  the  piece  of  glass  away,  there  is  only  a  streak  of 
white  light.    Now  learned  men  have  found  out  that  all  pure  white  light  is  made  up 
of  red,  yellow,  and  blue  light;  and  by  that  piece  of  glass  a  ray  of  light  can  always 
be  separated  into  the  parts  which  make  it  up.    Now,  the  red  ray  is  light,  the  yellow 
ray  is  light,  the  blue  ray  is  light.    But  the  three  together  make  up  only  one  ray  of 
light.     Then,  again.     In  your  own  self  vou  have  an  image  of  the  Trinity.    You  are 
made  up  of  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body.  Your  spirit  thinks,  it  prays,  and  you  say,  "  I 
think,  I  pray."     Your  spirit  is  you.     If  anything  pains  your  body,  you  say,  "  I  am 
in  pain,"  speaking  now  of  your  body  as  yourself.     Again,  your  soul  is  moved  by 
some  passion,  fear,  or  love.    You  speak  of  your  soul  as  yourself,  and  say,  "  I  fear," 
or  "I  love."    Well,  here  there  is  the  spirit  you,  the  body  you,  and  the  soul  you  ; 
and  yet  you  are  not  three  diliferent  creatures,  but  you — body,  soul,  and  spirit,  make 
up  one  being,  called  man.     Take  another  illustration.     You  know  the  florin,  oi 
two-shilUng  piece,  has  a  cross  of  shields  on  one  side.    In  the  corners  of  that  cross 
are  flowers  or  plants.    In  the  first  and  fourth  are  roses,  the  badge  of  England.    In 
the  second  is  the  thistle,  the  badge  of  Scotland.    In  the  third  is  a  little  cluatei  ol 


OHAP.  XXVIII.]  8T.  MATTHEW,  68S 

clover  leaves.  The  clover  leaf,  called  in  Ireland  the  shamrock,  is  the  badge  of 
Ireland.  I  will  tell  you  how  the  Irish  obtained  the  clover  leaf  as  their  badge. 
Long  ago,  when  the  Irish  were  heathens,  there  came  to  their  shores  St.  Patrick,  to 
teach  them  the  true  Catholic  faith.  He  was  brought  to  the  king,  and  he  spoke  before 
him  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  The  king  listened  attentively.  But  when  St.  Patrick 
began  to  tell  him  that  there  was  but  one  God,  and  yet  in  that  Godhead  there  were 
Three  Persons,  the  king  stopped  him,  saying,  "  I  do  not  understand  you.  You  say 
the  Father  is  God?"  "Yes."  "And  you  say  that  the  Son  is  God."  "Yes." 
"And  you  say  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  God?"  "Yes."  "Then,"  said  the  king, 
••  there  must  be  three  Gods."  St.  Patrick,  instead  of  answering,  stooped  down  and 
picked  a  little  clover  leaf  which  grew  at  his  feet.  The  clover  leaf,  as  you  know,  ia 
made  up  of  three  little  leaves,  joined  together  by  a  slim  stalk,  so  that  the  three 
leaves  make  only  one  leaf.  St.  Patrick  held  up  only  one  division  of  the  leaf,  and 
said,  "This  is  a  leaf?"  "Yes,"  said  the  king.  He  showed  the  second  division  of 
the  leaf,  and  said,  "  This  is  a  leaf  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  the  king.  He  showed  the  third, 
saying  the  same  words,  and  receiving  the  same  reply.  Then  he  held  up  the  whole 
leaf  by  its  long  stalk  before  the  king,  and  asked,  "  What  is  this?  "  "  It  is  a  leaf," 
replied  the  king.  "  So  learn  from  a  humble  plant  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity,"  said 
the  saint.  Now  all  this  does  not  make  us  any  more  able  to  understand  the  mystery 
of  the  Holy  Trinity ;  but  it  at  least  shows  us  that,  although  it  is  above  our  reason, 
it  is  not  contrary  to  our  reason  to  believe  that  God  is  Three  Persons  and  yet  but 
One  God.  (J.  E.  Vernon,  M.A.)  The  mystery  of  the  Trinity : — An  ancient  writer 
informs  us  that  when  the  Egyptians  named  their  greatest  God  who  was  over  all, 
they  cried  thrice,  "  Darkness !  Darkness  1  Darkness  1 "  In  the  name  of  the  Father 
— Darkness ;  and  of  the  Son — Darkness  ;  and  of  the  Holy  Ghosi — Darkness !  for, 
however  much  the  mind  may  strive  to  penetrate  this  mystery,  it  can  never  attain  to 
its  solution.  Just  as  the  eye,  looking  at  the  sun,  sees  the  overpowering  light  as  a 
dark  ball,  being  dazzled  by  its  excessive  glory,  so  the  eye  of  the  mind  perceives  only 
darkness  when  looking  into  the  infinite  splendour  of  God  in  Three  Persons.  We 
may,  indeed,  see  sundry  likenesses  here  on  earth  which  assist  us  in  believing  the 
doctrine  of  the  Holy  Trinity  ;  but  they  are  helps,  and  helps  only,  not  explanations. 
Thus,  the  sun  may  shine  into  a  glass,  and  the  glass  reflect  in  clear  water,  and  we 
see  three  suns — a  sun  in  the  heavens,  a  sun  in  the  glass,  aud  a  sun  in  the  water ; 
and  this  assists  us  to  understand  how  the  Son  of  God  is  of  the  Father,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  of  the  Father  aud  of  the  Son,  and  how  that  each  is  God,  and  yet  that 
there  are  not  Three  Gods  but  One  God.  But,  after  all,  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy 
Trinity  is  a  matter  of  faith,  and  not  of  reason.  We  must  believe,  though  we  cannot 
understand.  {S.  Baring  Gould.)  Mystery  no  bar  to  conviction: — "Sitting 
lately,"  says  one,  "  in  a  public  room  at  Brighton,  where  an  infidel  was  haranguing 
the  company  upon  the  absurdities  of  the  Christian  religion,  I  could  not  but  be 
pleased  to  see  how  easily  his  reasoning  pride  was  put  to  shame.  He  quoted  those 
passages,  *  I  and  My  Father  are  one ' ;  •  I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  Me  ' ;  and  that 
there  are  Three  Persons  in  One  God.  Finding  his  auditors  not  disposed  to  applaud 
his  blasphemy,  he  turned  to  one  gentleman,  and  said,  with  an  oath,  •  Do  you  believe 
Buch  nonsense?'  The  gentleman  replied,  'Tell  me  how  that  candle  burns.' 
*  Why,'  he  answered,  •  the  tallow,  the  cotton,  and  the  atmospheric  air,  produce  the 
light.'  ♦  Then  they  make  one  light,  do  they  not  ? '  •  Yes.'  •  Will  you  tell  me  how 
they  are  one  in  the  other,  and  yet  but  one  light  ?  *  •  No,  I  cannot.'  '  But  you 
believe  it  ? '  He  could  not  say  but  that  he  did.  The  company  instantly  made  the 
application,  by  smiling  at  his  folly ;  upon  which  the  conversation  was  changed. 
This  may  remind  the  young  and  inexperienced  that  if  they  believe  only  what  they 
san  explain,  they  may  as  well  part  with  their  senses;  for  they  are  surrounded  by 
he  wonderful  works  of  God,  whose  ways  are  past  finding  out«" 

Ver.  20.  And,  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway. — Christ  continually  present  trith  HU 
Church:—!.  That  the  Saviour  is  speaking  of  more  than  that  presence,  which 

18   INSEPABABLB   FROM    THB   NAT0Ea    OF    HiS   OWN    ESSENTIAL   AND   ETERNAL    GODHEA©. 

In  the  case  of  our  Lord  the  Godhead  is  so  modified  by  its  alliance  with  the 
Humanity — modified  not  in  itself,  for  there  no  modification  would  be  possible — 
but  in  its  action  upon  the  Church, — that  what  is  brought  into  contact  with  us,  ia 
the  human  sympathy  of  the  Saviour,  glorified  by  its  connection  with  the  Deity 
of  His  person.  H.  The  fact  that  communion  with  the  Saviour  is  hade  possiblh 
BT  THS  ADysNT  OF  THB  CoMTORTER ;  that  the  oomiug  of  the  Spirit  is,  to  all  in< 
tents  and  purposes,  a  coming  of  the  Saviour  to  the  people  who  love  TSim.    Th« 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvni, 

personality  that  is  in  Him  whom  we  address,  must  vibrate  to  tha  touch  of  the 
personality  that  is  in  us, — or  else  communion  will  not  have  taken  place.  Thii 
has  been  made  possible,  though  Christ  is  absent  in  the  body,  by  the  advent  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  No  one  will  be  disposed  to  question  that  the  personality  of  God  can 
reveal  itself  to  the  personality  of  man  without  the  intervention  of  a  visible  form, 
and  without  the  employment  of  articulate  language.  There  are  modes  of  fellow- 
ship between  spirit  and  spirit  with  which  we  are  unacquainted,  yet  real  and 
efficacious.  He  is  said  to  dwell  in  the  believer.  We  speak  not  of  grace  but  of 
living  communication.  And  where  the  Spirit  comes  Christ  comes ;  and  where  the 
Spirit  and  Christ  oome  the  Father  comes.  III.  This  coming  of  Christ  to  Hia 
people,  precious  as  it  is,  is  suited  to  a  state  of  topebfection  and  disciplinb. 
We  look  forward  to  something  beyond  that  which  we  enjoy  now.  There  was  the 
coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh.  That  passed  away.  It  gave  way  to  the  coming 
by  the  Spirit.  That  is  better,  more  spiritual,  butiusuflScient.  We  look  forward  to 
the  final,  exhaustive  coming.  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  The  present  Saviour : — Some 
benefits  of  Christ's  perpetual  presence  with  His  people,  especially  when  that 
presence  is  realized.  1.  It  is  sanctifying.  2.  Sustaining.  3.  Comforting.  (J. 
Hamilton,  D.D.)  Christ's  parting  promise  : — I.  The  promise — "  I  am  with  yon 
alway."  What  did  Christ  mean  by  this.  1.  Can  we  attach  to  the  words  a  meaning 
similar  to  that  conveyed  when  speaking  of  the  dead.  We  say  that  they  still  live  in 
the  hearts  of  those  who  knew  and  loved  them.  After  the  lapse  of  years  we  can 
often  recall  with  vividness  the  features  of  one  departed.  2.  Men  may  live  in  their 
works.  Is  Christ  only  present  as  other  good  men  are  ?  We  who  believe  in  Christ  as  a 
supernatural  revelation  regard  this  parting  promise  as  implying  infinitely  more  than 
this.  It  meant  the  indwelling  of  a  Personal  energy  distinct  &om  any  memory  of  Him. 
Is  it  rephedthat  this  is  incomprehensible ;  life  is  incomprehensible.  Christ  is  not  a 
power  generated  in  nature.  II.  The  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  (G.  M.  Short.) 
The  presence  of  Christ : — 1.  That  presence  is  spiritual.  Not  the  consecrated  host. 
The  believers  in  the  upper  room  had  nothing  to  appeal  to  their  senses.  2.  This 
presence  of  Christ  consists  in  something  more  than  there  is  in  His  word.  Csesar, 
Plato  are  still  with  us  in  their  words ;  but  there  is  infinitely  more  in  the  presence 
of  Christ.  Behind  the  written  word  there  is  the  living  word,  the  invisible  Saviour 
who  manifests  Himself  to  the  heart.  3.  This  presence  is  especially  promised  to 
the  Church,  and  is  the  secret  of  its  triumph  over  infidelity  and  persecution.  4.  But 
what  makes  men  doubt  the  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Church  is  the  sight  of  the 
inward  state  of  the  Church  itself.  5.  But  what  Christ  announces  to  the  Church 
He  announces  to  the  individual  soul.  6.  Affliction  may  be  a  proof  of  the  Lord's 
presence.  7.  Is  there  anything  on  earth  grander  than  faithful  love 7  "I  am 
with   yoa  alway."      {E.   Bersier,  D.D.)  Christ  present,   though  appearances 

may  seem  to  the  contrary  : — In  gloomy  winter's  day  no  tree  moves  its  verdant 
top  in  our  fields ;  no  flower  casts  its  perfume  to  the  winds ;  everything 
appears  dead  in  nature.  Will  you  tell  me  that  the  sun  has  not  risen?  No, 
although  he  has  disappeared  behind  a  curtain  of  clouds,  he  makes  his  powerful 
action  everywhere  felt ;  and  without  the  sun,  which  you  do  not  see,  there  would 
remain  for  you  only  an  icy  shroud,  and  the  darkness  of  night.  The  soul  has  its 
winter  also,  when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  no  longer  sheds  on  it  more  than  a  pale 
glimmer,  when  obedience  is  performed  without  joy.  (Ibid.)  Desirableness  of 
Christ's  presence : — I.  Christ's  presence  is  exceedingly  desirable  to  the  saints. 
1.  The  presence  of  Christ  is  an  evidence  of  His  love.  2.  Christ's  presence  is 
attended  with  the  most  desirable  effects ;  none  can  enjoy  it  without  deriving  the 
greatest  advantages  from  it.  3.  Present  communion  with  Christ  is  an  earnest  of 
everlasting  fruition.  II.  A  seemingly  departing  Christ  may  be  constrained,  as  it 
were,  to  abide  with  His  people.  1.  By  the  exercise  of  a  lively  faith.  2.  By 
fervent  prayer.  3.  By  a  suitable  conduct  towards  him.  (B.  Beddome.)  Christ's 
presence  essential : — Nothing  could  supply  the  room  of  Christ  to  His  Church ;  not 
the  gospels,  though  they  record  His  eventful  life  and  death;  not  the  epistles,  though 
they  contain  the  full  revelation  of  His  own  truth  ;  not  ministers,  though  they  are 
His  ambassadors ;  not  ordinances,  though  they  are  the  channels  of  grace,  and  so 
many  meeting  places  between  our  souls  and  Him  whom  our  souls  love.  None  of 
these,  nor  all  of  these  together,  can  be  to  the  Church,  in  the  stead  of  its  own 
Divine  Redeemer  and  Head.  Without  His  continued  presence  and  aid,  the  Church 
would  speedily  come  to  an  end.  People  may  talk  as  they  please  about  the  omni- 
potence  of  troth,  and  the  adaptation  of  Christianity  to  man,  but  in  a  world  like 
this,  hostile  to  the  truth,  and  alienated  from  God,  no  security  short  of  that  pre* 


«HAP.  xxviu.]  ST.  MATTHEW.  687 

seated  in  the  aotnal  indwelling  of  Christ  in  His  Chnrch,  His  own  kingdom  and  house, 
will  be  sufficient.  To  this  we  owe  it,  that  there  has  been  a  Church  in  the  world  up 
to  this  hour ;  to  this  we  owe  it,  that  there  shall  be  a  Church  in  it  to  the  end  of  time. 
{A.  L.  R.  Foote.)  The  ever-present  Saviour: — 1.  This  is  the  language  of  One  who 
had  been  through  the  passage  of  death  and  known  the  bitterness  of  separation. 
2.  It  is  difficult  to  realize  this  invisible  presence ;  it  is  more  real  when  reaUzed. 
It  is  spiritual,  always  with  us.  3.  It  conveys  the  idea  that  before  the  mind  of  the 
speaker  aU  the  days  lay  ranged  in  their  order  to  the  last.  4.  It  is  an  inner  pre- 
sence. 5.  Most  minds,  whatever  they  be,  do  best  in  fellowship.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
The  charm  of  the  Divine  presence: — Suppose" a  friend  who  combines  everything 
which  goes  to  make  your  idea  of  friendship — intellectual,  wise,  modest,  fond,  true, 
good.  Suppose  such  a  person  just  set  to  your  particular  taste — in  harmony  with 
every  thought;  his  society  like  a  continual  strain  of  music.  You  lean  on  his 
judgment — you  are  happy  in  his  love.  What  a  bloom  on  life — what  a  sunlight — 
what  a  charm — what  a  necessity  that  person  would  become  to  yon  I  But  what  is 
that  compared  to  Christ — to  a  man  who  has  once  learned  the  secret  of  finding  His 
presence  a  reality  ?  who  knows  and  loves  Him  as  his  own  near,  dear,  loving  Saviour 
— the  Brother  of  his  soul — much  more  than  another  self.  The  very  fact  that  He  is 
there — though  He  did  nothing,  though  there  were  no  actual  intercourse,  though  He 
were  not  seen — has  an  untold  spell  upon  you.  Did  you  never  feel  what  the  pre- 
sence of  a  very  little  child  would  be,  though  there  were  not  another  man  in  the 
world?  Think  of  what  even  a  silent  presence  can  bel  But  it  is  not  sUent.  (Ibid.'S 
Christ's  perpetual  presence : — I.  What  an  insight  we  have  here  into  the  essential 
nature  of  Christianity  itself,  and  what  a  guarantee  for  its  permanence  and  power.  It 
is  something  more  than  an  outward  revelation  of  facts,  more  than  a  community  of 
brethren :  it  is  a  life.  H.  May  we  not  see  in  this  promise  the  designed  preventa- 
tive against  or  remedy  for  certain  evils  sure  to  infest  and  corrode  the  life  of  His 
kingdom.  IIL  It  is  of  the  guarantee  of  the  permanence  and  power  of  Christianity 
in  Christ's  constant  presence  that  I  would  now  speak.  The  higher  the  principle  of 
life  the  longer  it  is  in  coming  to  maturity ;  but  also  the  surer  when  maturity  is 
reached.  This  explains  the  slow  progress  of  Christianity.  (J.  T.  Stannard.) 
Christ's  presence  our  stimulus : — There  is  a  touching  fact  related  in  the  history  of 
a  Highland  chief  of  the  noble  house  of  McGregor,  who  fell  wounded  by  two  baUs  at 
the  battle  of  Prestonpans.  Seeing  their  chief  fail,  the  clan  wavered,  and  gave  the 
enemy  an  advantage.  The  old  chieftain,  beholding  the  effects  of  his  disaster,  raised 
himself  up  on  his  elbow,  while  the  blood  gushed  in  streams  from  his  wounds,  and 
cried  aloud,  "  I  am  not  dead,  my  children ;  I  am  looking  at  you,  to  see  you  do  your 
duty."  These  words  revived  the  sinking  courage  of  his  brave  Highlanders.  There 
was  a  charm  in  the  fact  that  they  still  fought  under  the  eye  of  their  chief.  It  roused 
them  to  put  forth  their  mightiest  energies,  and  they  did  aU  that  human  strength 
oould  do  to  turn  and  stem  the  dreadful  tide  of  battle.  And  is  there  not  a  charm 
to  you,  O  believer,  in  the  fact  that  you  contend  in  the  battle-field  of  life  under  the 
eye  of  your  Saviour  ?  Wherever  you  are,  however  you  are  oppressed  by  foes,  how- 
ever exhausted  by  the  stem  strife  with  evil,  the  eye  of  Christ  is  fixed  most  lovingly 
upon  you.  (D.Wise.)  Christ's  presence  allrsujicient : — When  Christ  saith,  "  I 
am  with  you  alway,"  you  may  add  what  you  will :  to  protect  you,  to  direct  you,  to 
eomfort  you,  to  carry  on  the  work  of  grace  in  you,  and  in  the  end  to  crown  yon 
with  immortaUty  and  glory.  All  this  and  more  is  included  in  this  precious  pro. 
mise.  {John  Trapp.)  Presence  superior  to  memory  : — He  promises  His  presence. 
How  different  the  case  would  be  if  He  had  only  said,  "  The  memory  of  My  life  and 
work  shall  be  with  you  always."  What  a  difference  there  is  between  a  mere  memory 
and  a  presence.  At  first,  indeed,  when  we  have  just  lost  a  relation  or  a  friend, 
memory,  in  its  importunity  and  anguish,  seems  to  be  and  to  do  all  that  a  presence 
eould  do,  perhaps  even  more.  It  gathers  up  the  past  and  heaps  it  on  the  present ; 
it  crowds  into  the  thoughts  of  a  few  minutes  the  incidents  of  a  lifetime ;  it  has 
about  it  a  greatness  and  a  vividness  which  was  wanting  while  its  object  was  still 
with  ns.  But  even  a  memory  decays.  That  it  should  do  so  seems  impossible  ai 
first  We  protest  to  ourselves  and  to  the  world,  that  it  will  be  as  fresh  as  ever  to 
the  last  day  of  our  lives.  But  memory  is  only  an  effort  of  the  human  mind,  while 
a  presence  is  independent  of  it ;  and  the  human  mind  has  limited  powers  which 
are  easily  exhausted  ;  it  cannot  always  continue  on  the  strain ;  and  so  a  time  comes 
when  the  first  freshness  passes  away,  and  then  other  thoughts,  interests,  and  occu- 
pations crowd  in  upon  as  and  claun  their  share  of  the  little  all  that  we  have  to 
give.    And  ar),  what  seems  to  us  to  be  so  fresh  and  imperishable  is  already  indis* 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxrm. 

tinct  and  faded.  Oh,  think  of  any  private  friend,  think  of  any  of  the  celebrated 
men  whose  names  were  on  the  lips  of  every  one,  and  who  had  (Ued  within  the  last 
two  or  three  years  I  At  first  it  seemed  as  if  yon  might  predict  with  confidence  that 
the  world  woald  go  on  thinking  and  talking  about  them  for  at  least  a  generation ; 
bat  already,  the  sure  and  fatal  action  of  time  npon  a  living  memory,  however 
great  and  striking,  is  making  itself  felt ;  and  even  in  our  thoughts  about  them  they 
are  passing  rapidly  into  that  world  of  shadows,  where  shadows  soon  die  away  into 
the  nndistinguishable  haze  and  gloom  beyond  them.  It  is  otherwise  with  a  pre- 
sence ;  whether  we  see  the  presence  or  not,  we  know  that  it  is  here.  If  our  friend 
is  in  the  next  room,  busily  occupied  and  unable  to  give  us  his  time  just  now,  still, 
the  knowledge  that  he  is  close  at  hand,  and  can  be  applied  to  if  necessary,  is  itself 
a  comfort  and  a  strength  to  ns ;  we  can  go  to  him  if  we  like.  His  being  here  places 
OS  in  a  very  different  position  from  that  which  we  should  occupy  if  he  had  left  us ; 
if  we  could  only  think  of  him  as  having  been  with  ns  in  times  past,  though  really 
absent  now.  A  presence,  I  say,  is  a  fact  independent  of  our  moods  of  mind,  a  fact 
whether  we  recognize  it  or  not;  and  in  our  Divine  Saviour's  presence  there  is 
indeed  a  fulness  of  joy  which  means  hope,  work,  power,  eventual  victory.  (Canon 
Liddon.)  Christ'$  presence  secures  the  Church's  victory  : — This  is  a  factor  in  the 
life  and  work  of  Christ's  Church  with  which  persons  do  not  reckon  who  look  at 
her  only  from  the  outside,  and  judge  of  her  strength  and  prospects  as  they  woold 
judge  of  any  human  society.  They  say  that  she  will  die  out  because  this  or  that 
force,  which  has,  no  doubt,  weight  in  the  affairs  of  men,  is  for  the  time  being 
telling  heavily  against  her.  If  large  sections  of  public  feeling,  or  literature,  or  the 
public  policy  of  some  great  country,  or  the  infiuence  of  a  new  and  enterprisinf; 
philosophy,  or  the  bias  of  a  groap  of  powerful  minds  are  against  her,  forthwith 
we  hear  the  cry,  "  The  mission  of  the  apostles  is  coming  to  an  end  ;  the  Church  of 
Christ  will  presently  fail !  "  Do  not  be  in  too  great  a  haste,  my  friends,  about  this. 
Yon  have  yet  to  reckon  with  a  force  invisible,  and  perhaps,  as  far  aa  you  are  con- 
cemed,  unsuspected,  but  never  more  real,  never  more  operative  than  it  is  at  this 
moment.  Ton  have  forgotten  the  Presence  of  Christ.  He  did  not  retreat  to  heaven 
when  His  first  apostles  died ;  He  promised  to  be  with  them  to  the  end  of  time ;  He 
spoke  not  merely  to  the  eleven  men  before  Him,  bnt  to  the  vast  multitude  of  suo- 
oessors  who  de^ed  before  His  eyes  down  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  Christian 
ages :  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world  1 "  With  ns  by  Hi* 
Spirit ;  with  as  in  the  great  sacrament  of  His  love ;  with  as  amid  weaknesses, 
divisions,  failures,  disappointments.  He  is  with  as  still,  and  it  is  His  PreseBM 
which  alone  sustains  His  envoys,  and  which  gives  to  their  work  whatever  il  has  I 
or  has,  or  has  to  have,  of  vigour  or  of  pennaaenee.    (Ibid.) 


fi'm  i'i°I  ^''"'^'"}"^"  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01127  8050 


DATE  DUE 

11^"^ 

r* 

"^ 

^t^gigtmtm^ 

^.-.. 

DEMCO  38-2< 

37 

■,'Sk  4ii^ 


♦*•' 


